A WORLD of Words, Or Most copious, and exact Dictionarie in Italian and
English, collected by JOHN FLORIO.

Printed at London, by Arnold Hatfield for Edw. Blount. 1598

To the Right Honorable Patrons of virtue, Patterns of Honor, Roger Earl of
Rutland, Henry Earl of Southampton, Lucie Countess of Bedford.
THis dedication (Right Honorable and that worthily) may happily make your Honors
muse; well fare that dedication, that may excite your muse. I am no auctorised
Herald to marshall your precedence. Private duty might perhaps give one the
prioritie, where public respect should prefer another. To choose Tullie or
Ansonius Consuls, is to prefer them before all but one; but to choose either
the former of the twain, is to prefer him before all. It is said of Atreus in
a fact most disorderly, that may be said of any in so ordering his best duty,
It makes no matter whether, yet he resolves of neither. I only say your Honors
best know your places: An Italian turn may serve the turn. Lame are we in
Platoes censure, if we be not ambidexters, using both hands alike. Right Hand,
or left hand as Peers with mutual paritie, without disparagement may it
please your Honors to join hand in hand, and so jointly to lend an ear (and
lend it I beseech you) to a poor man, that inuites your Honors to a
christening, that I and my poor studies, like Philemon and Baucis, may in so
low a cottage entertain so high, if not deities, yet dignities; of whom the
Poet testifies.

Ma sopra ogni altro frutto piu gradito
Fu il volto allegro, e'l non bugiardo amore.
E benche fosse pouero il conuito,
Non fu la volonta pouera e'l core.
But of all other cheer most did content
A cheerful countenance, and a willing mind,
Poor entertainment being richly meant,
Pleaded excuse for that which was behind.
Two ouerhastie fruits of mine now some years since, like two forewarde
females, the one put her-selfe in service to an Earl of Excellence, the other
to a Gentleman of Worth, both into the world to run the race of their
fortune. Now where my rawer youth brought forth those female fruits, my riper
years affoording me I cannot say a braine-babe Minerua, armed at al assaies at
first hour; but rather from my Italian Semele, and English thigh, a bouncing
boie, Bacchus-like, almost all names: And being as the manner of this country
is, after some strength gathered to bring it abroad; I was to entreat three
witnesses to the entry of it into Christendom, ouer-presumptuous (I grant) to
entreat so high a presence, but your Honors so gracious (I hope) to be
ouer-entreated. My hope springs out of three stems: your Honors natural
benignity; your able emploiment of such seruitours; and the towardly
likelie-hood of this Springall to do you honest service. The first, to
vouchsafe all; the second, to accept this; the third, to apply it self to the
first and second. Of the first, your birth, your place, and your custom: of
the second, your studies, your conceits, and your exercise: of the third, my
endeavors, my proceedings, and my project gives assurance. Your birth, highly
noble, more then gentle: your place, above others, as in degree, so in height
of bounty, and other virtues: your custom, never weary of well doing: your
studies much in all, most in Italian excellence: your conceits, by understanding
others to work above them in your own: your exercise, to read, what the
worlds best wits have written, and to speak as they write. My endeavors, to
apprehend the best, if not all: my proceedings, to impart my best, first to
your Honors, then to all that emploie me: my project, in this volume to
comprehend the best and all. [In truth I acknowledge an entyre debt, not only
of my best knowledge, but of all, yea of more then I know or can, to your
bounteous Lordship most noble, most virtuous, and most Honorable Earl of
Southampton, in whose pay and patronage I have lived some years; to whom I
owe and vow the years I have to live. But as to me, and many more the
glorious and gracious sunshine of your Honor has infused light and life: so
may my lesser borrowed light, after a principal respect to your benign
aspect, and influence, affoorde some luster to some others. In loyalty I may
auerre (my needle touched, and drawn, and held by such an adamant) what he in
love assumed, that saw the other stars, but bent his course by the
Pole-starre, and two guardes, auowing, Aspicit vnam, One guides me, though
more I see. Good parts imparted are not empaired: Your springs are first to
serve your self, yet may yield your neighbors sweet water; your taper is to
light to you first, and yet it may light your neighbors candle. I might make
doubt, least I or mine be not now of any further use to your
selfe-sufficiencie, being at home so instructed for Italian, as teaching or
learning could supply, that there seemed no need of travel: and now by
travel so accomplished, as what wants to perfection?] Wherein no less must be
attributed to your embellisht graces (my most noble, most gracious, and most
graceful Earl of Rutland) well entered in the tongue, ere your Honor entered
Italy, there therein so perfected, as what needs a Dictionarie? Naie, if I
offer service but to them that need it, with what face seek I a place with
your excellent Ladyship (my most-most honored, because best-best adorned
Madame) who by conceited industry, or industrious conceit, in Italian as in
French, in French as in Spanish, in all as in English, understand what you
read, write as you read, and speak as you write; yet rather charge your
mind with matter, then your memory with words? And if this present present so
small profit, I must confess it brings much less delight: for, what pleasure
in a plot of simples, O non viste, o mal note, o mal gradite, Or not seen, or
ill known, or ill accepted? Yet heere-hence may some good accrewe, not only
to truantlie-schollers, which euer-and-anon run to Venuti, and Alunno; or to
new-entred nouices, that hardly can construe their lesson; or to well-forwarde
students, that have turned over Guazzo and Castiglione, yea run through
Guarini, Ariosto, Tasso, Boccace, and Petrarche: but even to the most complete
Doctor; yea to him that best can stand All'erta for the best Italian, hereof
sometimes may rise some use: since, have he the memory of Themistocles, of
Seneca, of Scaliger, yet is it not infinite, in so finite a body. And I have
seen the best, yea natural Italians, not only stagger, but even stick fast
in the mire, and at last give it over, or give their verdict with An ignoramus.
Boccace is pretty hard, yet understood: Petrarche harder, but explaned: Dante
hardest, but commented. Some doubt if all aright. Alunno for his
foster-children has framed a world of their words. Venuti taken much pains
in some very few authors; and our William Thomas has done prettily; and if
all fail, although we miss or mistake the word, yet make we up the sense.
Such making is marring. Naie all as good; but not as right. And not right, is
flat wrong. One says of Petrarche for all: A thousand strappadas could not
compel him to confess, what some interpreters will make him say he meant. And
a Judicious gentleman of this land will uphold, that none in England
understands him thoroughly. How then aim we at Peter Arctine, that is so
witty, has such variety, and frames so many new words? At Francesco Doni,
who is so fantastical, and so strange? At Thomaso Garzoni in his Piazza
universal; or at Allessandro Cittolini in his Typocosmia, who have more proper
and peculiar words concerning every several trade, art, or occupation for
every particular tool, or implement belonging unto them, then ever any man
heretofore either collected in any book, or saw collected in any one
language? How shall we understand Hanniball Caro, who is so full of witty
iestes, sharp quips, nipping tantes, and scoffing phrases against that grave
and learned man Lodouico Casteluetri, in his Apologia de' Banchi? How shall
the English Gentleman come to the perfect understanding of Federico Grisone,
his Art del Caualcare, who is so full of strange phrases, and unusual words,
peculiar only to horse-manship, and proper but to Caualarizzi? How shall we
understand so many and so strange books, of so several, and so fantastical
subjects as be written in the Italian tongue? How shall we, naie how may we aim
at the Venetian, at the Roman, at the Lombard, at the Neapolitane, at so
many, and so much differing Dialects, and Idiomes, as be used and spoken in
Italy, besides the Florentine? Sure we must say as that most intelligent and
grave Prelate said, when he came new out of the South into the North, and was
saluted with a woman's suit in Northren. Now what is that in English? If I, who
many years have made profession of this tongue, and in this search or quest of
inquiry have spent most of my studies; yet many times in many words have
been so stal'd, and stabled, as such sticking made me blushinglie confess my
ignorance, and such confession indeed made me studiously seek help, but
such help was not readily to be had at hand. Then may your Honors without
any dishonor, yea what and whosoever he be that thinks himself a very good
Italian, and that to trip others, does always stand All'erta, without
disgrace to himself, sometimes be at a stand, and standing see no easy issue,
but for issue wish a direction, which in this map I hold, if not exactlie
delineated, yet conveniently pricked out. Is all then in this little? All I
know: and more (I know) then yet in any other. Though most of these you know
already, yet have I enough, if you know any thing more then you knew, by
this. The retainer does some service, that now and then but holds your Honors
styrrop, or lendes a hand over a style, or opens a gappe for easier passage,
or holds a torch in a dark way: enough to wear your Honors cloth. Such then
since this may prove, prove it (right Honorable) and reprove not for it my
rudenes, or my rashness: rudenes in presuming so high, rashness in assuming so
much for it that yet is vnapprooued. Some perhaps will except against the sex,
and not allow it for a malebroode, since as our Italians say, Le parole
sono femine, and i fatti sono maschij, Words they are women, and deeds they
are men. But let such know that Detti and fatti, words and deeds with me are
all of one gender. And though they were commonly Feminine, why might not I by
strong imagination (which Phisicions give so much power unto) alter their sex?
Or at least by such heauen-pearcing devotion as transformed Iphis, according to
that description of the Poet.

Et ognimembro suo piu forte e sciolto
Sent, e volge alla madre il motto, e'l lume.
Come vero fanciullo esser si vede
Iphi va con parole alme, e deuote
Altempio con la madre, e la nutrice,
Epaga il voto, e'l suo miracoldice.
Feeling more vigor in each part and strength
Then erst, and that indeed she was a boy.
Toward her mother eyes and words at length
She turns, and at the temple with meek joy
He and his nurse and mother utter how
The case fell out, and so he paid his vow.
And so his strength, his stature, and his masculine vigor (I would, naie I
could say virtue) makes me assure his sex, and according to his sex provide
so autenticall testimonies. Lay then your blisse-full hands on his head
(right Honorable) and witness that he by me devoted to your Honors, forsakes my
private cell, all retired conceits, and selfe-respects to serve you in the
world, the world in you; and believes in your Honors goodness, in proportion as
his service shall be of moment and effectual; and that you will not only in
due censure be his judges, but on true judgment his protectors; and in this
faith desires to be numbered in your family, so in your studies to attend, as
your least beck may be his dieugarde; for he has tongue to answer, words at
will, and wants not some wit, though he speak plain what each thing is. So
have I crossed him, and so blessed him, your god-childe, and your servant; that you
may likewise give him your blessing, if it be but as when one stands you in
steed, supplies you, or pleases you, you say, Gods-blessing on him. But
though in the forefront he bears your Honorable names, it may be demanded how
is it, your Honors gave not him his name? Herein (right Honorable) bear with
the fondnes of his mother, my Mistress Muse, who seeing her female Arescusa
turned to a pleasing male Arescon (as Pliny tells of one) begged (as some
mothers use) that to the fathers name she might prefixe a name befitting the
childs nature. So called she him, A world of words: since as the Universe
contains all things, digested in best equipaged order, embellisht with
innumerable ornaments by the universal creator. And as Tipocosmia imaged by
Allessandro Cittolini, and Fabrica del mondo, framed by Francesco Alunno, and
Piazza universal set out by Thomaso Garzoni took their names of the
universal world, in words to represent things of the world: as words are
types of things, and every man by himself a little world in some
resemblances; so thought she, she did see as great capacity, and as meet
method in this, as in those latter, and (as much as there might be in Italian
and English) a model of the former, and therefore as good cause so to entitle
it. If looking into it, it look like the Sporades, or scattered Islands, rather
then one well-ioynted or close-ioyned body, or one coherent orb: your Honors
know, an army ranged in files is fitter for muster, then in a ring; and
jewels are sooner found in several boxes, then all in one bag. If in these
ranks the English out-number the Italian, congratulate the copy and variety
of our sweete-mother-toong, which under this most Excellent well-speaking
Princess or Lady of the world in all languages is grown as far beyond
that of former times, as her most flourishing reign for all happiness is beyond
the reigns of former Princes. Right Honorable, I fear me I have detained your
Honors too long with so homely entertainment, yet being the best the meanenes
of my skill can affoorde; which intending as my childs christening-banquet,
heereunto I presumed to inuit your Honors: but I hope what was said at your
Honors first coming (I mean in the beginning of my Epistle) shall serve for a
final excuse. And in conclusion (most Honorable) once again at your departure
give me leave to commend this son of mine to your favorable protections, and
aduowe him yours, with this license, that as Henricus Stephanus dedicated his
Treasure of the Greek tongue to Maximilian the Emperor, to Charles the French
king, and to Elizabeth our dread Sovereign, and by their favors to their
Universities: So I may consecrate this lesser-volume of little-lesse value, but
of like import, first, to your triple-Honors, then under your protections to
all Italian-English, or English-Italian students. Vouchsafe then (highly
Honorable) as of many made for others, yet made known to your Honors, so of
this to take knowledge, who was borne, bred, and brought forth for your Honors
chief service; though more service it may do, to many others, that more need
it; since many make as much of that, which is made for them, as that they made
themselves, and of adopted, as begotten children; yea Adrian the Emperor made
more of those then these; since the begotten are such as fates give us, the
adopted such as choice culs us; they oftentimes Stolti, sgarbati, and inutili,
these ever with Corpo intiero, leggiadre membra, emente sana. Accepting
therefore of the child, I hope your Honors wish as well to the Father, who to
your Honors all-deuoted wishes meede of your merits, renown of your virtues,
and health of your persons, humbly with gracious leave kissing your
thrice-honored hands, protests to continue ever

Your Honors most humble and bounden in true service, JOHN FLORIO.

To the Reader.
I Know not how I may again adventure an Epistle to the reader, so are these
times, or readers in these times, most part sick of the sullens, and peevish
in their sickness, and conceited in their peeuishnes. So should I fear the
fire, that have felt the flame so lately, and fly from the sea, that have yet
a vow to pay for escaping my last shipwreck. Then what will the world say for
ventring again? A suo danno, will one say. Et a torto si lamenta del mare, chi
due volte ci vuol tornare, will another say. Good counsel indeed, but who
follows it? Do we not daily see the contrary in practice? Who loves to be
more on the sea, then they that have bin most on it? Whither for change if they
have kept at a stay: or for amends if they have lost: or for increase if they
have gotten. Of these there are ynow, and wise-ynough to excuse me. Therefore I
have put forward at adventure: But before I recount unto thee (gentle reader)
the purpose of my new voyage: give me leave a little to please my self, and
refresh thee with the discourse of my old danger. Which because in some
respect it is a common danger, the discovery thereof may happily profit other
men, as much as please my self. And here might I begin with those notable
Pirates in this our paper-sea, those sea-dogs, or lande-Critikes, monsters of
men, if not beasts rather then men; whose teeth are Canibals, their toongs
adder-forkes, their lips aspes-poyson, their eyes basiliskes, their breath the
breath of a grave, their words like swords of Turks, that strive which shall
diue deepest into a Christian lying bound before them. But for these barking
and biting dogs, they are as well known as Scylla and Charybdis.

There is another sort of leering curs, that rather snarle then bite, whereof I
could instance in one, who lighting upon a good sonnet of a gentleman's, a
friend of mine, that loved better to be a Poet, then to be counted so, called
the auctor a rymer, notwithstanding he had more skill in good Poetry, then my
sly gentleman seemed to have in good manners or humanity. But my quarrel is
to a tooth-lesse dog, that hates where he cannot hurt, and would feign bite,
when he has no teeth. His name is H. S. Do not take it for the Roman H S.
for he is not of so much worth, unless it be as H S is twice as much and a
half as half an As. But value him how you will, I am sure he highly valueth
himself. This fellow, this H. S. reading (for I would you should know he is a
reader and a writer too) under my last epistle to the reader I. F. made as
familiar a word of F. as if I had bin his brother. Now Recte sit oculis
magister tuis, said an ancient writer to a much-like reading gra^marianpedante:
God save your eie-sight, sir, or at least your in-sight. And might not a man,
that can do as much as you (that is, read) find as much matter out of H. S.
as you did out of I. F? As for example H. S. why may it not stand as well for
Haeres Stultitiae, as for Homo Simplex? or for Hara Suillina, as for Hostis
Studiosorum? or for Hircus Satiricus, as well as for any of them? And this in
Latin, besides Hedera Seguace, Harpia Subata, Humore Superbo, Hipocrito
Simulatore in Italian. And in English world without end. Huffe Snuff, Horse
Stealer, Hob Sowter, Hugh Sot, Humfrey Swineshead, Hodge Sowgelder. Now Master
H. S. if this do gaul you, forbear kicking hereafter, and in the mean time
you may make you a plaster of your dride Marioram. I have seen in my days an
inscription, harder to find out the meaning, and yet easier for a man to pick
a better meaning out of it, if he be not a man of H. S. condition. There is a
most excellent preface to the excellently translated book signed A. B. which
when I saw, I ^ft soones conceived, could I in perusing the whole ABC omit the
needelesse, and well order the requisite le^ters, I should find some such
thing as Admitabilis Bonitas, or Amantum Beatissimus. But how long think you
would H. S. have bin rooting and grunting ere he could have found as he is
Hominum Simplicissimus; or would have picked out as he is Himdo Sa^guisuga, so
honest a meaning? Trust me I cannot but marvel at the disposition of these
men, who are so malicious as they will not spare to stab others, though it be
thorough their own bodies, and wrong other men with their own double harm.
Such men's worder a wise man compares to boltes shot right-vp against heaven,
that come not near heaven, but down again upon their pates that shot them:
or a man may compare them to dirt flung at another man, which besides it
defiles his hands that flings it, possibly it is blown back again upon his
own face: or to money put out to usury, that returns with increase, so they
delivered with hatred, are repaide with much more: or to the blasting Sereno in
hot countries, rising from puddles, dunghils, carions, putrified dampes,
poisoned lakes, that being detestable it self, makes that much more detested
from whence it comes. On the other side a good word is a deaw from heaven to
earth, that soakes into the root, and sends forth fruit from earth to heaven:
It is a precious balm, that has sweetness in the box, whence it comes,
sweetness and virtue in the body, whereto it comes: it is a golden chain,
that linkes the toongs, and ears, and hearts of writers and readers, each to
other. They hurt not God (says Seneca) but their own souls, that overthrow
his altars: Nor harm they good men, but themselves, that turn their sacrifice
of praises into blasphemy. They that rave, and rage, and rail against heaven,
I say not (says he) they are guilty of sacrilege, but at least they loose
their labor. Let Aristophanes and his comedians make plays, and scowre their
mouths on Socrates; those very mouths they make to vilify, shall be the
means to amplify his virtue. And as it was not easy for Cato to speak
evil, so was it not usual for him to hear evil: It may be Socrates would
not kick again, if an ass did kick at him, yet some that cannot be so wise,
and will not be so patient as Socrates, will for such iadish tricks give the
ass his due burden of bestonadas. Let H. S. hiss, and his accomplices
quarrel, and all break their gals, I have a great faction of good writers to
bandie with me. Think they to set their teeth on tender stuff?
But they shall mar their teeth, and find me tough.
Conautes frangere frangam, said Victoria Collonna:

Those that to break me strive,
I Will break them if I thrive.
Yet had not H. S. so causelessly, so witlesly provoked me, I could not have
bin hired, or induced against my nature, against my manner thus far to have
urged him; though happily heareafter I shall rather contemn him, then farther
pursue him. He is to blame (says Martial, and further he brandes him with a
knauish name) that will be witty in another man's book. How then will scoffing
readers escape this mark of a maledizant? whose wits have no other work, nor
better worth then to flout, and fall out? It is a foul blemish that Paterculus
finds in the face of the Gracchi, They had good wits, but used them ill. But a
fouler blot then a Jews letter is it in the foreheads of Caelius and Curio,
that he sets, Ingeniose nequan^, they were wittily wicked. Pity it is but
evermore wit should be virtuous, virtue gentle, gentry st^dious, students
gracious. Let folly be dishonest, dishonestie unnoble* ignobilitie scandalous,
and scandal slanderous. Who then are they that mispend all their leisure, ^e a
take this chief pleasure in back^^ting well-deseruers? I see and am sorry to
see a sort of men, whose fifth element is malediction, whose life is infamy,
whose death damnation, whose dates are surfe^ting, whose nights lechery, yea
such as Nanna could never teach Pippa, nor Comare and Balia discourse of and
whose couches are Spintrie; whose thrift is usury, meals gluttony, exercise
cousenage, whose valor bragardrie, Astolpheidas, or Rodomontadas, or if it
come to action, cruelty: whose communication is Atheism, contention
detraction, or pillardise most of lewdnes, seld of virtue, never of charitis;
whose spare-time is vanitis or villainy: yet will I not deal by them, as they
do by others. I like not reproof where it pertaines not to me: But if they
like to see their own pictures in lively colors of their ornaments
habillements, attendants, obseruances, studies, amors, religions, games,
travels employments, furnitures, let them as gentlemen (for so I construe
Nobiles, and more they be not, if they be no less) go to the Painters shop,
or looking-glass of Ammianus Marcellinus, an impartial historian, in his 28.
book about the middle, and blush, and amend, and think, that thence, and out
of themselves I might well draw a long declamation: they that understand him,
will agnise this; they that do not let them learn: let both conceive, how they
conform, and both reform their deformities; or if they will not, at least let
them for bear to blur others, because they are black themselves, least it be
said to them, as Seneca said to one not unfitly. Te fera scabies depascitur,
ut naeuos rides pulchriorum? this let them construe, and take to them the
meaning for their labor. And though I more then fear much detracting: for I
have already tasted some, and that extraordinary though in an ordinary place,
where my child was beaten ere it was borne: some divining of his imperfectnes
for his English part; some fore-speaking his general weakness, and very gently
seeming to pity his fathers. And one auerring he could be get a better of his
own, which like enough he can, and has done many a one, God forgive him. But
the best is, my son with all his faults shall approve himself no
misse-begotten. And for those exceptions knowing from whom they come, I were
very weak minded if they could any thing move me. And that husbandman might
be counted very simple, that for the ominous shreekes of an unlucky,
hoarce-voist, dead-deuouring night-rauen or two, or for fear of the malice of
his worst conditioned neighbors, would neglect either to till and sow his
ground, or after in due time to reap and thresh out his harvest, that might
benefit so many others with that, which both their want might desire, and
their thankfulness would deserve. So did I intend my first seed so do I my
harvest. The first fruits only reserved to my Honorable Patrones, the rest to
every worthy Lady and gentleman that pleases to come and buy; and though I
doubt not but ravens and crows both, will have a grain or two now and then in
spite of my teeth, especially H. S. who is so many grains too light: yet I am
well content to repay good for evil, thinking it not impossible that by the
taste of the corn those very fowls may in time have their mouths stopped for
speaking evil against the husbandman. And let this comparison of a laboring
man by the way put you in mind (gentle reader) of his labors; that has
labored so much, and so long to save you a labor, which I doubt not but he
may as justly stand upon in this tongue work, as in Latin Sir Thomas Eliot,
Bishop Cooper, and after them Thomas Thomas, and John Rider have done amongst
us: and in Greek and Latin both the Stephans, the father and the son, who
notwithstanding the helps each of them had, yet none of them but thought he
might challenge special thanks for his special travel, to better purpose
then any before him. And if they did so in those toongs, where they had so
many, and so great helps, and in toongs which were helps to one another;
they that understand, will easily acknovvledge the difference betwixt my
pains and theirs: yet I desire no preeminence of thanks; but either equal
thanks, or equal excuse. And well may I make that comparison betwixt our
labors, that Allessandro Cittolini makes in his Tipocosmia: we all fared
indeed like Seafaring men (according to my first comparison) and lanched
forth into a deep, and dangerous sea, but they had this advantage of me, that
they were many to steer a passage-boate; I was but one to turn and vvinde
the sails, to use the oar, to sit at stern, to prick my card, to vvatch
upon the upper deck, boate-svvaine, pilot, mate, and master, all offices in
one, and that in a more unruly, more vnvveildie, and more roome-some vessel,
then the biggest hulke on Thames, or burthen-bearing Caracke in Spain, or
slave tiring Gallie in Turkey, and that in a sea more diverse, more dangerous,
more stormy, and more comfortless then any Ocean. If any think I had great
helps of Alunno, or of Venuti, let him confer, and know I have in two, yea
almost in one of my letters of the Alphabet more words, then they have in all
their twenty; and they are but for a fevv auctors in the Italian tongue, mine
for most that write well, as may appear by the Catalog of books that I have
read through of purpose for the accomplishing of this Dictionarie. I would not
meddle with their defectes and errors, nor yet amplify the fullness or
perfection of my own work, farther then upon a just ground to satisfy his
good desire that wishes the best help. If any man ask whether all Italian
words be here? I answer him, it may be no: and yet I think here be as
many, as he is likely to find (that asks the question) within the compass
of his reading; and yet he may have read well too. I should think that very
fevv words could escape those auctors I have set down, which I have read
of purpose to the absolute accomplishing of this work, being the most
principal, choicest, and difficult in the tongue; especially vvriting in such
variety not only of matters, but of dialects: But what if I ask him again
how many hundred words he, and possibly his teachers too were grauelled in?
which he shall find here explaned? If no other books can be so well
perfected, but still some thing may be added, how much less a Word-booke?
Since daily both new words are invented; and books still found, that make a
new supply of old. We see the experience in Latin, a limited tongue, that is
at his full growth: and yet if a man consider the reprinting of Latin
Dictionaries, ever with addition of new store, he would think it were still
increasing. And yet in these Dictionaries as in all other that that is printed
still is reputed perfect. And so it is no doubt after the customarie and
possible perfection of a Dictionarie, which kind of perfection if I challenge
to mine (especially considering the yearly increase, which is as certainly in
this, in French, in Spanish, in Dutch etc. as we find by experience it is in
English; and I think I may well say more in this, then in the rest; yea and
in the rest mostly from this) I hope no man that shall expend the worth of
this work in impartial examination, will think I challenge more then is due
to it. And for English-gentlemen me thinks it must needs be a pleasure to them,
to see so rich a tongue out-vide by their mother-speech, as by the manie-folde
Englishes of many words in this is manifest? The want whereof in England
heretofore, I might justly say in all Europe, might more endeare the vvoorth.
Though without it some knevv much, yet none knevv all Italian, as all may do
by this. That well to know Italian is a grace of all graces, without
exception, which I ever exemplify in her gracious Highness; whose
due-deserued-praises to set forth aright I may rightly say, as a notable
Italian writer said erst of her most-renovvmed father of famous memory, Che
per capir le giuste lodi della quale conuerr^bbe o che il cielo s'^nalzasse, o
ch'il mondo s'allargasse; or as the modern Italian Homer said of a Queen far
inferior to her thrice-sacred Majesty, Chele glory altrui si esprimono
scriuendo e parlando, quelle di sua Serenissima e sacratissima Maesta si
possono solo esptimere marauigliando e tacendo. Of whose innumerable
excellencies, if not the fore-most, yet most famous I have heard, and often
have had the good hap and comfort to see, that no Ambassador or stranger has
audience of her Majesty, but in his native tongue; and none has answer but
in the same; or in the common toongs of Greek and Latin, by her sacred lips
pronounced. That the best by her pattern desire to do as much, I doubt not;
but I doubt how they can without such help, and that such help was to be
had till now, I deny: yet do I understand that a gentleman of worshipful
account, well traveled, well conceited, and well experienced in the Italian,
has in this very kind taken great pains, and made as great proofs of his
inestimable vvorth. Glad would I be to see that work abroad: some sight
whereof gave me twenty years since the first light to this. But since he
suppresseth his, for private respects, or further perfection, nor he, nor
others will (I hope) prize this the less. I could here enter into a large
discourse of the Italian tongue, and of the teachers and teaching thereof, and
show the ease and facility of it, with setting down some fevv, yea very
fevv observations whereunto the Italian tongue may be reduced: which some of
good sort and experience have merrily compared to iugling-tricks, all which
before a man know or discover how they are done, one would judge to be very
hard and difficult; but after a man has seen them and knovves them, they are
deemed but slight and easy. And I was once purposed for the benefit of all
learners to have done it, and to have showed why through my Dictionarie I have
in all verbes of the first conjugation only set down the Infinitive mood,
except it be of four irregular verbes, and wherefore in all of the second and
third coniugations I have noted besides the Infinitive mood, the first person
singular of the present-tence of the Indicative mood, the first person
singular of the first preterperfect-tence of the Indicative, and the
participle. And why in the verbes of the fourth conjugation, I have besides the
Infinitive mood, the participle, the first person singular of the
present-tence of the Indicative mood, only noted the first person singular of
the first preterperfect-tence of the Indicative mood of some very few, and not
of all, and how by those few only one may frame all the persons of all the
tences of all the verbes in the Italian tongue; without the knowledge of which,
and of those few observations glanced at before, no man can or shall ever
learn to speak or write true Italian in England: But that I understand there
be some that are persuaded, yea and affirm, that nothing can be set down
either by me, or any else that they have not or know not before; and I am
informed, that some would not be ashamed to protest they knew as much before:
and therefore contrary to my first resolution I forbear to do it, grieuing
that for their sakes the gentle reader and learner shall be barred of so
necessary a scale of the Italian tongue. If these, or others think of this no
such pains, little price, or less profit then I talk of, I only wish, they
felt but half my pains for it; or let them leave this, and tie themselves to
the like task, and then let the fruits of our labors, and the reapers of the
fruits judge betwixt us whose pains has sorted to best perfection: which ere
long (if God send me life, and bless these labors) I mean to perfect with
addition of the French and Latin, and with the words of some twenty good
Italian auctors, that I could never obtain the sight of, and hope shortly to
enjoy: And I intend also to publish and annexe unto this, an Alphabeticall
English Dictionarie, that any man knowing but the English word, shall presently
find the Italian for it. Meane-while I wish to thee, as of me thou shall
deserve, and wish of thee as I know of thee I have deserved.

Resolute John Florio.

To the Right Honorable Roger Earl of Rutland, etc.
In Italy your Lorship well has seen
Their manners, monuments, magnificence,
Their language learned in sound, in style, in sense,
Proouing by profiting, where you have been;
Bemantling grave conceits in colors green:
A Dictionarie yet, which might dispense
Of every word, the true intelligence
Of that tongue, erst of toongs the Peerelesse-Queene
You saw not there: Now see and joy the sight,
It matched, and ore-matcht by an English mate:
That he, whom in good grace your Honor places,
Graced by you, may grace you with your right.
"By ancient manners stood the Roman state;
From the ancient stock young Manors England graceth.
Il Candido.

To the Right Honorable Henry Earl of Southampton, etc.
Brave Earl, bright Pearl of Peers, peerless Nobility,
The height of arms and arts in one aspiring,
Valor with grace, with valor grace attiring,
Who more to amplify virtues ability,
To add to fore-learn'd faculty facility
Now live in travel, foreign rytes inquiring,
Honors engendered sparkles thereto firing,
Immutable in travels mutabilitie.
Though there your Honor see what here we hear,
And hear what here we learn at second hand;
Yet with good grace accept what was invented
For your more-ease, by yours-deuoted here,
So may you more conceive, more understand,
Return more complete, travel more contented.
Il Candido.

To the Right Honorable Lucie Countess of Bedford, etc.
Excellent Madame, chief grace of the graces,
Mind of the Muses, commendations letter,
To whom for virtue, Nature is a detter;
By whom wit, beauty; beauty, bounty graces:
In whom worth, Honor; Honor, wonder places;
Of whom this strife, if fortune could make greater,
Or nature fairer, or instruction better,
So fair, great, good, each-other entre-laces.
To offer words, a worthless sacrifice:
Yet words man's privilege, minds trouch-men are,
Loue-lawyers, Princes-Herauldes, marchants-factors,
If they to things, as things to them suffice.
Yet heavens, and you, accept what poor can spare,
Beyond poor power nor they, nor you exactors.
Il Candido.

A friends gratulation, to his beloved friend Master John Florio, for that
which God has sent him, and he us.
And (Florio) well may this the burden be,
Whereof thy head has traveled so long:
Minerua excepted, all the old birth's among,
Never had head such a delivery:
Were not the head an university;
A boy, a doctor-borne, and with that store
Of strangest learning in his faculty,
As England and Italy has no more.
A wondrous birth, in these childe-breeding days:
Did not his sisters make the wonder less,
Being (but for their sexe'-imperfectnesse)
As he, equal in blood, and next in praise:
These three their fathers house shall jointly raise;
And for the boy read him this destiny,
Some of his name may breed his Right delaise,
But none in the end caries the land but he.
De eodem partu, lusus eiusdem.
Dic quibus in terris inscripti nomina Regum
Nascantur flores: Phyllida solus habe.
Disce quibus terris inscripti nomina rerum
Nascuntur flores: Pallada solus habe.
Illi Mar^ tui lymphae vulgaris alumni;
At tantum nostros aureus imber alit.
B. B.

The names of the Books and Auctors, that have bin read of purpose, for the
accomplishing of this Dictionarie, and out of which it is collected.
APologia d' Annibal' Caro, contra Lodouico Casteluetri. Arcadia del Sanazzaro.
Capitoli della venerabile compagnia della lesina. Cento nouelle antiche, e di
bell parlar gentile. Decamerone o Cento nouelle del Boccaccio. Del' art della
Cucina di Christofano Messisbugo. Descrittione del Regno o stato di Napoli.
Dialogo delle lingue di Benedetto varchi, detto Hercolano. Dialoghi della corte
del' Aretino. Dialoghi delle carte del' Aretino. Dialoghi, o sei giornate del'
Aretino. Dialoghi piaceuoli di Stefano Guazzo. Dialoghi di Nicolo Franco.
Dialoghi di Speron Speroni. Dittionario volgare and Latino del Venuti.
Dittionario Italiano e Francese. Dittionario Inghilese and Italiano. Duo volumi
di Epistole di diuersi gran Signori e Prencipi scritte al' Aretino. Epistole o
lettere facete del Rao. Fabrica del Mondo di Francesco Alunno. Galateo di
Monsignore della Casa. Gierusalemme liberata di Torquato Tasso. Georgio
Federichi del Falcone and Vccellare. Gloria di Guerrieri ed Amanti del Dottor
Cataldo-Antonio Mannarino. Herbario Inghilese di Giouanni Gerardo. Herbario
Spagnuolo del Dottor Laguna. Historia delle cose Settentrionali di Ollao Magno.
Hospedale degli Ingnoranti di Thomaso Garzoni. Humanita di Christo del'
Aretino. Il Cortegiano del Conte Baldessar Castiglione. Il Genesi del Aretino.
I Marmi del Doni. I Mondi del Doni. I set salmi del' Aretino. La pelegrina,
comedia di Girolamo Bargagli. La nobilissima compagnia della bastina. La diuina
settimana di Bertas tradotta da Fer^ante Guisone. La ruffiana, comedia. La
minera del mondo di Giouan-Maria Bonardo. La vita della vergine Maria del'
Aretino. La vita di San Thomaso del' Aretino. La vita di Santa Catarina del'
Aretino. La P. Errante del' Aretino. La vita del Gran Capitano del Giouio. La
Tipocosmia d' Allessandro Cittolini. La Zucca del Doni. Le lodi del Porco.
Lettere Famigliari d' Annibale Caro. Lettere Famigliari di Claudio Tholomei.
Lettere facete e piaceuoli di diuersi grand' huomini, raccolte da Francesco
T^rchi. Le opere del Petrarca. Le quatro comedy del' Aretino. Le opere
burlesche del Berni, e d' altri, Duo volumi. Mathiolo sopra Dioscoride. Opere
di Senofonte, tradotte da Marcantonio Gandini. Ordini di Caualcare del S.
Federico Grisone. Osseruationi sopra il Petrarca di Francesco Alunno. Piazza
universal di Thomaso Garzoni. Pistolotti amorosi degl' Academici Peregrini.
Primo volume del' Epistole o lettere del' Aretino. Ragioni di stato del Botero.
Relationi universally del Botero. Ricchezze della lingua Toscana di Francesco
Alunno. Rhyme piaceuoli di Cesare Caporali, del Mauro et d' altri. Secondo
volume delle lettere del' Aretino. Sinagoga de' pazzi di Thomaso Garzoni.
Specchio di vera penitentia di Maestro Iacopo Passauanti. Theatro di varij
ceruelli di Thomaso Garzoni. Terzo volume delle lettere del' Aretino. Tito
Liuio tradotto dal Narni. Tree volumi di Conrado Gesnero degli animali, pesci,
et vccelli. Vocabulario delas dos lenguas, Italiano e Spagnuolo.
A most copious and exact Dictionarie in Italian and English.
A
A, The first letter of the alphabet, and the first vowell A. A, the sign or
preposition of the dative case, to, unto, at, at the, to the. A, the sign or
preposition of the accusative case, by, through, for. A, the sign or
preposition of the ablative case, namely being joined with privative verbes, as
Togliere, Rubbare, and such like, from, from of, of. A, the preposition to
govern the infinitive mood of verbs, for, to, for to, by, through. A, being
joined with the article la, and any noune of profession, becomes an aduerbe of
quality, or similitude, as Ala Francese, after the french fashion. Alla
soldata, soldier-like. Ab, used before Antiquo, Esperto, Eterno, from, or of.
Abastare, as Bastare. Abba, a Syrian word signifying father or dad. Abbabare,
to astonish, to amaze, to dismay: to loiter about idly. Abbacare, to number or
cast account: to rave, to seek out diligently. Also as Armeggiare. Abbachiere,
an arithmetician or caster of accountes. Abbachista, as Abbachiere. Abbaco,
arithmeticke. Also a deske, a cabinet, a casket, or court cupboord, a counting
table, a chesseboord, a pair of playing tables, a dresser. Also a quadrant or
square of a pillar below, which may serve to sit upon. Abbacinare, to dazzle,
to glimmer, to glimpse or blind the sight. Abbacinamento, a dazeling, a
glimmering, a glimps, a blearing, a dimming. Abbada, leasurely, at a stay, with
expectation, at a bay, in hope, in delay. Abbadare, to delay, to demurre, to
prolong, to hold off, to attend, to wait, to keep at a bay. Abbadessa, an
abbess, or lady of an abbey. Abbadia, an abbey, or a priorie. Abbagliaggine,
Abbagliamento, as Abbacinamento. Abbagliare, as Abbacinare. Abbaiare, to bark,
to howl, to quest or bay like a dog, to rail, or to boast and ^rak^.
Abbaiatore, a barker, a howler, a railer, a brawler, a backbiter, a scould or a
boaster. Abbai, barkings, howlings, questings, railings, scouldings, braulings,
boastes, vauntes. Abballordire, as Ballordire. Abballordimento, as Ballordia.
Abbandonare, to abandon, to forsake, to leave, to cast off, to shake off, to
give over, to refuse. Abbandono, refusal, at randon, unregarded, in forsaken
manner. Abbarbagliare, as Abbacinare. Abbarbicare, to fasten, to bind, to twine
about or clinch together, to take root. Abbare, as Abbaiare. Abbassare, to
abase, to depresse, to suppress, to stoop, to incline, to bend down, to
abate, to descend, to humble, to submit, to prostrate, to alay, to cast down.
Abbassamento, an abating or humbling or submission, or casting down.
Abbastardire, Abbastardisco, Abbastardito, to degenerate, to corrupt, to
adulterate, to bastardize. Abbastardimento, a bastardizing, a degeneration, a
sophisticating. Abbate, an abbot, a prior or religious man. Abbattere, Abbatto,
Abbattei, Abbattuto, to beat, throw or cast down, to depresse, to suppress,
to spoil or overthrow, to meet, light, fall, come or happen on by chance.
Abbattimento, a meeting by chance, an encounter, an assault, a fight, a combat,
an overthrow, a depressing, a spoiling, a hap, a chance, a casualtie.
Abbattitore, an encountrer, an ouerthrower, a combatant, a suppressor.
Abbatutamente, by chance, by fortune, casually. Abbauare, to slauer or driuell
at the mouth as children do. Abbellare, to please ones mind. Also as
Abbellire. Abbellire, Abbellisco, Abbellito, to beautify, to make fair, to
deck, to adorn, to decore, to embellish. Abbellimento, an adorning, a
beautifying, an embellishing. Also a painting that women use. Abbendare, as
Bendare. Abbentare, to rest, to be quiet, to be glad, to enjoy, to rejoice.
Abbergo, as Albergo. Abbeuerare, to water cattle, or give drink unto.
Abbeueratoio, a watering or drinking place for cattle. Abbicare, Abbiccare, to
heap or huddle up together, to make hay-cocks. Abbiendo, having. Abbigiare, to
make or become gray or ashcolour. Abbigliare, to attire, to apparel, to array,
clothe, to adorn, to set forth, or make ready. Abbigliamenti, attires,
ornaments, clothes, apparel, furniture, raiments. Abbisognare, as Bisognare.
Abbissare, to engulfe or sink, to throw down, as into bell or a pit.
Abbisso, hell, a gulf, a bottomless pit, a deep, an infinite gathering of
waters. Abbitumare, to bepitch, to cement or clam together. Abboccare, to meet
at a parlie to parlie or speak together, to come face to face, to put to the
mouth. Abboccamento, a parlie, an enteruiew, a speaking face to face, an
enterparlie. Abboccatoio, the mouth of a lymbeck or of a furnace. Abboccatore,
a broker, a days man, such as bring men to speak together. Abbollire,
Abbollisco, Abbollito, to abolish, to abrogate, to disanull, to cancel.
Abbollitione, an abolishing, a cancelling, an abrogation. Abbominare, to
abhor, to have in abomination, to loath, to detest. Abbominando, as
Abbomineuole. Abbominatione, abomination, loathsomnes, detestation.
Abbomineuole, abominable, detestable, loathsome. Abbominio, as Abbominatione.
Abbonacciare, as Bonacciare. Abbonare, to ripen, to make good or seasonable, to
assuage, to appease, to perfect. Abbonamento, a ripening, a making good, a
perfecting, an appeasing. Abbonire, Abbonisco, Abbonito, as Abbonare.
Abbordare, to approach or board, or grapple with a ship, to go near the shore.
Abbordire, as Abbortare. Abborracciare, as Abbo^rare. Abborrare, to stuff, to
quilt, to prepare, to make ready. Also to speak very thick as some men do.
Abbortare, to be delivered abortiuely, to cast untimely, to be borne out of
time. Abortiuo, abortiue, unseasonable, out of time, monstrous, untimely.
Abbortire, as Abbortare. Abborto, as Abbortiuo. Abbottare, to swell or become
venomous as a toade. Abbottinare, to mutiny, to pray, to rob, to spoil, to
sack, to subvert, to seduce, to go a freebooting. Abbottinamento, a mutiny, a
praying, a disordring, a robbing, a subversion, a bootehaling, a freebooting, a
booty. Abbottinatore, a mutinous, factious or seditious fellow. Abbozzare, to
rough hew any first draught, to bungle ill fauouredly. Abbozzamento,
Abbozzatura, a rough, course, imperfect, bungling piece of work. Abbozzatore,
a rough, unskillful, bungling workman. Abbracciare, to embrace, to claspe, to
coll, to hug, or receive lovingly. Abbracciamenti, embracements, collings,
huggings, clippings, blandishments. Abbracciatoie, a kind of tongs or mullets,
or pincers that goldsmiths use. Abbragiare, to set on fire, to blaze, to
kindle, to glowe. Abbreuiamento, as Abbreuiatione. Abbreuiare, to shorten, to
abridge, to cut off, to abreuiate. Abbreuiatione, an abreuiation, an
abridgment, a shortning. Abbreuiatura, as Abbreuiatione. Abbrigliare, to
bridle, to snaffle. Abbrigliamento, a brideling, a snaffling. Abbruggiare, as
Abrusciare. Abbrunire, nisco, nito, to make or become brown, dark, duskie or
black. Also to burnish. Abbrusciare, as Abrusciare. Abbrustire, Abbrustisco,
Abbrustito, as Abbrustolare. Abbrustolare, to burn, to singe, to toste, to
roste, to sear, to blast, to parch, to scorche. Abbrutare, to make or become
brutish or beastly. Abbruttare, to defile, to foul, to pollute, to sully.
Abbuiare, to darken, to obscure, to ouercloud, or grow duskie. Abbuire, as
Abbuiare. Abburattare, as Burattare. Abburattamento, a boulting. Abacare, as
Abbacare. Abachiere, Abachista, as Abbachiere. Abaco, as Abbaco. Abacinare, as
Abbacinare. Abada, as Abbada. Abadare, as Abbadare. Abadessa, as Abbadessa.
Abadia, as Abbadia. Abaiare, as Abbaiare. Abandonare, as Abbandonare. Abandono,
as Abbandono. Abantiquo, of yore, of old, from the beginning. Abaruffare, to
ruffle together. Abastanza, enough, sufficiently. Abate, as Abbate. Abattuta,
orderly, in proportion, as keeping of time in music. Abauare, as Abbauare.
Abece, the criscrosse row. Abecedario, a teacher of ABC. Also a horn book.
Abdomen, the outward part of the belly between the nauel and privy members,
and covers all the entrals. Abduto, led, removed or carried away. Also
lawless, one exempt from laws. Abella posta, for the nonce, purposely,
wittingly, voluntarily, expressly. Abel studio, as Abella posta. Abenche,
howbeit, although. Abentare, as Abbentare. Aberrare, to stray, to wander or gad
up and down. Abertolotto, scotfree, at other men's charges. Abesperto, by
experience, by proof, expertly. Abestone, a kind of blackish stone. Abete,
Abeto, the wood or tree called Fur. Abeterno, of yore, from the beginning of
the world. Abgiurare, to abjure, to forswear, to denounce or deny with an oath.
Abhorrire, to abhor, to loath, to detest. Abhorreuole, abominable, loathsome,
detestable. Abiccare, as Abbiccare. Abiettare, to abject, to despise, to
scorn, to contemn, to outcast. Abiettamente, abiectly, basely, vilely,
contemptibly. Abiettione, abiection, baseness, vileness, scorn, contempt.
Abietto, abject, base, vile, outcast, scornful, contemptible. Abiga, the
herb Iuie. Abigare, to bind, claspe, or clinch about as Iuie does. Abile,
able, sufficient. Abissare, as Abbissare. Abisso, as Abbisso. Abisto, a stone
which once being heated keeps his heat eight days. Abitare, as Habitare.
Abitatiuo, as Habitatiuo. Abitatione, as Habitatione. Abito, as Habito.
Abitudine, as Habitudine. Abituro, as Habitatione. Ablatiuo, the ablative case,
signifying taking away. Ablato, carried away violently or by force. Abnegare,
to abjure, to renounce, to deny. Abolatiuo verme. Look Verme. Abocca, by word
of mouth. Abollire, as Abbollire. Abollitione, as Abbollitione. Abomba, a man's
home or resting place: home again, home again. Abombare, to power in, to fill
up, to steep or lay in soke. Abominando, as Abbomineuole. Abominare, as
Abbominare. Abominatione, as Abbominatione. Abomineuole, as Abbomineuole.
Abominio, as Abbominatione. Abonamento, as Abbonamento. Abonare, as Abbonare.
Abondare, to abound, to have store or plenty. Abondante, abundant, plentious,
plentiful. Abondanza, abundance, plenty, store. Abondeuole, Abondoso, as
Abondante. Abordare, as Abbordare. Abortare. Look Disperdere, or Abbortare.
Abosimare, as Bosimare. Abottinare, as Abbottinare. Abottinamento, as
Abbottinamento. Abottino, to wrack, to havoc m^tinously, a bootehaling, a
freebooting. Abozzare, as Abbozzare. Abrame, a fish called a breame. Abrano, by
peecemeales, by mammockes, slicingly. Abrano abrano, as Abrano. Abriolo, a
singing Canarie bird. Abristicare, as Abbrustolare. Abrocare, to s^ort, or to
be h^arce. Abrogare, to abrogate, to abolish, to foredo, to disanull, to
cancel. Abronuntio, has been taken for a bo^e or whirret on the ear, or any
^es to rid one out of the way. Abrotano, the herb Southernwood. Abruggiare, as
Abrusciare. Abruscare, to make sower or sharp. to burn, to sear, to singe,
to scorch. Abrusciare, to burn, to consume with fire, to smart, to itch.
Abrusciamento, a burning, a smarting. Abrustire, as Abbrustolare. Abruttamente,
abruptly, out of order, without preface or due course. Abrutto, abrupt,
disordred, out of course, absurd. Abrutare, as Abbrutare. Abruttare, as
Abbruttare. Absentia, Absenza, absence. Absinthio, the herb Wormwood. Also a
kind of blackish stone. Absite, a kind of precious stone. Absoluere, as
Assoluere. Absolto, as Assolto. Absoluto, as Assoluto. Absolutione, as
Assolutione. Absorbere, Absorto, to swallowe or glut up. Abstenere, as
Astenere. Abstinente, as Astenente. Abstinentia, as Astenenza. Abstergere, to
cleanse or wipe away. Abstruso, secret, inward, dark or hard to be understood.
Absurdamente, absurdly, unorderly, against reason. Absurdo, absurd, orderlesse,
abrupt. Abuon conto, in part of payment, toward the reckoning. Abuon hora,
betimes, early, timely. Abuon hotta, idem. Aburattare, to boult or sift meal.
Abusare, to abuse, to misorder, to misuse. Abusione, as Abuso. Abusiuo,
abusiue, misordred, improper. Abuso, abuse, misorder, disorder, a misusing of a
thing. Abuzzago, a kind of buzzard, puttocke or kite. Acaccia, a hunting, a
hawking or a fowling. Acacia, a thorny plant bearing great timber. Also a
little shrub full of thorns, with leaves much like Rue. Academia, an
university where studies are professed. Academiante, of or pertaining to an
university. Academico, a student in any university, academicall. Acalzoppo,
skipping or hopping away upon one foot. Acambio, mutually, by exchange.
Acanino, an eawer, a casting bottle, a glass to keep sweet waters in.
Acantauola, an instrument which Chirurgions use to pull out bone^ with. Acante,
a dumb grasshopper which cannot chirpe. Also the herb Grounswell. Also a bird
called a siskin or linnet. Acantica, a kind of gum or drug. Acanthio, the
brazell tree. Acantida, as Acante. Acanto, near, by, joining unto. Also the
herb Bearefoote, Brank vrsin or Bears breech. Acapo, at the head or end,
again. Acapo chino, reverently, with the head bending, stowping, or louting.
Acarno, a sea fish having a great head and scales like gold. Acaro, wild
Myrtle or gow. Also a little worm or mite. Als odeere, or gladly. Acasa, at
home, home. Acaso, by chance, by fortune, by hap. Acaualcioni, stradling as men
use to ride. Acauallo acauallo, in post haste, a snatch and away. Also a march
sounded upon the trumpet. Acausache, because that, for so much as. Acca, the
letter h. Accadere, Accaduto, to happen, to befall, to chance, to need.
Accaffare, as Acceffare. Also as Vncinare. Accagionare, as Occasionare. Also to
blame or accuse. Accaldare, to chafe, heat or warm. Accampanare, to settle or
hang up in any frame: to bring into due form or fashion. Accampare, to
encampe, beleager or lay siege unto. Accanalare, to chamfure, to make gutter or
channel wise, to enchanell. Accanalatura, a chaneling or chamfuring, a
furrowing. Accanellare, as Accanalare. Also to dress with cinnamond.
Accannare, to pearce, prick, or streake with canes, reeds or goades. Also to
fill up to the throat. Accaneggiare, to bite, beset or bait with dogs.
Accanneggiare, as Accannare. Accantonare, as Cantonare. Accantoniere, as
Cantoniere. Accapacciato, busied in mind and body, as one ready to lose his
wits, entangled in business. Accapere, to cull, to choose. Accapestrare, to tie
or entangle with ropes or halters, to entramell. Accapezzare, to put in a
maunde, a hutch or a bin. Accappiare, to entangle, to ensnare, to catch in a
spring, to claspe, to entramel, to make in sliding knots. Accappiatura, an
entangling or ensnaring, a clasping together, an entrameling or making into
sliding knots. Accapigliare, to bind, to tie, to knit. Also to join or wage
battle. Also to bind up a woman's hair. Accaponare, to geld, splaie or lib.
Accappacciato, as Accapacciato. Accappucciare, to grow hard and round as a
cabage or hard lettice does. Accapricciarsi, to look staringly, to be
affrighted til ones hair stand for fear, to take a humor. Accarezzare, to
cherish, to cocker, make much of, or entertain lovingly. Accarrezzeuole, as
Carezzeuole. Accarierare, to bring or teach a horse to cariere. Accarnare, to
flesh, to enter a dog, to incarnate, to become flesh. Accarno, as Acarno.
Accarpionare, to dress any manner of fish with vinegar to be eaten cold, which
at Southampton they call marling of fish. Accasare, to marry, to ally, to
join house to house. Accascare, as Accadere. Accasciare, to bruise, to squat,
to squease, to make flat. Also to crud as milk does. Also to diminish or
wear. Accastiare, to fall heavily, to bruise in falling. Accattamenti,
borrowings, shiftings, findings, gettings. Also entertainments. Accattarrato,
as Accattaroso. Accattabrighe, as Cattabrighe. Accattaroso, reumatick, full of
catarrhes. Accattare, to get, to borrow, to shift for, to acquire. Also to beg
up and down. Accattatore, a getter, a borrower, a shifter, a purchaser, a
beggar. Accattatozzi, a beggar of scraps, mammocks or broken pieces of meat.
Accattalingua, a borrower or getter of the word or language. Accattastare, to
pile or heap up orderly as they do billets. Accatti, purchases, gettings,
gains, profits, vailes. Also borrowings. Accauigliare, to stringe silk or
give it a glass. Accauigliatore, a stringer of silk. Accecare, as Acciecare.
Accedere, Accedo, Accedei, Acceduto, to come, to arrive, to approach, to have
access unto, to assent or agree unto. Acceffare, to take by the snowte, to
root, to busse or beak as a hog does. Accegia, a moore hen. Some take it for
a woodcocke. Accelerare, to hasten, to dispatch or make speed. Accendere,
Accendo, Accesi, Acceso, to kindle, to inflame, to light, to provoke. Also used
in Florence for to curse, to banne, to chafe and swear. Accendimento, an
enflaming, an enkindling, a burning, a blazing, a provoking. Accennamento, as
Cenno. Accennare, to becken, to nod, to make a sign or glance at any thing a
far off, to give an inkling. Accensione, an enkindling or enflaming, a chafing.
Accenso, Acceso, enflamed, kindled, set on fire, provoked, chased. Accentare,
to accent or give a due sound to any word or letter, to tune. Accento, an
accent or due sound over any word or letter. Accentuare, as Accentare.
Accerchiare, to hoop, to compass or encircle about. Accerrimo, cruel, sell,
moodie. Accertare, to certify, to assure, to warrant, to ascertaine.
Accertamento, an assurance, a warrant, a certificate, a certainty. Acceruire,
Acceruisco, Acceruito, to heap or huddle up together. Acceruo, a heap, a
huddle, a bundle, a hay cock: a mass. Acceso, as Accenso. Accessione, an
increasing, augmentation or eeking. as Accesso. Accesso, access, approach or
entrance unto. Also a fit of an ague, or a qualme over the stomach. Also an
increasing or a flowing: a sconce. Accessore, an accessorie, a consenter or
approcher unto. Accessorio, accessarie, consenting unto, approaching unto.
Accetta, an hatchet or an adze. Accettabile, as Accetto. Accettabolo, a kind
of plant: a certain measure: a iuglers box. Also the hollownes or pan wherein
the huckle bone turns. Also a kind of instrument of music or pipe.
Accettare, to accept, to take, to receive. Accettar l'inuito, to accept an
offer or bidding when one is invited. Accettatione, an acceptance, a taking or
receiving. Accetteuole, as Accetto. Accetto, acceptable, grateful: in good
worth. Also accepted. Accheggia, as Accegia. Acchenea, an ambling nag or
gelding, a hackney. Acchetare, to appease, to quiet, to assuage, to mitigate,
to hush, to still. Acchetatione, an appeasing, a mitigation, a stilling, a
quieting. Accheteuole, quiet, peacable, pliable, gentle, easy to be entreated.
Acchiappare, to take, to catch, to lay hold on by the buttocks, to take
napping. Acchinea, as Acchenea. Accia, any yarne that is to be wouen: spinning,
cruel or statute yarne. A hatchet or a chopping knife, an axe or chipaxe.
Acciaio, Acciaro, the metal steel. Acciapinare, to miche, to shrug or sneake
in some corner, and with powting and lips show some anger, as an ape being
beaten will, grinning with his teeth. Accialino, a steel to strike fire with:
the swiuell of a chain. Acciare, to mince, to shred or chop small with a
chopping knife. Accidente, an accident, a chance, a hap. Also a fit of an ague.
Accidentale, accidental, casual, subject to fortune. Accidia, sloth, lazines,
idleness, slothfulness. Accidioso, idle, slothful, lazy, slow. Acciecare, to
blind, to enueagle, to hoodwinke. Acciecatura, a blindness, an enueagling.
Accieffare, as Acciuffare. Accigliare, to seele a pigeons eyes. Also to look
staringly. Accimatura, as Cimatura. Accimare, to sheare clothes, to top or lop
trees, to clip or to pare. Also to trim, to dress, to pranke up: to girde, to
prepare or make ready to do some thing. Accingere, to girde about, to prepare
ones self to do some thing. Accino, a crane to draw up any thing with. The
wheel of a well wherein the chain goes. The kernels, grains or seeds that be
in any fruit, a grape stone. Accinoso, full of kernels, grains or seeds.
Accioccare, as Accoccare. Also to tust, to betassell or reduce into locks.
Accio, to the end, that, because, for so much, to that purpose. Accioche, that,
to the end that, because that, least that or enaunter. Acciocche viole, a kind
of violets. Accipensero, a fish having the scales turned toward the head, and
swimmeth against the stream. Some take it for the sturgion or elops, or stuer.
Accismare, to molest, to vex, to trouble, to grieve, to afflict: to be
headstrong and obstinate: to divide. Acciucche, trifles, nifles, toies,
vanities. Acciuga, a kind of minced meat or gallimaufrie. Also a kind of
fruit. Acciuffare, to gripe, to seazeon, to pinch, to catch or clinch by the
snoute. Acciuire, Acciuisco, Acciuito, to put to exchange, to barter or trucke
for profit, to get, to procure, to atchieue, or to shift for: to bring to
pass. Acclamare, to exclame, to cry out, to call unto. Acclamatione, an
acclamation, a calling unto, a hue and cry. Acclinare, to incline, to bend or
stoop unto. Acclino, inclined, bent, stouping, addicted. Acclinatione, an
inclining, bending or stouping unto. Accobalista, Look Balista. Accoccare, to
fasten a jest upon one: to make one swallow a gudgeon: to stick or cleave
unto, to nocke. Accoccatura, a jest, a gudgeon, a fastening of a jest upon one:
a sticking unto. Accoccolare, to coure or squat down close to the ground.
Accodare, to set or fasten a tail upon one. Accodunare, to gather or assemble
together, to heap up. Accogliere, Accolgo, Accolsi, Accolto, to receive or
entertain with love and affection: to gather, to reap or assemble together.
Accoglienza, friendly entertainment* a collecting together. Accolare, as
Accollare. Accola, a sea swallow, or a sea rearemouse. Accollanare, to adorn
with chains of gold. Accollare, to coll, to hug, to embrace about the neck.
Accollatura, a colling, a hugging or embracing. Accoltellarsi, to buckle
together and fight with cutting weapons. Accolto, received or entertained
lovingly: reaped, gathered, collected, assembled. Accomandare, to recommende or
bequeath unto. Accombiatare, as Accomiatare. Accomiatare, to dismiss, to
discharge, to give license to depart, to take lea^e. Accomitare, to accompany,
to associate. Accomodamento, an ordring, settling or agreeing of a matter: a
bestowing, a placing, a lending. Accomodare, to lend, to accommodate, to ease,
to borrow, to bestow, to place, to stowe. Accomodo, at ease, commodiously, by
lone, in good plight. Accompagnate, to accompany, to associate.
Accompagnamento, a companying together. Accompagnatura, a coupling of
companies. Accompire, to accomplish, to atchieue, to finish, to end.
Accomunare, to publish or make common. Acconciare, to mende, to dress, to
redress, to set in order, to piece, to order, to settle, to make handsome: to
ease, to reform, to repair, to dight. Acconciamento, a mending, a dressing, a
settling, an ordring, a reforming, an attiring. Acconciastagni, a tinker, a
mender of pewter. Acconciatore, a reformer, a dresser, a mender, a setler, an
ordrer. Acconciatura, as Acconciamento. Acconciatamente, handsomely, orderly,
properly, in good sort. Acconcio, well ordered, handsome, settled in good sort,
mended, dressed, at ease. Also an ease or conueniencie. Acconcimi, mendings,
reparations, ordrings, dressings. Accone, a fish called in Latin Agonus.
Acconsentire, to consent, to yield, to grant or condescend unto.
Acconsentiente, consenting, accessarie, yielding unto. Acconsentimento, a
consent, a grant, a yielding or condescending. Accontare, to count, to reckon,
to number. Accontentare, to content, to appease, to satisfy. Acconto, a
reckoning, an account. Also in part of payment, toward. Acconuenire, as
Conuenire. Accoppare, to knock on the head and fell as a butcher does an ox.
Accoppiare, to couple, to yoke or join together. Accoppiatura, a coupling a
yoking or joining together. Accorare, to grieve, to pang or pinch at the heart.
as Incorare. Accorato, grieved or touched at the heart: hearty, true, loving,
passionate. Accorataggine, grief or panting at the heart: hearty affection.
Accorciare, to shorten, to clip, to cut off, to curtall, to pare, to abridge.
Accorciatura, an abridgement, a shortening, a curtalling, a paring, a clipping.
Accordare, to agree, to accord, to atone, to consent, to grant unto or with:
to tune an instrument. Accordare col fornaio, to be well to live: to have no
need of bread: to keep the wolf from door. Also to die. Accordo,
Accordamento, an accord, an agreement, a consent, an atonement, a tuning.
Accordeuole, agreeable, to be accorded, tunable. Accorgere, Accorgo, Accorsi,
Accorto, to perceive, to foresee, to be aware. Accorgimento, warines,
foresight, craft, wilines, wit. Accorrere, to run, fly or flock unto.
Accorri, helps, succors, assistance. Accorri huomo hue and cry for help.
Accortare, as Accorciare. Accortamente, warily, wisely, craftily, cunningly,
with foresight, wittily. Accortezza, as Accorgimento. Accorto, aware,
perceived, foreseen, wary, wise, wily, witty, crafty, foreseeing.
Accorrucciare, to be angry, to anger, to vex, to fret, to move, to be wroth.
Accorruccieuole, angry, fretful, wrathful, subject to anger. Accorruccioso,
as Accorruccieuole. Accosciare, to sit or cowre as women and tailors do: to
join thighs. Accostare, to approach, to come near, to join side to side.
Accostamento, an approaching or joining side to side. Accostante, familiar,
mild, gentle, easy to be acquainted with: a kind of brisk and well
rellishing wine. Accostiare, as Accosciare. Accostiatamente, cowring or sitting
low. Accosto, near, by, joining unto. Accostumare, to accustom, to use, to
be wont: to nourture or bring up to good education and manners. Accostumato,
accustomed, wont, used, well brought up, civil, mannerly. Accostumeuole,
usual, wont. Accostumatamente, mannerly, ciuilly, customably, according to
good nourture. Accottonare, to cotton or set a nap upon. Accouare, to hatch, to
lie close as a hen over her chickens, to squat, to cou^e. Accouerare, to have
recourse, or attain unto: to get shelter, countenante or protection: to
recover. Accozzare, to but: to shock: to encounter or entershocke as rams do:
to join, to fit, to unite, to put together, to shuffle or shake together.
Accozzamento, an entershocking, a shocke, a butting, a violent meeting: a
putting, fitting or joining together: a shuffling of cards: a shaking of the
dice. Accozzatura, as Accozzamento. Accquieta^e, as Acquetare. Accrescere, to
increase, to accrease, to add unto, to augment, to grow, to multiply, to
spring, to accrue, to eeke. Accrescimento, increase, accrease, profit,
advancement, accrue, eeking. Accrestare, to set a crest or a coxcombe upon one.
Accrestimento, as Accrescimento. Accrosture, to harden or bring to a crust.
Accubiare, to draw in a slipor a leash as a dog, to couple up dogs. Accuire,
as Aguzzare. Accumare, as Accumulare. Accumulare, to heap up, to lay up in
store, to heord up. Accumulatore, a heaper, a gatherer, a sauer, a hoorder.
Accupare, to occupy, to use or to possess. Accupatore, an occupier, an vser,
a possessor. Accuratamente, diligently, curiously, exactly, studiously, warily.
Accuratezza, curiousnes, exactnes, diligence, warines, precisenes. Accurato,
diligent, curious, exact, studious, sly, wary, precise. Accurbare, to bend or
make crooked. Accusa, an accusation. Accusare, to accuse. Accusatione, an
accusation. Accusatiuo, the accusative case. Accusatore, an accuser. Acento,
Acentinaia, by hundreds, by an hundred at once. Acerbare, to make sour or
sharp: to exasperate, to wax cruel or eager. Acerbamente, sowrely, sharply,
cruelly, severely, eagerly, bitterly, hardly. Acerbezza, sowrenes, sharpnes,
eagernes, tartnes, cruelty, hardness. Acerbita, as Acerbezza. Acerbo, sour,
sharp, tart, cruel, bitter, severe, eager, unripe. Acerco, about, wheeling,
circling. Acerrimo, most eager, sharp, tart, fell, cruel, fierce, sore,
vehement. Acero, the maple tree, or wood. Acetare, to make or wax sour like
vinegar. Acetosa, the herb Sorrel or Sowrell. Acetosella, as Acetosa. Aceto,
vinegar or alliger. Acetoso, sour, sharp, or tart like vinegar. Achante, as
Acante. Ache? to what end? wherefore? for what purpose? to what? Ache egl^ e
dentro? fast or loose: in or out? as iuglers use to say. Ache egli e fuora? out
or in? Ache effetto? to what end or purpose? Achefare? what to do? Ache fine?
to what end or purpose? Ache guisa? in what sort? how? Ache modo? how? in what
manner? Ache proposito? to what purpose? Achemene, an herb, which as some write
being cast into an army, will make the soldiers to be in fear and run away.
Achetare, as Acchetare. Achi? to whom? for whom? Achia, a fish called a mullet.
Achilea, the herb Milfoile, Nosebleede or Yarrow. Achirade, Achirada, a kind
of herb. Achiusi occhij, hood winkt, blindfold. Aciaio, Aciaro, steel.
Acialino, as Accialino. Acialare, to steel or temper with steel. Acicula, a
horn fish or hornebacke. Acido, sour, sharp or tart in relish. Acie, the
front of an army, a battle array: a squadron or maine battle: the edge or
point of any tool or weapon. Acidari, a kind of hat, broad about the brim,
and sharp and winding upward. Aciloffo, Andar aciloffo, to go sleep or snort,
to go fizle or fiste. Aciliaca, an ague proceeding of corruption of humors.
Acino, as Accino. Acipensero, as Accipensero. Aco, Ago, a needle. Aco a pomo, a
pin with a head. Aco da pomolo, a pin. Acolito, a resolute man, one that will
not be brought from an opinion. Acomparare, to compare, to confront together.
Acomparatione, in comparison, in respect. Acompitare, to spell or read
distinctly. Acompito, distinctly, syllable by syllable Aconcorenza, striving
one with another. Aconito, a venomous herb called Wolfes bane. Aconscienza
ritta, with a ready conscience, with a stiff standing prick. Acontia, a fiery
impression in the air like a dart. Also a kind of swift gliding serpent of
color green. Acopi, medicines, plasters or ointments to cure wearines, or
vnlustines of the body. Acorataggine, as Accorataggine. Acoro, the sweet
Cane: or as some think the great Galingale or false Calamus. Acorataggini,
sobs or pantings drawn from the heart: blubbrings. Acorpo di cauallo, within
the length of an horse. Acorrhuomo. Look Acorrihuomo. Acqua, any kind of
water. Acqua dilatte, clarified whay of milk. Acqua d' orgio, barley water or
tysane. Acqua nanfa, sweet washing water. Acqua rosa, rose water. Acqua viua,
running spring water. Acqua morta, standing puddle water. Acqua vite, Aquauite,
aqua composita. Acqua piouana, rain water. Acquaio, a cesterne for water.
Acquaiuole herb, all manner of herbs growing by or in the waters. Acquaiuole,
a kind of winde-galles full of water in a horse. Acquare, to water, to
sprinkle, to ouerflowe. Acquarella, a little brook or water. watrish matter
running from sores. Also washed or water colors. Acquarello, an eawer to give
water with. Also a kind of small single wine. Acquario, one of the twelve
signs named Aquarius. Acquastante, standing water. Acquaruolo, a water man.
Also a waterbearer. Acquastrino, that grows or lives in the water.
Acquattare, to hide or squat as a hare does. Acquatelle, a kind of fresh water
fish. Acquatico, as Acquazzoso. Vccello acquatico, a water foul. Acquazzoso,
waterish, plashie, full of water, moist, fennie, moorish. Acquedotto, a water
conduit. Acqueo, a waterie color. Acquetta, a little brook or water.
Acquetare, as Acchetare. Acquietare, as Acchetare. Acquifoglio, as Agrifoglio.
Acquisitione, acquisition, obtaining, procuring, purchasing. Acquistare, to
purchase, to get, to obtain, to acquire, to conquer. Acquisto, a purchase, a
getting, an obtaining, a conquest. Acquone, a fish called in Latin Agonus.
Acquosita, waterishnes. Acquoso, as Acquazzoso. Acre, as Agro. Acredenza, upon
trust or credit, for day, for time, at trust. Acreditare, to trust or credit,
or give days of payment. Acredito, as Acredenza. Acrepacuore, at hearts ease,
as a man's heart would wish, wallowing at ease. As we say, hold belly hold. Some
take it in the contrary sense, against ones will or heart. Acrestare, as
Accrestare. Acrimonia, as Agrimonia. Acrimonio, as Agrimonio. Acrisia, want of
judgment and wit. Acrita, sharpnes or sowrenes. Acro, as Agro. Acrocordone, a
kind of warts so small at the roots, that they seem to hang by a sinew.
Acrume, as Agrume. Acuino, a hornfish or hornbacke. Acuire, as Aguzzare.
Aculeo, a pin, a prick, a thorn or a sting. Acume, the sharpnes of the
sight or wit of man. Also wit. Acutezza, sharpnes, policy, subtlety,
vinacitie of wit or sight. Acuto, sharp pointed, keen, subtle, witty,
politic, wily, wary, ingenious. Also a pin or peg of wood. Ad, joined to a
noune is a sign of the dative case, to, unto, at, at the. As A. Ad, joined
with a verb is a preposition, for, to, for to, at, by, through. As A. Ad, with
verbes of privation is a sign of the ablative, from. As A. Adacquare, to
water, as men do wine, gardens or herbs, or cattle. Adagiare, to accommodate,
to settle, to place, to sit or ly at ease: to fit or pleasure. Adagio, at
leisure, at ease, fair and softly, by little and little. Also a proverb, an
adage or witty saying. Adamante, a diamond, an adament. Adamantino,
adamantine, hard as diamond, hard, cruel, stern. Adami, a kind of ducke,
mallard or wigin. Adanda, a kind of dividing in arithm^ticke that merchants
use. Adano, as Adeno. Adare, to be aware or circumspe^^^^ perceive, to foresee.
Adarmacollo, armed about the ^^cke, embracing or colling wise, hugging.
Adastare, to strive, to contend, to vex, to molest, to provoke or set on.
Adastiare, as Adastare. Adasto, grief, vexation, strife. Adatamente, warily,
circumspectly, subtily, formally, fitly. Adattare, as Addattare. Adda, a kind
of root. Addare, as Adare. Addato, wise, wary, subtle, circumspect.
Addattare, to fit, to accommodate or appropriate any thing. Addebolire, as
Indebolire. Addegnare, to make worthy, to daygne or vouchsafe. Addempire, to
fulfill, atchieue or accomplish. Addentare, to seize, to catch hold, to bite,
to nip, to pinch as a dog does a dear: to indent any work: to engraile as
some things in armorie are. Addestrare, to teach, to instruct, to tame, to
reclaim, to fit, to enable, to make nimble. Also to adapt, to accommodate or
suit unto, to soothe one up, to follow ones humor or bias. Addimandare, to
demand, to ask, to question, to name, to nominate, to call by name. Addire,
that is to say, id est, to wit, to speak. Addiscere, to learn. Additare, to
point at with the fingers. Additione, an addition, an adiunct. Addito, in
sight, in view, at gaze, to be pointed at. Addobbare, to adorn, to set forth,
to attire, to enrobe, to dress, to acoutre, to array, to dight. Addobbamento,
an enrobing, an adorning or costly raiment. Addocchiare, to eye, to look, to
mark, to gaze upon or take view of. Addogliare, to grieve, to smart, to ache,
to vex, to oppress or afflict. Addolcire, to sweeten, to appease or assuage.
Addolorare, as Addogliare. Addomandare, as Addimandare. Addomesticare. Look
Domesticare. Addoppiare, as Doppiare. Addormentare, to lull asleep, to fall
asleep, to slumber, to make to sleep. Addormire, as Addormentare. Addossare,
to lay or heap upon ones back, to load or heap upon. Addosso, as Adosso.
Addottrinare, as Adottrinare. Addotto, alleged, produced, brought.
Addozzenare, to make up or set in dozens. Addrizzare, as Indrizzare. Adduare,
to double two by two. Adducere, Addotto, to allege, to produce, to bring, to
lead, to bring to pass. Adduggiare, to bewitch, to charm, to enchant, to
forspeake: to darken. Adduggiato, bewitched, charmed, forspoken, ill, unlucky,
fatal, hard, dark. Adduggiatore, a witch, an enchanter, a sorcerer, a
charmer. Addurre, as Adducere. Adeguare, to equal, to eeuen, to match, to
compare, to consort. Adello, as Adena. Adempimento, a fulfilling, an
accomplishing. Adempire, as Addempire. Adena, a kind of fish called in Latin
Attilus. Adentare, as Addentare. Adentellare, to prop, to vnderhold, to
support, to lay a ground for. It is properly to ietty out, or indent stones or
timber of any unfinished building, that another may the easier be joined unto,
or that finished. Adentellato, an outbutting, or out-ietty of an unfinished
work, the groundworke of another building. Adentro, within, deeply in, far
in, inwardly. Adescare, to allure, to entice, to seek to catch by bait or
hook. Adescamento, Adescatura, an allurement, a bait, an enticement. Adesso,
now, at this instant, presently, by and by. Adess' adesso, now now, even now,
at this very instant. Adestare, to awaken, to rowze, to stir up. Adestrare, as
Addestrare. Adherbare, to grase, to feed with grass, to go to grass. Adetta,
by, at, or upon report. Adherente, adherent, coherent, taking part with.
Adherenza, adherencie, coherencie, affinity. Adherire, to adhere, to cohere,
to take part with. Adhora, now, at this instant, at times, some times. Adhor'
adhora, now now, even now, by times, at times. Adhorrire, to fear with horror.
Adhuggere, Adhuggiuto, to shadow, to obscure, to darken, to trouble, to hate,
to burn, to consume, to swallow up. Adhuggiare, as Adduggiare. Adianto, an
herb called Venus hair or Maidenshaire. Adiacente, adjacent, near bounding:
near unto. Adietro, behind, after: in times past: heretofore. Adiettiuo, an
adjective noune. Adigiuno, early: fasting, before any feeding. Adiguazzare, to
dash, to plash, to bedabble in the water: to make good cheer. Adiguazzo, in
sport, merrily, making good cheer. Adilongo, at large, at length: forthright.
Adimaino, a beast in India of the bigness of an ass, with wool and horns as
a sheep. Adimma, as Adimaino. Adimare, to descend, sink, fall or go down.
Adimesticare, as Domesticare. Adinstanza, at the entreaty, at the request: for
the love. Adinuenire, to encounter, to meet or to find by the may. Adio, fare
ye well, God be with you, adieu. Adio non piaccia, God forbid, Godsforbode.
Adipene posteme, as Adipina. Adipina, a bile, a blaine, a sore, an impostume
full of fat matter. Adirare, to anger, to vex, to grieve, to enrage. Adiritto,
foorthright, straight on, directly forth, point blanke. Adirittura, as
Adiritto. Adiroso, wrathful, angry, fretting, subject to anger, ^refull.
Adismisura, beyond measure, vnmeasurably. Adispetto, in despite, manger,
against ones will. Aditare, as Additare. Adito, as Addito. Adito, access, way
or approach, or entrance unto. Aditto, addicted or inclined unto. Adiuenire, as
Auenire. Adiuenimento, as Auenimento. Adiurare, to abjure, to renounce.
Adiuratione, an abiuration, a renouncing. Adiustare. Look Aggiustare.
Admettere, as Ammettere. Administrare, as Amministrare. Administratione, as
Amministratione. Administratore, as Amministratore. Adocchiare, as Addocchiare.
Adoganiere, as Doganiere. Adogho, as Adogo. Adogni hora, at all times, ever.
Adogni modo, howsoever, all manner of ways. Adogni tempo, at all times, ever.
Adogo quasi adunamento di feudatarij, a benevolence or gift of subjects to
their king or prince. Also that which we call to hold in Knights service.
Adolomato, troubled with a cricke or wrinch in the neck or back. Adolorare,
as Addolorare. Adoloscenza, childhood or youth. Adoloscentulo, a child, a
youth, a young lad. Adomandare, as Addimandare. Adombrare, to darken, to obscure
or ouershadow: to start or give back for fear, as some horses will do at the
shadow of some thing. Adonare, as Adunare, to give unto. Adoncia adoncia, by
ounces, ounce by ounce. Adonestare, to make honest: to excuse. Adonta, in
despite, manger, in reproach, in wrong. Adontare, to despite, to injury, to
wrong, to be or make ashamed. Adoperare, to use, to occupy, to employ or to
work withal. Adoppiare, as Addoppiare. Adoppio, double, doubly. Adoprare, as
Adoperare. Adorare, to adore, to worship, to reverence. Adoratione, adoration,
worship or reverence. Adorcare, to harrow, to grub or break ciods of earth.
Adoreza, ashadow, a shade or darkness of trees or boughs. Adorezare, to shade,
to shadow or obscure with trees or leaves. Adormentare, as Addormentare.
Adornare, to adorn, to beautify, to deck, to trim, to dight, to embellish.
Adornamento, Adornezza, ornament, beauty, trimming, trappings: embellishing,
garnishment. Adossare, as Addossare. Adosso, on, upon, upon ones back, about
one. Adottione, adoption or endowment. Adottiuo, adoptiue or fostred. Adottare,
to adopt, to endow, to foster up. Adottorare, to take the degree of doctor, to
doctor. Adottrinare, to teach, to instruct, to endoctrine. Adro, Atro, black,
pitchie, filthy, sootie, duskie, gloomie, sable, obscure. Adua, Adue, Aduo,
two by two, two and two together: a dewce at tennice play, that is two strokes
for it. Aduare, to double two and two together. Adue, as Adua. Aduedere, as
Accorgere. Aduerbio, as Auuerbio. Aduersario, as Auersario. Aduersita, as
Auersita. Aduerso, as Auerso. Aduilire. Look Auilire. Aduggiare, as
Adduggiare. Aduicinare, as Auicinare. Aduincere, as Auincere. Adulare, to
flatter, to fawn or to blandish: to clawe with one. Adulatione, flattery,
adulation, fawning, blandishment. Adusatore, a flatterer, a cogger, a fawner, a
clawbacke. Adulatrice, a woman flatterer or blandisher. Adulta, a woman
mariage-able. Adulterare, to commit adultery or fornication, to adulterate,
corrupt or sophisticate. Adulterino, a base, bastard or degenerate fellow:
false, sophisticated. Adulterio, fornication, corruption, uncleanness of life.
Adultero, an adulterer, a fornicator, a lecher, an unclean liver. Also false,
counterfeit or sophisticated. Adulto, grown, well sproong up. Aduna, together,
with, in company. Adunare, to assemble, to congregate, to gather together.
Adunanza, an assembly, a congregation. Aduncare, to bend or make crooked, to
bow downwards. Adunco, Naso adunco, crooked, bending or like an eagles beak.
Adunghiare, to catch, seize on or take hold with ones nails, claws or
pounces. Aduno aduno, one by one, one at once, by one and one. Adunque, then,
therefore. Adun tratto, at once, at a cast, at a draught, at a throw: roundly
away. Aduo, as Adua. Aduo aduo, by two and two, two and two together. Aduocare,
as Auocare. Aduocato, as Auocato. Aduolo, mourning. Vestito aduolo, clad in
mourning attire. Adusanza, like, as, according, after the manner. Adusare, to
use or accustom, to be wont. Adustare, to burn, to scorch, to parch or
consume with heat, to tan. Adustibile, that may be burned, parched: burning,
scorching. Adustione, consuming, soultrie, parching heat: a tanning in the
sun. Adustiuo, burning, parching, tanning. Adusto, adust, burnt, scorched,
parched, scalded, tanned. Aelio, a kind of hawke. Aello, a name of a dog, as
much to say tempest. Aerare, to air, to weather, to hang up in the air. Aere,
the element air: a countenance, a look, a cheer, an aspect, a presence or
appearance of man or woman. Also a tune, a sound, a note, or an air of music
or any ditty. Also a kind of wood good to make oars with. Aereo, ayrie, of the
nature of the air. Aeromantia, divination of things by the air. Aerone, a
bird called a hearon. Aeroso, ayrie, full of air, full of countenance,
cheerfulnes or good aspect. Aetite, boras or solder to solder metals. Afa,
has been used for tediousnes or annoiance. Afaca, a kind of wild weed
growing among corn. Affabile, gentle, kind, courteous, affable, gracious,
debonaire. Affabilire, to make or become gentle, kind, courteous or affable.
Affabilita, affability, kindness, courtesy, gentleness. Affabilmente, kindly,
lovingly, gently, courteously. Affacere, as Confare. Affachinarsi, to play the
porter or base fellow, to become base minded. Affaccia affaccia, afaccia
afaccia, face to face: in view or sight one of another. Affacciare, to appear
or look out of a window: to face, to outface: to come before ones face.
Affagianare, to persume or season meats, to dress feasans-like. Affalcare, is
properly taken when the horse does stop and stay upon his hinder parts.
Affaldare, to fold up, to wrinkle, to pucker, to pleit. Affaldatura, a folding,
a wrinkle, a puckring in any clothes, a ple^ting. Affalsare, to falsify, to
counterseit. Affamare, to famish or hungerstarue. Affangare, to bemire; to
bedirt, to dash with dirt or mire. Affannare, to grieve, to vex, to molest or
trouble in mind. Affanno, grief, vexation, sorrow or trouble of mind:
dreriment. Affannoso, full of grief, sorrow or vexation of mind: drerie.
Afare? Afare sia, nay, if it be so? do your worst, I care not for you. Affare,
as Confare. Affarinare, to white with flower or meal. Affarsi, to beseem, to
be seemly, to be convenient, to agree with. Affasciare, to swathe, to bind or
tie about: to huddle up, to sheaue. Affascinare, to bewitch, to forspeake, to
charm with looks or words. Also to faggot or bind up as a faggot or bauin.
Affascinatione, Affascinamento, a bewitching, forspeaking, or charming with
looks or words. Affascinatore, a bewitcher or charmer with looks or words.
Affasgianare, as Affagianare. Affastellare, to gather together into sheaues,
bundles or fardles. Affastidire, Affastidito, to tire, to weary, to trouble, to
vex, to be tedious unto. Affatare, to enchant, to forspeake or charm as
Fairies are said to do. Affaticare, Affatigare, to labor, to toil, to moile:
to tire, to weary, to endeavor. Affatica, Afatica, hardly, scarcely, with much
ado. Affatocchiare, as Affascinare, to use sorcerie, to bewitch. Affatocchiara,
a witch, a sorceresse. Affatucchiare, as Affatocchiare. Affaturare, as
Affatocchiare. Affatto, Afatto, wholly, altogether, thoroughly, utterly,
incomplete manner. Affe, in good faith, by my faith. Affebbrare, to take or
have an ague. Affedare, to trust, to give faith or credit, to warrant, to
assure, to affie, to enfeoffe. Affede, Affe, Afe, in good faith, in good troth,
in sooth, by my faith. Afferesi, a figure which takes a letter or syllable
from the beginning of a word. Affermare, to confirm, to affirm, to assure, to
stand to. Affermagione, Affermatione, an affirmation, an assurance.
Affermatiuo, affirmative, sure, assuring. Affetrare, to gripe, to grapple, to
snatch, to clinch or seize on violently. Afferro e fuoco, put to fire and
sword: to utter destruction. Aferro di cauallo. Look Briglie. Affettare, to
affect, to desire, to wish, to imitate curiously: to go against the hair, to
slice, to mince. Affettatione, affectation, a desire of that which nature has
not given: curiosity. Affettatuzzo, somewhat affected, nice, coy, minion,
ouerweening or selfe-conceited, ouercurious. Affettionare, to affectionate, to
love or bear good will unto. Affettionato, affected, affectionated, addicted.
Affettione, affection, love, kindness or good will. Also a desire. Affetto, an
affect, a motive, a disposition, a passion. Also affected, inclined, addicted,
tied, bound or liable unto. Affettuoso, affectionate, following the disposition
or passion of another. Afette, mincingly, by slices, by collops, by line and
measure. Affia, Afia, a kind of fish. Affiatare, to breath, to draw breath.
Affibbiare, to buckle, to claspe, to lace or tie together. Affibbiatura, a
buckling, clasping, lacing or tying together. Afficcare, to thrust, to drive in
or fix in hardly. Affidare, to assure, to credit, to give trust, credit or
faith unto. Affidanza, upon trust, upon credit, at credit, at trust, affiance.
Affiggere, Affiggo, Affisi, Affisso, or Affitto, to fix, to fasten, to stick
unto, to nail fast unto, to clean unto. Affigurare, to view, to mark, to
gaze upon, to take notice of. Affila, Afila, in ranks, in order, in files as
soldiers march. Afildispada, to the edge of the sword. Affilare, to grind, to
whet, to make sharp or set an edge upon. Affinare, as Affilare. Also to refine
or make perfect. Affinatore, a refiner, a perfecter of any thing. Also a sheare
grinder. Affinunundo, at the worlds end, till the world lasts. Affino, a
kinsman by marriage or bobtaile. Affiocare, to grow hoarse in speaking.
Affioccare, to flake as snow does: to hang with locks or tassels: to burst out
in laughter: to flock together, to come thick and threefold. Affioccamente,
pelmell, thick and threefold, in flocking manner. Affirmare, as Affermare.
Affirmatione, as Affermagione. Affirmatiuo, as Affermatiuo. Affissare,
Affisare, as Affiggere. Affissatione, a fixing or fastening together. Affisso,
Affiso, fixed, set on or made fast unto: an affixe, a thing fixed to another.
Affittaiuolo, as Affittuale. Affittare, to rent, to hire, to sarme or demise.
Affittatore, Affittaruolo, a farmer, a landlord, a letter. Also a tenant.
Affittagione, Affittatione, a fee-farme, a letting or demising. Affitti, rents,
revenues, profits that come of rents. Affitto, Afitto, by rent, in farm, by
lease, for rent, a fee-farme, a renting: fixed, fastened or nailed unto.
Affittuale, a landlord or farmer that takes rent. Also a tenant. Affiubare, as
Affibbiare. Afflare, to blow, to breath or draw breath, to blast. Also to fill
with wind. Afflato, a blast, a wind, an inspiration, a blowing, a breathing,
an aspiration. Affliggere, Affliggo, Afflissi, Afflitto, to afflict, to
trouble, to vex, to molest. Afflittiuo, full of affliction, afflicting.
Afflittione, affliction, trouble, vexation, persecution, torment or calamity.
Affluenza, confluence, affluence, flowing, store, abundance. Affocare, to
kindle, to burn, to smoulder, to choke, to stifle, to fire, to neale red hot.
Affocato. Look Sa^ro. Affodello, the herb Affodill or Daffodil. Affodillo, as
Affodello. Affogare, to smother, to smoulder, to stifle, to drown, to choke,
to strangle. Affollare, to breathe or blow with bellows, as Ansare.
Affoltare, to press, to thrust, to crowd, to heap, to thicken, to speak very
thick or fast. Affoltata, a hudling speech, a fast, thick told tale.
Affondare, to sink or plunge down to the bottom, to ouerwhelme. Affondere, as
Fondere. Affondo, Afondo, to the bottom, into the deep. Afforticare, to bind
up, to tucke up, to trusse up. Affortificare, to fortify, to strengthen.
Afforismi, Aphorismi, documents, or brief sentences. Afforzare, to enforce, to
force. Affossare, to dike, to ditch or moate about, to make trenches or dikes,
to endich. Affra, Afra, a kind of fish. Affrangere, as Frangere. Affrappare,
as Frappare. Affrappatore, as Frappatore. Affratellare, to become brotherly or
loving together. Affreddare, to cool, to make or take cold. Affrenare, to
bridle, to refrain, to restrain. Affreno, Afreno, in awe, bridled,
restrained, in fear. Affrettare, to hasten, to speed, to make haste.
Affrezzolare, as Affrettare. Affrico, Africo, the wind Southwest and by west.
Affrico austro, the wind Southwest and by north. Affrittellare, to fry, to
make like fritters or pancakes. Affrodisiace, a stone which once heated keeps
his heat seven days. Affrontare, to affront, to encounter, to set upon, to
outface, to conicatch, to cheat. Affrontatore, an afronter, an encountrer, a
cosener, a cheater. Affronte Afronte, face to face, opposite, over against.
Affronto, an affront, a knauish or conicatching trick, an injury, a bold
part. Affrustare, to whip, to scourge, to swinge, to shiuer or break in
pieces. Affrusto affrusto, by pieces, by scraps, by peecemeale. Affumare, to
besmoke, to dry in the smoke as baken is, or bl^^e as hearings. Affumicare, as
Affumare. Affuocare, as Affocare. Affuselare, to stretch upon a frame as
painters do canuas to paint upon it. Affusolare, to shave, to make or cut small
like a spindle. Affusolate gambe, spindle shankes. Affusolato, smugde, trickt
up, spruce, fine, also small or spinie. Affustare, to stock to breech or mount
any ordenance. Agabbo, in jest, in sport, in play. Agaglino, a kind of coin
in Italy. Agala, a flote, swimming as cork upon the water: smoothly. Agalare,
to flote lightly upon the water. Agapi, a yellow stone good against the
stinging of serpents. Agara, striuingly, contending for the mastrie. Agarico, a
drug called Agarike. Agasilli, the herb whereof Ammonike is made. Agata,
Agatha, a precious stone called an Agate. Agauignare, to bind, to swathe, to
claspe fast, to tug, to wrestle. Agauocciare, as Gauocciare. Agente, an agent,
a dealer, a doer, a factor, an ambassador, a negotiator. Ageuolare, to make
easy. Ageuole, easy, tractable, gentle, kind, nimble, light, ethe.
Ageuolezza, easines, facility, nimblenes, dexterity, agilitie. Aggabbare, as
Gabbare. Aggabbo, as Gabbo. Aggeggia, a moore hen. Aggelare, as Gelare.
Aggerato, the herb Cottonweede, golden Stechados or Mothweede. Aggettiuo, a
noune adjective. Aggetto, abject, despised, base, outcast. Agghiacciare, as
Ghiacciare. Agghiadare, as Ghiacciare. Aggiacente, adjacent, near bordering,
neighboring. Aggiacciare, as Ghiacciare. Also to underprop, to vnderhold, to
make sure. Aggielare, to freeze. Aggiontare, as Giontare. Aggiontatore, as
Giontatore. Aggiontione, an addition, an adiunct. Aggiornare, to adiorne, to
summon, to convent. Also to wax day. Aggiornatore, a summoner, an apparitor, a
conuenter. Aggiramenti, as Giramenti. Aggirare, as Girare and Armeggiare.
Aggiugnere, Aggiongo, Aggionsi, Aggiunto, to reach, to overtake, to join, to
adioyne, to annexe, to ad, to get, to obtain, to compass, to outgo, to
ouergo, to ouerreach, to ariue or to come to any place. Aggiungere, as
Aggiugnere. Aggiunta, an addition, a vantage, an ouertaking, an ouerreaching.
Aggiuntare, as Giontare. Aggiuntatore, as Giontatore. Aggiurare, to adjure, to
conjure, to urge. Aggiustare, as Giustare. Aggobbare, as Gobbare. Aggoluppare,
as Goluppare. Aggradare, as Gradire. Aggradire, as Gradire. Aggranchiare, to
crampe or have the crampe. Also to stiffen or benum with cold, to pinch, to
scratch, to torture, to seize or take hold of, to gripe with ones claws.
Aggrandire, Aggrandito, to greaten, to advance, to prefer, to make great.
Aggrappare, to grapple, to gripe, to seize on fiercely, to take hold, to
clime, to clammer, to rampe, to craule up, to shrink or draw together.
Aggrappamento, a grappling, a seazing, a shrinking, a climing. Aggratiare, as
Gratiare. Aggratiatino, a gracious, comely pleasing fellow. Aggratta, as Grata.
Also a watch tower. Aggratare, as Gradire. Aggratticcare, to fasten, cli^ch,
take hold or cling, or grapple, or gripe fast, or to make grater-wise, to make
like a hurdle, to hurdle: to broile upon a gridi^on: to be entangled in some
grate or hurdle: to be merry and blithe. Aggratigliare, as Aggratticciare.
Aggrauare, as Grauare. Aggrauio, as Grauio. Aggrauoso, as Grauoso. Aggregare,
to aggregate, to assemble together. Aggregatione, an assembly. Aggreuamento,
as Grauio. Aggricciare, to affright, to astonie, to make ones hair to stand
for fear. Aggricciamenti, astonishments, frightings, starings. Aggricciolare,
to become toyish, foolish, or fantastical. Aggrinzare, as Grinciare.
Aggrizzare, as Aggricciare. Aggroppare, as Groppare. Aggroppamento, as Groppo.
Aggropparsi, to knit together, but properly when the horse does knit himself
close together to show the strength of his back. Aggrottare, to make rugged
or craggie, to frown, to scoule, to lowre. Aggrottare le ciglia, to frown, to
lo^re, to scoule or look grim. Aggrumare, to heap or scrape together on a
heap. Agguagliare, Aguagliare, to equal, to match, to compare. Agguaglio, as
Agguagliaza. Agguaglianza, Aguaglianza, equality, a match or comparing.
Agguerrire, a^ Aguerrire. Agguindilare, to wind or reele yarne or silk.
Agguindilatore, a winder or reeler of silk or yarne. Aghedare, as Ghiacciare.
Aghiadare, as Ghiacciare. Aghiado, frost, benumbed, stiff^^ed with cold, also
perforce, upon constraint, grievously with pain and smart. Aghirone, as
Aerone. Agiambo, a kind of steel so called. Agiare, to ease, to accommodate,
to settle, to make easy. Agiato, at ease, eased, settled, at pleasure, able to
live, wealthy, commodious. Agiatamente, easily, commodiously, at leisure,
pleasantly, at will. Agies, an herb in India whereof they make good bread, and
yet the juice thereof is poison. Agio, ease, leisure, opportunity, pleasure,
delight, liberty, commodity. Agile, easy, nimble, light. Agilita, agilitie,
nimblenes, lightness, dexterity, facility, easines. Agilitare, to make easy,
nimble, or light. Agimina, a kind of tapestrie work so called. Aginina, a
kind of wouen or net work that women use to wear over tinsell or cloth of
gold or silver, to make it show the better. Agioccia agioccia, by drops,
drops by drops. Agioco, in jest, in sport, in mirth, iestingly Agiotto, a kind
of eagle that has so strong a beak that she breaks bones. in Latin
Ossifragus. Agironda, round about, about and about. Agirone, a hearon. Agitare,
to move, to stir, or toss up and down: to perturbe the mind. Agitatione,
a motion, a moving: an agitation, a tossing: a perturbation of the mind.
Agla, a kind of flat fish like a flounder or plaise. Aglaudo, a dogs name
called white tooth. Agliado, with a sword. Morto agliado, killed with a sword.
Agliata, a meat used in Italy made of walnuts and garlic. Aglio, garlic.
Aglione, as Agliata. Aglietti, young little garlickes. Agna, an ewe lamb.
Agnello, Agnelletto, a lamb. Agni, a kind of fresh water fish. Agnista
piombina, a kind of eagle called an Ospray. Agno, a he lamb. Agno casto, the
chaste tree. Agnolo, Agniolo, an angel. Also a kind of bird. Agnome, a
surname, a nickname. Agnus dei, a little lamb with a cross painted for
Christ, figured by Saint John Baptist. Aso a kind of ravenous sea foul. Ago,
a needle to sow with. Ago a pomo. Ago da pomolo, A pin with a head. Ago da
pomella, a pin with a head. Agognare, to wish, to covet, to desire, to long
for: to ba^e, to pant or be out of breath as a dog when he has run hard, to
be embost as a dear. Agognanti cani, baying dogs, dogs panting out of breath.
Agognante damma, a dear embost and weary. Agogno, Agugno, carke, care,
thought, or trouble of mind. Agoluppare, as Goluppare. Agoluppo, as Goluppo.
Agomitolare, as Gomitolare. Agone, a place in Rome to ride horses in; at this
day called Piazza nauona. Also taken for a camp or a battle. Agonizzare, to
fight valiantly or contend, as in private lists. Agono, a fish called in Latin
Agonus. Agonta, a kind of ancient coin in I^alie. Agonzi, a kind of broad
sleeves like a master of arts gown. Agora, sowing needles. Agorgogliare, as
Gorgogliare. Agoselle, as Agufeo. Agostane, a kind of plum in Italy that is
ripe in August. Agosto, Aosto, the month August. Agozzino, a butcher, a
hangman, an executioner, a provost marshall, a captain or ouerseer of slaves
in a galley. Also a clarke of the market: a surueier of good orders: a
catchpole, a serieant, a beadle. Agradare, as Gradire. Agradire, as Gradire.
Agrado, thankefully, acceptably, in good worth. Agramente, sharply, eagerly,
sowrely. Agramonia, as Agrimonia. Agranchiare, as Aggranchiare. Agranfatica,
very hardly, with very much ado. Agran pena, as Agranfatica. Agratiare, as
Gratiare. Agrauare, as Grauare. Agrauio, as Grauio. Agregare, to assemble.
Agregatione, an assembly. Agresto, Agresta, vertiuice, alligar, sowrish,
unripe grapes. Also taken for the Watercresses or Waterkarnes, or Nosesmart.
Agreste, rusticall, rural, clownish, like a swain, wild, an vplandish man.
Agretto, somewhat sour. Also Watercresses. Agrezza, sowrenes, sharpnes,
tartnes, eagernes. Agreuamento, as Grauio. Agrico, rude, foolish, clownish.
Agricola, a husbandman, a ploughman, a labourer, a till-man: Agricoltore, as
Agricola. Agricoltura, husbandry, tillage, ploughing and harrowing. Agrifolio,
the Holly, the Holme, or Huluer tree. Agrigento, in Latin Hoc Agrigentum.
Agrimonia, the herb Agrimonie or Liuerwoort. Also sharpnes that biteth the
tongue. Agrimonio, sharpnes, biting the tongue. Agrippa, a child borne with his
feet forward. Also a kind of herb. Also a wild Olive. Agrire, to make or
become sour, sharp or tart, to exasperate. Agrosto, Dogs grass or
Stitchwort. Agro, sour, sharp, tart, unripe. Also eager or fierce. Also a
field. Agropparsi, as Aggropparsi. Agrotto marino, a bird like a swan braying
like an ass. Agrumare, as Aggrumare. Agrume, Sowrenes, sharpnes or tartnes:
any kind of sour meat. Agruzzolare, to get, to scrape or spare together by
hook or crook. Agruzzo, a disease in a hawke called the frounze. Aguale, as
Eguale. Aguaglianza, equality. Aguatare, as Guatare. Aguati, stratagems,
wiles, ambushes, lurkings, deceits. Aguazzo, wash or water color. Also pashing
or plashing. Agucchia, a needle. Also a spire steeple or sharp pinnacle. Also
knit with needles. Agucchia da pomella, a pin with a head. Agucchiare, to thread
a needle, to pin with pins: to make sharp as a needle. Also to knit with
knitting needles. Agucchiaruolo, a needle or pin maker. Agueffare, to match, to
equal, to compare, to join together. Aguerrire, risco, rito, to enure or
train up to war, to make or become a soldier or warrier. Agufeo, an eelepout.
Some take it for a Lamprey. Others have taken it for a kind of dogfish.
Aguglia, as Agucchia. Also an eagle. Agugliare, as Agucchiare. Aguglino, a
kind of grain in Italy. Aguifoglio, as Agrifoglio. Aguisa, in manner, like,
as, after the fashion. Aguisare, to fashion, to reform or accustom. Agulla, a
fish called a roche. Aguluppare, as Goluppare. Agurio, Aguro, as Augurio.
Aguseo, as Aguseo. Aguto, as Acuto. Aguzzare, to whet, to make keen, to set an
edge upon, to entice, to sharpen. Aguzzatore, a grinder of knives, an enticer,
a sharpener. Aguzzino, as Agozzino. Aguzzo, as Acuto. Ah, alas, helas, oh, woe
is me: welladay: aye me. Ah, in stead of an answer when one is called: ah?
what? Ahi, Ahime, as Ah. Ahotta, now, at this time, by times, sometimes, now
and then. Ahuomo per huomo, man by man, one by one, man for man. Ai, to the,
for the, by the, from the. Aia, a barn, yard, floor or court to thresh corn
upon: a meeting place for merchants: banks, beds, or quarters in a garden. Also
as Aere. Aiace, a flower so called. Aiare, to thresh or beat corn: to houer
or linger about a thing as a kite does about his pray: to lose time, to loyter,
gaze or gape up and down idly. Aietta, a kind of hawk called a buzzard.
Aim, as Ah. Aio, a cuckoo bird. Also a long toonged knave, one full of words
that tells all he knows. Also taken for a minion, a darling, a favorite, a
white son. Aione a^dar aione, to gad, to roue, to gaze or loiter idly up and
down. Aiosa, store, hold belly hold, Gods plenty. Aira, Air, as Aere. Airone,
a hearon. Aita, aid, help, succor, assistance, redress, relief. Aitante,
helping, helpful, succouring, lusty and well disposed. Aitare, to aid, to
help, to assist, to redress, to relieve. Aitatore, a helper, an aider, an
assister. Aiutare, as Aitare. Aiutante, as Aitante. Aiutatore, as Aitatore.
Aiuto, as Aita. Aiutorij, the arm bones of a man. Aiuteuole, helpful.
Aiutorio, aid, help, succor. Aiuola, the diminutiue of Aia. Some have used
it for a little soul. Aiuolare, as Aiare. Aizza, anger, fude, mood,
provocation, wrath, fretting, vexation. Aizzare, to set on, to eg on, to
provoke, to hiss on with hissings and clappings as they do dogs upon bears.
Aizzatore, a prouoker, a setter on, a hisser on, one that sets men together
by the ears. Al, a sign of swearing, as Alcorpo, Alsangue, by the body, etc.
Al, a sign of the dative case, to the, at the. Al, a sign of the ablative
with verbes of privation, from the, of the, from him. Ala, the drink Ale. A
wing of any bird, a wing or side of a squadron of men, a wing of a dublet, the
brim of a hat, a flap of any thing. A measure which we call an ell. The dative
case, to the, at the. The ablative case, from her or from the. Put to any noune
it makes it an aduerbe of similitude. Look A. Alabandino, a kind of black
stone. Alabarba, in despite, mauger, even in disgrace. Alabarda, a holbard.
Alabardaro, a holbard maker. Alabardina, a little holbard. Also a kind of
yellow precious stone, which being drunk is good against poison, but it
provoke the bloody flixe. Alabardiere, a holbardier, using such a weapon.
Alabarra, at the bar or barriers. Alabastro, the Alablaster stone. Alabastrite,
a transparent Alablaster stone. Alabastrino, made of Alablaster. Ala buona,
simply, plainly, without fraud. Ala caccia, as Acaccia. Ala carlona, as
Alabuona. Alada, Haec Armisa in Latin. Aladistesa, at large, at length.
Alafede buona, in good faith. Alaffio, a kind of Pomegranat. Alagare, to
ouerflowe or turn to a lake. Alagamento, an ouerflowing of waters. Alaggio,
the alloy or value of coin as it is allowed by a prince, as we say sterling.
It is also the loss of money by exchange. Alamana, a lesson in music called
an Alemaine. Alambico, a still or limbecke. Alamoderna, after the late or new
fashion. Alano, a mastiue dog. Alantica, after the old fashion. Alantide, the
filme or skin compassing that skin wherein the infant is wrapped. Ala pedona,
like a footeman. Alardare, to larde, to inlarde. Alare, to wing or set wings
on. Alarma, an alarm in time of war. Ala riuerscia, waiwardly, topsie turuie,
clean contrary. Al'arma, to arms or weapons. Also a march so called, sounded
upon the drum or trumpet. Alasboccata, as Allasboccata. Allasgangherata,
lauishly, at randon, royishly, out of frame. Ala spiegata, at large, in open
view. Ala sprouista, extempore, on a sudden. Alato, near, hard by, by the
side, in respect, in regard, incomparison, winged, having wings. Alauentata,
furiously, rashly, lauishly, carelessly. Alba, the dawne, the morn or break of
day. Albagia, fondnes, peenishnes, toyishnes, sottishnes, a humor, a fancy, a
conceit. Albanello, a kite, a puttocke or buzzard. Albano, a kind of wine.
Also a kind of tree. Albarello, a gallie pot, a kind of limbecke or
stillatorie, a little measure. Albari, a kind of sea fish. Albaspina, the
white thorn. Also Lady thistle or white thistle. Albatro, a kind of wild
sour orange. A tree called a Strawberrie tree. Albazzano, a kind of stone to
make lime with. Albedine, as Albugine. Albenduccio, a let, an impediment.
Albeo, as Alueo. Also a kind of tree. Albergare, to lodge, to dwell, to lie,
to harborrow, to abide, to house. Albergatore, a lodger, a herbenger, an host.
Alberges, a kind of fruit in Italy. Albergo, Albergamento, a dwelling, a
lodging, an abiding place. Alberello, a little tree. Also as Albarello.
Alberetto, a little tree. Albero, as Arbore. Albichista, as Abbacchiere. Albio,
a pigs trough. Also a fish called in latin Aburnus. Also an iron tool that
smiths use. Also a rack to fodder cattle in. Albipede, white footed. Albo,
white, whitish. Also a fish called in latin Capitonus, or Orfum. Albogalero, a
hat like a bishops miter which the priests of Jupiter were wont to wear.
Alborata, an arbor, or a booth or bower made of trees and boughs. Albore,
whitenes. Also the daune, peep, morn or break of day. Albore, as Arbore.
Alboretto, a grove, a thicket, or tufft of trees: a young tree. Albuco, the
white or dutch daffodill. Albugine, the white of an egg or of a man's eye:
whitenes. Albume, as Albugine. Albuolo, a pigs trough: a kneading tub to make
dowe in. Albuscello, as Arbuscello. Alcaido, a spanish word, but used among
some Italians: a captain or chieftaine. Alcatrazzi, a bird as big as a
goose, and lives on fishes, a sea gull. Alce, a beast called an elke: some say
it is like a fallowe dear. Alche, to which, at which. Alchimia, the art of
Alchimie. Alchimista, an alchimist, a chimicke. Alcibiade, vipers herb, or
vipers buglosse. Alcione, a bird called a kings fisher which makes her nest
upon the sea side, and then it is a token or sign of fair weather. Alcionei
giorni, the quiet days during which the kings fisher builds her nest by the
sea which all that while is very calm and still. Alconspetto, Alcospetto,
before, in the presence, in view. Alcontrario, contrary, arsiuersie.
Alconuerso, clean contrary, arsiuersie. Alcorano, the book of the turkish
institutiones or laws called the Alcorane. Alcuna volta, sometimes, at times,
one time or other. Alcuno, some, some one, some body, any, any one.
Aldasezzo, at last, in fine, at the end, in conclusion. Aldiritto,
foorthright, right on, over against, directly over. Aldispetto, indespite,
maugre ones will. Aldisotto, under, underneath, below. Alea, an allie, a walk
or going. Aleche, as Alice. Aledia, as Alice. Alefangine, all manner of spices.
Also a kind of pills so called. Alega, as Alga. Alegoria, an allegory.
Alegoricamente, allegorically. Alegorizzare, to allegorize, to use allegories.
Alegrare, as Allegrare. Alenare, to give or take breath or wind: to rest, to
relent, or to enseame a horse, to bring in breath. Alepe, a little fish: the
name of an herb: the name of an ointment. Aleppe, the first hebrew letter.
Alerta, ready, heedefully, prepared, watching always at an advantage.
Alessandrina, the herb perwinkle. Alessare, to boil or sees meat. Alesso,
boiled or sodden meat. Alettere discatole, plainly, in all men's view: as
plain as a pack-staffe. Aletteria, a stone in the mawe or gizard of a cock
about the bigness of a bean, and in color like crystal. Alettorio,
Aletorio, as Aletteria. Alfa, the first greek letter: a beginning. Alfabeto,
an alphabet, or a b c. Alfabetico, alphabeticall, in order of letters. Alfana,
a breeding mare, a strange, iadish or wild mare. Alfar del giorno, by break,
peep, or dawne of day. Alfeste, a kind of fish. Alfiero, an ensign or
standerd bearer. Also a bishop at chesse. Alfino, Alfero, as Alfiero. Alfio, an
itch, a tetter, a ringworme, a spauin in a horse: the herb liuerwoort.
Alfonsino, a kind of coin in Naples. Alfordio, a kind of venomous serpent.
Alga, sea-grasse, duckweede, reeke or reits. Also spelt corn. Algebra, the
art of bone setting. Also of arithmetike or figurative numbers. Algebrista, a
bone setter: an arithmetician. Algente, cold, chill, freezing. Algere, Algo,
Alsi, Also, to chill; to freeze for cold. Alghebra, as Algebra. Algiro, about,
turning about. Also in Latin Dianapharum. Algironi, a kind of ravenous sea
foul. Algura, as Augurio. Alguzzino, as Agozzino. Alheppe, used of Dante for
Alehebbe, he had wings. Alhor, Alhora, then, at that time. Alhotta, as Alhor.
Alia, a band, a troop, a company or a wing of men. Aliare, to go or sneake,
or range about sneakingly. Alibanti, such as die for want of moistnes. Alibire,
to make lawful. Alica, as Alga. Alice, a little fish called a pilcher or a
sprat, like a herring. Alicorno, an unicorn. Also an unicorns horn. Alida,
alida carne, stale, tainted, mortified or flie-bitten meat. Alidare, to
mortify, taint or make meat stale. Alie, used for Ale: wings. Alienare, to
alienate or estrange. Alienatione, an alienation or estranging. Alieno, an
alien, a stranger, a foreign, a frenne. Alieta, a kind of eagle which alone
fixes her eyes against the sun. Aliga, as Alga. Aligare, to tie or bind
together. Aligero, one bearing wings. Alima, an herb whereof eating a little
one shall be kept a long time from hunger. Alimentare, to nourish, to feed,
to sustain. Alimento, nourishment, sustenaunce, food. Al'impensata, unawares;
extempore, not thought upon. Al'imprescia, in great haste. Al'improuiso, on a
sudden, at unawares, unprovided for, extempore. Al'improuista, as Al'improuiso.
Al'incanto, at who gives most, sold by a common crier. Al'incontro, on the
other side, ouer-against, opposite, contrary. Alimo, a kind of tree in India.
Some take it for Licorice. Aliossi, a play called Ni^e pins or keeles, or
skailes. Alipo, a weed growing upon rocks by the sea side. Aliso, a blew
Lilly flower. Alisma, a kind of weed growing in fens or marshes. Alitare, to
breath, to pant or draw breath. Alito, breath, breathing or panting. Aliungia,
the plant Spikenard. Alla, at the, to the, from the, of the, according, as,
like. Allacciare, to tie, to bind, to knit, to entangle, to lace. Also to
trap. Allacciamenti, latings, tyings, entanglings, trappings. Alla distesa, at
length, at large. Alla facchina, homely, basely, after the porters fashion,
clownishly. Alla finfine, in the end, at last, in fine. Alla foggia, after the
fashion, like as. Alla fuggita, by the way, cursoriwise, secretly, running
away. Allagare, to ouerflowe, to drown. Alla giornata, in time, day by day, in
tract of time. Allaginetta, after the manner of a ginnet horse. Alla grossa,
grossly, homely, clownishly. Alla lunga, at length, at last, in time, at
large. Alla malhora; with a mischief, in an ill hour. Alla mano, redily, at
hand. Alla muta, dumbly, mutely. Alla non pensata, extempore, not thought upon.
Allancare, to breath, to pant, to sigh, to sob, to throb, to blubber.
Allanciare, to fling, to hurl, to cast, to throw with violence. Allarappa,
snatchingly, higledi-pigledie, shiftingly, rap and run. Allargare, to enlarge,
to spread, to unfold, to set free. Allargatura, an opening, an enlarging a gap.
Allaria, the herb sauce alone, or Jack of the hedge, which tastes of
garlic. Alla rinfusa, pelmell, helterskelter, higledi-pigledie, confusedly.
Alla rotta, disorderly, confusedly, pelmell. Allardare, to larde, to inlarde.
Alla sbardellata, roistingly, swaggeringly, rashly, carelessly. Alla sbracata,
carelessly, without shame or honesty. Alla sboccata, without shame or honesty,
impudently. Alla scapestrata, riotously, swaggringly. Alla scatenata,
furiously, madly, rashly, desperately. Allasciare, to let loose, to slacken, to
unbend, to weaken. Alla sfilata, disordredly, without rule order or files. Alla
sfuggiasca, as Alla sfuggita. Alla sfuggita, without stay, cursory, running on
by stealth, a snatch and away. Alla spianacciata, as Alettere discatole.
Allasser, an herb which yeeldes a kind of bitterish sugar. Allattare, to give
suck, to feed with milk. Allatiuo caso, as Ablatiuo. Allato, as Alato. Alla
tua barba, in despite of thy beard. Alla volta, toward, toward. All, to the.
Also a kind of bird. Allecchiare, to lick, to sleeke, to trim, to deck: to
faune, to entice, to flatter, to make smooth, to stroke ones beard: to lick
and wash himself as a cat does. Allegare, to allege, to direct unto.
Allegatione, an allegation, an alleging. Alleggeramento, as Alleggiamento.
Alleggerire, to lighten, to ease, to disburden, to refresh. Alleggiamento, an
ease, a refreshing, a lightning. Alleggiare, as Alleggerire. Allegranza, as
Allegrezza. Allegrare, to rejoice, to glad, to be merry, to wax merry, blithe
or frolike. Allegramente, gladly, merrily, pleasantly, iocondly. Allegrezza,
mirth, joy, solace, pastime, glee, sport. Also a march sounded on trumpet and
drum in sign of victory. Allegro, joyful, merry, iocond, sportfull,
pleasant, frolike. Alleluia, praise to God or God be praised. Also the herb
wood-sorell. All mani, together by the ears, in hand. Allenare, as Alenare.
Allenire, to assuage, to relent, to mollify, to soften. Allenta^e, to relent,
to let go, to loosen, to slack, to appease, to stay, to sloe, to delaie, to
put of, to defer, to diminish. Allessare, as Alessare. Allesso, as Alesso.
Alletta, a fish called a mullet. Allettare, to entice, to allure, to inuegle,
to flatter. Allettamenti, enticements, allurements, flattrings. Allette,
lodgings, dwellings, hosteries, a shroud, a shelter. Alleuare, to foster, to
breed, to bring up, to feed, to nourish. Also to take from. Alleuatrice, a
midwife, a nurce, a foster-mother. Alleuiare, to ease, to lighten, to
disburthen. Alleuiamento, an ease, a lightning, a disburdening. Alleuolte, at
times or some times. Alhora, then, at that time. Alhotta, then, at that time.
Alliaria, as Allaria. Allignare, to prosper, to take root, to thrive, to
fadge, to grow, to follow kind. Allieuare, as Alleuare. Allieuo, a foster
child or servant of ones bringing up. Alligare, to bind or tie with or unto.
Allincanto, as Al'incanto. All'incontro, as Al'incontro. All'ingrosso, in
gross, by the great. Allisciare, as Allecchiare. Allodola, Allodetta, a lark.
Look Darel'allodola. Allogare, to place, to settle, to set in a place, to let,
to rent, to farm, to demise. Allogagioni, farmings, lettings. Also placings.
Alloggiare, to lodge, to harbor. Also to quarter or lodge a camp or soldiers.
Alloggiamento, a lodging, a harbor. Also the part of a camp whereon any
company or numbers of soldiers be quartered and lodged. Allongare, to prolong,
to defer, to put of, to lengthen, to prorogue. Allongoandare, in time, in
process of time. Allontanare, to elonge, to go far off or distant, to
separate, to alienate. Alloppiare, Alopiare, to bring or lull a sleep by art,
by drugs or potions, to stupefact ones senses. Alloppiato vino, wine that will
provoke sleep. Allora, then, at that time. Alloro, the laurel or baie tree.
Alludere, Alludo, Allusi, Alluso, to allude, to have reference unto, to dally
or play with. Allumare, to kindle, to light, to illumine. Also to allume
silks or clothes before they can be died into any light color. Alluminare, as
Allumare. Allungare, as Allongare. Allungoandare, as Allongoandare.
Allusingare, to flatter, to faune, to blandish. Allusione, an allusion, or
reference unto. Alma, the soul of man. Almadeu, a strange character or name of
devil that nigromants use to call upon. Almadia, a little boat, wherrie or
cockboate. Almen, Almeno, at least. Almicanthari, the circles imagined, to
pass through every degree of the meridian, parallel to the horizon up to the
zenith. Almiraglio, Almirante, an admiral of the seas. Almocohol, as Burra.
Almo, high, omnipotent, life-giuer, sustainer, holy, fair, sovereign. Also
an alder tree. Also a foster father, ones nurces husband. Also nourishment.
Almoniaca, an apricock plum. Almucabala, as Algebra. Alno, an aller or alder
tree. Alnonegro, the black alder tree or sugerchest whereof some make arrows.
Alocco, an owl, or howlet. Also a silly gull, or fond ninnie. Aloe, a bitter
drug called aloes, whereof there be diverse sorts. Aloetta, a lark. Alogia,
want of reason. Alopecia, the falling away or shedding of the hair through
diseases. Alopiare, as Allopiare. Al'opposito, ouer-against, on the contrary
part. Alosa, a fish that kills the tunnie to have a vain in his jaws. Also
as Laccia. Alosso, an herb which diers use called madder. Alospicchio del
sole, at the rising or peeping forth of the sun. Alostendardo, the name of a
march upon the drum and trumpet. Alpa, Arpa, an instrument called a harp.
Alpari, alike, even, hand to hand. Alpe, Alpi, the alps or high mountains.
Alpedica pernice, a kind of partridge breeding on mountains. Alpeggio andare,
at woorst, if the woorst fall out. Alpestrezza, craggednes, wildenes, ruggednes
of hills. Alpestre, alpish, mountanous, craggie, wild, rugged. Alphi, a kind
of vlceration. Also a morphew or staining of the skin. Alphitomantia,
divination or witchcraft by corn. Alpie, Alpiede, at the foot or below.
Alpisano, borne and bred in the mountains or alps. Alpiu, at the most, to the
utmost. Alpiu alpiu, at the very most, at the utmost. Alpossibile, with the
most, to the uttermost. Alpostu^to, altogether, with all possibility, with might
and maine, to the uttermost of all notwithstanding any thing else. Alpresente,
now, at this present. Alquanti, some, some few in number. Alquanto, some,
somewhat in quantity. Alrado, seldom times. Alse, did freeze for cold.
Alsereno, in the clear, in the open air. Alsi, also, moreover, eftsoone.
Altabasso, a kind of wrought velvet with high and low work. Also a kind of
musical instrument with strings. Altalena, a kind of fish or serpent. Altana,
a bay window made out of the roof of a house. Altano, a pleasant gale of wind
blowing on the sea. Altanto, as much more. Altardi, late, lately, at last,
lastly. Altar, an altar of a church. Also an oil mill. Altea, a kind of
herb called Smallage. Alteluogo, in Latin Colophon. Alterare, to alter, to
change, to remove. Also to wax angry. Alteratione, alteration, change.
Alteramente, proudly, stately, disdainfully, haughtily. Altercare, to contend,
to chide, to brabble, to braute, to wrangle, to debate. Altercatione, a
contention, a chiding, a wrangling, a brabling, a debate. Alterezza,
haughtines, pride, statelines, disdainfulnes. Alterio, Alterigia, as Alterezza.
Alternare, to do by course or turn: to change or be inconstant. Alternamente,
by turns, by courses, interchangeably. Altero, haughty, proud, stately,
disdainful, high minded. Altersi, as Altresi. Altezza, height, highness,
deepenes. Also Altesse, a title given to Dukes. Altezzoso, as Altero.
Altieramente, as Alteramente. Altierezza, as Alterezza. Altiero, as Altero.
Altimetria, measuring of height or altitude. Altitonante, high thundering.
Altitudine, as Altezza. Alto, high, eminent, lofty, deep, profound. Also a
treble in song and music. Alto, is used for broad. As Pannoalto, broad cloth.
Altouolante, high flying. Altrabacche, a kind of great cart, wagon, or such
thing that will carry much. Altramente, Altrimente, otherwise. Altrauolta,
another time, at other times. Altresi, also, eke, eftsoons, moreover, over and
besides, likewise, withal, as well, as much besides. Altretale, of the
selfsame quality, such another. Altretanto, as much more. Altrice, a nurse,
one that nourishes and maintains. Altrilo, the bird called a wren. Altro,
other, another, ought else, any thing else, except. Altroche, except, saving,
reserving, if not. Altrocivuole, something else is required. Altronde, from
elsewhere, elsewhence. Altroue, elsewhere, somewhere else. Altrui, others, to
others, of others, from others, other men's. Altura, height, altitude, depth.
Altutto, wholly, altogether. Aluala, an acquittance, a bill, a schedule, a
warrant, a ticket. A Luca ti vidi, those days are past, acquaintance is gone,
I know you no more. Alueo, a bee-hiue. Also a shelter, a cover or a roof. The
channel of a river, the pipe of any conduit, a vain in any body, a bathing
tub: the bulk, belly or bottom of a ship. Aluerde, almost in the end: as we
say, in the socket. Aluiuo, lively, done or drawn to the life. Alumare, as
Allumare. Alume, allome. Alume di rocca, roche allome. Alungo andare, as
Allongoandare. Alunno, a nurse child, a foster child, a child kept for Gods
sake. Aluo, a woman's womb, a tomb or sepulcher: the bed or bottom of a
river. Alzana, a crane to draw or hoise up any thing with: properly a halse or
cable to draw a boat or ship withal. Alzaniere, a halsier or he that haleth a
ship or barge by a rope: a halse or halsier in a ship. Alzare, to advance, to
raise, to lift up, to eleuate, to hoise up, to heave, to rear up. Alzare il
fianco, to fare well, to make good cheer, to have the world at will. It is
prouerbially used. Alzare vela, to hoise up sail. Amabile, loving or to be
beloved, amiable. Amacco, dog cheap, plenty, hold belly hold. Also scot free,
at other men's charges. Amadriadi, nymphs of the woods. Amainare, to piece or
patch a ship or a sail, to amain. Amalare, to sicken, to fall sick. Amalato,
sick or diseased. Amalgame, a kind of drug that Alchimistes use. Amano, at
hand, ready, ^y. Aman amano, in order, orderly, by and by, anon, presently.
Aman chitide, a stone that coniurers use to conjure up infernal spirits. Aman
destra, at the righthand. Amandio, a stone of diverse colors good against
poison, which makes him victorious that wears it about him, and teaches to
interpret dreams or riddles. Amandolata, a kind of meat made of almonds or
almond milk. Aman gionte, with joined or clasped hands, humbly. Aman manca, at
the left hand. Amannire, Amannito, to seize or lay hands on. Also to
accomplish. Amanpiene, with full hands. Aman salua, safely, without danger.
Amantici rami, shadie, shadowing or spreading boughs. Amante, a lover. Also
loving. Amantilla, the herb Valerian, Capons tail or Setwall. Amantino, as
Amandio. Aman vuote, empty handed. Amanza, a man's mistres, love, sweet heart or
beloved, a paramour. Amarancino, the name of a precious ointment. Amaranto, the
herb Maudlin: and also the Flower gentle. Amaranto g^allo, goldilocks, Gods
flower or Gold-flower. Amare, to love, to be in love, to delight, to please, to
like, to rejoice. Amareggiare, to make or taste bitter. Also to grow or flow
to a sea. Amarella, the herb Mugwort. Some take it for Feuerfew. Amaretto,
bitterish, somewhat bitter. Amarezza, Amaritudine, bitterness. Amaricino, a
kind of precious ointment. Also somewhat bitter. Amarine, the first cheries
that come, called so because they are something bitter. Amarire, to make
bitter. Amaro, bitter, tedious, sharp, spiteful, cursed, hard to be appeased,
breame. Amartora, a beast called a Martin. Amarulente, bitter, spiteful,
malicious. Amarulentia, bitterness, spitefulnes. Amassa, by heaps, gods plenty.
Amassare, to heap up. Amatisto, a precious stone called an Amathyste. Amatore,
a lover, an amorous loving man. Amatorio, to be beloved or loving. Amatrice, a
woman that loves. Amaturare, to ripen, to grow ripe. Amazzacchera, as
Amazzata. Amazzare, to kill, to slay, to slaughter, to quell, to murder.
Amazzamenti, killings, slayings, slaughtrings, murders. Amazzata, a fishing or
angling rod. Also to be taken in a bait as fishes are. Also standing stark
still as one key cold* Amba, a fruit like an olive but something bigger.
Ambage, a reeling or dizines in the head. Also an ambiguitie, a compass or
circuit of words, that makes the sense doubtful. Ambagia, noie, grief,
torment, vexation, a lothsomnes, a dismaie, a swouning or qualme over the
stomach: an ecstasy or passion of the mind, a shortness of ones breath.
Ambascia, as Ambagia. Ambasciadore, Ambasciatore, an ambassador, a legaete, a
messenger. Ambasciare, to grieve, to vex, to torment, to fall into a swoune,
to lose ones breath. Ambasciata, Ambasciaria, an embassage, a message. Ambassi,
ams ace, two aces at a cast at dice. Ambastia, as Ambagia. Ambedue, Ambeduo,
both. Ambi, both. Ambiare, to amble, to pace it. Ambiatura, Ambio, an ambling
pace. Ambiguita, ambiguitie, doubtfulnes, uncertainty. Ambiguo, ambiguous,
uncertain, doubtful. Ambio, an ambling pace. Ambire, Ambisco, Ambito, to
aspire, to compass or seek after with ambition. Ambitione, ambition, an
immoderate desire, a circuit or compassing. Ambitioso, ambitious, very desirous
of honor. Ambito, a circle, an ambition, a compass, an unlawful suite for
offices. Ambligonio, blunt cornered. Ambo, both. Ambodestro, that has the use
of both hands alike. Ambra, Ambre, Ambro, amber such as they make beads with.
Also ambergreece. Also the sperme of a whale fish called Parmacetie. Ambracane,
amber greece. Ambracani, pomanders made of amber greece. Ambragatta,
ambergreece. Ambragialla, yellow or stone amber. Ambrici, tiles laid overthwart
between other tiles. Ambrogino, a kind of coin in Italy. Ambrosia,
ambrosia, a meat that the gods are said to feed upon. Also an herb called Oak
of Jerusalem, or of Cappadocia. Ambrosine, a kind of almond so called. Also
Dandelion, Priests crown, Swines snout, Monks head or Dogs teeth. Ambubeia, a
kind of herb. Ame, as Amen, to me. Ambulatione, a walking, a walking place, a
gallerie, an alley. Ameda, Amita, an aunt. Amello, a kind of weed growing in
the water. Amen, Ameno, at least, within less or within a little. Amen, amen,
so be it. Amenadito, at fingers end, by rote, by heart, perfectly. Amenare, to
lead, to bring, to direct. Amenazampetto, as Amenadito. Amenazzare, to drive,
to drove or bring cattle into droues: to threaten. Amenda, amends or
satisfaction, a correction. Amendare, to amend, to correct, to redress.
Amendola, an almond. Amendolo, an almond tree. Amendua, Amendue, Amendui,
Amenduo, both, both together. Amenduni, idem. Amenita, pleasance, pleasantnes
or delightsomnes to the eye. Ameno, pleasant, fair, delightsome to the eye or
in situation. Amente, by rote, by heart. Imparar amente, to learn by rote.
Amerochita, a fish called in Latin Notola. Ametistino, an amathist. Also an
azure or violet color that painters use. Ametisto, as Amatisto. Amfodillo, the
Affodill or Daffodill f^ower. Amia, a fish like a Tunie but has no scales,
which having swallowed the hook, nibleth the line in sunder, and so freeth
himself. Amiamo, a kind of stone so soft that it is both spun and wouen into
cloth, which like Salamander will endure the fire: in such were the Egyptians
wont to wrap their kings being dead, that so they might burn them and keep
the ashes of them. Amfisbena, as Anfisbena. Amfiscij, as Amphiscij. Amianto, as
Amiamo. Amica, a she friend, a lover, a paramour, a concubine, a leman.
Amicabile, amiable, friendly, kind, loving. Amicare, to make or become a
friend. Also to crum or crumble. Amicheuole, friendly, loving, kind. Amicitia,
friendship, good will, good fellowship amity, friendlines. Amico, a friend, a
lover, a paramour, a make favorable, propice. Amida, an aunt. Amidare, to
starch. Amido, starch. Also a kind of grain or rise. Aminuto, by retaile, by
small pieces, distinctly, severally, smally. Amir, a kind of drug or fruit
coming from India. Amissione, a loss or leesing. Amista, as Amicitia. Amita,
an aunt. Amitare, to starch. Amito, starch. Amitarrice, a starcher. Amma, a
lath or thin small board. Ammaccare, to bruise, to break or frush together.
Ammaccatura, a bruise, a bruising, a frushing together. Ammacchiare, as
Macchiare. Ammaestrare, to teach, to instruct. Ammaestramento, a teaching or
instruction. Ammaestreuole, cunning, skillful, able to teach or to be taught.
Ammagliare, to waste, to destroy, to bruise, to break, to clatter, to frush,
to havoc. Also to charm or bewitch. Ammagrire, to make or become lean, to
to take down ones fat. Ammaliare, to charm, to bewitch, to besot, to
forespeake. Ammanire, to prepare or make ready to ones hand. Ammannare, to
prepare, to deck, to set in order, to set forth. Also to gather together by
handfuls as gleaners do corn. Ammantare, to cloak, to enmantle, to enrobe, to
deck, to cover. Ammantellare, as Ammantare. Ammantino, a kind of precious
stone of many colors. Ammanto, as Manto. Ammarcire, as Marcire. Ammareggiare,
as Amareggiare. Ammaricare, as Ramaricare. Ammarire, to make bitter.
Ammartellare, to hammer, to forge, to beat, to stamp, to appassionate with
jealousy. Ammartellato, one that is passionated with love or jealousy. Also
forged or hammered. Ammascarare, as Mascherare. Ammasciare, as Ammassare.
Ammassare, to gather, to heap, to huddle up, to make solid, massy or stiff.
Ammassicchiare, as Ammassare. Ammassicciare, as Ammassare, but properly to
harden, enure, or accustom himself to endure all hardness, to become, grow or
make massy or tough. Ammasso, a heap, a mass, a huddle, a gathering.
Ammattonare, as Mattonare. Ammattonato, as Mattonato. Ammattire, to become
foolish or mad. Ammazzare, as Amazzare. Ammazzamenti, as Amazzamenti.
Ammazzata, Ammazzacchera, as Amazzata. Ammazzatore, a killer. Amme, as Amen.
Ammelato, a bright dun color of a horse. Ammenda, Ammendamento, Ammendatione,
amends, amendment, satisfaction. Ammendare, as Emendare. Ammentare, to
remember, to call to mind, to mention, to name, to ming. Ammettere, Ammetto,
Ammisi, Ammesso, to admit, to auowe, to allow. Ammessione, an admission, an
allowing. Ammi, the herb Ammie, Ameos, herb William, bulwoort or bishops
weed. Ammicare, to mark, to note, to point at, to glance at, to nod at, to
becken or make signs at any thing, namely with winking of the eyes. Ammiccare,
as Ammicare. Amminiculo, any kind of help, furtherance, aid, or assistance.
Amministrare, to administer. Amministratione, administration. Amministratore,
an administrator. Ammirabile, admirable, wondrous. Ammiraglio, an admiral of
the sea. Ammirando, as Ammirabile. Ammirare, to admire, to wonder at.
Ammiratione, admiration, wonderme^t. Ammiratiuo, admirable, wondrous.
Ammirante, an admiral of the seas. Ammissario, a stallion horse. Ammissibile,
that mayor or is worthy to be admitted. Ammogliare, to wiue, to wed, to
marry. Ammogliamento, a marriage, a wedding. Ammollare, as Ammolire.
Ammollire, Ammollito, to mollify, to soften, to appease, to steep in water.
Ammoniaco, a juice or gum that comes of an herb called Agasilli.
Ammonimento, as Ammonitione. Ammonire, to warn, to admonish. Ammonitione,
warning or admonition. Ammonitore, an admonisher. Ammontare, to heap up, to
cock as they do hay, to amount. Ammontonare, as Ammontare. Ammorbare, to
infect or make contagious, to fester. Ammorbidare, to soften, to mollify, to
smooth. Ammorbidire, as Ammorbidare. Ammorciare, to quench, to extinguish.
Ammortare, to draw toward death, to quench, to extinguish. Ammorzare, as
Ammorciare. Ammostare, to make must or new wine. Ammucchiare, to heap up, to
cock into heaps or cocks as hay is, to hoord up, to muzzell. Ammuffare, to
grow mustie, to dance, to leap, to skip, to excel: to peep forth.
Ammurcare, to calke a ship. Also to snort. Ammusare, to root as a pig, to
busse, to break: to snout, to bill: to muse. Ammutire, to become or make dumb
or silent, to put to silence. Ammutinare, to mutiny, to seduce, to rebel.
Ammutinamento, a mutiny, an insurrection, a rebellion. Ammutolire, as
Ammutire. Amnestia, forgetfulness of things past. Amo, a fishing hook.
Amomeglio, I would rather, I had rather. Amomo, a sweete-smelling shrub in
Armenia with leaves like the vine, called our Ladies Rose, or the Rose of
Jerusalem, or garden Pepper. Amonte, to swig or deal again at cards.
Amoraccio, filthy love or lust. Amore, love, favor, grace, desire, lust,
affection, sake. Amore dei, gratis, for Gods sake. Amor d'hortolano,
Goosegrasse, Gooseshare, Cleuer or Cleuergrasse. Amoreggiare, to play the
wanton, to make love, to court with lust. Amoretto, an amoret, a little love, a
wanton, a paramour. Amoreuole, loving, courteous, kind, gentle, affable.
Amoreuolezza, louingnes, kindness, courtesy, affability. Amorosa, Amoroso, a
lover, a paramour, a favorite, a love: amorous. Amorosanza, Amorosita,
amorousnes, louingnes. Amortare, as Ammortare. Amorte, to the death, mortally.
Amoscire, Amoscito, to wither, to enfeeble, to droope, to quail, to fade, to
faint, to fail. Amostante, a chief, a ringleader, a chieftaine. Amotto
amotto, verbatim, word by word. Ampaludare, as Impaludare. Amparare, to
learn. Ampelite, a kind of earth in Syria good to kill woormes, rubbing the
veins with it. Amperlo, the white thorn or Hawthorne tree. Also a Berberie
tree. Amphesibena, as Anfisbena. Amphibio, that lives as well on water as on
land. Amphitrite has been used for the sea, the maine Ocean or watrie
kingdom. Amphibraco, a foot of a verse, having the first and third syllable
short and the middle long. Amphicirto, the state of the moon not yet come to
the half compass bending and crooked on both sides. Amphideo, the head of the
wombes mouth. Amphimacro, a kind of lascivious verse used at wanton weddings.
Amphibologia, an equivocation or doubtful meaning. Amphibologico, equivocal,
ambiguous, or doubtful. Amphiscij, those that have their shadows cast on both
sides of them, as those that dwell within the fieri zone whose shadows
sometimes go north and sometime south. Amphisbena, as Anfisbena. Amphiteatro, an
amphitheatre. Amphodillo, the daffodill flower. Ampiare, to amplify, to
enlarge. Ampiezza, amplenes, largenes, scope. Ampio, ample, large, scopefull,
great. Ampleare, as Ampia^e. Amplessi, embracements, louings, favors,
clippings, collings. Ampliare, as Ampiare. Ampliatione, as Ampiezza. Amplo, as
Ampio. Amplificare, to amplify, to enlarge, to augment. Amplificatione, an
amplification, an enlarging, an increase. Amplitudine, largenes, greatness,
authority, dignity, or spreading power. Ampolla, a thin violl glass.
Ampollose parole, words that be windle without substance or matter, puffed words.
Ampollosamente, foolishly, vaingloriously, boastingly, puffingly. Ampolluzza, a
little violl glass. Amucchiare, as Ammontare. Amucchio, by heaps, by huddles,
by the great. Amuda a muda, by turns, by courses, by changes. Amuta a muta,
idem. Amutata, an entermewed hawk. Amutire, as Ammutire. An? how? ah? what?
quoth you? Ana, a word used by physicians in their receipts signifieng of each
a like in quantity. Anabattista, an anabaptist. Anacangris paschi, a bird in
India whose dung is as sweet in smell as ambergreece. Anaccare, to share or
divide in rogues language. Anacardio, a tree in India that has a fruit like
the heart of a bird, and yields a juice red like blood: and out of the fruit
proceeds a kind of honey that exulcerateth where it touches. Anacapsirote,
an herb which will make one remember old forgotten love. Anachite, a stone
good against poison and madness: some take it for a diamond. Anacrisi, an
examination of a matter. Anacreontici, a kind of verses that Anacreon devised.
Anacithido, as Amanchitide. Anadiplossia, doubling of words. Anadrotti, young
ducks, or ducklings. Anaffiare, to water or sprinckle with water. Anagallide,
sea purslaine or brookelime. Anagallo, as Anagallide. Anagiri, an herb fair
to the eye but stinking, bean trifoile. Anagogia, the high and subtle
understanding of the scriptures or other things. Anagogica strada, a way
leading in and out, here and there. Anagogico, full of high and mysterious
understanding. Analesia, a disease taking away the senses from all parts of the
head. Analisi, resolution. Analogia, proportion, conueniencie. Analogo, an
answering in proportion. Anapestici, a kind of verse having the first syllable
short and the two last long. Anaphora, an ascension of the planets from the
east by daily course of the firmament. Also a figure called repetition.
Anapolitanata riuerenza, a neapolitanized, lowting curtzie. Anarancio, an
orange tree or fruit. Anarchia, a kind of confused licentious common wealth.
Anarco, without a prince or beginning. Anasarca, a dropsy over the whole body.
Anasare, to smell or sent. Anaspamento, a reeling, a winding. Anaspare, to
reele or wind up yarne. Anastomosi, a conjunction of two veins in one, or of
an artery and a vein. Also bleeding by a broken vein. Anatomia, an anatomy.
Anatomista, an anatomist. Anatomizzare, to anatomize. Anatra, a ducke or
mallarde. Anatrario, a kind of kite or hawk that kills ducks. Anca, a hanch or
hip of a man's body. Also the ankle bone. Ancarella, a tripping or hopping.
Also a little hanch. Ancella, a maiden servant or waiting woman. Ancheggiare,
is when a horse does coruet with a quick time, carrying himself altogether upon
his hanches. Anche, also, moreover, besides, yet, again, a new, withal, to,
eeke. Anchioue, a little fish called Anchoues. Anchiroide, the interior
processes of the shoulder blade. Anciana, as Alzana. Anciano, as Anziano.
Ancidare, to kill, to slay. Ancidere, Ancido, Ancisi, Anciso, to kill, to
slaie. Ancile, a short shield, buckler, or skutcheon. Ancilla, as Ancella.
Ancinelli, little hooks and claspes. Also little crookes. Ancino dipesce, a
fish hook. Ancioue, as Anchioue. Ancipite, cutting, sharp, keen. Anclude, a
fish called a pilchard or a sperlin. Anco, as Anche. Also a kind of great
weight used in Italy. Also some part of a cart. Anco, this day, to day. Ancora,
as Anche. Ancora, an anchor for a ship. Ancora ancora, yet, as yet, also,
moreover, eftsoons. Ancorache, Ancorche, howbeit, albeit. Ancoraio, an anchor
master or an anchor maker. Ancorare, to anchor or cast anchor. Ancroia, a jade,
an old filthy whore, a common stale rampe. Ancude, Ancudine, an anuill.
Ancuo, this day, to day. Ancusa, a kind of pricking weed. Andare, to go, to
walk, to march, to pace, to proceed, to depart, to wend. Andamenti, goings,
walkings, proceedings, behauiours. Andanti, travelers, wayfaring men. Andata,
a going, a walking, a proceeding, a departure, a voyage. Andar'amonte, to swig
or deal again at cards. Andar'alla caccia, acaccia, to go a hunting, a
chasing, a coursing, a hauking or fowling. Andar alla crocciata, to go to the
cross or to torments. Andar'alla mazza, to go to be killed, to go to the
slaughter. Andar'al bosco, to go to the weed: to take the diet drink. Andar'a
seconda, to follow the tide, to second or sooth one. Andar'a fila, to go or
march in ranks or files. Andar'a onde, to go reeling, to stagger. Andar'a
scosse, to go reeling like a drunken man. Andar'ripoere, to go put up (...).
Andar'a gala, to flote up and down the water: to run a drift. Andar'aione, to
go idly gaping up and down loosing of time. Andar'a ruba, to go a freebooting,
to go a bootehaling. Andar'a contrafar'i morti, to go to sleep. Andar'a
vanga, to fadge, to prosper with, to go as one would have it. Andar a
saccomanno, to go a freebooting: to be ransacked. Andar carpone, to go
creeping. Andar a pisciare, a game at cards so called. Andar'in cornouaglia
senza barca, to be made a cuckold, to be cuckolded. Andar'in corso, to go a
rouing, a shifting, a robbing or a freebooting. Andar'in sincopi, to swoune or
fall in a trance. Andar di palo in frasca, to go from one matter to another.
Andar tentone, to go groping, fumbling or feeling in the dark. Andar in
barberia, to go and be cured or laid of the pocks. Andar dove vannoi sauij
e'matti, to go to sleep or to die. Andar dove ne papa, ne imperatore, puo
mandar imbasciatore, to go piss or shite. Andar in dozzina, to go among the
common sort of people, or as liuerie horses. Andar in frega, to go a
catterwalling, to be lecherous or proud, to go to rut. Andar in amore, as Andar
in frega. Andar in Carnafau, to go a fleshing or a wenching. Andar ramengo, to
go rouing, wandering or begging. Andar in striazzo, to go a shifting or a
robbing. Andar del corpo, to go to stool. Andar in pelliccieria, to go to be
tormented. Andar in piccardia, to go to be hanged. Andar palpegone, to go
groping or fumbling in the dark. Andar a spasso, to go a solacing, a walking
or a sporting. Andar di portante, to pace or amble. Andar di trotto, to trot or
go a trotting pace. Andatura, a going, a gate or manner of going. Andiriuieni,
as Fagiolata. Andito, a porch, a portall, an entry, a going, a way, an
access. Ando, a rising hill that has neither dale nor vallie about it.
Andragone, a manly woman, a virago. Andrino, a kind of black colored horse
of the worst sort. Androgino, he that is both male and female, or man and
woman, or of both sexes and kinds. Andromada, as Andromante. Andromante, a
kind of precious stone very hard and ponderous, bright like silver, that
draws silver as the adamant does iron. Androna, an alley, a narrow lane, a
privy, a sink, a sew or draught for water. Also a chamber for household men
servants: a space between two walls. Andronica, the virtue called fortitude.
Androsace, an herb growing in the sea, white, without leaves, having green
husks in the tuftes. Androsemo, the herb Saint John's wort, or rather Tutsane.
Anegliare, to grow or make thin, to rarifie. Anelito, natural drawing of
breath or breathing. Anellaro, Anelliere, a ring maker. Anello, Anella, any kind
of ring or rings. Anello da bolla, a seal ring. Anelletti, little rings.
Anelli, links or rings of chains. Anemone, the herb Coquelourds or
Passeflowers. Also wild Poppie. Anero, with black or mourning weeds. Anetho,
Aneto, the herb Dill or Anet. Anetra, as Anitra. Anfanare, to rave foolishly,
to commit follies, to go idly loytring up and down as we say, to go seeking
for a halfepenie worth of gaping seed. Anfanamenti, foolish rauings, follies,
toys, trifles, vanities, fooleries: loytrings. Anfanatore, a rauer, a foolish
trifling fellow, a loytrer. Anfanie, as Anfanamenti. Anfisbena, a kind of
venomous serpent with two heads one before, another in his tail. Anfibologia,
as Amphibologia. Anfitano, a stone of the virtue of the adamant, but it makes
gold to grow in quantity. Anfitrite, as Amphitrite. Anfiscij, as Amphiscij.
Anfora, Anphora, a vessel with two ears for wine. Also a certain measure.
Anfodello, the Daffodill flower. Anfusaglia, base, rascally people: only fit
to make spindles. Angaraio, an imposer of taxes or impositions. Angareggiare,
to impose, aggrauate or oppress with taxes. Angariare, as Angareggiare.
Angarie, taxes, impositions, toles, customs or impostes. Ange, a kind of
water snake. Also vexes or grieueth. Angelica, the herb Angelica. Also
angell-like or angelical. Angelino, a kind of fine glass to drink in Angelo,
an angel. Angere, a verb irregular, to vex, to molest, to carke, to care, to
grieve, to afflict, to anguish, to fret, to smart, to pain. Anglio, a bile, a
blaine, a pocke or a sore, a swelling, a bunch. Anghiorno, the name of a little
bird. Anghirone, a hearon. Angina, a disease in the throat called the
Squinancie. Also the herb Dodder or Withwinde. Angione, a corner, a nooke, a
canton, an angle. Angiporto, a close narrow lane or alley that has but one
entrance, and yet many windings. Angoella, as Anguello. Angolare, Angulare,
having corners. Angolo, as Angione. Angoloso, full of corners, nookes or
angles. Angonia, as Angoscia. Angoscia, anguish, pain, carke or care of mind,
a swouning. Angosciare, to anguish or fall in a swoun. Angoscioso, full of
anguish. Angue, a snake, an adder or a serpent. Anguello, a fish called in
Latin Atharina or Lauaronis. Anguettare, to wriggle to and fro as an adder or
snake does. Auguilla, an eele or eelepout. Anguinaglia, as Anguinaia.
Anguinaia, the groine, the thigh, the hip or flank. Also a mortal disease.
Also a disease in horses in the inside of a horses hinder legs. Anguistara, as
Inghistara. Angulo, Anguloso, as Angione. Anguria, a cucumber or kind of
Pompilion. Angusigola, a needle, a pin, a prick: a fish with a sharp tail
called a hornefish. Angustia, straitnes, strictnes, narrownes. Angustiare, to
straiten, to pinch, to urge, to bring to a narrow pass. Angustioso, full of
anguish, pinching, strait, narrow. Anhelare, to pant or fetch wind with pain,
to aspire or gape after earnestly. Anhelanti cani, baying, panting or breathing
dogs, embost as an ouerwearied dear. Anhelo, a panting or shortness of breath.
Anichilare, as Annullare. Anichilatione, as Annulatione. Anidare, Anidiare, to
rest, to roost, to nusle. Aniello, a steel to strike fire with. Also the
swiuell or ring of a chain. Anima, the soul of mankind. Also the core or
kernel of any fruit. Animadu^rtere, verto, versi, verso, to consider, to
regard, to mind, to think, to heed. Animaduersione, consideration, regard,
mindefulnes, heed, remembrance. Animale, any living creature: the breathing or
vital part of any body. Animale sentacchio, a sitting, squatting, groueling or
cowring creature. Animare, to give soul or life unto. Also to encourage or
animate. Animato, having or created with a soul. Animante, breathing, living
or having a soul. Animella, the kernel of any nut or stone. Animetta, a
little pretty soul. Animetto, a silly mind, a little mind. Animo, a mind,
a courage, a heart, a spirit, wit or hardines. Animoso, courageous, hardy,
bold, aduenturous, valorous, stout. Animosita, courage, hardines, bouldnes,
valor, stoutnes. Animuccia, a little, poor, silly, wretched soul. Aniso,
Anisi, the herb or seed Anise. Anitra, a ducke, a drake, a mallard, a wigin.
It has bin used for the bird that breeds of a barnikle hanging upon old
ships. Anitraro, a keeper or seller of ducks or drakes. Anitrella, a teale, a
duckling or little mallard. Anitrire as Annitrire. Anitroccolo, a duckling, a
young duck. Aniun modo, by no means, no way. Anna, as Ana. Annacquare, as
Anaffiare. Annaffiare, as Anaffiare. Annale, yearly, year by year, annual.
Annali, annals, histories of years, or don by years. Annalmente, annually,
yearly. Annasare, to smell or sent unto. Annaspamento, a reeling or winding.
Annaspare, as Anaspare. Annata, any years season, time, profit, rents, fruits,
or government. Annatomia, an anathonie. Annatomizare, to anatomize. Annatomista,
an anatomiste. Annebbiare, to bemist, to befogge, to cloud, to grow duskie, to
lowre. Annebbiatino, effeminate, sweet smelling, comely araid, wantonly dressed
up, smug. Annegare, to drown, to stiflle under water, to smother. Anneggiare,
as Annegare. Annegrare, as Annerare. Annegrite, as Annerare. Annellare, to
curle, to frizle or reduce into rings. Annella, rings. Annellati crini, curled
or frislled hairs. Annelleti, little rings, little rings in the mouth of a
bit. Annello, any kind of ring. Annerare, to darken, to make black. Annerire,
as Annerare. Annessare, to annex or ad unto. Annesso, annexed or added unto.
Also a tying or joining unto. Annestare, to engraffe, to insert. Anni, years.
Annicchiare, to neighe or braie as some horses do either for joy or when they
encounter another horse or mare. Also as Ranicchiare. Annichilare, as
Annullare. Annicolo, a yeereling, of one year, one year old. Annidare,
Annidiare, as Anidare. Annido, shelter, lodging, rest, dwelling, a shrowde, a
nest. Anniegare, to drown, or be drowned. Annighitire, as Impigrite.
Annitrire, to neigh as a horse. Anniuersario, from year to year, once a
year, done every year at a certain time. Anno, a year, twelve months.
Annobilire, to ennoble, to nobilitate. Annobilitare, as Annobilire. Annodare,
to knot, to tie or bind in knots. Annoia, tediousnes, annoy, lothsomnes,
annoiance. Annoiare, to annoy, to vex, to molest. Annolare, as Nolare.
Annolino, a bird so called, as Annicolo Annona, provision of corn, and all
manner of sustenance and other necessaries. Annoso, full of years, aged, old.
Annotare, to note or to mark. Annottare, to darken or grow night. Annouerare,
to number, to tell, to count, to reckon. Annullare, to disannull, to cancel,
to make void, to frustrate. Annullatione, a cancelling, a disanulling.
Annumerare, as Annouerare. Annuntiare, to pronounce, to denounce or do in
message unto. Annuntiata, Annuntiatione, the annuntiation or salutation day,
our lady day in lent. Annuntiatore, a pronouncer, a denouncer, a messenger.
Annuntio, a message or embassage. Ano, an arse or hum. Anodide, a kind of
herb. Anodini, medicines which provoking sleep do put away pains and
griefs. Anolare, to hire as a horse or a ship. Anomali, out of rule,
irregular, inequall. Anona, at high noone, about midday. Anormale, without rule
or order. Anotare, to note, to mark, to record. Anotatione, an annotation.
Anphiscij, as Amphiscij. Ansare, to breathe, to pant, to gasp, to labor, to
toil, to moyle: to long, to desire, to carke, to care, till one be out of
breath. Ansatio, a disease in a horse: a shortness of breath. Ansciare, as
Ansare. Ansero, a goose, a gander, a gosline. Ansia, as Ansieta. Ansiare, as
Ansare. Ansieta, curiosity, longing, desire, thought, anguish, sorrow, care,
toil. Ansima, a bird that braieth like an ass and has three feathers in his
wings like horns, and one on his head with which he defends himself from
wild beasts, for he is so heavy and great that he cannot fly. Ansio, Anscio,
as Ansioso. Ansioso, curious, careful, sorrowful, longing, desirous,
toilesome, tedious. Anta, an addition to every tenth number above thirty, as
Quaranta, as we say she is in her teenes. Antano, some take it to be a kind of
wood or borne. Antartico, the antartike pole. Ante, before, rather, soo^. Also
a wild beast in India as big as an ass with round ears with the nether lip
like a trumpet never going but by night. Antecedente, antecedent, going before.
Antecedere, to go or take place before. Antecedentia, antecedencie,
precedencie, superiority. Antecessore, a predecessor, a forefather. Antecore,
a griping or pinching at the heart: a disease in a horses breast opposite to the
heart. Antelaus, a monstrous beast with great horns, and so sharp that it will
saw and cut down any tree with them. Antelucano, before break of day.
Antemettere, metto, misi, messo, to prefer or put before. Anten^scere, nasco,
nacqui, nato, to be borne before. Antenati, predecessors, forefathers,
progenitors, ancestors or elders. Antenna, the maine yard or sail yard of a
ship, a pole, a perch or stake, a staff. Antenoti, as Pederetti. Antepasto, as
Antipasto. Antephitheatro, an amphitheater. Anteponere, pongo, posi, posto, to
prefer, to set or put before. Antepenultimo, the last saving two. Anteriore,
former or foregoing. Anthema, an anthem in a church. Anthia, Anthea, as Antia.
Anti, a word much used in composition before other words, signifying
contrariety or against. Antia, a kind of broad flat fish very wary and
subtle. Antianita, eldership, ancientnes, senioritie. Antiano, elder, ancient,
senior, an alderman. Antibachio, a foot of a verse of three syllables, whereof
the two first are long, and the last short. Antica, that part which is toward
the east. Anticamente, anciently, of old, of yore. Anticamera, an outward or
forechamber. Anticaglie, antiquities, old monuments, ancient relics.
Anticapere, as Anticipare. Anticare, to make ancient, to settle or take root
in a place. Anticato, settled, rooted, antiquated. Anticatoni, books which
Caesar wrote against Cato. Anticaio, an antiquarie. Anticategoria, pleading
when one accuses the other. Antichi, elders, ancestors, predecessors,
progenitors, forefathers. Antichita, antiquity, ancientnes, age, Antichristo,
antichrist, contrary to Christ. Anticipare, to prevent, to supplant, to
anticipate. Anticipatione, anticipation, prevention, supplanting. Anticipatore,
a preuenter, a supplanter. Antico, ancient, senior, anticke, old, stale.
Anticoli, as Antiesi. Anticuore, as Antecore. Antidoto, an antidote or remedy
for poison. Antiesi, those that dwell under one half meridian and parallel of
like distance from the Equator, the one northwarde, the other southward.
Antifana, an antheme in the church. Antifate, a kind of black stone.
Antifrasi, a figure where a word has a contrary meaning. Antiguardia, a
vantgarde, a forewarde, a vawarde. Antillida, an herb whereof there be two
kinds something like unto Lentils. Antilogia, contradiction or gainsaying.
Antimonio, a mineral called Stibium or Antimonium. Antinomia, a repugnance
between two laws. Antipasto, any thing that is eaten or served in first at a
table. Quelquechoses to provoke appetite. Also a kind of verse or rhyme.
Antipate, a kind of black stone. Antipathia, a contrariety in natural
qualities. Antiperistasia, a repulsion on every part, whereby any thing is made
more strong in it self, by the restraining of the contrary. Antipetto, a
stomacher. Also a disease or swelling in a horses breast. Antipodi, the
antipodes that be under us. Antiporto, a portall or porch before a door.
Antiquare, as Anticare. Antiquato, as Anticato. Antiquario, an antiquarie.
Antiquaglie, as Anticaglie. Antiquita, as Antichita. Antiquo, as Antico.
Antiracino, as Antracino. Antirrino, a kind of herb which a scorpion seeing
he loses his venom and becomes senseless. Antisapere, to foreknowe, to
know before. Antispasi, a turning to the contrary way. Antispodij, in latin
Antispoda: some kind of physic. Antista, a prelate or religious man, a chief
ruler, one that excels others. Antistite, a president over sacred things, as
Antista. Antithesi, a figure in rhetorike opposing one contrary against
another contrary. Antitosi, a figure when one case is put for another.
Antiuedere, veggo, vidi, veduto, to fores^e. Antoeci, as Antiesi. Anthora, the
yellowe helmet flower, or munkes-hood. Antro, a cave, a den, a hole, a grot, a
cauerne. Antracino, black as a cole, coleblacke. Antracitide, a precious stone
wherein seem to be sparks of fire, cast water in it, it kindles, put in the
fire and it quenches. Antropofago, a deuourer or eater of men. Anulare, the
little finger. Anza, a kind of water snake. Anzare, as Ansare. Anzi, rather,
sooner, but. Anziano, an ancient, an elder, a chief, a magistrate, an
alderman, a senior, a prior. Anziche, rather then, sooner then. Anziche no,
rather, rather yea then no. Anzi piu, rather more. Anzolo, the part of the bell
whereto the clapper hangs. Aogni guisa, howsoever, every way, every manner of
way. Aogni patto, as Aogni guisa. Aombrare, to ouershadow, to obscure, to
shadow, to start as a horse. Aoncia, by ounces, by retaile. Aondare, to wave as
the sea does. Aonde, made wauing, wauie, to go staggering, reeling or indenture
wise. Aonghiare, to tip with horn as a nail Also to catch with ones nails.
Aornello, a kind of wild ash tree with broad leaves. Aorta, the chiefest
artery in any creature the root, whereof is fastened to the gristle bone which
is in the heart, it is called the mother of all arteries. Aorza, sailing with a
quarter wind, as mariners say. Aorzare, to sail with a quarter wind. Aotto,
put to any day makes come seauen-night, as Lunedi a otto, a monday come
seauen-night. Aparare, as Apparare. Apanciolle, merrily, carelessly, without care
or thought, hold belly hold. Apar'a paro, hand to hand, even hand. Aparo,
equally. Also as Aparuolo. Aparuolo, a bird in color green with red feathers
in his wings who feeds upon bees and flies. Also one that keeps bees.
Aparte, severally, apart, from others. Aparte aparte, part by part, severally.
Apartare, as Appartare. Apartenere, as Appartenere. Apartenente, as
Appartenente. Apartenentia, as Appartenenza. Apartito, put to voices, in doubt.
Apasso, by paces, by steps. Ape, Api, a be or bees. Apeggio, at the woorst, to
the woorst. Apelo, by the hair, just, iumpe, pat, even, barely, poorly,
mincingly. Apena, scarcely, hardly, scantly, scant, upon pain or forfeiture,
uneaths. Apenello, curiously, perfectly, exquisitely, by line and measure,
done with a pensill. Aperitiuo, opening, soluble. Aperire, to open, to set
open, to declare, to reveal. Aperto, open, opened. Also a man that is burst.
Apertura, Apertimento, an opening, an ouerture, a gap, a breach made by
assault. Also a leake in a ship. Also a bursting of a man's cods. Apetere, to
wish, to covet, to desire or have an appetite unto, to long for. Apetibile, to
be wished or longed for, longing, wishing for. Apetire, as Apetere.
Apetiteuole, as Apetitiuo. Apetito, a stomach or appetite. Also desired,
wished, coueted, longed for. Apetitiuo, sauourie in taste, having a good
appetite. Apetitiuamente, hungerly, with a good appetite. Apetitoso, as
Apetitiuo. Apettare, when a horse does carry his head so low that he does
touch his breast with it. Aperto, in respect, in comparison, in regard. Also a
pursines or shortness of breath. Apezza, for a wh^^, a while since, not long
since. Apezzo, by pieces. Apezzo apezzo, piece by piece. Aphorismo, a brief
sentence or a document. Apiacere, as Piacere. Apiaria, the trade of keeping of
bees and making of home, or a place where bees are kept. Apiastra, a bird
called a Moodwall that destroieth bees. Apiastro, the herb baulme or baulme
gentle. Apibue, a strange beast of some pagans heretofore deemed a prophet and
adored as a God. Apice, a teg or a sheep with a little head and little wool.
Also a foot stool, a place where one sets his foot. Apie, apiedi, at the
foot. Also a foot or on foot. Apieno, fully, at full. Apieno popolo, before
the people, in view of all men. Apigionare, to farm, to rent, to demise.
Apigione, at rent, in farm, to hire. Apihuolo, a nickname for a silly foolish
noddie. Apilottare, as Appilottare. Apio, as Appio. Apiolo. Look Pomo apiolo.
Apiombino, perfectly, by line, square, and measure. Apiombo, plump down, down
right, eeuen or level. Apiu modi, many manner of ways. Apisso, a black stone
pointed with blew veins, which being once heated with fire remains hot
seven days after. Apiupotere, with might and maine, to the utmost of ones
power. Aplaudere, Aplauso, as Applaudere. Apocalissi, a revelation or a vision.
Apocino, a kind of herb or weed. Apoco, within a little, by little. Apoco
apoco, by little and little. Apocopa, an abridging of the last letter or
syllable of a word. Apocopare, to cut off the last syllable or letter of a
word. Apocrifa, a thing hid, the original whereof is not known. Apogei, winds
rising out of the ground. Apogeo, that point of heaven wherein the sun or any
other planet is farthest from the center of the earth. Apoglicarni, a disease
in the gums of the teeth. Apografo, a copy, an extract, a draught. Apologia,
an excuse, an apology, a defense, a purgation. Apologo, a tale or fable,
teaching lessons for life and manners. Apona, a medicine helping without pain.
Apophiade, certain strings hanging to the entrails. Apophisi, that part of a
bone which the Anatomists call the processes. Apoplessia, an apoplexy, which
is a disease that takes away moving, breathing and feeling, an vnsensiblenes
or a numnes. Apopletico, one subject to the apoplexy. Apopletica vena, the
name of a vain. Aporogie, certain impressions in the air, falling or
shooting of stars. Apossessionare, as Appossessionare. Aposta, for the nonce,
of purpose, expreslie, wittingly, voluntarily. Apostare, as Appostare.
Apostasia, an apostasy or abiuring of ones religion. Apostata, a renouncer or
abiurer of his religion. Apostatare, to renounce and abjure ones vowed
religion. Apostema, an impostume. Apostemare, to grow to an impostume.
Aposteparnismo, a cutting away of a bone with a wound. Aposticciare, to make
by art, to work by the hand any thing, to imitate nature. Aposticcio, made by
art or wrought by the hand, counterfeit. Apostolato, an apostleship.
Apostolico, apostle-like, apostolical. Apostolo, an apostle. Apostrofe, a
sign denoting the taking away of the last letter of a word. Also a figure in
speech, as when one conuerte^^ his speech from one party to another, as from
the present to the absent. Apotegma, a short, witty, and quick sentence.
Apotelesma, a declaration of the signification of stars at ones nativity, a
calculation of ones nativity. Apotheosi, a consecration or dedication, a
canonization. Apotosi, a disease when the hairs about one fall and shed.
Appagare, to satisfy, to appaie. Appago, appaid, satisfied. Appaiare, to
couple, to pair, or yoke together. Appalesare, to reveal, to manifest.
Appaltare, to set to farm, to hire, to farm, to rent, to demise. Appaltatore,
a hucster, a retailer, a renter, a tenant, or farmer of any thing.
Appaltaruolo, as Appaltatore. Appalto, a see farm, a demise. Appamondo, the
map or type of the world. Appannare, to hide, to cover, to close, to hoodwinke,
to stop or dim or bleare the light. Appannate, drawing board windows.
Appannatotto, fast, plumbe, pampred, fat, well fed, in good plight. Apparare,
as Apparecchiare, to learn. Apparato, a preparation, a garnishment.
Apparecchiare, to prepare, or set in order, to cover or lay the board, to
dight. Apparecchio, Apparecchiamento, as Apparato. Appareggiare, to compare, to
match, to equal. Also as Apparecchiare. Apparere, as Apparire. Apparente, as
Appariscente. Apparentare, to ally or become kinsmen, to marry together.
Apparenza, as Appariscenza. Apparimento, as Apparitione. Appariscente,
appeering or comely, seemly, worth the seeing, of a good presence.
Appariscenza, comelines, seemelines, appearance, an apparition, a show, an
appearing, an illusion. Apparire, Appaio, Apparso, to appear or come in sight,
to seem. Apparitione, as Appariscenza. Apparitore, an officer called an
apparitor or paritor, a sumner, a beadle, a catchpole. Apparitoria, herb
pellitory of the wall. Apparsione, as Appariscenza. Appartamento, a diuidence,
a separation, a several part, a partition. Appartare, to part, to divide, to
sunder, to share. Appartatamente, severally, apart. Appartato, parted, divided,
apart, several, a sunder. Appartenere, to appertain or belong unto.
Appartenente, appertaining, belonging. Appartenenza, an appurtenance.
Appastare, to kneade paste, to make paste, to bepaste. Also to soften, to cram,
to feed, to mew, to fatten: to bait a book: to lay in paste. Appatumare, to
reconcile and appease, to pacify. Appellare, to appeal. Also to name or call,
to challenge. Appellagione, Appellatione, an appeal, a challenge. Appellatiuo,
appealing. Also that may be appealed. Appello, as Appellagione. Appendere,
Appendo, Appesi, Appeso, to hang up. Also to weigh. Appendice, an appendix, a
penthouse, a houell, that hangs to another thing. Appendio, downe-hanging,
downe-bending, sloping. Appensione, a hanging, an appendixe, a penthouse.
Appertenere, as Appartenere. Appertenente, as Appartenente. Appertenenza, as
Appartenenza. Appestare, to infect with any plague or contagious disease.
Appetire, as Apetere. Appetibile, as Apetibile. Appetitiuo, as Apetitiuo.
Appetito, as Apetito. Appetitoso, as Apetitiuo. Appettare, as Apettare.
Appetto, as Apetto. Appeuerare, to pepper or to season with pepper. Appeuerata,
a kind of pottage or sauce made with pepper. Appiacere, in sport, for
pleasure, in jest. as Piacere. Appianare, to plain or raze or make smooth, or
level. Appiano, a kind of green color that painters use. Appiastricciare,
to beplayster, to bedaube, to belome, to clam or slime together, to stick.
Appiattare, to squat or hide, to make flat. Appiatto, squat, hid, secret,
closse, flatling, lurking. Appiccare, to hang or fasten unto, to join, stick
or cleave unto. Appiccaticcio, clammie, gluish, slimy, burrish, pitchie.
Appiccarla a qualcuno, to fasten a jest on one, to make one believe the moon
is made of green cheese. Appicatura, a fastening or holding. Appicciolare, to
make little, to lessen. Appicco, a hold taking, a holdfast. Appigionare, as
Apigionare. Appigione, as Apigione. Appigliare, to take hold off. Appilottare,
to tie, to bind, to manickle or make fast, to fetter. Appio, the herb
smallage or water parsley. Applaudere, plaudo, plausi, plauso, to applaude or
clap hands for joy. Applauso, applaude, applause, a clapping of hands in sign
of gladness. Applicare, to apply or have reference unto. Applicatione, an
application. Appo, with, by or near, in respect, in regard. Appogare, as
Affogare. Appoggiare, to lean unto or stay upon, to rely, to rest upon.
Appoggio, a leaning place, a stay, a rest, a help. Apponere, pongo, posi,
posto, as, Apporre. Apponitore, an obiecter, an imputer, an accuser, an
vpbraider. Appontare, as Appuntare. Apponto, just, iump, fit, even so, point by
point, right so, in the nicke, pat. Appoplessia, as Apoplessia. Appopletico, as
Apopletico. Appopolare, to people or store with people. Apporre, to object, to
charge with, to appose, to impute, to accuse, to twit, to vpbraide or cast in
the teeth. Also to divine, to hit, to tell or guess a truth, to lay against.
Apportare, to bring or ^eare unto. Aportatore, a bringer, a bearer.
Appositione, an objection, an apposition, a charge, an imputation, a guessing
of a truth. Appositiuo, that which may be objected against another. Also
supposed. Appositiuo padre, a supposed father. Appossessionare, to take
possession of, to put in possession, to impossesse of any thing. Apposta, as
Aposta. Appostare, to appointe, to mark, to spy, to lay wait for, to prefix,
to point. Apposticcio padre, a supposed father. Apposto, guessed or hit a
truth, deuined. Appozzare, to diue, to ducke, to plunge under water.
Appreggiare, as Apprezzare. Appretiare, as Apprezzare. Apprendere, to learn,
to take hold off, to take. Apprendimento, a learning or apprehending.
Apprenditore, a learner, an apprentise. Apprensiua, an apprehension or conceit.
Also apprehensiue. Apprehendere, to conceive or apprehend. Apprehendimento, an
apprehension or a conceit. Apprehensiua, as Apprensiua. Appresentare, to
present unto. Appreso, learnt, taken hold off. Appressare, to approach, to come
near or join unto. Appresso, by, near, fast by, after, behind, moreover,
besides. Apprestare, to prepare, to make ready, to speed or dispatch.
Apprezzare, to prise, to esteem, to regard, to accou^pt of, to rate or sesse
men. Apprezzo, a rate or sessing of men. Also at a price. Appriccioso, as
Capriccioso. Approbare, as Approuare. Approbatione, as Approuatione.
Approcciare, as Appressare. Approdare, to board, to join, to grapple as ships
do: to come to shore. Also to further, to help, to succor, to come upon one.
Approfittare, to profit, thrive or gain by. Approfumare, to perfume.
Appropiare, as Appropriare. Appropinquare, to approach. Appropriare, to
appropriate. Appropriatione, an appropriation. Approssimare, to approach, to
neighbor. Approssimante, approaching, neighboring. Approuagione, as
Approuatione. Approuare, to approve, to allow, to confirm. Approuatione, an
approbation, a confirmation, an allowing. Apputidire, to corrupt, to infect
with a stink. Appulcrare, to beautify or make fair. Appuntare, to point, to
appoint, to prefix: to underprop, to set down, to set the feet or stay
against any thing, to set a point on a thing, to tie or bind fast unto. Also
to find fault with one, to be captious or snappish, to carpe at every trisle.
Appuntamento, an appointment or fixing of time or place, an agreement, a
pointing. Appuntino, Appuntatore, a nice peevish finde-fault, a Momus, a
Zoilus, a carper. Appunto, as Apponto. Appuzzare, to stink or make to stink.
Aprendere, as Apprendere. Aprenditore, a learner, an apprentice. Apresso, as
Appresso. Apretio, a prezzo, at a price, at a rate. Aprico, open, wide,
discovered, wide open to the sun, fair, pleasant. Aprile, the month April.
Aprire, Apro, Apersi, Aperto, to open, to set open, to manifest, to declare.
Apritura, as Apertura. Apriuare, as Priuare. Apropriare, to appropriate.
Aprossi, an herb that draws fire unto it. Apruoua, for the nonce, contending,
striving, upon proof. Also to the utmost, Aptoto, without case. Apuntare, as
Appuntare. Apunto, as Apponto. Aquando aquando, from time to time, now and
then, sometimes. Aquattro, by four and four. Aquattro occhij, face to face,
boldly. Aquesta volta, at this time, toward this way, this way. Aqui, here or
hither, hitherto. Aquifoglio, the holy or huluer tree. Aquila, an eagle: a
kind of fish: the name of a star: a kind of coin. Aquilastro, a buzzard.
Aquilegia, the herb or flower Columbine or Setwall. Aquilino, eagle-like. Also
a long beakt or nookt nose: a columbine color. Aquilina, as Aquilegia.
Aquilone, a great eagle. The northren wind, the northren parts. A fish much
esteemed in Rome. Aquosita, waterishnes, moistnes. Ara, an altar or sanctuary.
Also a star near Scorpio called the Altar. Also as Aia. Arabascio, a soldiers
coat, cassocke, iacket or mandillion. Arabbiare, as Arrabbiare. Arabico, a
kind of gum called Gum Arabicke. Taken in jest for Arabiato, enraged. Arabile,
earable or plowable ground. Arabo, a kind of marble stone. Also an Arabian.
Aracelle, a kind of mushroms or todestooles. Aracnoide, a thin skin of the
eye. Aragatta, striving, contending, as it were playing at musse. Aragione,
justly, reasonably, upon good reason, good cause why. Aragna, Aragne, a spiders
web, a fowlers net, toil or hay. Aragno, a spider. Araldo, an herald, a
messenger, an interpreter. Aranata, a wild beast in India as big as a
grayhound, bearded as a goat, mouthed, footed and handed as an ape. Arancare,
to skud or scowre away, to lash out, to swager, to waste, to riot, to lavish.
Arancatore, a swaggrer, a waster, a lavish riotous man, a swasher. Arancia,
Arangia, Aranza, an orange. Aranciata, the herb baulme or baulme gentle.
Arancio, Arangio, Aranzo, an orange tree. Aranda, hardly, scarcely, with much
ado. Arare, to plough, to till, to ear or harrowe the ground. Aratiuo,
earable, or ploughable ground Aratolo, as Aratro. Aratore, a ploughman, a
husbandman, a harrower, an aker man. Also a kind of fish which who touches
has presently an ague, and let go is presently eased. Aratro, a plough. Also a
harrow. Arazzarie, tapistrie or arras works. Arazzi, as Arazzarie. Arbalestra,
as Balestra. Arbero, as Arbore. Arbicocche, the fruit Apricocks. Arbintro,
has bin used for Laberinto. Arbitrare, to arbitrate, to judge, to censure, to
awarde, to think, to suppose, to give sentence. Arbitrato, an arbitrament.
Also arbitrated. Also a compromise. Arbitrio, an arbitrament, an a ward, a
censure, a judgment, a sentence. Arbitro, Arbitratore, an arbitrator, a judge,
an awarder, a sentence giver. Arbolino, a fish called a Bleake. Arborata, an
arbor or bower of boughs or trees. Arbore, any kind of tree in general, a
mast of a ship, a pedigree, a stock, a race, a stem. Also the name of a
monstrous great fish, and also taken in particular for a Poplar tree.
Arboreggiare, to grow or spread as trees. Arboreo, of or pertaining to a tree,
branchie or far spreading. Arbuscello, a shrub, a young tree, a thicket of
young trees. Arbusto, a shrub, a bramble, a brake, a brier, a bush, a young grove
or thicket planted with young trees shread and cut: a cops. Arbuto, an arbute or
strawberie tree. Arca, an arc, an arche, a great chest, a tomb, a vault, a
house. Arcaito, a keeper of a fort or castle. Arcamo, the back or chine-bone of
any creature. Arcanamente, secretly, in hidden manner. Arcangelo, an
arch-angell. Arcano, Arcani, the secrets or secrecies of heaven. Arcare, to
bend like a bow, to arche or vault. Arcaro, a bowyer, a bowmaker. Arcase, a
bird called a Curlue. Arcata, a blow or shot of a bow. Also an agate stone.
Arcauolo, a great grandfather. Arcazzene, a kind of ravenous sea soul.
Arcera, a Woodcock or a Snite. Arcelle, a kind of scallop, cockle, or such
shell fish. Also a kind of mushrome or todestoole. Archetipo, after the first
example, or original copy. Archetto, a little bow, a fidling stick, a
racket, a spring to catch birds with. Archibugiare, to shoot, hit, or hill
with any kind of gun, caliuer, or pistol. Archibugiata, a blow, or stroke,
or shot with a caliuer. Archibugiaro, a gun or caliuer maker. Archibugiere, an
harquebusier, a musketier, a gunner, a shot. Archibugio, a harquebuse, a
pistol, a caliuer, a gun, a musket. Archiciocco, Archicioffo, an Artichock.
Archiero, as Arciere. Archiloici, a kind of verse. Archimandrita, a chief
abbot, a prior or prelate, a rector. Archimia, alchimie. Archimista, an
alchimist, a chimike. Archipendolo, Archipenzolo, Archipezzolo, a plummet that
carpenters use to level works by. Archipenzolare, to level by a plummet.
Architetto, Architettore, an architect or builder. Architettura, architecture
or building. Architriclino, a steward or master of a household, a marshall of a
hall. Architiclino, idem. Archiuescouato, an archbishoprike. Archiuescouo, an
Archbishop. Archiuo, as Arciuo. Archiuio, as Arciuo. Arcia, a Woodcock or a
Snite. Arciauola, a dopchickin. Arcicanne, Tu menti per le arcicanne della
gola, Thou lie in thy very grand archthrote. Arcidiacono, an arche-deacon.
Arciduca, an archduke. Arciere, an archer. Also a bowyer. Also a kind of dry
measure. Also taken for such as be of a princes or kings guard. Arcifanfana, a
spirit, an illusion, a hobgoblin, a hag, a robingoodfellow. Arcifanfano, a
supreme ruler, director, or find-fault* taken in mockery. Arcifanfo, as
Arcifanfano. Arcigoloso, a gormand, an arch-glutton. Arcigno, frowning,
lowering, skouling, grim, sowre-looking, powting. Arcionata, any arch-roofe or
bow-like building, the upper part of a coach. Arcione, the arson or saddle
bow. Arcipanca, used of Caro for a prince of forms or stools. Arciprete, an
archpriest. Arcissa, a kind of coche, wagon or cart. Anciuescouado, an
archbishopricke. Arciuescouo, an archbishop. Arciuo, a place where records or
evidences be kept: the treasury of monuments, charters or roules, the chancerie
or exchequer office, the office of the master of the roules. Also the arches or
spiritual court. Arco, a bow or an arche. Also a tiller of a bow.
Arcobaleno, the raine-bowe or Iris. Arcobalista, a crosse-bowe, a steele-bowe
or tiller. Arcobugiare, as Archibugiare. Arcobugiata, as Archibugiata.
Arcobugiaro, as Archibugiaro. Arcobugiere, as Archibugiere. Arcobugio, as
Archibugio. Arcoceleste, a raine-bowe. Arcolagio, a reele, a rice or wheel to
wind reele or spin with. Arcolai, foolish totes, humorous fancies, castles in
the air. Arcolare, to reele or wind silk or yarne upon a reele or rice.
Arcolaio, Arcolo, as Arcolagio. Arcontici, certain heretics that denied the
resurrection of the flesh, and said the world was made by princes. Arcopago, a
chief senate of excellent men in Athens of no certain number. Arcopendolo, a
fish called in latin Zygaena. Also as Archipendolo. Arcorano, as Alcorano.
Arcotraue, a cross beam or chief beam of any frame. Arcotriumphante, a
pageant or triumphant chariot. Arcouolta, a vault or an arche. Arcouoltare, to
vault or arche. Arcturo, a star by the tail of Vrsa mayor. Ardea, a kind of
moore-hen. Ardente, burning, violent, ardent, hot, earnest, furious, glowing.
Ardere, Ardo, Arsi, Arso, to burn or consume with fire, to fire. Ardire,
Ardisco, Ardito, to dare, to have courage. Also stoutnes, daring or courage.
Arditamente, boldly, courageously, stoutly, daringly. Arditanza, Ardire,
courage, stoutnes, boldness, daring, valor, hardines. Arditello, a bold,
malepert, saucie fellow. Arditezza, Ardimento, as Arditanza. Ardola, as
Ardoesa. Ardoesa, a kind of precious stone wherein are naturally the pictures
of sundry beasts and birds. Ardore, heat, burning, violence, fury,
ardencie. Arduo, hard, difficult, uneasy, painful, perilous, dangerous to be
attained unto. Arduita, difficulty, hardness, vneasines to climb or reach
unto. Arecare, to bring, to reach, to yield. Also to take. Aregano, the herb
Origan or wild Marioran. Aregazza, Aregata, a woodpie or a piot. Arena, sand or
gravel. Arendere, as Rendere. Arendamento, the fruits or rents that any thing
yields. Arendare, to let, to farm, to rent out, to demise. Arendatore, a
farmer or yeelder of any payment, a tenant. Areuino, as Armelino. Arenoso,
sandy, grittie, grauelly. Arenga, the fish herring. Arente, aneust, anenst,
very near, hard by. Areolo, a little Greek weight of half a caret or two
grains. Arequisitione, at the request, instance, entreaty or suit. Aresta,
the bone or fin of a fish: the pricks of ears of corn. Arestare, as
Arrestare. Arestamento, Aresto, as Arresto. Aretaglio, by retaile, by small, as
hucksters sell things. Areticare, to torment, to vex, or afflict in mind.
Aretio, a kind of herb or weed. Arfilo, a bishop at chesse. Argano, a crane
to draw up heavy things with, a gouldsmiths or wyer-drawers bench to draw
with, an instrument or engine to mount any piece of ordinance up into the
carriage. Arganare, to draw up with a crane, or mount up any thing. Arganello,
as Arganetto. Arganetto, a wyer-drawers bench. Also a crane or pullie used in
ships to rem^ue wares. Argema, the white of the eye, a disease in the eye,
which being in the black of the eye is white, and being in the white is black.
Argemone, wild tansie, or siluerwort. Also as Argema. Argentare, to silver
over. Argentata, lip-salue. Also a painting for w^mens faces. Argenteo, as
Argentino. Argenteria, plate of gold, silver, or parcel gilt. Also a goldsmith
row. Argentiere, a silver smith, a steward, spender or cater for a house.
Argentina, the herb stone-serne, or finger-serne: others affirm it to be the
silver weed or tanzie. Also a kind of fish. Argentino, siluerie, of a silver
color, like silver, of a shrill silver sound. Argento, silver, or money or
coin. Argento solimato, sublimate. Argentolo, full of silver, siluerie. Also a
monied man. Argento viuo, quickesiluer. Argeste, the northwest or western
wind. Arghe, a wild beast with the face like a woman. Argilla, potters clay.
Argilloso, full of clay, claish, fattie or fertile. Argillo, as Arzeglio.
Arginare, to bank, to trench, to mound, to fortify, to fence against water,
to rampire. Argine, a bank, a trench, a mound, a fence, a rampire against
water. Also embost or reared work. Argirite, the foame that comes of lead
tried, being in color like silver. Argo, Argus with a hundred eyes,
cleere-sighted, watchful. Argoire, to argue or dispute. Argolici, as
Argonauti. Argomentare, to argue, to dispute, or make an argument. Argomento,
an argument, a sign, a token, a reason, a remedy. Also a glister. Argonauti,
Argonaui, the noble Greeks that went with Jason to fetch the golden fleece.
Arguire, to argue or dispute. Argusella, a hornefish, or horneback.
Argutamente, subtillie, sharply, craftily, wittily, wilily. Argutia, a craft,
a subtilitie, a slight, a wyle. Arguto, subtle, sharp, wily, crafty,
witty. Aria, look Aere. Ariamide, an herb of the color of fire. Aricordare,
to remember. Aricordeuole, mindful. Aridamente, barrenlie, dryly, parchedly,
harshly. Aridezza, as Aridita. Aridire, to make or become dry or barren.
Aridita, drynes, barrennes, parchingnes. Arido, dry, barren, parched, harsh.
Aridosso, look Caualcare. Aridromada, a precious stone growing square like a
dye. Ariento, as Argento. Ariete, a ram, a tupp. Also a warlicke instrument.
Arifuso, enough and to spare. Arigogoli, as Arzigogoli. Arilento, slowly,
softly, sparingly, heedily. Arimetica, Arithmetica, the art arithmeticke.
Arimetico, Arithmetico, an arithmetician. Arimpetto, oueragainst, opposite.
Arincontro, opposite on the other side. Arine, bee-hiues. Arinella, a wrinkle
or pleit, a pucker. Arinellare, to wrinkle, to pucker, to pleit. Aringa, as
Arringa. Aringare, as Arringare. Aringo, as Arringo. Ariolare, to divine or
soothsay. Ariolatione, a divination or soothsaying. Ariolo, a diuiner or
soothsayer. Arioso, as Aeroso. Ariotino, a wren. Arisato, the herb wake
robin, rampe, or cuko-pintle. Arischiare, to hazard, to adventure, or ieopard.
Arischio, in hazard, in adventure, or ieopardie. Arisigare, as Arischiare,
Arisigo, as Arischio. Arismetica, the art of arithmetike. Arismetico, an
arithmetician. Arispetto, in respect, in comparison, in regard. Arista, a pin,
a prick, a thorn, a prickle, a sting. Aristocratia, a government or
principality of good men. Aristologia, the herb hartwort or birthwort.
Aristolochia, idem. Aristula, a pin, a prick, a thorn, the prickles of ears
of corn, a sting. Aritroso, frowardly, akewardly, thwartly, crossely.
Aritaglio, by retaile, by small pieces. Arithmantia, a foretelling or
divination by numbers. Aritmo, a rhyme, or meeter. Arizzare, to stand up, to
rear up stiffely or rightly. Arlasso, an affront, a wrong, an injury, a
cousening trick. Arlotta, a proud, filthy, common whore. Arlottare, to play
the common foolish priest, or to play the whore. Arlotto, the name of a merry
priest, a lack-latine, or hedge priest. Arma, any weapon or armor, a badge, or
arms. Armaio, Armaro, a cupbord, a press, a wardrobe, an ambrie, a shelfe, an
armorie. Armaiuolo, a little ambrie, press, or shelfe, or cupbord. Armamento,
a complete armor, an arming. Also an armorie. Armare, to arm, to weapon.
Armararo, an armorer. Armare di fuora, as Fare Chiomazsuoli. Armaria, an
armorie. Armarla galea, a kind of christmas game so called. Armaruolo, an
armorer. Armata, an army, a navy, a fleet. Armatura, an armor a weapon.
Arm, arms, weapon^, badges. Arm auree, the chief shoulder bones in a horse.
Armeggiare, to follow, exercise, or profess arms or feats of arms. Also in
prouerbiall manner taken for to rave or commit some foolish part, to miss the
cushion, or be wide from the purpose, to speak nothing to the matter, tu
Armeggi, thou art wide. Armeggiamento, any exercise at arms in what kind so
ever. Armeggiarie, all sorts of arms or armings, or exercises in arms.
Armeggiatore, one that follows or professes arms. Armelle, apricock plums.
Armellino, an hermine, an hermelin. Also an apricock tree: the color of a
horse so called. Armellina, an apricock plum. Armenio, a kind of marble or
such hard stone. Also a kind of color that painters use. Armento, a drove or
heard of cattle. Armentaio, a Grasier, a Drouer or heardsman of cattle.
Armentale, of or pertaining to herds or flocks. Also a stallion that lives
abroad with mares. Armeuole, the name of a bird. Also that may be armed.
Armi, all manner of arms or weapons. Armiero, an armorer. Armigero, a follower
or professor of arms, an Esquire. Armiggi, an implement about a ship. Armilla,
a bracelet about ones arms, a wristband. Also an astronomers instrument made
of hollow circles like hoopes. Armi manesche, short hand weapons. Armipotente,
mighty in arms. Armolla, the herb orage, or orache. Armoneggiare, as
Armonizzare. Armonia, harmony, melody, accord in music. Armoniaco, an
apricock tree. Also a kind of salt so called. Armoniaca, an apricock plum.
Armonioso, Armonico, harmonious, melodious, well tuned, musical. Armonizzare,
to make harmony, to make melody. Armonizzante, harmonious, melodious, full of
melody. Arnabo, a kind of tree in India. Arnese, harness, furniture,
implements, any thing about arming or apparelling, household stuff, ornament
about any thing. Arnie, beehiues. Arnioni, the raines of the back. Aro, as
Arone. Arogare, as Arrogare. Arogante, arrogant, presumptuous, malepert,
saucie. Arogantia, arrogancy, presumption, saucines. Arogatione, as
Arrogatione. Aromataio, a perfumer, one that sels perfumes or spices: an
apothecarie. Aromatico, aromaticall, sweet smelling, savoring sweet: an
apothecarie. Aromatite, a kind of precious stone that has the smell of
myrrh. Aromatizzare, to perfume or make to smell sweet. Aromatizzante, as
Aromatico. Aromato, as Aromatico. Aromore, in a hurly burly, in an uproar.
Aronano, a kind of little fish. Arondella, a sea Swallow, a sea Bat, a sea
Reremouse. Arone, the herb cuckowpintle or wake robin. Aronfa, a play at
ruff or trump. Arosegare, to gnaw, to fret, to nibble. Arosigare, as
Arosegare. Arostire, to roste, to toste. Arostita, a toste. Arosto, any kind
of rostmeate. Also roasted. Arotare, to grind the teeth or any thing else* to
grind sharp, to wheel about. Arouersciare, to ouerturn, to overthrow, to
reuerse, to turn the inside out. Arouerscio, Arouescio, clean contrary,
kim-cam, inside outward, arsiuersie. Arouerscione, Arouescione, as Arouerscio.
Arpago, Arpagone, a great hook, a dragging hook, a weeding hook, a rake a
harrow, a grubber. Also a pothooke, a crook. Arpegare, to dig, to rake, to
harrowe, to grub, to break clods of earth or the ground. Arpegone, as Arpago.
Arpia, a monster called a Harpie. Arpiceri, the names of certain guts in any
body. Arpicordo, an instrument like clarigols. Arpicone, as Arpago. Arpigia,
greedines, rauenousnes, rapacitie. Arpino, as Arpago. Arpione, as Arpago, the
hinge of a gate, the hook whereon a door hangs and moves. Arpioncelli,
tacks or tenterhookes, or little hooks. Arquata, as Auosetta. Also a curlue.
Arra, any earnest, pledge or earnest penie given upon bargain, a gods penie.
Arrabatarsi, to shrug or shrink, to crinch together as one when he is a cold.
Arrabbiare, to enrage, to grow furious, or frantic, to be mad or moodie.
Arragiato, a horse that has the laske. Arramacciare, to cut off, to lop
boughs or trees, to spoil, to havoc. Arrampare, to take hold of, to climb
up, to hold fast, to drag, to gripe, to creep, to twine about as Iuie does:
to rampe or branch up. Arrampegare, as Arrampare. Arrampinare, as Arrampare.
Arrancare, to snatch up, to hurl, to fling, to throw, to twirle about
violently. Arrancato, stripes, blows, hurlings, throws. Also plucked up.
Arrancigliare, as Arrampare. Arrandella, a cudgel or stick to wind a cord
about, as carriers do about their packs or pack-saddies. Arrandellare, to
hurl, to throw or fling with violence. Arrangolare, to wrangle, to dodge, to
chafe aloud that all may hear. Arrappare, as Arrampare. Arraspare, as Raspare.
Also to snatch with haste or greedines. Arrecare, as Arecare. Arredare, to
dight, to adorn, to set out handsome, to deck to garnish. Arrenato, sick or
troubled with the stone or gravel in the bladder, graueled. Arrendare, as
Arendare. Arrendamento, as Arendamento. Arrendere, to yield, to render, to
give, to restore, to stretch. Arrendeuole, yielding, stretching, pliable,
giving, tractable, gentle. Arredi, Arrendi, as Arnese. Arrequiare, to quiet, to
rest, to appease, to assuage. Arrestare, to arrest, to stay, to cease, to
detain: to set a lance in his rest, to rest. Arresto, an arrest, a stay, a
rest, a detaining. Also a decree and ordinance or judgment in law. Arretitio,
which creeps in privily, or is pulled by violence of a devil or spirit. Also
pores or little unseen holes. Arretrare, to retire or withdraw back.
Arretrattare, to treat or handle again. Arreso, yielded, given, rendered,
stretched, restored. Arrezzare, as Arizzare. Arricciare, to affright, to
terrify till ones hair stand and stare, to curle, to frizle, to make rough or
brissly. As Arizzare. Also to rough-cast any work with mortar. Arricchire, to
enrich or grow rich. Arricordare, to remember. Arricordeuole, mindful.
Arricordo, a remembrance, a warning, an admonition, a document. Arridere, to
smile, to favor, to laugh together. Arringa, as Aringa, an array: an arange: an
oration, a declamation. Arringare, to arange or set in array or order of
troops, to profess arms, to declame or make a noise, to make an oration in
some public place: to run at tilt. Arringatore, a declamor, an orator, a
common speaker: a runner at tilt, a tilter. Arringhiera, as Arringo. Arringo, a
pulpit: a riding or carreering place, a list for horses, or feats of arms: a
declamation, an oration, a noise, a common loud speech. Arrischiare, to hazard,
to adventure, to ieopard, to endanger. Arrischieuole, hazardous, aduenturous,
bold, fond hardy, ieopardous. Arrischio, hazard, danger, ieopardie, adventure.
Arriuare, Arribare, to arrive, to reach unto, to obtain. Arriuata, an arrival
or coming to a place. Arriuo, an arrival or reaching, or coming unto.
Arrizzare, as Arizzare. Arroba, a pipe, a barell, a tun, a hogshead, or a great
measure of wine or oil in Spain. Also a weight waying five and twenty pound
weight. Arrobinare, to make or become red or ruddie: to fill or swell with
drinking. Arrocare, to become or be hoarse, to snort. Arrocchiare, as Arrocare,
to tell incredible tales, as we say to lie for the whetstone. Arrochisire, as
Arrocare. Arrogare, to arrogate, to ascribe, to impute, to attribute, to
presume, to insult, to adopt. Arrogante, as Arogante. Arrogantia, as Arogantia.
Arrogatione, arrogation, a presuming, an adopting, an imputing. Arrogere, rogo,
rogei, rogiuto, as Arrogare. Also to yield or give help, to add unto.
Arroginire, to become rustie, mouldie or mustie. Arroginoso, rustie, mustie,
mouldie. Arrolare, to enroule or write, or note upon a check roll, to
register, to put upon the files or records. Arroncigliare, to snort, to speak
hoarse, to hook, to rake, to snatch, to filch, to seize on or gripe violently.
Arrosigare, to gnawe, to fret, to nibble. Arrossare, to blush, to make or
become red. Arrossire, as Arrossare. Arrostare, to roste, to toste, to burn,
to parch, to blast, to scorch. Also to turn or wind round. Arrostire, as
Arrostare. Arrostita, a tossed or rosting. Arrosto, as Arosto. Arrotare, to
grind or make sharp or keen, to set an edge upon, to gnash with the teeth,
to set ones teeth an edge, to provoke or stir up, to incense. Also to clip
money. Arrouelare, to wheel or turn about, to dodge, to wrangle, to chafe, to
skould. Arrouersciare, Arrouesciare, as Arouersciare. Arrouerscio, Arrouescio,
as Arouerscio. Arrozzire, to become or make rude or clownish. Arrubbare, to
steal, to rob. Arrubinare, as Arrobinare. Arruffare, to brissle, to desheuell
or stare with ones hairs. Also to strut or pranck it as a Turkey cock. Also
to touze, to tug, to bang or ribbaste one. Arruginire, as Arroginire.
Arruotare, as Arrotare. Aruotatore, a sheare grinder: any grinder else.
Arsenale, a storehouse for munition, but properly a place of exercises.
Arsenico, Arsnick or rats-bene or Orpine. Arsibile, that which may burn.
Arsicciare, to burn, to blast, to parche, to scorch, to tan in the sun.
Arsiccio, burnt, blasted, scorched, tand with the sun. Arsinico, as Arsenico.
Arsione, a burning, a skalding, a fire, an inflammation, a flame. Arsiuo,
burning, skalding, parching. Arsis, the elevation or lifting up of the voice in
singing. Arso, burnt, skalded, consumed with fire. Arsura, heat, burning,
scorching. Artamente, Artatamente, subtly, craftily, wittily, by art. Also
in strict manner, straightly, in bonds or fetters. Artano spade, a devilish
character that nigromants use. Art, an art, a trade, an occupation, a
science, a craft. Artefice, an artificer, a tradesman, a man of an occupation,
a crafts-man. Arteficiale, Arteficioso, artificial. Arteficio, art,
knowledge, skill, workmanship. Artegiano, as Artefice. Arteggiare, to artize,
to live by an art, to profess an occupation, to show art or skill.
Arteglieria, as Artiglieria. Artegliero, as Artigliero. Artelaria, as
Artiglieria. Arteria, an artery or beating or panting or pulse of a man's
vein. Artemisia, the herb Motherwoort or Mugwoort. Artenne, a kind of
ravenous sea foul. Artetica, a disease in a Hawk. Arti, arts, trades,
sciences, occupations. Artico, the articke pole, northward or northren.
Articolare, Articulare, to articulate, to condition, to covenant, to
distinguish. Also pertaining to the ioints. Also a painful swelling or gout in
any joint. Also the Cowslip or Primrose. Also to speak distinctly, to point or
distinguish joint by joint. Articolatamente, articulately, distinctly, from
point to point, joint by joint. Articolo, Articulo, an article. Also a natural
composition of bones or ioints, a joint, a knuckle. Artificiale, Artificioso,
artificial, according to art. Artifice, as Artefice. Artificij, devises,
sleights, deceits, cunning shifts or tricks. Artificio, art, skill, knowledge.
Artigiano, as Artefice. Artiglieria, artillery, ordinance. Artigliero, a
gunner, a caster or founder of ordinance. Artiglij, the talents, claws or
pounces of birds or hawks. By a metaphor the bands of love. Artimone, the
maine or greatest sail of a ship, a foresaile. Artista, as Artefice. Arto,
narrow, straight, pinching. Artomi, a beast like a Hedgehog, having the shape
of a Mouse and a Bear. Arturo, as Arcturo. Aruba, Arruba, by stealth,
filchingly, a bootehaling, a free-booting, in a hurly burly, a snatch and
away. Arue, foolish, idle, loytring sports. Aruggiare, to make or dye red.
Aruotare, as Arrotare. Aruspicio, a diuiner or soothsayer, by looking into
beasts bowels. Arze, haec Arsenaria, or Colonia in latin. Arzauola, a ducklin,
or a d^bchickin. Arzeglio, a horse with a white foot on the farther side.
Arzenale, as Arsenale. Arzente, burning, scorching. Arzere, to burn, to
scorch. Arzigogalo, a lifter, a heauer, a lea^er, an underprop: a foolish,
fond, toyish fellow. Arzigoghelarie, foolish toys, fond tricks, toyish parts.
Arzigogolare, as Fantasticare. Arzigogoli, sudden toys, foolish humors,
fantastical devises. Arzilla, clay, or a tough earth, cla^^ie earth.
Arzinanello, a kind of watersnake. Asacco, Asaccomano, to the spoil, to the
sack, ransakt. Asaluamento, Asaluo, to safety, safely. Asalto a salto, leap
by leap, skipping. Asanzo, a kind of game at tables so called Asaro, the
herb folesfoote, or wild Spikenard. Asbacco, carelessly, at randon, enough,
hold-belly-hold. Asbaraglio, at six and seven, in confusion, carelessly.
Asbergo, a breast plate, a curasse or va^tplate. Asbestino, a kind of web in
India that no fire can consume. Asbesto, a stone in Arcadia, which once kindled
will never be quenched again. Asca, a rafter, a single quarter, a stub, a
stake, a pile, a chip, a lath, a stump, a stock. Ascapezzo, a kind of
multiplying by broken numbers. Ascatafascio, at random, at six and seven.
Ascaride, arse-wormes, or gut-wormes. Ascauezzacollo, headlong, furiously,
carelessly. Ascella, the armehole, the armepits. Ascendere, scendo, scesi,
sceso, to ascend, to mount up. Ascendente, ascendent, ascending. Ascentio,
woormewood. Ascentione, an assension or Ascension day. Ascesa, an ascending
place. Aschifo, Aschiuo, loathsome, yrkesome, filthy, in abomination.
Aschincio, reeling or staggering as a drunkard, indenturewise. Aschio, spite,
rage, vexation, disdain, yrkesomnes, swelling, malice, venom, rancour.
Aschioso, spiteful, raging, disdainful, furious, yrkesome, moodie, venomous,
full of rancoure. Aschite, a kind of dropsy when much waterie humor is heaped
up between peritoneum and the bowels, and makes the belly swell. Ascia, a
pickaxe, an adze, a chipaxe, a plane. Also a board or a planke. Asciare, to cut
out work with an axe or adze. Also to plane, to board or to planke.
Asciogliere, to assoile, to free, to absolve, to acquit. Asciomene, an herb
which makes wild beasts leese their fiercenes. Asciro, a plant, or herb
called in latin Ascirum. Asciugare, to wipe or dry. Asciugatoio, a wiper or a
towell. Asciutto, wiped or dried. Asclopiadi, a kind of verse or meter. Also an
herb like Iuie having many roots. Ascoltare, to harken, to listen.
Ascoltatore, a harkner or listner. Ascondaregli, lurking, secret, or hiding
holes or corners. Ascondere, to hide, to conceal. Ascondimento, a hiding.
Ascoso, Ascosto, hidden, hid, lurked, secret. Ascrittitio, a writer, a clarke,
an enregistrer. Ascriuere, to ascribe, to impute. Ascrocco, scot-free, at other
men's charges. Asdegno, in contempt, in disdain. Asenno, wittingly, for the
nonce. Asella, cod-fish or hadock-fish. Asfadello, a flower called a Daffodill
or Affodill. Asfalto, a kind of drug or gum that burns. Also a kind of
medicament. Also the English Galingale. Some take it for a kind of wild
Olive. Also our ladies Rose or Rose of Jerusalem. Asfodillo, as Asfadello.
Asiati, a kind of ducke, wigin or ^eale. Asicurta, upon assurance or safety.
Asia, a fish which brought in sight of the fire is presently enough and fit to
be eaten, else very hard. Asieme, together, helter-skelter. Asilo, Asillo, a
rack to so^der cattle in. Also a place of sanctuary, a franchise or place of
privilege. Also the sting of a waspe, or a waspe it self. Asima, a disease in
a horse growing in the lungs, a fainting or swouning. Also a painful drawing
of the breath with a wheezing or puffing, a pursines or cough in the lungs.
Asimiglianza, Asimilitudine, like or resembing, as. Asinaggine, as Asinaria.
Asinaria, folly, foolishnes, of an asses condition, assishnes. Asinaro, a
driuer or keeper of asses. Asindicare, as Assindicare. Asinello, a little ass.
Also a kind of fish. Asinesco, asselike, like an ass or a fool. Asinino,
assish, foolish. Asinita, as Asinaria. Asino, an ass. Also a cod or codfish.
Asio, a kind of stone called Eate-flesh, because that dead bodies laid therein
in forty days consume away. Also a kind of owl called a horn coute with
feathers on each side of his head like ears. Asma, as Asima. Asmatico, pursie,
short winded, broken winded. Asmodeo, a friend or lover of lechery.
Asofficientia, sufficiently, enough. Asoleo, by furrows, chamsured. Asorte, by
chance, by lot, by fortune. Aspada tratta, to swords drawing. Aspagnolato,
spaniolized, foolish, effeminate or bragging. Aspalto, Aspalato, as Asfalto.
Asparago, the plant Sparage. Aspare, to reele, to wind or make silk into
skeines. Aspasso, to solace, to walk, to sport, to recreate. Aspe, as Aspide.
Asperella, a kind of weed growing in the water. Aspergere, to sprinkle, to
bedeaw. Aspergolo, asprinkle or brush to sprinkle holy water with. Asperino, a
beast bearing a rich surre: some take it to be the budge. Also a coin in
Turkey. Asperita, sharpenes, sowrenes, craggednes, roughnes, eagernes,
severity, surlines, rigor, austeritie. Aspernabile, contemptible, to be
skorned or rejected. Aspero, sharp, sour, rough, craggie, eager, severe,
cruel, sur^^e, unpleasant, churlish, rude, austere, hard, grievous, fierce,
stubborn, rigorous, rugged, stinging, biting. Also a kind of come in Turkey.
Also a kind of twining brier or wee^^. Asperso, sprinkled, bed^wed.
Aspersorio, as Aspergolo. Asputtare, to expect, to tarry for, to pertain or
belong unto. Aspettatione, expectation, tariance. Aspetto, aspect, countenance,
presence. Aspid^, an aspike or aspe. Also deaf. Also a short piece of
ordinance called a chamber or a mortar. Aspidochilone, a fish that swims in the
water, flies in the air, and creeps on the ground. Aspilate, a precious
stone like silver. Aspirare, to aspire, to aim at to pretend, to breath, to
desire. Aspiratione, an aspiration, a drawing of breath, an influence. Aspleno,
the herb Ceterach, Waleferne, Miltwaste, Stoneferne, Scaleferne, or
Fingerferne. Aspo, Aspolo, a reele to reele or wind yearne. Also a ring put in
the spindle to make it way, a whirroll. Aspramente, cruelly, severely, roughly,
surly, sharply. Aspredo, a fish called a ruff or a goldfish. Aspreggiare, to
provoke to roughnes, to misuse, to abuse sharply, to exasperate. Asprezza, as
Asperita. Aspro, as Aspero. Asprone, a kind of soft, blackish, rugged stone,
that they have about Rome to build with. Aspruso, deawie, sprinkled. Asquadra,
by troops or squadrons. Asquarzo, in havoc, at six and seven. Assadolce, a
kind of sweet g^m called Benjamin or Benzoin. Assafetida, a kind of loathsome
liquor so called of the Apothecaries. Assaggiare, to taste, to try, to prove,
to assay. Assaggiatore, a taster, a proouer, an assayer. Assaggio, a taste, a
trial, an assay, an essay. Assaiare, as Assaggiare. Assai, enough, sufficient,
many, much, mickle. Assaiuolte, many times. Assaissimo, very much, enough to
spare. Assaiuolo, a bustard, a bistard. Also a harmowle or sch^^echowle.
Assaldare, to solder or join together closly, to staunch, to close up a wound
or blood. Assaldatura, a closing, a stanching, a soldring. Assalire, to
assail, to assault, to set upon, to invade. Assalitore, an assayler, an
assaulter, an inuader. Assalone, the name of a bird. Assalto, an assault, an
invasion, an onset. Assannare, to bite, to take hold off with the tuskes.
Assanno, a biting, or pinch with the teeth. Assaporare, to savor, to taste.
Assassinare, to murder; to rob by the high way. Assassinamento, Assassinaria,
a murder or a robbery. Assassino, Assassinatore, a murderer, a high way
thief, a robber. Ass, a board, a planke. Also an axletree of a wagon or cart:
the diameter of the world, a hook of a door or gate. Also a wild beast in
India with a speckled skin. Assecurare, to assure, to warrant. Assedare, to
swage, to appease, to qualify, to mitigate. Assedere, to sit near or by.
Assediare, to besiege or heleaguer. Assedio, a siege or leagre. Asseggere,
Asseggo, Assisi, Assiso, to sit down, to pitch in a place, to place.
Asseggiare, to sit down or rest. Assegnamento, an appointment or assignation.
Assegnare, to appoint, to assign, to allege, to address, to teach, to
delegate, to institute. Assegnatamente, orderly, duly, according to
appointment. Asseguire, to attain, to atchieue, to bring to pass.
Asseguimento, an obtaining, an atchieuing, an accomplishing. Assellare vena, a
large vain being a branch of Vena caua. Assemblare, to assemble, to gather
together. Also to seem to resemble. Assemblea, an assembly or congregation.
Assembrare, as Assemblare. Assembramento, as Assemblea. Assemplare, to copy or
take an example by. Assennare, to nod, to beck, to wink or make any other
sign. Also to instruct, to teach. Assenso, Assentimento, an assent or consent:
a voice or a grant. Assentare, to absent or sit down. Assentatione, absence,
an absenting. Also an assenting unto. Assente, absent. Assentia, Assenza,
absence. Assentio, Assenzo, frankensence. Also the herb Wormwood. Assentione,
an ascension or ascending. Assentire, to assent, to consent, to grant, to
condescend. Assepare, to compass with hedges, to hedge, to fence or mound
about. Assepatore, Assepiatore, a hedger. Assepiare, as Assepare. Asserenare,
as Rasserenare. Asserire, Asserisco, Asserito, to affirm, to assure, to
auerre, to avouch. Assertione, an assertion, an affirmation, an auouching.
Asserto, affirmed, avouched, asserted. Assertiuamente, affirmatively,
auouchingly, with an assertion. Assessare, to limit or assise, to assesse, to
tax, to impose. Assessinare, as Assassinare. Assessinamento, as
Assassinamento. Assessino, as Assassino. Assesso, the assise, value or alloy of
money, as we say sterling or according to the standard. Assessore, an assessor
or assiser, a limiter, a counselor. Assestare, as Assettare. Assetare, to be
or make thirsty, to long for. Assettare, to settle, to order, to place, to
dress up, to reform, to redress, to fix, to conform. Assettatura, a fishing
line: a settling, an ordring of any thing. Assettatuzzo, a minion, a gallant, an
afffected fellow. Also accommodated. Assetto in Assetto, in order, in good
order, in good form, handsomely: stay or settling. Asseuerare, to affirm, to
protest, to swear, to auerre, to avouch. Assibilare, to hiss like a serpent.
Assicella, a little board or a planke or splint of thin boords, a spall of a
broken stone. Assicurare, to warrant, to assure. Assicuranza, surety,
assurance. Assicurta, boldly, upon assurance. Assiderare, to stiffen or benum
with cold, to swoune, to enterfer as a horse does, to blast or strike with a
planet, to be taken: to gall or rub off the skin. Assideratione, freezing,
benumming, enterferring, galling or rubbing off the skin, blasting or a
striking with a planet. Assidere, to sit down, to situate. Assidenza, the act
of sitting down, a sitting, a settling. Assidi, as Epicicli. Assiduare, to
continue with diligence. Assiduita, continuance, diligence, daily labor.
Assiduo, careful, continuing, diligent, laboursome. Assieme, together,
helterskelter. Assiepare, to hedge or fence about. Assiepatore, a hedger, a
maker of hodges. Assillare, to bite with a horseflie. Also to leap and skip
furiously as oxen do when they are stung and bitten with flies. Assillo, a
sting or prick of a waspe. Also a sharp goade. Assimigliare, to resemble or
be like. Assindicare, to judge, to arraine, to condemn by order of law, to
try by law. Assinghiozzati sospiri, sobbing, deep fetched sighs. Assioma,
authority by reason of an office, a maxim, a principle, a general ground or
rule of any art. Assinomantia, diuina^^on or witchcraft done by hatchets.
Assisa, size that painters use. Also an assise or manner. Also a liuerie, a
guise or fashion, an assise or session. Assisare, to sise, to sesse, to assise,
to suit well. Assiso, sitten down, seated, situated. Assistere, to assist, to
aid, to help. Assistenza, help, assistance. Assistente, assistant, helping.
Assito, a beam, a prop, a quarter, a iaw^^, a supporting piece of timber.
Assiuolo, as Assaiuolo. Asso, an ace upon a die or upon a card. Also a naught
or nothing. Associate, to accompany or associate. Assodare, to make solid,
fast or hard, to order or settle a matter. Assogna, grease or tallow.
Assognare, to dream, to rave. Also to tallow, to grease. Assolato, settled upon
four feet, s^l^d. Assoldare, to press soldiers, to take men into pay.
Assoluere, Assoluo, Assolsi, Assolto, to acquit, to discharge, to pardon or
absolve, to remit, to forgive, to assoile. Assoluto, absolved, discharged,
remitted, forgiven, quitted. Also absolute. Assolutione, absolution, remission,
forgiveness, assoiling, perfection, vprigh^nesse, absolutenes. Assolutorio,
pertaining to absolution. Assomiglianza, resemblance, like, after the manner.
Assomigliare, to resemble. Assomigliante, resembling, like. Assommare, to sum
or heap up. Assongiare, to grease with hogs grease. Assongia, tallow or hogs
grease. Assontione, an assumption. Assonto, assumed, mounted up, obtained,
climed, ascended. Also a charge or office. Assopire, to supple, to mitigate, to
assuage, to smoother. Assorbire, to swallow up or sip up. Assordaggine,
deafnes, thicknes of hearing. Assordare, to make or become deaf. Assordaforni,
a common scould or railer. Assortare, to sort, to consort or accompany, or
come to effect. Assortire, as Assortare. Assotigliare, to subtilize, to make
small, slender or thin, to distinguish, to divide, to beat or stamp thin.
Assumere, to assume, to undertake, to mount up. Assunto, as Assonto. Assurgere,
to raise or rise up. Asta, a staff, a lance, a spear, a pike, a long poule.
Astace, a Lobster-fish, a sea-crab. Astaffetta, in post-hast, hastily.
Astallare, to abide or stay in a stable, to stable, to stale, to abide, to
remain. Astanti, bystanders, being present. Astare, to arm one as a
speareman, or pikeman. Astase, Astese, Astrase, as Astace. Astenere, tengo,
tenni, tenuto, to abstain or forbear, to temper. Astenente, abstinent,
temperate. Astenentia, abstinence, temperance. Astenuato, lean, meagre, gaunt,
lanke. Asterite, a kind of precious sparkling stone. Asteratico, a kind of
sky color. Also a stone or earth so called. Astersione, a wiping away, a
cleansing, a drying up. Astersiuo, that will wipe away, cleanse, or dry up.
Asti, or Cucchi, money in rogues language, or pedlers french. Astesi, a kind
of sea-crab or lobster, so called in Italy. Astinenza, as Astenentia. Astio,
as Aschio. Astioso, as Aschioso. Astipulatore, that is of one accord or assent
with another. Astiuola, Asticciuola, a little lance, a little spear, a little
staff. Astoccata, by or with a thrust or stoccado, or a phoine. Astolfeida, a
fault which many have to presume to have that which they have not, as Astolfo
presumed by his force to do that which his enchaunted spear did. Astorre, a
Gossehauke. Astorella, a tassell of a Gossehauke. Astrabacca, the herb
Asarabacca or Hazellwort. Astracco, a floor or a seeling that is fretted.
Astragalomantia, a divination or casting of lots with dice, or hucklebones.
Astragalo, a hucklebone. Also the neckbone. Also a kind of word in building.
Also the herb Peasearthnut. Astrapia, a kind of whitish, and greenish stone.
Astrapie, in haste, a snatch and away. Astrarre, to abstract or draw out.
Astrattezza, a strange, far-fetcht conceit, an abstractnes. Astratto,
abstracted, drawn out, an abstraction. Astrattione, abstraction. Astrea, taken
for justice, the daughter of Astrea and Aurora. Astretta, a gripping or
pinching at the heart. Astrettiuo, restrictiue, restringent. Also enforcing.
Astretto, constrained, urged, forced, bound, at a narrow pass, compelled.
Astrico, a pauement, a place that is paued. Astringente, astringent, enforcing.
Astringere, to constrain, to force, to bind, to enforce, to compel. Astrio,
a precious stone in India with a shining star in the center or midst of it.
Astro, a star. Astroccomusiato, floored, seeled, or paued with frets.
Astroide, a stone which being laid upon marble wet with vinegar or juice of
limons does stir and creep away. Astrolabio, an astrolobe, an instrument
whereby the motions of the stars is gathered. Astrologare, to play the
Astrologer. Astrologia, Astrology. Astrologo, an Astrologer. Astronamo, an
Astronomer. Astronomare, to play the Astronomer. Astronomia, Astronomy.
Astronomizzare, as Astronomare. Astronomo, an Astronomer. Astroppicciare, to
rub or claw hard. Astura, a shellfish called a nakre. Astutia, craft, malice,
subtilitie, wit, shrewdnes. Astuto, crafty, malicious, subtle, witty,
shrewd. Asua posta, at his pleasure, at his peril. Asua scelta, at his choice.
Asuefare, to accustom, or be wont. Asuefatione, as Asuetudine. Asueto, wont,
accustomed. Asuetudine, a custom, a fashion, a wont. Asuo danno, at his
peril. Asuolo asuolo, piled in order as herrings be in barrels. Asuo mal
grado, in despite of him. Asu^ senno, after his own wit. Atagliare, to fit,
to cut or square any thing Atalche, so that, then. Atanato, the herb Rose
campion. Atanasia, the herb Tansie. Also a kind of salve so called of the
Apothecaries. Atante, in stead of Aiutante, helping. Atanto, in the mean time,
there whilst, insomuch, so far forth, then. Atapezzare, as Atapezzire.
Atapezzire, to burnish, to trim or smug up, to hang or adorn with tapestrie.
Atarantolati, such as are bitten or stung with the serpent Tarantola.
Atarantula, as Tarantola. Atare, to help, to address, to fit, to settle.
Atastare, as Attastare. Ateo, Atheo, Atheista, an atheist, a miscreant, godles,
one that thinks there is no god. Atempo, in time or season, for time, upon
trust, fitly, oportunely. Atempo luogo, in due time and place. Attentione,
attention or heed. Atento, attempted, attentive, heedie, marking. Atentone,
groping in the dark upon all four. Aterina, a fish called in latin Atherina.
Atergo, behind ones back, behind. Athleta, a wrestler or a contender with
hand and foot, a champion. Atimo, Attimo, an atome or mote or an indivisible
thing. Also a moment of time. Atleta, as Athleta. Atomo, Attomo, as Atimo.
Atorno, about, in a round, in a circle, touching, concerning. Atorto,
wrongfully, against right or reason. Atoscare, as Atossicare. Atossicare, to
poison or enuenome. Atramento, a kind of dying or coloring. Also ink. Also a
kind of mineral salt. Atramento sutorio, copperas or vitrioll, or shoomakers
black. Atrauersare, to trauerse or cross the ground: to thwart, to cross, to
hinder. Atrauerso, acrosse, contrary to expectation, overthwart. Atristare, as
Attristare. Atro, dark, black, sable, pitchie, dreadful, cruel, loathsome,
ghastly, grisly, dreadful, horrible. Atroce, fierce, cruel, fell, severe.
Atrochite, as Astroide. Atrocita, fiercenes, cruelty, severity. Atrophia, a
disease, when one for fear eats less, or through too much greedines eats
more than he ought, whereupon follows a consumption or pining away. Some take
it for a disease in the eyes. Attaccare, to fasten, to cleave, to join, to
hang up, to pitch up, to tacke, to attache. Attaccar battaglia, to join
battle. Attaccaticcio, clammie, slimie, pitchie, fastening, cleaving unto.
Attaccatura, a fastening, tying or joining unto. Attacco, a holdfast, a
fastening. Attafanato, a flie-stoong or flie-bitten-coloured horse. Look
Tauani. Attagene, a dainty bird called a godwit. Some take it for a moore hen.
Some say that in company it sings, but never alone. Attagliare, to sooth one
up in his speeches, to make good what one says, to fit, to grace, to fadge or
square fit with any thing. Attalentare, to assent or agree to ones mind.
Attalianato, Italianated or Italianized. Attamente, aptly, fitly. Attanagliare,
to tanacle, to pinch with tanacles or tongs. Attare, to act, to make apt, to
fit. Attasentare, to put to silence, to hushed. Attastare, to feel, to grope,
to try, to prove, to taste, to assay, to tent as a sore. Attasti, the frets
of any instruments. Attauanato, as Attafanato. Attediare, to weary, to
overcome one with tediousnes. Attegare, idem. Also to dance on ropes of to
tumble. Attegatore, a teacher of nimblenes, a iugler, a tumbler, an active man,
a dancer upon ropes. Atteggiare, to teach, to make docile or active, to be
nimble, to iugle, to tumble. Atteggiatore, an actor, a teacher, a tumbler, a
iugler, an active man. Attelana, a kind of comedy divided into acts.
Attelare, to put or place in due, right and even order. Attempare, to grow or
increase in age. Attempato, aged, old, in years. Attendare, to encampe, to
pitch a tent. Attendere, tendo, tesi, teso, to accomplish, to keep, to harken,
to expect, to stay, to tarry. Also to attend, to wait, to follow, to
solicit, to mark, to hear, to regard, to apply. Attenenti, kinsmen,
allies, cosins, pertainings. Attenere, tengo, tenni, tenuto, to keep, to hold
fast, to take hold, to pertain, to belong unto, to observe. Attentare, to
attempt, to hazard, to adventure. Attentato, attempted, hazarded. It is also
taken in Grisoni, when a horse goes so heedfully or warily, that he dares not
tread one foot on another. Attentione, attention, attendance, diligence, care,
heed. Attentiuo, attentive, diligent, careful, heedfull, vigilant, prone,
ready. Attento, as Attentiuo. Also an attempt, an intent or purpose. As
Attentoche. Attentoche, since that, since, seeing that, considering. Attentone,
as Atentone. Attenuare, to extenuate, to make fine, small or lean.
Attenuatione, extenuation, finenes, smalnes, thinness, leanness, gauntnes.
Attenuire, as Attenuare. Attergare, to turn the shoulders or back toward.
Atterrare, to suppress, to throw or cast down to the ground, to humble, to
fell. Also to fill or dam up with earth. Atterrire, Atterrito, to deter, to
affright, to fear, to amaze, to terrify. Atterzare, to join three and three
together, to pack or prick the cards. Atteso, attended, waited, followed,
solicited, marked, hard, accomplished, kept, expected, regarded, applied,
harkned, stayed, tarried. Attesoche, seeing that, since that, since, since.
Attestare, to witness, to testify. Attestatione, a witnessing, a testimony.
Attestatore, a witness, a testifier. Attezza, aptitude, dexterity, actiuitie,
aptnes. Atti, acts, actions, deeds, jests, doings, customs, behauiors,
statutes, decrees. Attica, one of the four Greek tongues that were commonly
spoken. Atticciare, as Attizzare. Attidudine, as Attitudine. Attignere, as
Attingere. Attillare, to notify, or set out with a grace, or to make handsome.
Attillato, n^tified, refined, set out with a grace, or handsome, smug, triuie,
trim, fine. Attillante, gallant, fine, neat, spruce, handsome in clothes.
Attillatezza, neatnes, finenes, handsomnes, comlines. Attillatuzzo, nice, fine,
spruce, smug, selfe-conceited, or ouerweening. Attimo, Attomo, as Atimo.
Attinare, to make fit, commodious, or proper for any action. Also to tun.
Attinenza, pertaining or pertinencie. Attinente, pertaining, belonging, allied,
liable. Attingere, to touch or dip in, or draw water. Also to dye into any
color, to reach or fetch water. Attinto, touched, dipped in, or dyed, or
reached, or keeched water. Also when a horse is tainted or hurt, or
ouerreacheth one foot with another, and withal does hurt a sinew. Some
conster it to be a taint or ouer-reach in the back or shanke of a horse.
Attione, an act, an action, or a deed. Attirare, to draw unto, to allure.
Attitudine, aptnes, fitnes, actiuitie, dexterity, gesture, action. Attiuo,
active, nimble, full of agilitie, doing, actual, effectual. Attizzamento, a
stirring up, or provocation. Attizzare, to stir, to move, to provoke to
anger, or to stir up the fire. Attizzatoio, an iron or forke to stir up the
fire with. Also a kindling place. Attizzonare, as Attizzare. Atto, an act, a
deed, an action, a gesture, a part, a trick. Also apt or meet, ready, fit,
prone, prepared, proper, good, ordained. Attondare, to round or make round, to
go round. Also for a horse to close up his turn roundly. Attondar di sproni,
to help with both spurs at one time to make a horse to close his turn just.
Attoniare, as Attorniare. Attonire, to astonie or be astonished, to amaze.
Attonito, astonished, amazed. Attore, a challenger or prouoker in any combat or
quarrel, an actor, a doer, a demandant, a plaintiff, an accuser, a pleader, an
attorney, a factor, a player in a comedy, a bailife in husbandry.
Attorcicchiare, as Attortigliare. Attorcigliare, as Attortigliate. Attorcere,
attorgo, attorcei, attorto, or attorciuto, to make crooked, to wind about as a
with, to torment, to rack, to wind up together. Attorneggiare, as Attorniare.
Attorniare, to compass, to enuiron, to incircle, to girde about. Attorno, as
Atorno. Attortigliare, to curle or turn round, to entangle. Attorto, wrong
fully. Attoscare, as Attossicare, Attossicare, to enuenome or poison.
Attraggere, as Attrarre. Attrarre, to attract, to draw out from, to abstract,
to benumme, to shrink up the sinews, to allure, to entice. Attratile, a kind
of burre or pricking weed, good against the bitings of Scorpions. Attrattiuo,
attractiue, enticing, alluring. Attratto, drawn out from, attracted, benumbed
in the ioints, shronken in the lims, allured, enticed. Attrattore, a Surgeons
tool, or drawing instrument so called. Attrauersare, to cross or overthwart.
Attrauerso, acrosse, athwart, overthwart. Attrecciare, to pleite or make up in
tresses, to pleite flowers as in a garland. Attribuire, tribuisco, tribuito, to
attribute, to impute, to ascribe, to refer, to presume. Attribuitione,
attribution. Attriplice, the herb Orache or Orage. Attristare, to make sad or
melancolicke, to grow bad. Attritare, to mince, hew, or cut small. Attrittione,
rubbing, fretting or wearing. Also attrition, that is a remorce proceeding of
servile fear, fearing either punishment, or loss of something, a fained
contrition. Attropicamento, a stumbling-blocke, a stumbling. Attropicare, to
stumble. Attuale, actual, effectual. Attuccio, a trick, a seat, a pranke, a
slight. Attuffare, to diue or ducke or plunge under water. Attuiare, to
obscure, to darken, to ouershadow, to blemish, to beguile. Attuire, as
Attu^are. Atturaccio, a stopple, also a skowringsticke for great Artillery.
Atturare, to stop or shut, to extinguish. Atturatoio, as Atturaccio. Attustare,
to drown, to smother, to stifle. Attuttare, to sum or cast up, to dam up, to
fill up, to extinguish, to assure, to appease. Attutare, to ducke, plunge or
diue under water, to assuage, to appease, to hush, to extinguish, to qualify,
to temper. Also to assure or warrant. Attutire, to make one perforce to hold
his peace, to hushed. A tua posta, at thine own pleasure, peril, or hazard.
Aturfo, the Tamariske tree. Atutta oltranza, with might and maine, with all
ones strength and force. A tutto transito, as A tutta oltranza. A tutti i modi,
by all means, howsoever. A tutto pasto, all the meal through, from the
beginning to the end of dinner or supper. Atutto corso, without stop or let,
with might and maine, on a maine gallop. Aua, a grandmother, a grandame.
Auacciare, to dispatch, to rid, to hasten, to make short. Auaccio, with speed,
in haste, hastily, quickly, out of hand, shortly. Auale, now, even now, by and
by. Auallare, to descend, to make a valley, to swallow down, to stoop, to
alight. Also to diminish, to confound, to sincke, to suppress, to veil down,
to encompasse or encircle round. Aualere, to prevail. Also to serve ones own
turn, to avail. Aualorare, to make valiant, to encourage, to animate, to
become valorous. Auampare, to set on fire, to flame, to blaze, to kindle.
Auangare, to thrive or prosper well, to succeed happily. Auania, an undeserved
wrong, an insulting injury, a secret grudge. Auantaggiare, to advantage, to
excel, to exceed. Auantaggiato, aduantaged, to have more pay then others.
Auantaggio, advantage, ods. Auantaggioso, aduantageous, having ods or
advantage. Auantare, to brag, to boast, to glory, to crake, to vaunt.
Auantatore, a bragger, a boaster, a vaunter. Auante, Auanti, before, foremost,
former, tofore, first, before. Auant'hieri, the day before yesterday.
Auanticuore, as Anticuore. Auanuara, at a venture, at hazard, hab or nab, at
six or seven. Auanzare, to grow, to increase, to augment, to out go, to
forgo, to exceed, to excel. Also to leave overplus, to get aforehand, to
advance, to prefer, to profit, to surmount. Auanzamento, as Auanzo.
Auanzaticcij, as Auanzi. Auanzi, scraps, leauings, mammocks, relics, shreads,
vailes of any thing, odd ends. Auanzo, above, moreover, profit, gettings,
increase, overplus, gain. Also the rest at Primero. Auanzugli, as Auanzi.
Auaritia, couetice, covetousness, avarice. Auaro, covetous, sparing, a niggard,
a miser. Auarone, a chuffe, a niggard, a great covetous man, a pinch penie, a
paltrer, a dodger, a miser, a penie father. Auccellare, as vccellare. Audace,
bold, hardy, daring, aduenturous, courageous, valiant, presumptuus, audacious.
Audacia, boldness, hardines, courage, valiancie, daringnes, presumption.
Audientia, audience, listening, hearing. Audire, to hear, to hearken, to
listen, to give ear. Auditore, an auditor, a hearer, a disciple. Auditorio, an
auditorie, a place of audience. Auedere, veggo, vidi, veduto, or visto, to
perceive, to forsee, to beware, to forecast, to advise. Auedimento, warines,
foresight, forecast, discretion, wisdom. Auedutamente, warily, discreetly,
wisely, with forecast, advisedly. Aueduto, Auisto, foreseen, perceived, aware,
forecast. Also wary, wise, subtle, crafty, foreseeing, a forecaster,
discreet or advised. Auegna che, howbeit, albeit, although. Auegnadioche,
idem. Auellana, a filbert or hazell nut. Auellano, a filbert or a hazell nut
tree. Auelenare, to enuenome, to poison. Auellere, to pluck by the roots, to
root out. Auello, a vault, a tomb, a sepulcher, a hollow den or cave.
Auemaria, evening tide or evening prayer time, euensong, an auemarie. Auena,
oats or prouander for horses. Also an oaten pipe. Auenaro, an Auenor in a
stable that has the charge of oats or prouander. Auenante, as Auenente.
Auenenare, to poison, to enuenim. Auenente, comely, gracious, handsome,
seemly, proper, fine, with due proportioon. Auenentia, comelines, graciousnes,
handsomnes, propernes, seemelines. Auenentezza, as Auenentia. Auenga che, as
Auegna che. Auengadio che, as Auegna che. Auenire, vengo, venni, venuto, to
happen, to come to pass, to chance, to meet, to hap. Also to come, in time to
come, hereafter. Auenimento, a hap, a chance, an accident, a success, an
issue, an event. Auentare, to hurl, to fling, to throw, to darte, to cast
violently, to seize greedily or leap upon. Auentata, as Al'auentata, a
flinging. Auentitij beni, goods that come by chance. Auentitio, a stranger,
strange, happening, chauncing. Auento, Auuento, Aduento, aduent, a time of the
year so called. Also an ariuing or a passage unto. Auentore, as Auentitio.
Also a customer or a frequenter to a place. Auentura, adventure, hap, fortune,
chance, by hap, hab or nab, by chance. Auenturare, to adventure, to hazard.
Auenturiere, an aduenturer, a hazarder. Auenturoso, Auenturato, hardy,
fortunate, aduenturous. Auerare, to verify, to aver, to affirm. Auerbio, an
aduerbe: one of the eight parts of speech. Auere, as Hauere. Auersario, an
adversary, an opponent. Auersione, a turning or driving away. Also a
contrariety. Auersita, adversity, contrariety. Auerso, adverse, contrary,
turned. Auertente, wary, foreseeing, subtle, aduertising, heedefull.
Auertentia, advertisement, warning, regard, notice, an admonition, a respect, a
heed. Auertere, to warn, to advertise, to mark, to note, to take heed, to
admonish, to regard, to take warning, to respect, to attend, to look unto.
Auertimento, as Auertentia. Auertire, as Auertere. Auertito, warned,
advertised, marked, heeded, regarded, admonished, noted, respected, attended,
looked unto. Also wary, sly, circumspect. Auezzare, to accustom, to be wont,
to use. Auezzamento, a custom, a fashion, a use. Auezzo, Auezzato, accustomed,
wont, used. Auge, the highest point of any planet. Augello, Auge^, a bird, a
foul in general. Augelletto, a little bird. Augumentare, as Aumentare.
Augumento, as Aumentatione. Augurale, that by which any thing may be guessed.
Also the ornaments of a soothsaier. Augurare, to forbode, to soothsay, to
foretell, to foreshew, to divine. Augurio, an augure, a soothsaying, a
prediction, a sign, a conjecture, a divination, a bad or ill hap, a wishing of
good hap, a forboding. Auguro, a soothsaier, a foreboder, a coniecturer, a
diuiner, a wisher. Augusta, the chief kind of eagle that is. Augusto,
consecrate, holy, noble, royal, imperial, full of majesty, reverend. Also
worshipful, honorable, of great magnificence, sanctified. Auiare, to address,
to set forward, to set in the way, to convey, to direct. Auiamento, as
Auiatione. Auiatione, a conueiance, a direction, an addressing. Auidita,
greedines, rauenousnes, desire, covetousness. Auido, greedy, covetous,
ravenous, desirous. Auignare, to plant, to set or store with vines. Auile, in
scorn, in contempt, in spite, in vile sort. Auilire, to debase, to vilify, to
deiect, to suppress, to scorn, to defile, to dishonor, to despise.
Auilluppare, to fould up, to entangle, to enwrap, to bundle up, to wind up. As
Armeggiare. Auiluppo, a bundle, a fardle, a winding. Auinato, a kind of wine
of grape color. Auincere, vinco, vinsi, vinto, to bind, claspe or tie hard
together. Also to overcome, to embrace, to wind or compass about as Iuie does
about a tree, to clinch ones fingers. Auinciare, as Auincere. Auincigliare, as
Auincere. Auinchiare, as Auincere. Auinghiare, as Auincere. Auisamento, as
Auiso. Auisare, to advertise, to mark, to note, to consider, to advise, to
think, to view, to heed, to regard, to inform, to warn, to judge, to
imagine. Auisatamente, advisedly, considerately. Auiso, advertisement, advise,
consideration, notice, an opinion, account, or a seeming. Auiso auiso, face to
face, over against. Auisto. Look Aueduto. Auiticchiare, as Auincere. Auiuare,
to revive, to quicken. Auiuatoio, a goldsmiths or guilders tool. Aula, a kings
or queens court, a palace, a hall. Aulimento, as Alimento. Aumentare, to
augment, to increase, to multiple. Aumentatione, Aumento, augmentation,
increase. Aumento, a disease or sore in the eyes. Aumiliare, as Humiliare. Aun
per uno, one by one. Auo, a grandfather, a gransire. Auocare, to plead or law,
or play the advocate, to solicit. Auocaria, an advocate or atturneyship. Also
a bar where lawyers plead. Auocato, pleaded, lawed or played the advocate,
solicited. Also an advocate, a lawyer, an attorney or counselor at law, a
solicitor. Auocadore, an advocate or counselor at law. Auogadare, as
Auocare. Auola, a grandmother, a grandame. Auolgere, volgo, volsi, volto, to
turn, to enwrap, to entangle, to wind up, to roll or bundle up. Also as
Armeggiare. Auolgimento, an enwrapping, an entangling, a bundle, a roll.
Auollere, as Armeggiare. Auolo, a grandsire, a grandfather. Auolo, in flight,
flying. Also in post haste. Auolpacchiare, to play the fox or crafty
companion, to deal subtillie. Also as Armeggiare. Auoltacchiare, as Auoltare.
Auoltare, to ouerturne, to ouerwhelme or overthrow, to wallow or roll in, to
toss or turn, to wander or range about. Auoltatiuo, one of the eight kinds of
worms breeding in horses. Auoltoio, Auoltore, a kind of hawk, a gripe, a
vulture or a geyre. Also a precious stone found in a vulturs head. Auolto,
enwrapped, turned, entangled, wound up, rolled. Auoltolare, as Auoltare.
Auorio, Yuorie. Auoserta, as Auosetta. Auosetta, a foul like a Storke with a
white bill bending upward, and of a whitish color. Auotare, to vow, to
promise: to empty. Auoto, empty, idle, for naught or in vain. Also upon a vow
or promise. Auotire, as Auotare. Aura, the air, a pleasant gale of wind or
sweet morning breath, a blaste. Auraco, golden, of gold, glistring as gold.
Aurare, to gild or deck with gold. Aurelia, the herb called Mothweede, or
golden Floweramour, or golden Stechados or Cudweede. Aurelio, shining like
gold, yellow, golden. Also the little wings of butter flies. Aureo, golden, of
a golden hew. Aureo d'Allessandro, a precious physic against poison.
Auricalco, latten or copper metal. Also taken for a trumpet. Auricolare,
auricolar. Also the name of a certain vain in ones body: the finger next to
the little finger. Auricone, of a golden or sunshine colored hair.
Auriflamma. Aurifrigio, a kind of water and land fowle^ Auriga, a carter, a
wagoner, a waneman. Auro, gold. Aurora, the morning, the morn, the dawne or
break or peep of day, the gray morning. Auruspicio, he that looked into the
live parts of the sacrifices to guess at the issue of them. Ausa, Auso, bold,
daring, aduenturous. Ausare, to dare, to be bold, to adventure. Ausare, to use,
to be wont, to enure. Auscio auscio, door by door, from door to door.
Ausiliare, auxiliare, fighting under one standerd, a helping neighbor.
Ausiliari soldati, auxiliare, aiding or helping soldiers. Auso, after the
fashion, custom or use. Auspice, a soothsaier, a deuiner, a guesser. Also a
direction or guide. Also he that gives a woman to the priest to be married.
Auspicio, a foresigne, a foreshew, a divination, a guessing, fortune. Also the
man that couples the man to the wife in marriage. Also conduct, government,
disposition, authority, direction of a captain. Austerita, severity,
cruelty, strictnes, austeritie. Austero, severe, cruel, strict, austere,
harsh or unpleasant. Australe, of the south or southern. Austro, the south
wind, or the southern part of the world. Autenticare, to make authentike, to
give authority, to make lawful, to approve. Autentico, lawful, authentike,
powerful, authorized, approved. Autonno, as Antunno. Autore, an actor, an
author, a dooer, a beginner of a thing. Autoreuole, powerful, having power or
authority. Autorita, authority, power, freewill, command, swaie, rule.
Autorizzare, to give power, freewil or authority. Autrice, a she author.
Autunnale, of or pertaining to Autumn. Autunno, the autumn or fall of the
leaf. Auzzare, Auzzo, as Aguzzare. Note that whersoeuer Au comes before a
vowell, the u may either be pronounced and written single or double as pleases
the speaker or writer: for you may say and write Auacciare, or Auuacciare,
Aualorare and Auualorare, Auedere and Auuedere. and so with all the rest.
Azaireth, a kind of physical pills. Azimo, bread without leven, unleavened.
Aziminthi, great circles meeting in the Zenith point, and passing through all
the degrees of the horizon. Azimuccio, one that suffers shortness of breath.
Azio, a dog fish. Some take it for a fish like a lamprey. Azizare, to settle,
to reform, to dress, to adorn. Azurrino, a kind of blew color that
painters use called bisse. Azurigno, somewhat bluish or azure. Azurro, azure,
blew, watchet, sky color. Azza, as Accia. Azzale, Azzalino, as Acciaio.
Azzampato, having fanges or claws, caught with claws or griped. Azzannare, to
catch with the teeth or tuskes. Azzeuia, a kind of fish much like a soale.
Azziccare, to tickle, to set on, or to start suddenly, to provoke or entice, to
dandle. Azzicchetto, a tickling, a starting, a sudden motion of the body, a
dandling, a provoking. Azzimare, as Accimare. Azzimi, a kind of marchpane or
comfets. Azzimino, a kind of fine work used in Persia upon their cimitaries
or other iron works like damasking. Azzollare, to beat, to bang, to tugge, to
cudgel, to clod together. Azzoppare, to halt, to become lame or criple.
Azzopegare, as Azzoppare. Azzuffare, to fight, to quarrel, to bicker, to
combat, to make a fraie, to buckle, cope or grapple together. Axinomantia,
divination or witchcraft by hatchets or axes.
B
BAaras, an herb of the color of a flame of fire. Babbione, a great babuine,
monkie or ape, a gull, a sot, a ninnie, a fool. Babbo, the first word children
call their fathers by; as we say dad. Babbole, bubbles, trifles, toies,
vanities, nifles, fond devises. Babbuasso, as Babbione. Babbuino, Baboino, an
ape, a monkey, a babuine. Also a stammering fellow, a fool, an ass, a doult.
Baccalaro, a batcheler in any art, a scholar, a licentiate, a clerk. Also
taken for a fond self-conceited fellow. Baccana, a tavern, a tippling house.
Baccanali giuochi, feasts and sports for Bacchus sake, we call them wakes.
Baccano, Bacano, a forest in Italy where much robbing and murdering is used.
Baccara, an herb, whose root is very sweet, the leaf like the Iuie, called
our ladies gloves, or London buttons: some take it for the ploughmans
spikenard. Baccaro, as Vaccaro. Baccata, an herb called spikenard. Also a
furious foolish woman. Baccato, a drunkard, an ale-knight, a tipler, mad and
foolish, a Bacchus priest. Baccelliere, as Baccalaro. Baccerelli, silk worms.
Bacello, a cod of any thing, as of beans or peason. Also young beans. Also a
gull, or a fool: it is also taken for a pillicocke or prick. Bacche, the
berries of Laurel, or Juniper. Bacchelle, the grains or kernels that be in
any fruit. Bacchetta, a wand, a rod, a bat, a stick, a little staff, a
cudgel, a scepter, an officers stick. Also a drummers stick. Bacchetta da
vino, a tavern, or alehouse bush. Bacchi, silk worms, as Bacchio. Bacchiale
osso, a chief bone in a man's arm. Bacchio, as Pacchio. Also a foot of a
verse consisting of one short and two long sillables. Bacciletto, a kind of
basket so called. a little basin. Bacco, the god Bacchus. Also a ruffler, a
swaggrer, a furious fellow. Also a silkeworme. Bacherozzoli, all kind of
little creeping or crawling worms, silke-wormes. Bachi, as Bacherozzoll.
Baciare, to kiss, to smacker. Bacicare, to practice or canuas much for a
thing, to fumble. Baciello, as Bacello. Bacielliere, as Baccalaro. Bacile,
Bacino, a basin, also a kind of musical instrument. Bacinetto, a little
basin. Also a skull, a sallet, a murrion or headpeece. Bacio, a kiss, a
smackering. Baciozzo, a smacking kiss. Baco, Bacho, a silke-worme. Bacocche,
as Bacche. Also apricocks. Bacolo, a wand, a stick, a truncheon, a cudgel, a
bat. Bacolo di Giacob, a staff that Mathematicians use, called Jacobs staff.
Bacueco, a manger, an ox stall. Baculo, as Bacolo. Bada, a delay, a stay, a
lingering, a demurre, loss of time, vain hope. Badagliare, to gape, to yawne,
to loiter about. Badaglio, as Badalone. Badaglione, a gaper, as Badalone.
Badalone, a slow, idle, lazy, loitering, negligent fellow, a loggarhead, a
dull, lither companion. Badaluccare, as Baloccare. Badalucco, loitering
pleasure, a lazy man's delight, idle gaping about. Also an idle fellow. It has
also been taken for an engine of war to batter walls withal. Badare, to
delay, to stay, to linger, to tarry, to lose time, to be idle, to attend, to
gape idly up and down. Baderlo, as Badalone. Badessa, an Abesse, or a
Prioresse. Badia, an Abie, or a Priorie. Badiale, idly, abot-like, at ease,
loitringlie. Badile, a spade, a digging shouell, a skoope. Baena, the name of
an herb. Baffetta, a kind of meat used in Italy made of paste. Baga, a
wine measure of a pint. Bagaia, the white-thorne, hawthorne tree, or landouers
may bush. Some take it for the Berberie tree. Bagaglie, baggage stuff,
luggage, trumperie, bag and baggage, or carriage of an army. Bagaglioni, idle
fellows, as soldiers, boys that follow the camp, and carry their masters
bag and baggage. Bagair, as Bagaia. Bagaro, a mite, or the least piece of money
that is. Bagascia, a baggage wench, a harlot, a strumpet, a whore. Bagasciare,
to play the baggage, harlot or whore. Bagascione, an idle, sluttish, unthrifty
riotous fellow, a bawd, a ruffian. Bagasciuolo, a wanton boy, an ingle.
Bagatella, as Bagatelliere. Bagatellare, to iuggle or trifle with the hands, to
play legerdemaine. Bagatelliere, Bagatello, a iugler, or a trifler.
Bagatellaria, a iugling or trifling trick. Bagatelle, trifles, joys, nifles,
vanities, or iugling tricks, driblets, legierdemaines. Bagatino, Bagattino, a
little coin used in Italy, a nickname for a kitlin or whelp as we say, a pug,
a pusse, a puppie. Baggeo, as Badalone. Baggiane, look Dare Panzane.
Bagianotta, hushed, close, squatting. Baglia, a she nurce. Baglio, as Balio.
Bagliori, drowsines, or enticing to sleep. Bagliuo, a bayliwike, the office of
a Bayliefe. Bagnare, to wet, to wash, to bathe, to moist. Bagnaruolo, a bathe
or baine-keeper. Bagno, a bathe, a baine, or bathing house. Bagnolo, a bathe, a
bathing or suppling medicine. Bagnomaria, a kind of limbecke or still, or
serpentine. Bagolaro, a lote tree, or nettle tree. Bagordare, to mask, to mum,
to revel. Bagordi, maskings, mummings, reuellings. Bagordiere, a masker, a
mummer, a reueller. Baia, a trifle, a toy, a nifle, a jest, a vanity, a little
wicker basket which the cariers in Italy fasten at their moyles muzles with
hay or prouender in it, so that they may eat as they travel. Baiana, a shell,
a cod, a husk, a case. Baiante, look Da baiante a ferrante. Baiaccia, Baiata,
as Fagiolata. Baiare, to bark, to bay, to howl, to toy, to jest, to trifle,
to gape, to yawne. Baicolo, a fish called a Base. Baiarda, a common filthy
ouer-ridden whore, a common skould. Baiella, a trifle, a toy, a jest, a kind
of small coin. Baietta, bays or pennistone used for linings. Baigua, an
herb, the juice whereof cast into the water makes fishes so drunk that as
dead they will flote upon the water with their bellies upward. Some think that
Verbasco will do so. Baila, a woman nurse. Bail, as Badile. Bailo, a man
nurse, a foster-father, a tutor, an ouerseer; a bailie, an agent, an
ambassador. Baio, the bay color of a horse. Also an abot. Baio cactagno, a bay
chestnut color. Baio dorato, a bright bay color. Baio ferrante, a brown bay.
Baio scuro, a dark bay. Baioccare, to flurt or click with ones fingers as
Barbers do, to snap. Baiocco, a small coin, a flurt, a snap or clicking with
ones fingers. Baiolo, Baiulo, a base, abject fellow, a porter or burden
bearer. Baione, a gull, a nodie, a ninnie, a fool, a iolt head, a mocker, a
iester. Baiucche, trifles, toys, jests, fooleries. Baladore della naue, the
upper deck of a ship. Balamite, a kind of precious stone of sundry colors.
Balancia, as Bilancia. Balanciare, as Bilanciare. Balano, a kind of shell fish.
Balare, to gape or yawne. Also to bleat as a sheep. Balarina, a bird called a
wagtaile. Ballascio, Balasso, a precious stone. Balatro, a slouen, a greasy,
sluttish, durty companion, a rascal, a pratler, a railing fellow. Balatroni,
dashings of dirt or mire, mirings, clods of earth, as Balatro. Balausto, a
Pome-granate-flowre. Balaustino, a kind of mixed color. Balbeggiare, to stut,
to stutter, to stammer, to lispe, to mutter, to mumble, to maffle; not to be
able to pronounce the letter R. Balbettare, as Balbeggiare. Balbezzare, as
Balbeggiare. Balbezza, a stammering, a stutting, a lisping or maffling in
speech. Also toongtied. Balbo, a stutter, a lisper, a stammerer, one
toong-tyed, a maffler. Balbotteuole, stutting, stammering, maffling.
Balbutiente, idem. Balbuttimento, as Balbezza. Balbuttire, as Balbeggiare.
Balbuzzare, as Balbeggiare. Balchi, a fustian, roguish, gibbrish word, used for
money. Balco, a skaffold or a stage, an out-ietting corner of a house. Balcone,
a window, a bay-windowe, a bulk, a stall of a shop. Balcorare, to snatch up,
to filch, to pilfer, to hook at windows, to burglarie. Baldacca, Baldacco, an
alehouse, a taphouse, a tipling-house, a tavern: it was wont to be the name
of an Inn in Florence. It is taken in ill sense for Babylon, or the whore of
Bablyon. Baldacchino, a canopie, a cloth of estate, a testerne carried over
Princes. Baldamente, Baldanzosamente, Baldosamente, boldly, assuredly,
confidently, saucily, without blushing, licenciously. Baldanza, Baldezza,
boldness, hardines, confidence, saucines, iolitie, mirth or glee. Baldanzoso,
bold, hardy, confident, assured, saucie, presumptuous, undaunted, licentious.
Baldo, as Baldanzoso. Baldocchino, as Baldacchino. Baldoria, as Baldanza.
Baldosa, bold, hardy, saucie. Also a musical instrument so called. Also a
kind of country dance. Baldracca, a common strumpet, a filthy contemptible
whore. Balena, a great fish called a whale. Balenare, to twinkle, to lighten,
to flash, to sparkle, to shine, to glister, to glimmer. Also to stammer, to
trip, to stutter, to maffle, to err or miss in speaking. Baleno, a twinkling,
a lightning, a sudden flashing, a glimps. Balestra, a crosse-bow, a stone-bowe,
a tillar, a little pillar, an engine of war to batter walls. Balestrare, to
shoot in or with a crosse-bow or stone-bow, to batter. Balestraro, a
crosse-bowe or stone-bowe maker. Balestrata, a blow or shot with a stonebow.
Balestriera, a spike hole or loope hole, to shoot out at. Balestriere, a
crosse-bow-man, a shooter in a crosse-bow. Balestrucci, a kind of swallow or
martin. Balia, power, freewill, authority, selfewill, liberty, choice, will,
force. Balia, a woman nurse. Balice, a cloke-bag, a male, a port-man-teawe.
Balio, as Bailo. Balin, a kind of herb. Balire, to bleat as a sheep. Balista,
a warlike engine to cast stones or darts. Also a crosse-bow, a stock-bow or
tillar. Also a sling. Balistario, a steele-bow-man, a crossebow-man, a shooter
of stones, a slinger or maker of slings. Balla, a ball, a bullet, a round
boule, a pack of any thing: a ball of wild fire. Balladore della naue, the
upper deck of a ship. Ballanzuola, a kind of fowling net, spring or haie.
Ballare, to dance, to hop, to skip. Ballarino, Ballatore, a dancer, a teacher
to dance. Ballata, a ballade, a song, a gigge, a roundelaie. Ballerino, he that
leads or gives a bride to her husband in Venice. Balliero, a tenis ball maker.
Ballo, any kind of dance. Ballocaggine, Balloccamento, foolish, idle, droning,
loytring or gaping about. Balloccare, to gase, to loyter, to gape or look
about idly. Ballocco, as Badalone. Ballo d'acqua, a moore hen or such foul.
Ballo della botte, a kind of Christmas game used in Italy. Ballonaro, as
Balloniere. Ballonchio, a country hopping or morris dance. Also a handball, a
footefall. Ballonciuolo, a merry country dance. Ballone, a great ball, a
ballone, to play at with braces, a footeball. Balloniere, a ballonier, a
ballone-maker, foote-ball maker. Ballose, a kind of round, light, puffed
cakebread. Ballotta, a round bullet. Also a voice or lot. Ballottare, to
choose, to cast or draw lots with bullets as they use in Venice. Ballottadore,
a caster or drawer of lots by bullets. Ballotto, a gull, an ignorant round
ass, ninnie or meacocke. Ballottola, any kind of little bullet. Also a
weasell. Baloardo, as Belloardo. Baloccare, Balocco, as Balloccare.
Balordagine, Balordezza, as Balordia. Balordia, foolishnes, dissines, giddines,
simplicity of wit, the staggers in cattle. Balordire, to become or play the
fool, idiot, noddie, or dizard, to stagger or become giddie-headed. Balordo, a
fool, a noddie, a dizzard, an idiot, a giddie-head. Balordon balordone, dingle
dangle, carelessly, very foolishly. Balottara, a kind of stone bow or trunk
to shoot pellets in. Balsamare, to embalme or enspice. Balsamina, a kind of
weed that twines about trees. Balsamita, the herb Costemarie or Maudelin.
Balsamo, Balsamum or baulme. Balsate, a kind of black stone. Balso, a little
hole or cave, or den in a cave. Balteo, a belt, a sword or arming girdle.
Baltresca, as Beltresche. Baltroni, as Balatroni. Baluardo, Baluarte, as
Belloardo. Balza, a hill, a mountain, a rock, a cliffe. Also a certain head
attire for women. Also a lock or fetter for a horse. Balzacchini, buskins.
Balzano, a horse with white feet. Balzano ceruello, a hopping, skipping,
leaping, foolish iumping wit. Balzare, to bound, to hop, to skip, to iumpe.
Balzello, as Bargello. Also tallage, custom, tole, tribute or imposition.
Balzi, washing bals, soap bals. Balzo, a bound of a ball: a skip, a hop. Also a
certain head attire. Bamba, a babie or puppet for children to play withal: a
doting woman. Also vain, childish or triuiall. Bambacina, as Bambagiuola.
Bambagia, Bambace, bumbast. Bambagina, a woman's long wastcote. Also bombasine.
Bambagiuola, Bambasina, a kind of stuff made of bumbast, we call it
Bumbasine. Bambagiotta, a plum, soft, fat, round, dainty or white skind
woman. Bambaro, a fool, an ass, an idiot that has no more wit then a babie.
Also a child. Bambina, a babe or babie. Bambinesco, childish, foolish.
Bambire, to doat or play the child. Bambo, a foolish simple fellow, a silly
gull, a dotard. Bamboccia, as Bambola. Also a cotton cod. Bambola, a babie, a
puppie for children to play withal. Bamboleggiare, to doat or play the
child again, to play the babie. Bamboleggiamento, as Bambolita. Bambolino, a
little babie or yo^ng child. Bambolita, childishnes, dotishnes, babish tricks.
Bambolo, the foil or lead of a looking glass. Also a dotard. Banca, a bench
or a form. Bancali, all manner of benches and forms. Also hangings or clothes
to cover benches, bench carpets. Bancarotta, Banchierotto, a bankrupt.
Banchettare, to banquet or to feast. Banchettiere, a banquetter or feaster.
Banchiere, a banker or Lombard, or a money lender. Banco, a bench, a merchants
bank or counting house, a counter, a butchers stall, a bulk, a seat. Also a
kind of fish. Banco fallito, a game at cards. Banda, a side, a shore. Also a
skarfe or a swathe, a rowler. Also a garding, a band or company of men. Also a
bend in armorie. Bandare, to guard with lace or gards. Also to bandie or
company together. Also as Bendare. Bandatuola, a streamer, a fane, a banderoll.
Bandeggiare, to cry, to banish, to proclaim. Bandela, a ring or hammer of a
door, a boult or a bar. Bandelle, corners in a house. Banderaio, Banderale, an
ensign bearer, a standard bearer, a crier, a proclaimer. Banderella, a little
streamer, a little baneroll, or a fane, a banderoll. Banderesi, as we say
knights banerets. Bandiera, a banner, an ensign, a standard. Bandieraio, as
Banderaio. Bandimento, as Bando. Bandine, the lay-bande of a skaine of thread.
Bandinella, as Bandine. Also the hinges of a door that are fastened to the door.
Also a case, or box or cabinet. Bandire, to cry, to proclaim, to banish, to
exile, to publish. Bandita, proclaimed, public, open, as tener corte bandita,
to keep open house. Banditi, outlawed, outlawes, rebels, fugitives. Banditore,
a crier, a proclaymer, a banisher, a publisher. Bando, a proclamation, a cry, a
banishment, a publication: an act or law published. Bandolo, as Bandine.
Baneretto, a knight baneret. Banzuola, any kind of stool or seat, settle, or
little cupboord. Baobao, to play bo-peepe with children. Bara, a coffin or
beer for a dead man. Baradra, a bird called in latin Rubetra. Baragella, a
market place or meeting place. Barare, as Barrare. Baratta, a fight or battle
as Dante does use it. Barattare, to barter, to trucke, to chop and change one
thing for another, to chaffre, to mart, to sell things forbid, to bribe.
Baratteria, a bribing, a selling of forbidden things in hugger mugger. Also a
dicing or cheating house. Also a cheating, cogging or conie catching trick.
Barattiere, a barterer, a trucker, a marter, an exchanger, a briber, a cheater,
a false gamster, a cousener, a broker, a fripper, a chaffrer, a cogger, a
foyster, a deceiuer, a coni-catcher, a bareter, a prowler. Baratto, a barter, a
mart, an exchange, a trucking, a chopping, a chaffring. Barattoli, Baratolini,
those little pots of lead or earth that Apothecaries put musk and drugs in.
Also a kind of ravenous sea foul. Barattoro, a kind of gallie pot or
drinking pot of earth. Baratro, the throat or weasand pipe, a pit, a depth or a
dark place, a whirlepoole. Also an unthrifty spendall, or waste good in belly
cheer. Barba, a beard. Also an uncle. Also the curb place or chin of the
horse. Barbacane, a tool belonging to masons and carpenters. Also an outnooke
or corner standing out of a house, a iettie. Barbacapri, the herb
maides-sweete or medowe sweet. Barbacino, a round, a watch or a sentinel.
Barba cheppo, a kind of munkey or ape. Also a goat with a great beard.
Barbad'albero, the knots of the root of a tree. Barba di becco, as Barba
capri. Barbagia, a common bawdie house. Barbagianni, an owl, an howlet.
Barbagliare, as Abbarbagliare. Barbagrigia, a gray beard. Barbaniccare, to play
the common base fellow. Barbanicchi, a word in jest taken for the common base
people. Barbanterie, as Furfanterie. Barbarauoce, blew bottle, corn flower, or
hurtsickle, a weed growing among corn. Barbare, to take first hold of, as a
root in the ground. Also to beard. Barbariccia, a curled, grim, shagd, goatish
beard. Barbarico, Barbaresco, as Barbaro. Barbary, barbarousnes, inciuilitie.
Barbarismo, barbarism. Also the corrupt form of speaking or pronouncing.
Barbaro, barbarous, inciuill: it is also a barbary horse. Also a bird called a
Woodpecker. Barbarossa, a red beard. Barbasco, as Verbasco. Barbasso, a
mariners or fishers habit with a hood. Barbassore, as Valuasore. Barbastrello,
a night-bat, or rearemouse. Barbazzale, the curb of a horses bit. Barbataccio,
a filthy bearded fellow. Barbegghie, a kind of worm or caterpiller.
Barbello, a fish called a Barbell. Also a bird so called. Also a kind of
butterfly. Barberia, a barbers shop. Barbero, a barbary horse. Barberotto, an
vnderbarber, that is next to his master, the chief servant. Barbetto, a
little rough or shagged Spaniell. Barbicane, as Barbacane. Barbicare, as
Abbarbicare. Barbiccine, the little small beards or threeds that some roots
have. Barbiera, a sheebarber. Also a common harlot. Barbiere, a barber.
Barbiglioni, the hairs about a woman's or man's priuities. Barbine, a kind of
ornament or carkanet about a woman's head. Barbiton, a musical instrument
called of some a Dulcimer, and of some a Harp. Barbo, a barbell fish. Barbole,
a disease in a horse called the barbles. Barbolo, Barboro, a barble fish. Some
take it for Smelts, or another fish called in latin Orcynnus. Barbone, a rough
shagged spanniell. Also a fish called a Barbell. Also a great beard.
Barboncello, the barbes or little tetes in the mouth of some horses.
Barbottare, to stut, to stammer, to maffle, to lisp, to grumble, to mutter, to
mumble. Barbotto, as Barbozzo. Barbozzo, the chinne where a ma^^ beard grows,
the under lip of a horse. Barbozzale, a curb for a horse. Also an vnderlip or
chap. Barbugliare, to paddle, to garboyle, to trouble, to entangle. Also as
Balbeggiare. Barbuglio, a garboile, a confusion, a trouble, a buddle. Barbuta,
a piece of armor called a bea^er. Barbuto, bearded, having a beard. Barca, a
bark, a boat, a barge, a wherrie, a lighter. Barcaruolo, a waterman, a
barge-man. Barcata, a boat full, the freight or lading of a boat. Barca
vergola, a kind of gondola, bark or wherrie. Barcheggiare, to go by boat or
by water. Barchetta, a little boat or whirrie. Barchiero, a boate-man, or
waterman. Barco, as Varco, or as* Parco. Barcollo, a shaking of the neck, a
staggering. Barda, the trappings or ornaments of a horse, or a caparison, or
the bardings. Bardare, to trap or bard a horse, to caparison. Bardascia, a
bardash, a buggering boy, an ingle. Bardassone, as Bardascia. Bardella, a straw
pad used for coults at the first riding, and so continued until they be
tractable. Some have taken it for a foote-cloth. Bardellaccia, a kind of
pack-saddle used in Italy for asses and mules. Bardellette, labels hanging at
a myter. Bardello, a fool, a patch, a gull, a noddie. Bardiglio, friars gray.
Bardocco, a gull, a sot, a patch, a noddie. Bardo, light, nimble, bold,
saucie. Also blunt or blockish. Bareggiare, as Barrare. Bareggiatore, as Barro.
Barella, a wheele-barrow or a tumbrell. Also a kind of bird. Barganella, the
name of a bird. Bargello, Barigello, a captain of serieants, or such base
officers that walks up and down with them by day and night in some cities of
Italy to see good orders kept. Bargelli, silkewormes. Bariare, to fight at
bariers. Baricare, to baricado, to fortify with barels full of earth and other
timber. Baricata, Barricada, a baricado, or fortification with barels, timber,
and earth. Baricocoli, as Biricocoli. Also a kind of boys play in Italy.
Baricola, a little wheelebarrow. Bariglietto, as Barletto. Barilare, to barrel
up. Barildo, the name of a color that painters use. Barile, a barrel, a
hogshead, a firkin. Also a kind of coin sometimes current in Italy. Baripto,
a kind of stone like an agatte. Barire, as Barrire. Barlacco, a gull, a
noddie, a meacock, a fool. Barleffo, a gash, a cut, a slash, a skarre.
Barletto, a rundlet or little barrel, a firkin. Barlione, a barrel, a
rundlet. Also a drinking pot. Barlotto, Barlozzo, as Barletto. Barlume, a thing
that is foggie, dark, or not transparent, a duskie light, a twylight. Barnire,
as Barrire. Barnusso, as Barbesso. Barocco, a shift made for good cheer, meat
and drink gotten by hook or crook. Barone, a Baron, a Lord. Baronaggio, a
baronie, a baronship. Baronia, a baronie, a Lordship. Baronzi, instructions,
instructors. Also apparel or clothes, rags, clouts, tatters. Baronzola, a
kind of play that boys use in Italy. Barra, a bar. Also a stang: it is
also that part of the nether iawe where the bit rests on the gum. Barrare,
to cheat, to cog, to cosen at game. Also to bar, to conycatch. Also to
truck, or barter. Barratteria, as Barraria. Also a bartring or trucking.
Barraria, a cheating house where false dice are used. Barrattiere, as
Barattiere. Bar, look le bar. Barricello, Barrigello, as Bargello.
Barriera, a bar, where pleading or fighting at barriers is used. Barriere, a
barrister, one that stands or pleades at the bar, a fighter at barriers.
Barrire, to bray, as an Ass or Elephant. Barrito, braide. Also a braying.
Barro, Baro, as Barattiere. Bartaldare, to teazell clothes. Baruffa, a
bickering, a fray, a quarrel, a hurlyburlie, a tumult, a brabble. Baruffare,
to chide, to skould, to quarrel, to make a fray. Baruola, as Barutola. Also
the name of a bone in the root of a horse tail. Baruto, a boulter, or
boulting cloth. Barutola, a cheese-fat, or any round hollow thing. Also a
churning-fat. Barzellette, a kind of madrigall, song, gigge, or sonnet.
Barzuole, casting stones for a hawk. Basa, Base, a base or foundation of a
pillar. Basalisco, as Basilisco. Basalte, a kind of black stone. Basamento, a
base or foundation or ground work of any thing. Basar, the Bezars stone.
Baschi, the common rascal people. Basanite, a stone whereof they make
whetstones. Baschiera, is taken for the privy parts of a woman. Basciabile,
that may be kissed, to be kissed. Basciare, to kiss, to busse. Bascio, a
kiss, a busse. Bascioso, a lively kiss, a busse, full of kisses, kissing.
Basciozzo, a smacking kiss, or busse. Basciuccare, to kiss smackingly.
Basciucchiare, as Basciuccare. Basilica, a Kings house, a Princes palace or
court: also the liver vein in man's body. Basilico, herb Basil. Basilinda, a
play called one penie one penie, come after me. Basilisco, a basiliske. Also a
piece of great ordinance so called. Basiotto, a beggars drinking dish.
Basoffia, a kind of potage or broth. Also any kind of light stuffing. Basire,
to yield up the ghost, to gasp the last. Basole, a kind of fine drinking
glass made at Murano. Bassa, a low dale, a bottom, a vale, a valley. Bassare, to
stoop, to fall, to decline, to descend, to abase. Bassetta, a kind of play at
cards used in Italy. Bassezza, lownes, baseness, humility. Basso, low, base,
below, deep. Also a base in singing. Also narrow, as Panno, basso. Bassotta, a
kind of cake. Bassura, as Bassezza. Basta, it is sufficient, enough, well, go
to, sufficient, hold. Bastagio, Bastaggio, a porter, a bearer of burdens, a
base fellow. Bastante, able, enough, sufficient. Bastanza, sufficiency.
Bastango, Bastonago, a forke-fish, it is like a ray; some call it a
puffin-fish. Bastardello, as Bastardolo. Bastardire, to corrupt, to degenerate,
to fall from kind. Bastardo, a bastard, a kind of sweet wine so called, a
mungrell. Bastardolo, a blotting book, a day book, a house book to write in
every thing. Bastardume, bastardise, mungrelism, corruption, unlawfulness.
Bastare, to suffice, to be enough. Bastar l'animo, to dare, to have the heart.
Bastar la vista, to dare, to have the courage. Bastante, Basteuole, sufficient,
enough. Bastanza, sufficiency, enough. Basteggiare, to play the porter, to
bear like an ass. Basterna, a kind of little cart, a chariot, a pageant.
Basteuole, able, sufficient. Bastia, a skonce, a rampire, a block-house, a
sort, a keep in a castle, a bastion. Bastina, a pad, a pack-saddle, an asses
saddle. Bastinare, to saddle with a pack-saddle. Bastionare, to enskonce, to
fortify, to block, to rampire, to flank. Bastione, as Bastia. Bastitta, as
Bastia. Basto, a pad-saddle, a pack-saddle, a pannell, a dosser. Also a doublet
or ierkin, in rogues language. Bastonare, to cudgel, to strike, to beat with
a stick. Bastonata, a bastonadoe, a blow or stroke with a cudgel. Bastone, a
cudgel, a stick, a staff, a truncheon, a bat, a waster. Bastonetto, a
bastonet of a bridle. Also a little cudgel. Bastoso, a porter, one that
bears burdens or loades, a loads-man. Bata, a bird like a bunting. Also a
fish called a raye or a skeate. Batalo, a kind of miniuer hood that Doctors
are wont to wear in sign of honor. Also a hawks hoode. Batedore, as
Battitore. Batellaro, a boat-maker. Batelliere, a boat-man, a ferie-man.
Batello, a little boat. Batessa, an abbess. Batia, an abbie. Batolo, as
Batalo. Batrachio, a kind of sea fish. Also a stone which is found in a toades
head. Also a kind of color to paint vizards. Also a swelling growing under
the tongue with an inflammation* Also as Battachio. Battacchio, the herb
Crowfoote, or butter-flower. Battaglia, a battle, a fight. Battagliare, to
battle or fight. Battagliero, a man at arms, a warrior, a soldier, a fighter.
Battaglio, a bell clapper. Also a hammer upon doors to knock with. Also a
belly clapper. Battaglione, a battalion, a great squadron, the maine battle.
Battalo, Battolo, as Batalo. Battata, a kind of fruit growing in India. Some
have taken it for the herb Sampire. Battente, panting, beating. Battere,
Batto, Battei, Battuto, to smite, to beat, to strike, to knock, to thump, to
swing, to thresh corn, to batter. Batter denari, to mint, to coin money.
Batter il cuore, to pant the heart. Batteria, a battery. Battesimo, baptism,
christening. Also a kind of coin in Florence. Bettesimale, of or belonging to
baptism. Battezzare, to baptize, to christen. Batticuore, a panting of the
heart, or sudden passion. Batticuli, the tases or base^ that horsemen use
behind. Battiferro, an iron beater or forger. Buttifolle, a skonce, a fort, a
rampire, a blockhouse or bulwark. Also used for a belly clapper. Battidore, as
Battitore. Battifuoco, a flint to strike fire with. Also the steel to strike
fire. Also a tinder box. Battifuora, a goldbeaters flat hammer. Battigrano, a
corn thresher. Battigliuola, a mil-clapper. Battilana, a wool-winder or
dresser of wool. Battimano, a kind of great weight in some parts of Italy.
Battimento, a beating, a tumult, a quarrelling. Battino, as Battimano. Batti
l'oro, a gold beater. Battipotta, a crampe fish, look Sgramfo. Battirame, a
copper-smith or brasier. Battisecula, as Battisegola. Battisegola, a stone
called a Zaphire. Also blew bottle, corn flower or hurtsickle. Battisteo,
Battisterio, a font for to baptize in. Also a clapper. Battisuocere, a kind of
weed, herb or grass. Battitoio, a clapper or such a hammer as is set upon
doors to knock with. Battitore, a striker, a hitter, a smiter, a thresher, a
clapper. Also a paper mill. Also a threshing flaile, a cudgel, a staff, a
powle. Also a Printers presseman. Battitura, a beating, a thumping. Battocchio,
a bell-clapper. Also a belly clapper, a trounser. Also a hammer to knock at a
door. Battola, a pot, a pipkin, a posnet: a kind of garment or ornament about
a garment. Battuta, a beating, a panting, a keeping of time in music.
Battuto, beaten, smitten, stricken, knocked, thumpt, bumbasted, threshed corn,
floored, seeled, an open terrasse, a gallerie, a leads, a walk, a causey, a
path, a trodden high way, a keeping of time in music. Also a bowling allie.
Bau, as Baubau. Baua, slauer or slauering, foame, driuell* a kind of sleauie,
raw or riu^ling silk. Bauare, to slauer at the mouth as children do, to foame
at the mouth, to driuell. Bauaro, Bauero, a bib or mucke^ler. Also a hood or a
veil, a Friars cowle, a beauer. Also a cape about the neck of any garment.
Baubau, boe-peepe, boe, to fear children with. Bauccare, to mask or muffle.
Baucco, a woman's mask or muffler. Bauella, a kind of raueled silk or sleaue
silk. Also satin of Bridges. All manner of raw silk. Bauellare, to rauell.
Also to pick silk. Bauellaro, a picker of silk. Bauero, as Bauaro. Also a
kind of stuff made of raw silk, as curled or raw cipers. Bauiera, the chin
piece of a caske or headpeece. Bauisi, the finnes of any fish. Bauonare vna
naue, to rub a ship over with grease to make it glide through the waters the
faster. Bauoso, slavery, slimie, filthy, sluttish. Baurach, a matter much
like salt that Alchimists and goldsmiths use to solder with, called nitre or
borace. Baurda, a kind of ravenous bird. Bazaro, a shifter, a conicatcher, a
setter, a cogger, a haltersacke. Bazzarro, an atonement, an agreement, an
accord, a consort. Bazzegare, to stut, to stammer, to lispe, to fumble, to
filch, to purloine, to proule, to sneake about, to wagge up and down. Bazzesco,
as Croio. Bazzicare, as Bazzegare. Bazzicatore, a stealer, a thief, a filcher,
a purloiner. Bazzicature, stealings, filchings, burglaries, purloinings,
prowlings. Also baggage, foolish things, rags, trash, tatters, things much
worn. All manner of household stuff. Bazzicchiare, to shake between two
hands, to play handy dandy. Bazzigare, as Bazzegare. Bazzo, a coin in Germany
worth three pence. Bazzotto, imperfect, unpolished, rough hewn, unfinished,
unhandsome. Bdelio, a tree in Arabia. Also the g^ of the same tree, sweet of
savor and bitter in taste. Be, well? how now? how goes it? go to, it is well.
Bear, to bless, to make happy. Beatificare, to bless, to make happy.
Beatitudine, blessedness, happiness. Beato, happy, blessed. Becabunga,
sea^purslaine, or brookelime. Beccacenere, a fire-forke to stir the fire with.
Beccaccia, a Woodcocke. Beccaccini, the birds called Snites. Becca fico, a
little bird much like the black-birde that feeds upon figs. Some take it for
a Witwall. Some also take it for a gnat-snapper. Becca lite, as Catta brighe.
Beccaio, a butcher, a slaughterer. Becca in cauo, a fish whose gall heals
scars of wounds, and superfluous flesh in the eyes. Beccamento, a pecking, a
billing. Beccare, to bill, to pick, to snatch, to pecke as birds do. Beccare
della padrona, to have a snatch at ones mistress. Beccarelli, such as help to
carry, search and bury the dead. Also grave or pit makers. Beccamorti, as
Beccarelli. Beccarocchi, a bird called a Woodpecker. Beccaria, a shambles, a
butchers row, a slaughter house, a flesh market. Beccaroueglia, a kind of
faulkon, taken for the passenger that will pray for hirselfe. Beccarsi il
ceruello, to bestow or study ones wit about any matter. Beccarsi il cuore, to
fret or gnawe the heart. Beccati su questa, crack me this nut. Swallow this
gudgeon. Beccata, a mouth full, a billing, a pecking with ones bill. Beccatura,
a biting, a pecking, a billing. Beccheggiare, as Boccheggiare. Becchera, the
beak or bill of a hawk. Beccheria, as Beccaria. Becchi, as Beccarelli. Also
bucks, he goats, or cuckolds. Becchietti, a kind of bird. Also a kind of
fruit. Becchigno, gotish or rammish. Becchini, as Beccarelli. Also gotish or
rammish. Becchina, a woman's quaint or priuities. Beccilo, weak, faint, tired,
feeble. Becco, the bill of a bird: a he goat, a bucke, a ram, a cuckold: the
beak of a ship. Beccodi oca, the herb wild Tansie or silver herb. Becco mal
guardato, a kind of Christmas game used in Italy. Beccone, a fool, an idiot,
a gull, a patch. Beccorella, Beccostorto, as Auosetta. Bechiche, a kind of
pills against the cough. Bechio, Folefoote, All-hose or Horsehoofe. Bid, the
white Thistle. Bedona, a kind of sarge or say. Bedollo, the Birch tree. Been,
wild Sage: some use it for Horsemint. Beffania, the Epiphanie: it is spoken in
mockery. Beffa, a flout, a scoff, a gibe, a frumpe, a jest, a mock. Beffana,
a bug-beare, a bull-begger, a scar-crowe, a toy to mock an ape. Beffare, to
flout, to scoff, to gibe, to frump, to jest, to mock. Beffardo, Beffatore, a
flouter, a scoffer, a frumper, a mocker. Beffeggiare, as Beffare.
Beffeggiatore, as Beffardo. Beffiare, as Beffare. Beffiardo, Beffiatore, as
Beffardo. Bega, a Be, an humble Be. Beghino, as Pinzocchero. Also a kind of
course graie cloth, religious or poor old men were wont to wear. Also used
for a bighin that our children wear. Belare, to bleate as a sheep. Belbello,
fair and softly, leasurely, fairlie. Beleno, a kind of fish. Beletta, as
Belletta. Belfegore, the name of a devil, a bugbeare, a cruel man. Belgimi, a
sweet drug called Benjamin. Belgioino, Belgini, as Belgimi. Belico, as Bilico.
Beliale, the devil, an apostata. Also a prophet. Belido pliniano, as Coppadi
Gioue. Belicato, having a navel or middle. Bella bellina, taken for a woman's
priuities or quaint. Belletta, claie, mire, dirt, a dead water, slime, bogge or
mud. Also a wheale or a pimple. Bellettare, to paint, to beautify, to make
fair. Also to deceive. Belletto, painting that women use for their faces. Also
a deceit. Bellezza, beauty, fairenes, comelines. Bellico, as Bilico. Bellico,
as Bellicoso. Bellico di venere, an herb so called. Bellicoso, warlike,
martial. Bellificare, to beautify. Bellino, pretty and fair: somewhat
fair. Bellirici, a kind of plum or prune. Bellis, the white Daisie. Bello,
fair, beautiful, well-fauoured, handsome, goodly, shene, comely, pretty.
Belloardo, Bellouardo, a bulwark, a blockhouse, a skonce, a forte, a ram^kin.
Bello in piazza, a cracker, a boaster, a vanter, great boast and small roste.
Bellor^, as Bellezza. Belta, Beltade, as Bellezza. Beltramo, fair, handsome
goodly. Beltresche, rampires to defend walls, scaffolds. Beltro, a mixed color
of green, white, and red. Belua, a wild beast or dreadful monster. Beluardo,
as Bellouardo. Beluedere, a place of a fair prospect, or a fair sight, an
herb called Topa regia in latin, which some take to be the toade flax, or
flax weed. Belzini, Belzoino, as Belgimi. Bembe, very well, go to, good
enough. Benaggia, well fare his heart, gods blessings be with him. Ben or been,
very well, well, go to, good, enough, wealth, much. Benandata, a farewell that
men give, or drinking penny given when men go away. Ben been, very well.
Benche, howbeit, although. Benda, a skarfe, a veil, a swathe, a fillet, a
hairelace, a bend in armorie. Also a hosegarter. Bendare, to enskarfe, to
swathe, to hoodwinke, to bend with a bend about, to blindfold. Bendella, a
fillet, a ribond, a tape, a little skarffe, a bandell, a swathe, a rowler.
Bendellare, to go staggering as dronken men do, to bandell, to enskarffe.
Benedicite, a grace before or after meat, a thanks-geuing, a blessing.
Benedicente, a well-speaking man. Benedicenza, a well-speaking, a blessing.
Benedire, to bless, to bliss. Benedittione, a blessing, a bliss. Benedetto,
blessed, happy, blist. Benefattore, a benefactor, doing good, or liberal to
do good deeds. Beneficare, to benefit, to benefice, to do a good turn unto.
Beneficiale, beneficial. Also of or pertaining to benefices. Beneficiare, as
Beneficare. Beneficenza, a benefit, a good deed, a good turn. Also
liberality. Beneficiario, he that receives a good turn. Also a pencioner, or
one that lives upon some annuitie, allowance, or exhibition. Beneficio, a
benefit, a good turn, a benefice, a good deed. Benefico, as Benefattore.
Been habbia, as Benaggia. Been merito, well deserving. Been spesso, very often,
very thick. Been stante, well to live, able, rich. Beneuolenza, benevolence,
or good will. Bengodi, as we say well fare your heart. Also a fained name of a
country where they say dogs run away with whole shoulders of mutton. Bent,
goods, wealth, chattell. Beni castrensi, goods gotten in war. Benignita,
benignity, gentleness, kindness, louingnes, goodness, bounty. Benigno, gentle,
kind, loving, benign, good, bountiful. Beninanza, as Benignita. Beniuolenza,
benevolence, or good will. Beniuolo, as Benigno. Ben parlante, well-speaking,
eloquent. Ben per tempo, early, or very timely. Benuenire, to well come home,
to welcome. Benuenuto, well come home, welcome. Benuenuta, a welcome, a welcome
home. Benuedere, to love, or view with a good will. Benueduto, well regarded,
well respected, well beloved. Benuoglienza, benevolence or good will.
Benuogliente, a good willer, well willing. Benuolere, to love, to affect, to
befriend. Benuoluto, well beloved, affected, regarded. Benna, a kind of
dungcart, or tumbrell. Bennola, a wad of straw or clouts to carry burdens
with upon the head. Also the stalk of a Cucumber. Beone, a careless, idle,
lazy, lo^tring fellow, an ale-knight, a tospot. Bera, a Drone, a Hornet, a
Humblebee. Berbena, the herb Veruein. Berberi, the tree or fruit we call
berberies. Berbici, all manner of sheep. Berbiciaro, a shepherd. Bear, beuo,
or beo, beuui, beuuto, to drink. Beretta, a cap or a bonet. Beretta da prete,
a priests cap. Also a broad leafed weed growing in the water as a dock leaf.
Berettare, to put on a cap, to cap one. Berettaro, a capper, a cap-maker.
Berettata, a capping. Berettina, a little cap or bonet. Berettino, a little
cap, a nightcap. Also gray or ash color. Berettone, a great cap or bonet, a
cap of maintenance as the Mayor of London has carried before him. Bergamotte, a
kind of excellent pears. Bergantino, a Brigandine, a Pinnace, a Foist, a
light boat. Berghinella, a gadding, idle, gossoping, abroad going, a tittle
tattle woman, an idle huswife. Berghinellare, to gad or go idly abroad a
gossoping from house to house as idle huswiues do. Bergola, a sheep that is
dizzie and staggers as she were drunk. Bergolo, a skullion, a drunkard, a
brabler, a wrangler, a common bareter, a beastly foolish fellow. Bergolare, to
brable, to wrangle, to skold, to prate, to loyter idly up and down.
Bergogliere, as Bergolo. Bergumella, a silly wretched woman. Berilla, the
herb water parslie, or yellow water cresses. Berillo, a precious stone called
a berill, in color like oil or seawater, a seawater stone. Berlengo, a
tippling or drinking house where all manner of riffraff company comes.
Berlesche, windows, drawing windows, out-bay windows, or skaffolds. Berli,
little bushes, locks, or tufts of hairs. Berlina, Berlino, a pillerie, or
cuckingstoole, heretofore called a tombrell. Berlingare, to prate, to prattle,
to chat, to skould, to rail. Berlincione, a fool, an idiote, a noddie.
Berlingaccio, the thursdaye before shrouesunday, when every man gives himself
to sport: so called in Florence. Berlinghiera, a prattling, railing, babbling,
skoulding woman. Berlingozzo, a kind of biscuit, simnell, or sugar bread, a
tansie of eggs, a dronken song, a threemens song* Also the wind or wezell pipe,
the name of a bird. Bernacche, the barnickles that grows upon the sides of
ships. Bernasso, a cloak with a hoode as shepherds wear, a thrumbed hat.
Bernia, an irish rug, or mantle, a rug, such as seamen wear. Berretta, a cap
or a bonet. Berrettare, as Berettare. Berrettaro, as Berettaro. Berricocoli,
apricocks. Also a kind of comfets or suckets. Berrina, larde. Also a larding
stick. Berrouiere, a catchpole or seriant. Bersaglio, a but or mark to shoot
at. Bersela, to swallowe a gudgeon: to pocket up any wrong, to believe any
tale. Berta, as Beffa, a bird called a Iai^. Berteggiare, as Beffare.
Berteggiatore, as Beffatore. Bertesche, as Beltresche. Bertolotto, a noddie, a
gull, a ninnie, a foolish shift. Bertonare, to love lecherously or secretly,
abusing married folks beds. Bertone, a married man's or wedded woman's secret
lover, leman, whore or adulterer. Bertonega, a kind of herb. Bertuccia,
Bertuccio, a pugge, a munkie, a marmoset, an ape. Bertuccione, a great munkie,
a babuine or ape. Berzagliare, to condemn, cast, judge, confine or limite. to
shoot at a mark. Berzaglio, as Bersaglio. Berze, the blew marks of any
stripe or beating, the prints of the lashes of a whip. Also used for long
shankes or stalking legs. Besegnini, a kind of ravenous sea foul. Besenfio,
swollen, puffed up, bladdered. Also pursie or broken winded. Bessaggine,
lisping, flutting, stammering, maffling, faltring in speech, foolishnes,
idiotisme. Besso, a fool, a gull, an idiot, a ninnie. Best, in latin Hyrium.
Bestemmia, a blasphemy, a curse. Bestemmiare, to blaspheme, to curse, to
banne, to swear and forswear. Bestemmiatore, a blaspemer, a curser, a banner.
Bestia, any kind of beast: it is taken for a man's privy parts, a bulls pizell.
Bestiaggine, as Bestialita. Bestiale, beastly, terrible, mad, foolish,
unreasonable, furious. Bestialita, beastlines, filthiness, madness, hugenes,
unreasonableness, beastlihead, brutishnes or rudenes. Bestiame, all kind of
cattle. Bestione, a great beast, a gull, a noddie, a fool, a patch. Betilo, a
kind of stone called in latin Betilus. Bettino, a page, a knauish wagge, a
halter sack. Bettola, a common drinking, d^ing, gaming, base ale house, a tap
house, a tippling house. Bettolare, to haunt ale houses, tippling houses, dicing
houses, to play the drunkard, to tipple, to quaffe or to gourmandise.
Bettoliere, Bettolante, a common dicer, a quaffer, a tipler, an ale knight.
Bettonica, the herb Betonie, Speedewell, Groundhale, or herb Fluellin.
Bettula, a kind of herb or tree. Betonica, as Bettonica. Betulo, the Birch
tree. Also as Ceraunia. Beua, a beauie. Beuacchiare, to tipple, to drink, to
sip, to swill, to bouze, to quaffe. Beuacchiatore, Beuacchione, a tipler, a
quaffer, a drunkard, an ale knight. Beuanda, a drink, a drench, a mashe, a
beuerage. Also a potion. Beueltutto, a tipler, a quaffer, a sound drinker, an
ale knight. Beuere, Beuo, Beuei, Beuuto, to drink, to quaffe, to tipple. Also
a drinking penie. Beueraggio, as Beuanda. Also a drinking penie. Beueratoio, a
workemans apron or bib. Also a watring place for cattle. Beuer la briglia,
when a horse draws up the bit with his tongue. Beuero, a beauer, a badger, a
graie whereof they make beauer hats. Also a poole, a pond or watring pit.
Beuerone, a drench or mashe for a horse; swilling for swine, a drunkard, or a
tospot. Beuicare, as Beuacchiare. Beuitore, Beuitrice, a drinker, a quaffer.
Bezar, Bezoar, a beazer stone. Bezzicare, to prick, to sting, to provoke, to
allure, to egg on. Bezzo, a small coin in Venice. Bezuca, an old monkie, an
ill-favored ape, a withered face. Biacca, a kind of white lead, called Ceruse.
Biaccare, to white, to dawbe, to paint with Ceruse. Biada, any kind of corn
or grain, any blade of corn. Also prouender for horses. Biadare, to feed or
prouender a horse. Biancare, to white, to whitten, to blanch. Biancaria, all
manner of naperie or white linen. Biancheggiante, whitish or drawing upon
white, blanching. Biancheggiare, as Biancare. Metaphorically it is taken to
rail at one secretly. Bianchetta, a blanket. Also some thing white.
Bianchetto, as Biacca. Also pretty and white. Also a fish called a Dace, a
Merlane, and of some a Menow. Bianchezza, whitenes, hoarines, palenes.
Bianchiccio, whitish, somewhat white, pale, wan or salow colored.
Bianchimento, a whitening, a blanching, a whitishnes. Bianciardo, as
Bianchiccio. Bianco, white, blanke, pale, wan, horie: the name of a worm
breeding in horses. also a disease in a horses knee or the ioints thereof. Some
take it to be a disease in a horses eye. Bianco del' occhio, the white of the
eye. Bianco del'uuouo, the white of an egg. Bianco mangiare, a kind of white
meat. Biancone, a goodly, great milkesappe, a fresh water soldier, a kind of
coin. Biancure, the monthly flowers that women have. Biaos, a tree with whose
leaves they cover their houses in India. Biasciare, to smack or smacker in
chawing, to mumble as a tooth^^sse old woman. Biasimare, Biasmare, to blame,
to condemn, to accuse, to reprove, to check, to taunte. Biasimabile,
Biasmabile, blamewoorthie. Biasimeuole, Biasmeuole, blamewoorthie. Biasimo,
Biasmo, blame or reproach. Biassare, as Biasciare. Biastemmiare, as Bestemmiare.
Biaua, as Biada. Biauo, a bright pale yellow color. Bibia, Bibbia, the Bible
or holy writ. Also the funnell or tunnell of a butte. Also the leese or dregs
of wine. Bibliopola, a Stationer or seller of books. Bibliotheca, a library or
study of books. Bica, Bicca, a heap, a huddle, a hay cock, a great mass, a
great deal, a rick, a stack, or houell of haie or corn: it is also taken for
anger or pepper in the nose. Montare su la Bica, to take pepper in the nose, to
be sore angry. Bichiacco, a smack or smackring with the tongue. Bichiacchie,
iestes, toys, frumps, flimflam tales, smackrings. Bicchiere, any kind of
drinking glass or beaker. Bicchieraro, a drinking glass maker. Bicchigno,
rammish, goatish, smelling of a goat. Bicchignolo, the socket of a
candlestick or lamp. Bicocca, a hamlet, a cottage, a little village.
Bicocche, the principal feathers of a hawk. Bicollo, a cowle-staffe to carry
behind and before with, as they use in Italy to carry two buckets at once.
Bicornia, a kind of bending anuile that goldsmiths use. Bicorporeo, that has
two bodies. Bidello, a beadle. Bidente, a pitch forke with two teeth, or having
two teeth. Bidetto, a little horse, a nagge, a tit, a little doing horse.
Bieco, squintie, sidelin, crooked, twart awrie. Bieco atto, an dishonest,
unlawful act. Biedone, the dregs of honey. Also the herb Blit or Blites, a
kind of Beet that has no sent. Bielletta, some stone or shell that Ichnemone
uses to kill the crokodill with. Biestemmia, as Bestemmia. Biestemmiare, as
Bestemmiare. Bieta, Bietole, the potherbe Beetes. Bietolone, a fool, a ninnie,
a gull, a meacocke. Bietta, a wedge to cleave wood with. Biettola, as Bettola.
Biffara, a fidle or croude. Biffaro, a fiddler, a crouder, a minstrell. Biffera,
ill, soul, duskie, gloomie weather, a whirlewind, a gust or berry of wind, a
contrariety of winds. Bifera, as Biffera. Bifida lingua, a cloven tongue, that
is cloven in two. Bifoglio, the herb Twaie-blade or Eifoile. Bifolca, a kind
of measure in Italy. Bifolco, a ploughman, a husbandman, a heardes-man.
Biforca, a forke, a pitchforke. Biforcato, or Biforcuto, that has two points
like a forke, forked. Biforcopiede, a cloven foot. Biforme, of two shapes or
forms. Bifronto, with two foreheads, bifronted. Bifulca, any land that is
twice ploughed. Biga, a tumbrell, a dung cart with two wheels. Bigamia, the
marriage of two wives. Bigamo, a man twice married. Bigatti, silke-wormes,
worms. Bigiaccio, a friars gray or sheep russet. Bigio, gray or russet
color. Also homespun cloth or sheep russet. Bigiocco, as Bizocco. Bigiuccia,
a kind of gray or clay color. Bigolo, as Bicollo. Bigoncia, a wine-measure in
Italy. a pulpit or a chair for a common speaker to speak or declaime in.
Bigonzolo, as Bicollo. Bilancia, a balance, or pair of scales. Bilanciare, to
balance, to weigh, to ponder, to consider. Bile, gall, anger, choler,
melancholy. Bilicare, as Bilanciare, Bilicato, having a navel, or middle.
Bilico, the navel of any body, the middle of any thing. Also a mill clapper.
Biligato, part of a wyer-drawers bench. Bilingue, a man that has two toongs or
languages. Bilta, as Bellezza. Bimba, a babe, a babie, a child, a puppie.
Bimembre, of two members or parts. Bimense, of two months. Bimole, of the age
of two years. Binangolo, having two angles or corners. Binare, to accompany
for good fellowship, to gather, to couple, to yoke together. Binato,
accompanied, gathered, coupled, or yoked together. Also twice borne. Bindella,
as Bendella. Bino, two and two, double, twofold. Binomio, that has two names.
Biocca, as Bicocca. Bioccole, locks or fleeces of wool. Bioccoloso, slovenly,
slavery, sluttish, snottie, sniuelie. Bionda, a kind of lie to wash and make
women's hairs yellow. Biondeggiante, shining yellow, or of the color of gold.
Biondeggiare, to make shine, or become yellow, or as the sun. Biondella, the
herb centorie so called, because washing ones head with it, it makes the
hears yellow. Also a goldenlockt wench, as we say a goldilocks. Biondello,
such a one as we call a gouldilock. Biondezza, yellownes of hairs. Bioua,
rain, or drizle. Bipalmo, two handfuls broad or long. Bipalio, a grubbing
axe. Bipara, that has brought forth twice. Bipartire, to divide in two parts.
Bipartito, divided in two parts, bipartite. Bipedale, two foot long, wide or
broad. Bipede, two footed, having two feet. Bipenne, Bipanne, a carpenters
axe that cuts on both sides, a twybill or twale. Also having two wings. Bircio,
I find used for Guercio. Bireme, a ship or gallie with two ranges of oars, or
two oars in a seat. Birettino, as Berettino. Biricuocoli, the fruit
apricocks. Biroldo, a kind of pudding, or haggas. Birra, the drink we call
beer. Birraria, places where knaves and serieants meet together. Also a
bru^house, a beerehouse. Birresco, rascally, or seriantlike. Birro, a serieant,
a catchpoale, a paritor. Birsa, the cheuerill skin to make purses with. Bisa,
a cold wind that brings a frost with it. Bisaccia, a wallet, a scrip, a bag.
Bisacuto, the herb toothpick, or cheruill. Bisanta, a kind of coin. Bisaua,
a great grandmother. Bisauo, Bisauolo, a great grandfather. Bisbigliare, to
whisper, to mutter, to buzze, to murmur. Bisbiglio, whispering, muttering,
buzzing. Bisbiglione, a murmurer, a whisprer, a mutterer. Biscacciare, to
waste, to spend riotously. Biscantare, to sing and sing again. Bischencho, a
jest, a knauish pranke, a mad trick. Bischeri, lute pins or pegs, or virginal
keys. A childs pillicocke or prick. Bischiccio, an agnomination or a
concordance of two words, as piu che un toro tira. Bisciere, a harrow, a rake.
Also a pin or peg of a lute: the key of a virginal. Also a childs hobbie
horse or stick to play with: a furner or a maulkin. Bischizzare, to draw the
first draught of any deed or writing. Also to agnominate or accord words
together. Bischizzoso ceruello, a fantastical, heteroclite wit. Biscia, a
snake, an adder. Bisciare, as Serpeggiare. Biscia scutaia, a tortoise. Biscia
scutelaia, a tortoise. Biscio, as Bigio. Bisco, slime, birdlime. Biscoso,
slimie, clammie. Biscottare, to bake, sees or roste twice. Biscottelli, a
kind of comfet or biscuit bread. Biscotto, biscuit. Also twice sod or roasted.
Biselli, young peason. Bisestare, to change as the leap year. Bisestile, the
leap year. Bisesto, the leap year, or one day added in four years.
Bisgiello, homespun cloth, sheep russet. Bisigare, to be busy or meddle
with any thing. Bisigarare, as Bisigare. Bislacco, a gull, a vain
lightheaded man. Bisleggiante, fair, handsome, pretty, sightly, goodly.
Bislingua, as Bonifacia. Bislongo, twice long, a slangrell. Bismalua, the weed
water mallows, or marsh mallows. Biso, a pease, as Bigio. Bisogna, a business,
an affair, a need. Also, it behooves, it is requisite, it is convenient.
Bisognare, to have need, to behooue, to want. Bisogneuole, needful, needy.
Bisogno, need, necessity, want. Bisognoso, needy, poor, distressed,
wanting. Bisolco, as Bifolco. Bisonte, a great beast like a horse in Polonia.
Bisonto, a filthy, greasy, slowenlie fellow. Bisuntone, as Bisonto. Bissa, as
Biscia. Bissino, a kind of fine silken stuff called bisse. Bisso, idem.
Bistentare, to languish, to pine, to linger. Bistento, languor, languishing,
pining. Bisticciarla con alcuno, to stand out to any thing stoutly, not to
yield or give one an inch of ground upon any controversy, to keep tacke with
one. Bisticcio, a bisticke or two verses. Also as Bischiccio. Bistorta, the
herb snakeweede, bistorte, oysterloite, or adderwort. Bistrattare, to misuse,
or abuse one, to evil entreat. Bisulco, cloven foot, forked. Bitontoni,
certain green figs. Bitorze, the swelling of a blow, bunches or swelling
knobs. Bitorzolare, to make, or go crooked, crankling, winding or turning in
and out. Bitorzolo, a crooked crankling in and out. Bitorzoluto, crabbed,
knottie, knobbie, ruffled, curled or clustrie. Also crooked crankling, winding
or turning in and out. Bittore, a foul called a Bitter. Bitumare, to bepitch,
to make clammie, to tar, to mortar. Bitume, lime, clay, pitch, tar, rosin,
or any such burning or sulphurous slimie or clammie thing. Bituro, Butiro,
butter. Biualuo, opening two ways, twofold. Also that has two, or double
scales, shells, or husks. Biuio, a way parting into two or on both sides. Biui,
a swallow. Biumbe, a kind of pipe, crowd or fiddle. Biuto, used for Beuuto,
drunk. Bizzaria, fantasticalnes, toyishnes, a foolish humor, rashness.
Bizzarire, to grow or become humorous, fantastical or toyish. Bizzarro,
fantastical, humorous, toyish, self conceited, a haire-brane. Bizzer,
heertofore used for Messere, master, sir. Bizzicare, to prick, to stinge, to
pinch. Bizzocca, a puritan dissembling woman. Bizzocco, a friar of the third
order of Saint Fraunces, but taken for a dissembling puritan. Bizzucche,
munkies, apes, pugs. Bladiseri, as Fiorecampese. Blandire, to flatter, to sooth
or smooth one, to blandish. Blandimenti, flatterings, allurings, soothings,
blandishments. Blanditie, as Blandimenti. Blando, flattering, alluring, blithe,
bonny, pleasant, buxome, gamesom, blandishing. Blatta, a little worm or fly
like a moth. Also a beetle or silk worm. Blatterare, to bleate as a lamb, to
clatter out of measure, to make a noise like a camel. Blattaria, the herb
called purple or moth-mullein. Bleconia, pudding grass or peny-royall. Bleso,
stammering or slutting, or lisping, or toong-tide. Boaccia, mud, mire, durte, a
quag mire. Boaccio, a kind of great beast like an ox. Boar, to go to bull as
a cow does, to bellow like an ox, to calue. Boarina, a bird which some take
for the siskin or titmouse. Boaro, an oxeheard or cow-heard. Boazzo, filthy
bull beef or a filthy ox. Boba, mud, mire or puddle. Bobolco, as Bisolco.
Boca, a sea fish that belloweth as a bull. Bocasia, a kind of wine made in
Sicilie like malmesie. Bocca, a mouth, the mouth or fall of any river or haven.
Bocca, look tirar di bocca. Boccadoro, golden mouth, taken for money. Bocca in
capo, a fish called in latin Callionimus. Boccale, a quart pot, a drinking
pot, a crewse, any kind of pot. Also an Ewer. Boccalaro, a pot maker, a potter.
Also a tipler, a tospot, a quaffer. Boccaletto, Boccaruolo, a little pot or
crewse. Boccalino, as Boccaletto. Boccarico, a tribute that is paid, so much
for every head or mouth. Boccasino, properly, such stuff as we call Buckram.
Also such stuff as we call Callimanco. Also a single garment for a woman. Some
have used it for fine Calico or lawne. Boccata, a mouth-full. Also a bucke of
clothes. Also a word used when one is about to tell a thing and knows not what
it is: or that a scholar would feign read his lesson and cannot, and that we by
some sign or voice will let him know that he is out, wide, and says he wots
not what. We use to say Boccata, as in English, yea in my other hose, or iump
as Germans'lips, you are as wise as Waltams calfe, and such other phrases.
Boce, has been used for Voce. Boccellato, a kind of fine biscuit bread.
Boccheggiare, to gape, to yawne, to make moes, to play or check with the mouth
as some ill horses do. Bocchetta, a little pretty mouth. Bocchetto, a posie
or nosegay of flowers. Bocchina, Bocchino, a little pretty mouth. Boccia, a
vial of glass. Also a pot to distill in, a receptorie. Also a mouth. Also a
kind of limbecke. Also a cupping glass. Boccicata, Boccicone, as Boccata.
Boccie di rose, buds of roses or flowers, blossoms. Bocciero, a butch^r.
Boccinare, to buzze, to mutter, to mumble. Boccinamento, a buzzing, a
muttering, a mumbling. Boccinolo, a silk or musk cod. Bocciolare, to bud
forth, to blossom. Boccioloso, buddie, full of buds or blossoms: full of
cupping glasses or limbecks. Bocciuolo, a reed to make a pipe with: the ioints
of a cane or reed. Also the cod of a silkeworme. Also that part of a horn, of
a cornet or trumpet, which is put to ones mouth to wind or sownde him.
Boccole, stones that are given unto hawks. Boccoleccia, a steel to strike
fire with, or a swiuell for a chain. Boccolo, Boccolor, a bud of any flower or
blossom. Boccone, a morsel, a piece, a scrap, a mamm^cke. Also groueling on
the ground with the face downward. Bocconcellare, to mince it or bite little
morsels, to eat mincingly, to simper it. Bocconcino, a little morsel. Boccon
d'adamo, the bone that some men have sticking in their throat. Bocconeggiare,
as Bocconcellare. Boccore, a kind of grain or corn to fatten poultrie with,
called Bucke-wheat. Boccuccia, a little simpering mouth. Bociare, as
Vociferare, to call alowd to one. Boda, the plague or pestilence. Boemo, a
coin or ducket of Bohemia: a Bohemian. Boffa, Buffa, Buffone, a toade.
Boffetteggiare, to buffet, or box on the ear. Boffetto, a blow, or box, or
buffet given on the ear. Also a cupbord. Also a kind of manchet or cheat
bread so called. Boghe, as Boope. Boglia, pap for children, water gruell.
Bogliente, boiling, seething hot. Bogliere, as Boglire. Boglire, boglio,
boglito, to boil, to sees. Boglio, the boiling or seething of the pot, a
boiling, a bubbling, a waume. Boglione, warm broth. Bognone, a bile, or such
sore. Boia, a hangman, an executioner. Boiaro, a neatheard. Boie, a kind of
great Serpent. Boiesco, hangman-like. Bolasso, a fish called a Perch.
Bolcello, a little worm breeding between the skin and the flesh. Bolcione, a
boult, or shaft. Bole, marks of sores or plasters. Bolerminio, as Boloarmeno.
Bolgetta, a budget. Bolgia, a budget, a wallet, a maile, a bag, a pit or poole
of water. Bolgicchino, a little budget. Also a kind of torture, rack, or little
ease. Boldone, a pudding made of blood. Boldoniere, a pudding-maker, or seller.
Boletti, a kind of Mushroms or todestooles. Boletta, a shoomakers tack or
little nail^ to fasten his leather to his last. Bolino, a chizell to cut stone
with. Bolla, a vial of glass, a bull, a marking iron, a seal, a print. Also
a wheale, o^ bladder, a bubble. Also any round stud or bosse. Bolladore, as
Bollaro. Also a branding-iron, a stamp, or a seal. Bollare, to mark with a
hot iron, to seal, to imprint, to bubble. Bollaro, a marker, a sealer, a
printer. Bollatura, a marking, an impression, a sealing, a bubbling. Bolletta,
Bollettino, a schedule, a ticket, a billet, a bill, a note, a docket. Bolletta
is also taken for dry mud, dirt, or claish earth. Bollente, boiling, seething.
Bollite, to boil, to sees. Bollisola, Bollifola, a push, a wheale, a pimple,
a scab, a scurfe, an itch. Bollimento, steame or boiling heat: also the
foaming, or swelling, or working of the sea. Bollino, a tool that stonecutters
use. Bollo, a seal, a marking or branding iron, a mark: also a boiling, or a
waume. Bollore, steame, or boiling heat, a sudden waume, a bubling or
boiling of waters. Boloarmeno, a kind of yellow or reddish earth good against
poison and infection, it grows in Armenia. Bolognino, a kind of small coin.
Bolpino, a fish, which having swallowed a hook, will cast up all his entrails
with it, and so saues himself. Bolso, pursie, shortwinded, sick of the lungs,
puffed, swolen. Bolsiua, pursines, a cough in the lungs. Bolsiuo, as Bolso.
Bolseggiare, to blow, to puff as a broken winded jade, to cough in the lungs.
Bolzacchin^, buskins. Bolzo, as Bolso. Bolzone, a boult, a shaft. Bolzelli, the
wards of a lock. Bomba, a pump of a ship. Also home, a man's own home, roost
or neast, a kind of play that children use in Italy. Bombagia, all manner of
bumbast, or cotton wool. Bombagiaro, a carder of bumbast, a bumbaste maker.
Bombagiare, a kind of stuff called bumbasine made of cotton wool. Bombarda,
a gun, or any kind of bumbard. Bombardare, to batter, to shoot, to beat, to
cannon a city. Bombardaro, a gun-maker, a gunner. Bombardiera, a spike hole,
a loope hole to shoot out at. Bombardiere, a gunner, a harquebusier, a
musketier. Bombare, to resound, to buzze, to hum as Bees do. Bombice, a silk
worm. Bombilare, as Bombare. Bombilio, a kind of buzzing Be or waspe.
Bombitare, as Bombare. Bombo, a humming, a buzzing, a resounding hoarse noise.
Bombone, a kind of kernel that comes in the fat of man. Bomolcho, a
cauelling, a foolish fellow, one that prefers gain before friendship.
Bonaccia, a calm or fair weather at sea. Bonacciare, to calm, to appease, to
quiet, to assuage. Bonaga, the herb Cammock, rest-harrow, Whin, Groundfurze, or
petie Whin. Bonamano, a new years gift, a good hansell, a reward, a drinking
penny. Bonario, debonaire, honest, good, vncorrupt. Bonaso, a beast as big as
a bull with great horns, but bending back. Bonetto, a bonet or a cap.
Bonificamento, any profit or increase coming of lands. Bonifacia, the herb
called horsetoong, toongwoort, toong-blade, or double tongue. Bonigoldo, as
Bilico. Bonita, as Bonta. Bono, as Buono. Bonoga, as Bonaga. Bon pro, as Buon
pro. Bon pro vi faccia, as Buon pro. Bonta, bounty, goodness, honesty,
vprightnes. Bonta del mio signore, god a mercy my lord. Bontadoso, bounteous,
bountiful, liberal, good. Bonzole, a kind of dainty meat, pudding or
haggas. Booba, as Boope. Boope, a kind of strange fish having scales backward,
called in latin Boops. Boot, a serpent living by milk of rudder beasts. Also
a star in heaven following charles waine. Borace, borace that goldsmiths use to
solder with. Boraciere, a borace box that goldsmiths use. Boranez, a kind of
tree in India. Borbo, as Borgo. Borbocca, a kind of sea fish. Borbottare, to
mutter, to mumble, to grudge, to grumble. Borbottolare, as Borbottare. Borchie,
the bosses of a bridle, the hanging lips of a mule. Borda, the name of one of
the little sails of a ship. Bordare, to border about, to embroder. Also to
board a ship. Bordatura, a border, a bording, a boarding of a ship: also a
cheuron in armory. Bordellare, to haunt the stews, to follow or frequent
whoores. Bordelleggiare, as Bordellare. Bordelletti, foolish toies for whoores:
any scornful things. Bordelliere, a whooremonger, a frequenter of harlots.
Bordello, a brothell house, a bawdy house, a stews. Bordo, a kind of silk
stuff wouen. Bordonali, rafters or quarters of timber. Also a great clarke or
doctor wearing a tippet. Bordone, a staff, a bat, a verge, a sound, a noise, a
tennor or keeping of time in music, the burden of any song: a prop of timber,
a pilgrims staff. Also the second base string of any instrument. Borea, the
northeast wind, boreas blasts. Boreale, northren, of the north. Borella, a
bowl to play at bowls with. Borellare, to play at bowls, to bowl.
Borellatoio, a bowling allie. Borelliere, a bowler, a plaier at bowls.
Borellone, a great bowl. Borfare, to huffe, to puff, to snuff, to chafe, to
snort. Borfiare, as Borfare. Borfio, a puffing, chafing, huffsnuffe fellow.
Borgare, to cast or scowre as a hawk. Borgatura, casting or scowring for a
hawk. Borge, as Borchie. Borghese, a burgess or town dweller. Borghigiane,
as Berghinelle. Borghinelle, as Berghinelle. Borghinetta, a burganet, a skull,
a caske. Borgno, bleare-eied, squint-eied, purblinde, sand-blinde. Borgo, a
borough, a town, a suburb. Boria, vaineglorie, ostentation, vaunting.
Boriate, to boast, to glory, to brag, to vaunt. Borico, Boricchio, as Borrico.
Borine, the names of certain shroudes or ropes in a ship. Borino, a small
sharp pounce that grauers use. Borioso, boasting, proud, a bragger, a vaunter,
a vaineglorious man. Boriosuzzo, somewhat vaineglorious. Bornio, as Borgno.
Borniola. Look Dare vna borniola. Borra, any stuffing for saddles, or other
quilting or bombasting. Also as Borace. Borrabozza, a fish called in Latin
Blennus. Borrace, Borraso, as Borace. Borragine, Borrana, the herb Borage.
Borrare, to solder, to stuff. Borrattare, to sift or boult meal. Also a
racking between an amble and a trot. Borratto, a boulting cloth, a sieue* a
racking of a horse. A kind of stuff called Burato. Borreuolmente, stuffingly,
fully, gulchingly. Borrico, a kind of quilted wastecoate. Also a frocke.
Borrire, to rouse a dear for to hunt him. Also to fill or stuff. Borro, the
wood called Cork. Borsa, a purse, a little bag. Borsapastoris, the herb
Shepherds purse or scrip. Borsare, to imburse or put into a purse. Borsetta,
Borsella, a little pouch, a little purse. Also a glister. Also a bladder or a
blister. Borsia, a purse, a satchell, a little bag. Borsiere, a purser, a purse
keeper. Borsone, a pouch, a hauking bag, a great purse. Borza, as Borsa.
Borzacchini, buskins, fine boots. Borzachinato, having buskins on, buskined.
Borzachinetti, little buskins, little cheuerell purses. Borzetta, as Borsetta.
Bosca, a bird called a pocard. Boscaglia, wooddie ground, boscage. Boscare, to
grow to wood or wild. Boscareccio, Boschereccio, rural, savage, woodie,
siluan, desert, swainlike. Bossatore, a forester. Also a woodfeller or a
woodman. Boschetto, a grove, a thicket, a little wood, a cops of wood. Also a
rispe, a lushe or lime twigge to catch birds. Bosco, a wood, a forest, a
grove. Boscoso, woodie, full of wood. Bosecchie, as Busecchie. Bosima, a kind
of yeast or gum that weauers use to stiffen linen cloth with. Bosimare, to
stiffen linen cloth as weauers do. Bossetto, a shoe-makers round piece of
wood to sow his shoes upon. Bossita, Bossitella, a little box. Bosso, the
wood or tree called box. Bossola, a box that mariners keep their compass
in. Also taken for the compass. Bossolare, to put in a box. Bossoletto, a
little box. Bossolo, a box such as they put ointments in. Also a mariners
compass. Bossoro, a silk cod, a cod of raw silk. Bota, a fish that grunteth
called a Molebout. Bostrizzo, as Bottarissa. Botare, to vow, to promise, to
swear, to vouch. Botargo, a kind of salt meat made of fish used in Italy in
Lent. Botauro, a kind of beast breeding in cold countries. Botero, Botiro,
butter. Boto, a vow, a promise. Botola, as Bottolo. Botonaria, a flower called
the blew or globe Dasie. Botri, the herb Oak of Cappadocia, or Jerusalem.
Botrio, a disease or sore in the eyes. Botonomantia, a divination by herbs or
weeds. Botrite, a kind of blackish stone. Botta, a blow, a stroke, a time.
Also a toad. Also the flowing or surging of the sea. Also a kind of fish
called a Millers thumb, or a gull. Bottaccio, a filthy ^ut or pipe, or
hogshead. Also a bottle or flagon. Also as Bota. Bottadi graselle, that which
our farriers call stifeling, or a hurt in the stifeling place. Bottana, a kind
of flanell or such stuff. Bottarello, the calfe of the leg. Bottarissa, a
kind of lampreie or eelepout. Bottaro, Bottaio, a cooper or tubmaker. Botta
scudaia, a tortoise. Botte, a But, a tub, a barrel, a hogshead, a pipe. Also
stripes or blows. Bottega, a shop. Also taken for a stall or a tavern.
Bottegaio, a shopkeeper. Botteghiero, a shopkeeper. Botteghino, a little shop
or stall. Bottegino, a little rundlet, a firkin or barell. Also the hole of a
privy or iakes. Botteglia, a flagon or bottle. Bottegliere, a bottle-maker,
yeoman of the bottles, a butler. Bottero, a cooper. Botteguccia, a poor stall
or shop. Botticelle, a tool that ropers use. Also rundlets or little barels.
Botticino, as Bottegino. Bottiglia, a bottle or a flagon. Bottigliere, as
Bottegliere. Bottiglione, a great flagon ^r bottle. Bottinare, as Abbottinare.
Bottinamento, as Abbottinamento. Bottini, buskins or thin boots. Bottino, as
Abbotinamento. Also a little but, barrel or firkin. Botto, as Botta. Bottoli,
flocks of course raw silk. Bottolo, a whelpe, a puppie, a sheapheards cur, a
filthy dog. Also as Bottarissa. Bottonare, to button. Bottoncini, little
buttons, buds of flowers quips, jests or taunts. Bottone, a button, a scoff, a
quippe or a taunt. Bottoneggiare, to quip, to scoff, to mock, to gibe slilie
or covertly. Bottonetto, a little button. Bottonetto di fuoco, an instrument of
iron that farriers use, having at one end a little knot like a button.
Bottoniera, a button hole or a loope hole. Bottoniere a button-maker. Boturo,
butter. Bouare, to play the ox or bellowe as an ox. Bouaro, a neatheard or
oxekeeper. Bouazzo, filthy bull or cow-beefe. Also a filthy ox. Boue, an
ox, a beef. Bouemarino, a fish taken for the sea calfe. Bouile, an oxe-stall,
a court or yard where cattle go. Bouina, of an ox or beef. Also an ox
dung. Bouine, certain biting flies called brizzes. Bouino of the nature of an
ox. Also a poor sheapheards cottage, an oxe-stall. Bouolo, a snayle, a
cockle, a Perwincle, a Tortoise. Also a pair of winding stairs. Also the
place where a rower sits to row in any boat. Bozza, the first rough draught
of any thing. Also a round violl glass. Bozzacchio, an acorne. Also a puff
or mushrump full of dust. Bozzacchioni, dried Prunes or Pears. Also the gall
or fruit breeding on Oak leaves, a puff. Bozzare, to rough hew or draw, cast,
cut, work or write any thing, to bungle. Bozzatura, a rough-hewing or hudling
up of any thing in haste, a bungling piece of work. Bozze, deceits,
trumperies, trash, unlawful tricks, forbidden parts, as when a woman makes
her husband cuckold, untimely or abortiue fruits, imperfect bungling works.
Bozzima, a huddle, an hotchpoch or imperfect thing, as Bosima. Bozzo, a bastard
or a mungrell. Also a thorn or brier. Bozzolato, as Bucellato. Bozzoli, a fish
called a Millers thumb. Braca, a breech or a slop. Bracato, breeched, having
hosen on. Bracatura, a breeching, the seat of a saddle. Bracca, a brache, or a
bitch. Braccare, to breech, to brack, to mount, or bind about with iron: to
hunt or quest as a dog. Braccesca licentia, as we say in English, Stafford law.
Braccia, an arm, arms. Also a yard or an ell. Also a vine branch. Also a
horses forelegs. Braccia boschi, woodbind or honysuckle. Bracciale, a bracer to
play at ballone with. Also pouldrons. Braccialetti, bracelets or wristbands.
Bracciamenti, as Abbracciamenti. Bracciare, as Abbracciare. Bracciatura, the
embracing place of a shield, an embracing. Bracciatello, Bracciello, a kind of
cake, bun, roll, simnell, biscuit or ginger bread. Bracciolare, a yard or ell
to measure by. Bracciuole, a bracer, a little arm, a handle, a stock.
Bracciuoli, are short links and buttons set to one side of the vpset in the
place of the water cheine of a horse. Brache, all manner of breeches, slops,
hosen, breekes, gascoines, venetians. Also silk worms. Bracheraro, a maker of
trusses or breeches. Brachetta, Brachietto, a cod piece. Some have used it for
the iesses or varuels of a hawk. Brachiero, a hosier or breech-maker, breeches
or slops. Also a trusse, such as those that be burst or open-bellied use to
wear. Bracchio, Braccio, an arm, a yard, or an ell measure. Bracco, a
beagle, a hound, a spaniell, a blood hound, a draught hound, a vermin called a
hog-louse. Braccoda rete, a setting dog. Braciare, as Bragiare. Brachecuculi,
the flowers Cowslips, Paigle, Palsiewort or Oxe-lips. Bracie, as Bragie. Braco,
as Brago. Braga, as Braca. Bragare, to breech or put on breeches or hosen: to
set a piece upon the stock. Braghe, as Brache. Bragheraro, as Bracheraro.
Braghesse, as Brache. Braghiero, as Brachiero. Bragiare, to burn, to broyle,
to set on fire, to consume to cinders. Bragie, quick-burning coals or imbers.
Bragiole, as Brasuole. Brago, mud, dirt, mire, earth or clay: a puddle.
Bragoni, great breeches, slops, breekes or hosen. Brama, a wish, a desire, a
coveting. Bramangiare, a kind of meat so called. Bramare, to wish, to covet,
to desire earnestly. Bramoso, desirous, covetous, wishing. Branare, to havoc,
to hew, to cut or slice in pieces or mammocks. Branca, the clawe or pawe of any
beast, a clinch, a fang. Also a man's fist. Also a kind of cockle, or such
shell fish. Branca polpo, a kind of crab fish. Branca leonina, the herb
Harts-fodder or wild Parsnep, Brancare, to gripe, to clinch, to catch with the
claws or fangs. Brancata, a handful, a griping, a bundle, a wad, a faggot, a
trusse. Branca vrsina, the herb bears foot, bears wort, or bears breech,
or branke vrsine. Branchi, the claws of crabs. Also multitudes, herds,
flocks, or droues. Brancicare, to gripe, to groape, or fumble, or to be
handling. Branco, a flock, a heard, a drove, a shole of fishes, a flight of
birds. Also a catarre or rheum descending into the throat of a man.
Brancolare, to grope, to fumble, or feel in the dark. Also to gripe.
Brancoloni, gropingly, fumblingly. Brancorsina, as Branca vrsina. Brancuti,
having claws, or paws. Brandire, to trick, smug, spruce, or trim up any
thing. Also to brandish a sword. Brando, a sword. Also a gad of steel.
Brandone, a great torch, taper, or wax candle. Branla, a french dance called a
bransle. Brano, a piece, a scrap, a mammock, a cob, a luncheon, a lump.
Branoabrano, piece by piece, in small mammocks, by piecemeale. Brasare, as
Bragiare. Brasci, plats, quarters, beds, allies, v^ide places, or banks in
gardens. Also threshing places. Brasciare, as Bragiare. Brasciuole, as
Brasuole. Brase, as Bragie. Brassare, to brue, to embrue. Brassaro, a bruer.
Brassarura, a bruing, an embruing. Brassica canina, the herb dogsbane, or
dogscole. Brasuolare, to fry, or broyle in steakes or collops. Brasuole,
steakes, collops, rashers, or carbonados. Also a kind of hose or slops so
called. Brauare, to boast, to brag, to brave it, to vaunt, to swagger, to cut
it out, to flaunt it, to be all a hoigh. Brauazzo, a swashbuckler, a swaggrer,
a cutter, a quareller, a roister, a flaunting fabian. Brauo, a boaster, a
brauer, a vaunter, a brave fellow, a gallant, a swaggrer. Also brave, fine, or
gallant. Brauoso, as Brauo. Brauura, Braueria, bravery, brauing, boasting,
swaggring, flanting. Breccia, a breach, a gap, a rupture. Brena, a kind of
ginnie or turkey wheat. Brenna, taken for branne or course meal. Some take it
for an herb. Brendola, a kind of butterflye. Brenta, a certain vessel to
carry wine in upon men's shoulders used in Italy. Brentadori, wine-porters that
carry wine from place to place, or wine-measurers, dreymen. Brentari, as
Brentadori. Bresca, a honey comb. Bresuole, as Brasuole. Bretonica, the herb
Betonie. Breue, brief, short, or compendious: a brief, a note, a word, a
motto, an emblem, a posie, a brief in music. Breuiale, a breuiarie, a
breniall, a prayer, service, or masse-booke. Breuiare, to abreuiate, to
shorten, to cut off, to make brief. Breuiario, as Breuiale. Breuiatore, a
register, a remembrancer, an abreuiator, a shortner. Breuicino, a little
manuell or prayer book, a pamphlet. Breuiloquentia, short or compendious
speaking. Breuita, brevity, briesenes, shortness. Brezza, Breza, a raw, cold,
shiuering or dampish weather, a chillnes. Briachezza, dronkennes, carousing,
bousing, canning. Briacare, to be or make drunk. Briaco, dronken, or a
drunkard. Briacone, a filthy beastly drunkard. Briccia, a crum, a jot, a
myte, a whit. Bricchi, Bricconi, sergeants, catchpoles, or such raskalie base
people. Bricciolo, as Boccata. Bricco, Briccore, a rock, a cliff, a crag of any
mountain. Briccola, a creeping hole, a hole or corner to creep in at. Also a
brikoll or rebounding of a ball from one wall to another in a tenis court. Also
a tillar, or stockbow to shoot boults or arrows in. Brieue, as Breue.
Brifalda, a bold, shameless, mankind, virago woman. Briga, a trouble, a
braule, a strife, a brable, a contention, a quarelling, a fumbling. Brigante, a
pirate, a rouer or robber by sea on land, a lout, a wag, a good lad, a false
crafty knave, a cheating companion. Brigantino, a kind of pinnasse or small
bark called a Brigantine. Brigare, to trouble, to braule, to strive. Also to
practice, sneake, or canuas for any thing. Brigata, a company, a flock, a
knot, a rout, or crew of good fellows. Briglia, a bridle or a snaffle. Look
Beuer la briglia. Briglia d'oro, a golden bridle. Also the name of a horse in
Ariosto. Brigliamenti, bridlings, all things pertaining to a bridle. Brigliare,
to bridle, to snaffle. Brigliaro, a bit or bridle-maker. Briglie a ferro di
cauallo, in times past they called bits with ports so, by reason that the port
has somewhat the shape of a horseshooe. Brigoso, contentious, or quarellous.
Brillante, sparkling, twinkling, twiling, quauering. Also leaping, or chucking
for joy. Brillare, to twinkle, to sparkle, to quauer, to leap or chuck for
joy. Brillo, a twinkling or sparkling, as a diamond does in turning it. Brina,
a must or a hoarefrost, a nipping frost, a breame, so called by Chaucer.
Brinaccia, a filthy fogge, mist, or hoarefrost. Brinare, to fogge, to mist.
Brincia, the name of a tool that sadlers use. Brindello, a stalk of a pear
or apple, a little scantling or erum of any thing. Brindesi, Brindisi, a
drinking or health to one, I drink to you. Brinosa, mistie, foggie, frosen,
covered with a hoare frost, breamie. Brio, an herb growing in water called in
latin Pes galli. Brionia, the herb Brionie, wild nep, or white vine. Brisaro,
a hogs hastle^. Brisciole, as Brasuole. Brissi, a kind of biting fly, called
brizzes. Britanica, the herb Spone-wort. Brittanica or Britonica, as
Britanica. Broare, to parboile, or skalde with skalding water. Broca, a pipkin
or posnet of earth. Brocca, a stud or a nail, or a bosse with a great head.
Also a block, a slock, or a perch for a hawke. Broccaglio, a bodkin, or
pouncing iron. Broccale, something about a plough. Broccame, all manner of
cloth of tissue, gold, or silver. Broccare, to nail, to stud, to bosse. Also
to but, to shock, to encounter. Broccata, an encounter, a butting, a shock,
Also afore-right blow, a thrust over the dagger. Broccatello, thin tinsell, or
slight cloth of gold or silver. Broccato, cloth of gold or silver. Also cloth
of bodkin, or tissue. Brocchette, Brochette, little studdes, nails, or bosses.
Brocchiero, Broccoliero, a buckler, a target, a shield. Brocco, a kind of red
or yellowish color. Broccoli, Broculi, the stalks, sprouts, or tops of
coleworts. Broccuta, the mute of hawks or other birds. Broco, a fish, called
in latin Pastinaca. Broda, wash, swill, or draffe for swyne. Brodaglione, as
Brodolo. Brodaiuolo, Brodaruolo, as Brodolo. Brodare, as Broare. Brodetto,
Broduso, a little fine broth. Brodo, any kind of broth, or thin pottage.
Brodolo, a broth-bellie, a slouen, an idle body, one that makes his belly his
god, a swinish kitchen fellow. Broetto, a fine broth. Broffola, a push, a
wheale, a bile, a gall, a blister, a pimple, a skab, a skurfe, an itch, a
tetter. Broffoletta, a little push, worm, pimple, wheale, blister, skab, itch,
or tetter. Brogie, red pimples in men's faces. Brogiotti, a kind of excellent
good figs so called. Also red pimples in men's faces. Brogliare, to pill, to
spoil, to mar, to waste, to huddle up together, to canuas for any office, to
take up commodities, to rob Peter and pa^e Paul, to shift for, to confound, to
hurly ^urlie, to mangle, to mingle mangle, to toss, to disorder, to ouerturne
any matter. Broglio, a hurly burly, a confusion, a mingle mangle, a huddle, a
canuasing trick, a coil, a shift, a shifting, a hotchepoch. Brogna, Brognola,
any kind of plum. Brognata, a kind of stuff made of prunes to make tartes
with, which they call black stuff. Brogno, Brognolo, a plum tree. Broilo, a
kitchen garden. Broio, as Broglio. Brolardelli, a kind of fritter or pancake.
Brollare, as Brogliare and Brullare. Brollo, as Broglio and Brullo. Also a
kitchen garden. Brolo, as Brullo. Bromboli, stalks or stems, namely of
coleworts and cabbage. Bronchi, branches or loppings of trees, shrubs, stubs,
stumps, snags, or logs of wood. Bronco, the fish Cungar. Broncolare, to top or
lop trees. Broncone, Broncolo, a stump, or stock of a tree, or a dried bough,
a stub, a snag. Bronfare, Bronfiare, to snort, to huff, to snuff, to puff, to
chafe. Bronfatore, Bronfiatore, a snorter, a huff snuff, a chaser. Brongie,
pushes or pimples in men's faces. Brongino, as Bronzino. Bronia, a precious
stone, good against thunder and lightning. Brontea, as Bronia. Brontolare, to
grumble, to mutter, to mumble, to grudge, to repine. Bronzino, brazen, of
brass or copper. Also an eawer to give water with, a cock for a cesterne of
water. Also a lauer, a barbers basen of copper. Bronzo, brass, or bell-metall.
Brostolare, Brostolire, as Brustolare. Brotto, Broto, as Brullo. Brouare, as
Broare. Brouetto, a mess of fine broth. Brozze, knobs or bunches as upon a
crabsticke, the marks, skarres, or sores of the pox. Also pimples, pushes,
biles, skabs, skurfes or tetters. Also the skurfe or crust of any skab or sore.
Brucamaglia, a route of raskals and base fellows. Bruchi, Brucchi, brizze
flies. Also caterpillars, or silke-wormes. Bruccioli, a kind of weed or wild
pulse. Also dried small wood to make a sudden blaze. Brucco, as Bastango.
Bruccuda, the muting of hawks or other birds. Bruciare, to burn, to itch, to
smart. Bruciore, a burning, a smarting, an itching. Bruculo, or Bruco, a
vermin, caterpiller, or worm that eats vines. Bruffola, as Broffola.
Bruggiate, a kind of fritters or hard cakes. Brughe, silke-wormes. Also
caterpillars. Brugiare, to burn, to itch, to smart. Brugna, Brugnola, any
kind of plum. Brugnata, as Brognata, Brullare, to singe or skald a hog, to
parboile, to pill and pull as a hen, to parch, to scorch. Also to tanne or
sun-burne. Brullo, singed, skalded, burnt, parboiled, pild, plucked, spoiled,
bald, bare, poor, naked, silly, wretched, parched, skorched, tanned, or
sunburned. Bruma, Brumale, mid-winter, frost, mist, fog, cold frosen weather,
breame. Brumale, feeding at othermens cost, one that lives by others labors.
Also winterie, frozen, cold. Brunazzo, brounish, blackish, dark, duskie,
pitchie, black, sable, broune, gloomie. Brundulare, to grumble, to grudge, to
mutter. Brundulatore, a grombler, a muttrer. Brunella, the herb selfheale.
Brunire, nisco, nito, to burnish, to rub close together. Brunito^o, a
burnishing tool. Brunotta donna, a nutbrowne woman. Bruodare, as Broare.
Bruodaiuolo, as Brodolo. Bruodo, as Brodo. Bruolo, any ground tilled about a
house, a garden plot. Bruosina, Bruosa, a flake of ise, a hoare-frost, an
isesickle. Brusca, ling or heath to make brushes or broomes with. Bruscare, to
prune, to lop, to cut. Also to burn, to singe, to skalde, or broile. Also to
make sour, sharp or tarte. Brusciare, to burn, or consume with fire. Also to
smart or itch. Brusciore, smarting, itching, or burning. Brusciolo, a bile, a
blane, a push, a pimple. Bruschetto, the diminutiue of Brusco. Brusco, sour,
tarte, sharp, unripe, eagre. Also a push, a pimple or a wheale. Also a moth or
a thing of nothing. Also the shrub, kneeholme, butchers broom, petiegree, or
kneehuluer. Bruscolino, a push, a worm, or wheale, or pimple. Brusola, a bird
called a Witwall. Also a fish called in latin Alpheste, or Cynaedo.
Brustolare, as Brullare, to toste, to singe. Brusuola, as Brasuole. Brutale,
brutish, beastly, unreasonable. Brutalita, brutishnes, beastlines. Bruto,
brute, brutish, without reason. Brutta, a staggring or falling disease, in a
horse. Bruttare, to defile, to pollute, to foul, to sullie. Bruttezza,
Bruttura, pollution, foulenes, filthiness, filth, illfauourednes, vglines.
Brutto, foul, illfauored, unhandsome, polluted, defiled, filthy, ugly.
Bruzaculo, the name of an herb. Also the hip of a rose. Buaggine, oxishnes,
foolishnes. Buasso, a gull, a mome, an ox, an ass. Buba, Bubo, an owl, an
owlet or a howpe. Bubare, to cry or skriche as an owl. Bubola, as Pupa.
Bubolare, as Bubare. Also to bubble. Bubole, Bubbule, toies, jests, vanities,
nifles, trifles, bubbles. Buca, Buco, a hole, a gap. Bucarare, as Bucherare.
Bucare, to boar, to make a hole, to make hollow or full of holes. Also to wash
or lay in a bucke. Bucarone, a scarabe fly, a beetle, a hornet. Bucata, a
bucke. Also lie to wash a bucke with. Bucati, clean, new-washt clothes.
Bucato, buckt, washed in a bucke. Also a bucke. Also holed, hollow, or full of
holes. Bucellato, a kind of simnell, or spiced bread. Bucello, biscuit, simnell
or cracknell bread. Bucentoro, look Buccintoro. Bucherame, buckram or Calicoe
cloth. Bucherare, to boar or pearce full of holes. Also to shift or canuasse
hard for voices or for any office by any indirect means, to sneake, to lurk,
to miche, to toote, to pry or peep into any matter diligently. Bucchia, the
bark of a tree, the parings of fruit, a shell of an egg. Buccia, the paring
of any fruit, a button of a flower, a kind of a limbecke. Also a hide, a fell,
a skin, a shell, the bark of a tree, a hukse, a molde. Also a cod of any
pulse. Bucciacchere, filthy guts, garbish, offale. Bucciare, to pare or shell
or shale. Bucciario, a bustard. Buccina, as Bucina. Buccinare, as Bucinare.
Buccinamento, as Bucinamento. Buccine, a kind of shell fish or seasnaile.
Buccinelli, springes or ginnes or nets to foul with. Also tools to pick
l^ckes with. Buccintoro, a gally-foist, a stately galley in Venice that the
Duke goes in triumph in. Bucciolo, a reed to make a pipe with. Also the
joints in a cane. Buccisoffiola, a flimflam tale whether it be true or false to
make a man fear or suspect shame or loss, as we say a tale of Robinhood.
Buccolica, heardmens songs. Also eating or gluttony. Buccolici, things
pertaining to plowmen or heardsemen. Bucigatti, lurking holes, sluts corners,
by-corners. Bucina, a hornepipe. Also a sordine trumpet. Bucinare, to hum, to
buzze, to whisper or murmur. Also to clange or blow out as a trumpet, to
proclaim, to publish. Also to blow a pipe. Bucinamento, a humming, a
whispering, a buzzing, a murmuring. Bucinelli, as Buccinelli. Buco, a hole, a
gap. Bucolino, a little hole, a peeping hole. Budello, a gut. Budello culare,
the arsegut. Bue, an ox. Also a gross gull. Also a greek coin of two drams.
Also a kind of fish. Buessi, simple fools or guls. Buffa, the buffie or
breathing holes of a headpiece or helmet. Also a toade. Also a brawle, a
hurliburly, a strife, a contention, a puff, a push with the mouth in skorne.
Also as Buffera. Buffalagine, foolishnes, idiotisme, gullishnes. Buffalaro, a
buffe-keeper, a buffle-heard. Buffalino, of buffe, buffin. Also a kind of
cheese made of bufs milk Buffalo, a buffle, a buffe. Also an ignorant fellow:
as we say a gull or loggarhead. Buffare, to puff: to blow. Buffera, a
confusion or variety of winds, a blast or gust or berrie of winds. Buffetare,
to blow or puff with ones mouth. Also to buffet one. Buffetto, as Boffetto.
Buffettone, a great box, blow or whirret on the ears or cheeks. Buffo, a
puff, a blast, a berrie or a gust of wind. Also a toade. Buffonare, to jest
or play the iester. Buffone, a iester, a fool, a pleasant companion. Also a
great toade. Buffoneggiare, to jest or play the iester. Buffoneria, jesting,
pleasant meriment. Bufolo, as Buffalo. Bufonchiare, to grumble as one that is
never pleased, to grudge at every thing, to swell as a toade does. Bufonchino,
a grumbler, one that will grudge at every thing. Buftalme, the herb May-weede
or Oxeie, or stinking Cammomill. Bugancie, kibes or chilblanes. Bugandiera, a
landres, a washer of bucks. Bugerare, Bugierare, to bugger. Bugerone,
Bugierone, a buggerer. Bugetta, a budget. Bugia, a lie, a leasing. Bugiardo, a
liar, a leaser. Bugiare, to lie. Also to boar or to make hollow. Bugigattolo,
a sneaker, a pryer into corners, a tooter. Also a sluts corner. Bugio, a hole.
Also hollow. Bugliare, to shake between two hands, to play handie dandie, to
shift for. Buglosa, as Bugolosa. Bugna, a kind of work in building. Bugnola,
a frail, a wicker, a basket, a cade or a dosser. Also a binne for bread.
Bugno, as Bugnone. Bugnone, a push, a bile, a blane, a botch. Bugolosa, the
herb Lang-de-beuf or Buglosse or Rose-campion. Bugone, a snaile, a cockle.
Also a pair of winding stayres. Buiare, to darken or obscure, to huddle up.
Also to cast or throw. Buio, dark, pitchie, obscure. Also darkness, obscurity.
Bula, chafe of corn. Bulbari, a kind of meat used in Mantoa. Bulbo, ani^
root that does pill as Oinions, Scalions or Garlic. Also Dogs-bane,
Dogs-stones or Corne-leeke. Bulboso, round headed in the roots, made
bladder-like, as Oinions are. Buldriana, a common strumpet, a filthy whore.
Bulesco, gullish, foolish knauish, momish. Bulette, studs, tacks or nails with
great heads. Buli, asses, woodcockes, guls, fools, coxcombes, noddies,
patches, momes. Bulicame, a man's bum or tale, a natural warm bathe, the
natural heat or boiling of hot water. Bulicane, as Bulicame. Bulimia,
exceeding great famine or hunger. Bulino, a kind of tool that goldsmiths use.
Buliuacca, an arche cow, a filthy cow. Bulla, a bubble. Also as Bolla.
Bullette, bubbles, vanities, trifles. Bullo, a ruffian, a swashbuckler, a
tistie-tostie, a swaggrer. Bumbo, as Bugone. Buoine, as Bouine. Buolerminio, as
Boloarmeno. Buonamano, as Bonamano. Buonamemoria, God have mercy on his soul.
well fare all good tokens. Also of good memory. Buonamerce, god amercie, or by
means. Buonaria, good or pleasant aspect to look upon. Buonarobba, as we say,
good stuff, a good wholesome plum-cheeked wench. Buonauentura, good hap, good
luck. Buondato, a jot, a trifle, a thing of nothing. Buono, good, apt, fit,
honest, much, great, able, happiness or summum bonum. Buonpartito, a good
course, a good intertainment, a good resolution. Buonpresso, a pullie in a
ship, called dead man he. Buon pro, much good, much good may it do you, god
give you joy. Buon pro vi faccia, as Buon pro. Buora, as Borea. Buorino, as
Boarina. Buosega, a clown, a clownish fellow. Also a wooden pantofle. Buouale.
as Bugone. Buouolo, as Bouolo. Bupresti, a very venomous fly called a Wag-leg
or Long-leg. Also the name of an herb. Burasca, a tempest, a storm, a gust or
flawe of wind. Buratelli, a kind of salt fish. Burattare, to boult or sift
meal. Burattadore, a boulter of meal. Burattino, a kind of stuff called
Burato. Also a boulter. Also a millers or bakers man. Buratto, a boulter or
sieue. Burazzino, as Burattino. Burbanza, a swelling, a puffing, a frowning, a
fiercenes, a sturdines, grudge, pride or disdain. Burbare, to swell, to puff,
to frown or look grim, to grow fell, cruel or furious, to grudge. Burbero,
a frowning, grim, grisly, ghastly swart, or horrible look or countenance. Also
fierce, fell, cruel, sturdie. Also a fish called a carpe. Burbo, as Burbero.
Burchio, a boat, a hulke, a bark, a craire, a lighter, a barge. Burchio
ferrante, a kind of hulke with sails. Burchiello, as Burchio. Burdello, as
Bordello. Burella, as Borella. Also a dark narrow place, a by-corner.
Burellare, as Borellare. Burghera, a gorget, a partlet. Buriasso, a stickler or
judge of any combatants, such a one as brings into the listes such as shall
fight a combat, or run at tilt. Also a prompter, or one that keeps the book
for plaiers, and teaches them, or scholars their kue. Burino, a kind of
caruing, cutting, or iagging in garments. Burla, a jest, a scoff, a mock, a
gibe, a floute, a frumpe. Burlare, to jest, to floute, to frump^, to mock, to
gibe, to scoff. Burlenghi, a kind of biscuit or simnell bread. Burleuole,
jesting, merry, flouting, pleasant. Burliere, merry, jesting,
pleasant-conceited, a iester, a pleasant fellow* a giber. Burlone, a merry
conceited iester. Burna, a wild beast so fierce in Africa, that it will fight
with two elephants at once, it overcomes the lion and the panther. Burra, a
part of a plough. Also as Borra. Burratino, as Buratino. Burrato, a deep dark
dungeon, a pit, a downfall, a deep, a depth. Also a stream running violently
in some low valley making a hideous noise with the downfall. Burro, Butiro,
butter. Burrone, a crag, a cliffe, a rock, a grot, Also a sheep or goats
walk. Also a stream or current, or downfall of waters out of some hill or
rock. Burzacchini, buskins. Busare, to make hollow, to bore. Also to tell a
lie. Busbaccone, a sneaker, a searcher, a groper or a creeper into corners.
Busca, a getting, a filching, a shifting or prowling by hook or crook, a
musse, as boys play at. Buscamento, as Busca. Buscandoli, hops wherewith they
brewe beer. Buscare, to get, to filch, to make shift for, to proule for any
thing by hook or crook. Buschetta, a play at musse, as children use.
Busciarella, a reed, a cane, an oaten pipe. Buscio, as Buso. Busecchie, guts,
entrails, garbage, tripes, bowels, empty guts. Busigattolo, as Busbaccone.
Busnar d'orecchie, a buzzing or humming in ones cares. Buso, a hole, hollow.
Also void. Bussare, to knock, to strike, to beat, to smite. Busse, knocks,
blows, strokes, stripes, beatings. Busso, a tree or wood called Box. Also a
confusion, a hurly-burly, a great quoile or rumbling. Bussola, a mariners or
seamans compass. Bussolo, as Bossolo. Busta, an implement or tool that
Apothecaries use, or rather a kind of gally pot. Bustello, a kind of dry
measure. Busto, a trunk, a body without a head, a trusse. Also a woman's
buske. Bustuaria, a witch frequenting and keeping about graves and tombs.
Butafaro, a kind of pudding. Buteone, a kind of hawk or buzzard. Buthisia, a
great sacrifice, wherein were killed an hundred beasts. Butirare, to butter.
Butiro, Butire, butter. Butta in sella, a charge that trumpetters use to sound
when they would have men arm themselves and take horse. Buttare, to cast, to
throw, to hurl, to fling. Buttar in occhio, to hit in the teeth. Buttiro, a
master or mistres of boules or coites, whereat the plaiers cast or play: some
call it the block. Butturo, butter. Buzzago, as Paracucchino. Also a puffed or
dried mushrom full of dust. Buzzellato, biscuit bread, simnell bread.
Buzzicchiare, to whisper, to buzze, to mutter in hugger-mugger. Buzzicchio, a
privy whisperer, a close mutterer in hugger-mugger.
C
CA, as Casa. Cabacello, a kind of fish like a dace or a menow. Some have
taken it for a mullet. Cabala, Cabalia, a hidden science of heavenly and divine
mysteries professed by the Rabbis, a revelation of secret things Cabali, a
kind of beast in Samatra more hunted after than the Bezoar, for the bones of
it are most forcible to stanch bleeding. Cabalista, any professing Cabala.
Cabalistico, mysterious, cabalisticall. Cabarino, a gabardine, a frocke, an
Irish rug, a shepherds cloak or cassocke. Cabinetto, a cabinet, a closet, a
casket. Cabuccio, a cabbage. Cabuli, a tree, the fruit whereof eaten does cure
all manner of diseases, and is of much estimation in India. Cacabalde,
Cacabaldole, foolish, toyish, trifling shitten things or tricks, coggings and
foistings. As Fagiolata. Cacabo, the herb called Solano. Cacabre, a kind of
whitish stone. Cacafiori, a vain, selfe-conceited, others scorning
find-fault-foole. Cacafretta, a hasty fellow, a squirt, a laske, shitten
haste. Cacafuoco, a hot violent fellow, a shite-fire. Cacalia, as Cacalide.
Cacalide, wild Carowaies, or wild Cheruill. Cacaloro, the name of a bird.
Cacama, a kind of many colored stone. Cacamento, a shiting or a cacking, a
shitten toy. Cacamo, a kind of tree that yields a precious liquor. Cacao, a
fruit in India like unto an almo^d whereof they make a kind of wine.
Cacapensieri, a kind of croude, fiddle or kit. Also an idle, lazy, loytring,
careless or thoughtlesse fellow. Cacamusone, a foolish conceited gull, a fond
shitten fellow. Cacare, to shite, to cacke, to scummer. Cacarella, as
Cacaruola. Cacarelle, the trickles or dung of sheep, goats, rats or conies.
Cacaruola, the squirt, the laske or flixe. Cacarie, trifles, toys, vanities,
shitten tricks. Cacasangue, the bloody flixe or laske. Cacasotto, Cacasisotto,
a pisse-kitchin, always cowring by the fire: an idle flurt, a driggle-draggle,
a durtie slut: one that will beray hirselfe. Cacastraccie, a shite-rags, an
idle, l^zie, loobie fellow. A pinch penie, a niggard. Cacastecchi, a hard
chuffe, a shite-sticks, a niggard, a shitte^ fellow: dung or dirt. Cacatamente,
sneakingly, drawingly, fair and softly, faltringly, d^dgingly, shittenly.
Cacatoio, a privy, a iakes. Cacatreppola, a kind of thistle, teazell or such
pricking we^de. Cacauinci, as Cacauincigli. Cacauincigli, a base abject fellow,
a miserable wretch, an idle lubber. Cacazibetto, a fine perfumed effeminate
fellow. Caccherare, to cackle as a hen. Caccherelli, cacklings of hens. Also
eggs, as we say cockanegs. Cacchione, a prating smell-feast parasite. Cacchioni,
the first down or feathers of young birds. Caccia, a hunting, a chasing, a
driving, an expulsion, a fouling. Also a chase at tennis, a blot at tables.
Cacciacornacchie, a skar-crowe in a field. Also a kind of shot or piece of
ordinance. Cacciadiauoli, the herb Saint John's woort. Cacciafrusto, a kind of
sling. Cacciagione, hunting game. Caccialepre, an herb called Sowthistle.
Cacciamosche, a fan to put away flies. Caccianemico, a bragging craking
boaster, a bugbeare, a rawe-flesh and bloodie-bone. Cacciare, to hunt, to
drive, to chase, to banish, to expel, to drive forth or away, to lill, to
thrust forth. Cacciarcarote, to make one swallowe a gudgeon, to make one
believe the moon is made of green cheese. Cacciata, a chase, a chacing, a
banishment, a driving: a gudgeon or gull given to any man. Cacciatore, a
hunter, a chacer, a driuer, a huntsman, a woodman. Caccima, a bitch with
whelps. Caccole, Cacole, as Cacarelle. Case, a blot at tables, a chase at
tennis. Cacetico, as Bolso. Cachessia, an evil disposition or state of the
body, either by long sickness or bad diet. Cachetto, a man of ill disposition
of the body, one that nothing proves with, but pineth and consumes away.
Cachinare, to laugh immoderately, to pule, to cackle, to prattle. Cachino, a
prattling, a whining, a puling, a cackling. Also an immoderate foolish
laughter. Cacro, the mossinesse of the outward part of fruits. Cacoccia,
Cacozza, as Cacasotto. Cacochimia, ill digestion or ill juice in the body.
Cacochimico, an ill alchimist. Cacodemone, an evil spirit or devil. Caconite,
a precious stone that makes him conqueror that has it about him. Cacume, the
top or height of any thing. Cadaletto, a horse-litter or chair to carry one
in. Also a couch or little bed, also a beer for dead men. Cadauero, a
carcass, dead body, corpse or carian. Cadauno, each one, every one. Cadena,
any kind of chain. Cadenaccio, a boult or bar of a door. Cadenacciare, to
boult or bar of a door. Cadenelle, little chains, chaine-lace or
chaine-stich. Cadente, falling, declining. Cadenza, a cadence, a falling, a
declining, a low note. Cadere, cado, caddi, caduto, to fall, to decline.
Cadiletto, as Cadaletto. Cadimento, a fall, a falling. Cadino, a basin, a trey,
a milk pan, a washing bowl, a charger, a platter, a broad dish. Cadmia,
the oar of brass, or a stone out of which brass is drawn which is
medicinable. Cadmite, a precious stone having blewe specks about it. Cado, a
certain wine measure. Cadrega, a chair. Cadregaro, a chaire-maker.
Caduceatore, an Ambassador or Herald sent to treat of peace. Caduceo,
Mercuries rod, a caducy, a white rod or wande that Heralds or messengers are
wont to carry in their hands. Caducita, falling or readiness to fall, a
staggring. Caduco, falling, mal Caduco, the falling sickness. Also frail,
inconstante, momentarie, subject to fall, fading. Caduta, a fall, a falling, a
cheat, a winter fall. Caere, Caendo, used for Cercare. Caffettano, a cassocke,
a gabardine, a cloak or such like garment. Caffo, the number which we call od.
Also a kind of worms. Also the working, boiling or skum of new wine. Cafiso,
a kind of weight or measure. Caforchio, a clay pit, a lime pit. Also a cliffe,
a rock, a crag. Cafro, a cipher of nothing. Cagiana, a bird called a coote.
Cagionare, to occasion, to cause. Cagione, an occasion, a cause, a mean.
Cagioneuole, casual. Also weak, crased and feeble, defective. Caggia, let him
fall, that he may fall. Caglia, may care or take thought for. Cagliare, to crud
or congeale as milk does. Also to grow hard as a corn. Also to hold ones
peace. But it is taken from the Spanish. Cagliata, crudded milk. Caglio, a
crudding or congealing. Also a corn in a man's hand. Also rennet to make cheese
with. Cagna, a bitch. Also taken for sloth, idleness or lazy stretching,
sluggishnes. Also an interiection of swearing or denying a thing. Also a
dragging hook, a hook. Cagnaccia, a filthy currish bitch. Cagneggiare, to
play the dog or cur, to be currish. Cagnesco, dogged, doggish, currish.
Cagnetto, a puppie, a whelpe, a little dog. Cagnola, Cagnoletta, a little
bitch. Cagnolare, to whelpe or puppie as a bitch does. Cagnoletti, whelps,
little dogs, puppies. Cagnolino, as Cagnetto. Also a tool to draw teeth with.
Cagnotto, a sheapherds cur or whelpe. Caiandra, a tortoise, or a shell-crab.
Cai di latte, cream. Caie, a kind of ravenous sea bird. Calabrache, a game at
cards which we call laugh and lie down. Calabrone, a fly called a Beetle, a
Hornet. Calace, a precious stone, so called because it remains cold being
cast into the fire: it resembles hail. Calafate, a caulker of a ship, a
shipwright. Also a swabber in a ship. Calaia, a narrow lane or path, a passage,
a foord or ferrie over the water. Calalini, as Farfalla, as Pauiglioli.
Calamagio, as Calamaio. Calamaio, Calamaro, a fish called a sea-cut, or
cuttle-fish. Also a standish, or a pen and inkehorne. Calamandrina, an herb
called Betonie. Calamandrina palustre, water or garlike Germander. Calamenta,
an herb called bush calamint, or hoare calamint: another kind called wild
penniroyall, or nip calamint. Calamistro, an iron that women use to curle and
frizle their hairs with, a crisping wire. Calamita, the adamant stone.
Calamita, calamity, misery. Calamitoso, miserable, poor, needy,
unfortunate. Calamo, a cane or reed, a writing pen. Also an arrow or shaft. a
kind of measure used of yore in Greece. Calandario, an Almanacke, a Calendar.
Calandra, a woodlarke, or a bunting. Calandrelli, wooden shoes, wooden
pattens. Also buntings. Calandrino, a Goldfinch. Also taken for a gull, a
ninnie, or simple fellow. Calappiare, to take by deceit in a trap or cage, as
fishes and birds are. Calappio, a basket, a pannier, a cage of twigs, a trap, a
fishing cage with a narrow mouth. Calare, to diminish, to fall, to stoop, to
descend, to strike sails, to abate, to fall as the tide, to wane as the moon,
to abate or bate in price, to descend a pair of stairs, to stoop from aloft,
to come down from on high, to veil bonet, to stoop to a lure as a hawk, to
welke. Calata, a falling note. Also a fit of mirth. Also a trap door, a
descending. Calatabelletta, as Cacasotto. Calatide, a kind of tree. Calatura,
as Calo. Calaurita, the north pole, Vrsa mayor. Calaurone, a hornet, a beetle.
Calca, a crowde, a press, a throng, a thrust. Also as Calta. Calcagnare, to
dodge, to cog, to wrangle, to cavil, to streeke with ouerheeles. Calcagnaria,
dodging, wrangling, a cauelling. Calcagno, a heel of a man. Calcagnolo, a
term of founders, and is some part of a piece of ordinance. Calcara, a
lime-kill. Calcare, to crowde, to press, to throng, to thrust, to stamp, to
tread, to kick. Calcarello, a lime-maker. Calcatoio, a stick to ram the powder
into a cannon, a rammer. Calcatrippa, Star-thistle, or Saint Barnabaes thistle.
Calce, a kick, a blow with the foot, a wincing blow. Also a vanplate, the
iron about a tilting-staffe near the hand. Also the big end of a lance or
staff. Also hosen, breeches, sl^ps, stockings. Also lyme. Also the heelebone
of a man's leg. Calcecumia, as Calcimia. Calce vergine, unslaked lyme.
Calcedonio, a precious stone called a chalcidonie. Calcese, the nether part of
the mast of a ship. Calcestre, any stone good to build or make lyme withal.
Calcette, hosen, or nether stockings, or shinners. Calcetti, linen socks, by
a metaphore a narrow passage, pinch or straight. Calchi, rogues, crosbiters,
vprightmen, vagabonds. Calcia, any kind of hose. Calciamento, any kind of
hosing or shooing. Calciante, befitting, meete-for, agreeing with, squaring in
proportion, fit. Calciapiade, a shooinghorne. Calciare, to put on hosen, or
shoes. Also to fit, to agree, or square in proportion. Also hosen or shoes.
Calciaio, a shoemaker. Also a hosier. Calciatoio, a shooing horn. Calciette,
as Calcette. Calcidonio, as Calcedonio. Calcie, hosen. Also taken for shoes.
Calcifraga, the weed or herb called Sampeere, growing upon rocks by the sea
side. Calcimia, a word used of alchimists for calcination. Also a kind or part
of alchimie, or transmutation. Calcina, lyme. Also loame or mortar.
Calcinaccio, all manner of rubbish of broken walls, the rugged or stony mute
of a hawk. Also a tanners fat or pit. Also a lyme-pit. Calcinare, to
calcinate, to mortar, to loame, to lyme, to glase earthen pots within.
Calcinato, calcinated, mortred, loamed, glased. Also as Calcinaccio.
Calcinatione, a calcination, or a mortering. Calcinatoio, a lyme-kill.
Calcinetti, a kind of little fish. Some take it for a shell fish. Calcio, a
kick, a yerke, a wincing blow with ones foot. Also lyme. Calcioni, great
breeches, hosen, slops. Also boote-hosen. Calcite, the stone whereof brass is
tried. Also red vitrioll. Also a kind of fish. Calcitrante, kicking, yarking,
wincing, stubborn, froward. Calcitrare, to kick, to wince, to yarke, to
spurn, to sling, to be stubborn. Calco, a dresser, or dressing-boord in a
kitchen. Also a Sewer or Usher of a hall. Calcofano, a kind of blackish stone.
Calcole, the tredles of a weauer. Also knobs or corns in ones hands or feet.
Calcosa, a press, a throng, or crowd of people, a common high trodden way.
Calculare, to calculate, to count, to number, to reckon. Calculo, a
calculation, a computation. Calda, a heating, a flaming, a skalding. Also hot,
proud, lecherous, or salt as a bitch. Caldacci, soultrie, filthy, faint,
burning, skalding heates. Caldaia, Caldara, a caudron, a kettle, a bruers lead
or vat. Caldaio, Caldaro, as Caldaia. Caldaraio, a brasier, a tinker, a
kettle-maker. Caldarello, a little heat or warmth, a little kettle. Caldarino,
Caldaruolo, a little kettle or posnet. Caldarone, a great caudron. Calderugio,
the bird goldfinch. Caldezza, heat, warmth, earnestnes, violence. Caldei, the
Chaldeans: but it is taken for hot and violent people. Caldicciuolo, a little
temperate heat or warmth. Caldo, hot, warm, earnest, violent: also warmth, or
heat. Cale, he cares for, or takes care. Calea, as Solatro. Also dogs
grass. Calefare, Calefacere, to warm, to heat, to chafe. Caleffare, to mock,
to skoffe, to jest, to flout, to dally. Calefattar le naui, to calkeships.
Caleffo, a play, a jest, a dalliance, a flout, a mock, a skoffe. Calegaio, a
cord-wainer, a shoemaker. Calere, caglio, calsi, caluto, to care, to take care
or thought for. Calendario, an Almanacke, a calendar. Also a book of accounts.
Calende, the Calends or first day of the month. Calene, a kind of harpies.
Calenzuolo, a kind of little singing bird. Caleselle, foolish, mimik, apish,
iugling tricks. Also a kind of paste meat so called. Calia, as Boccata.
Calice, a chalice or a cup. Calicia, an herb which cast into any water, it
will make it freese. Calidita, heat or warmth. Calido, hot or warm in
operation. Calidonia, a kind of stone or earth that chi^^ick^ use. Caligare,
to darken, to obscure, to b^s^t, to besmoulder, to (...) or make mistie,
duskie, glomie, suttie, dark, pitchie or smouldring. Caligaro, a cord-^ai^^ or
shoemaker. Caligere, as Caligare. Caliginare, as Caligare. Caligine, the sut or
smouldring of a chi^ney, darkness, miste or duskishnes. Caligo, as Caligine.
Caligoso, a tree that every morning is so full of fog and mist, that it
distills so much water, that the people and cattle of many countries in India
have no other water to drink. Calimana, a kind of Apple in Italy. Calisoni,
a kind of comfets so called. Calistefano, a kind of wild Olive tree.
Calliuola, a narrow little pathe, way or causey. Call, Callaia, a causey, a
pathe, a high way, a narrow lane, a beaten wait or trod. A habit or custom
that a man cannot leave. A braunie flesh or corn growing in men's hands or
feet. Callionimo, a fish whose gall heals scars of wounds. Callire, callo,
callito, to grow hard or brawnie as a corn. Callitrico, a kind of Ape in
AEthiopia. Callo, as Call. Also the fastening of an Oyster shell. Calloso,
brawnie, hard, knobbie with labor, full of corns, having a thick skin.
Callosita, hardness, braw^^es. Callostro, butter-milke, the ill milk of a
woman's breast, sour curded milk. Callostro, the shrub we call Priuet or Prime
printe. Calma, a calm or fair weather. Also calm or quiet. Also a branch, a
twig, a sprig, a graft, a sien^, a set, a plant. Calmare, to graffe, to
engraffe, to calm. Calmazza, a kind of Peasant-powte. Some take it for a
Bustard. Calmei, such as speak the rogues language or pedlars French. Calmo,
calm, quiet, peaceable, mild or flexible, and gentle: also as Calma. Calmone,
the roguish language, pedlers French or gibrish. Calo, the diminishing, loss,
abatement or defalking of any thing. Calonica, Calonaca; the chief chapel in
a Church, a queere of a Church, the chancell of a Church. Also a c^ster.
Calonico, as Canonico. Calonicato, as Canonicato. Calonio, a fish that has his
scales contrary to others, and swimmeth against the tide or course of the
water. Calore, heat or warmth. Calorifico, Caloroso, full of heat or warmth.
Calorite, a green stone which set in iron and worn about one, is good against
magic and charms. Calpestare, to trample or tread under foot. Calpestio, a
trampling noise, a pathe or high common way. Calta, the flower Marigold or
brave Bassinet. Also a kind of Violet that comes in Autumn. Calterito, used
for Scaltrito. Caluaria, baldnes. Caluaria, the head or skull of a dead body.
Calueggiare, to become balde. Caluezza, baldnes. Caluire, to become bald.
Caluitie, Caluitio, baldnes. Calunnia, a false or crafty accusation, a forged
crime, a malicious surmise, cavil or detraction to slander or trouble one.
Calunniare, to accuse or lay to ones charge falsely and maliciously.
Calunniatore, a malicious detracter or deceitful accuser. Calunnioso, always
ready to accuse or forge crimes falsely, full of deceitful interpretations,
false, unjust, cauillous. Caluo, bald on the head. Calza, as Calcia.
Calzaiuolo, a hofier or shoemaker. Calzamento, as Calciamento. Calzante, as
Calciante. Calzare, as Calciare. Calzari, either hosen or shoes. Calzato,
hosed or ^ho^. Also a horse that is white footed above the pasternes.
Calzapiedi, a shooing horn. Calzatoio, idem. Calze, hosen or shoes.
Calzolaio, a shoemaker or a hosier. Calzolaria, a shoomakers shop, or where
they sell shoes or hosen. Also the trade of shoomakers. Calzoni, as Calcioni.
Calzoppare, to hop, to skip, to go a false gallop. Calzoppo, hoppingly, roundly
away, a false gallop, skippingly. Camaglio, a gorget of maile. Camaldole, a
place frequented or full of people. Camamilla, the herb Cammomill. Camangiare,
all kind of victuals beside bread and drink. All manner of household victuals.
Camarina, a stinking herb provoking vomit. Camarzo, a kind of game at tables
with dice. Camato, a long staff or cudgel or bat. Camarra, a martingall
usual among horsemen. Cambetta, as Crambetta. Also a fish called in Latin
Zingana. Cambiare, to exchange, to change. Cambiatore, an exchanger, a changer.
Cambiatura, a changing or exchanging. Cambio, a change, an exchange, a stead,
liew or place. Cambrai, cambricke cloth, named of the town where much is made
of it. Cambrasia, a kind of light dart or arrowe. Came, a kind of shell fish
or cockles. Camecisso, some take it for Hare-hoofe: some for ground Iuie, and
some for Perwinkle. Camedafne, the herb Perwinkle. Also a plant called Lawry.
Camedrio, the herb Germander or English Treacle. Cameine, the nine muses.
Camelea, as Cameleuca. Cameleone, Cameleonte, a camel^on, an herb growing upon
rocks by the sea side called Chameleon. Cameleuca, the herb Colts hoof, or
asses foot. Camellino, a kind of dainty sauce used in Italy. Also of a
camel. Camelo, Camello, a beast called a camel. Camelopardo, a beast begotten
of a camel and a panther. Camelotto, the stuff we call chamblet: a kind of
wild sheep in India shaped like a camel. Camene, the nine muses. Also a
poetical song. Camera, a chamber or lodging: the chamber of a piece of
ordinance. Camera locanda, a hiring chamber. Camera terrena, a low chamber
next the ground. Cameraio, Camerario, a chamberfellowe, a camerado soldier.
Also a chamberlain. Camerale, of, or pertaining to a chamber. Camerare, to
chamber or lodge. Camerata, a camerada, a society in a chamber, a chamber
full. Camerelle, little holes, flawes or chambers. Camerino, Cameretta, a
little chamber or study. Cameriera, a chamber maid or waiting woman.
Cameriero, a chamberlain or groom of a chamber. Camerlengo, a chamberlain.
Also an auditor. Camerlengheria, a chamberlaineship, or an exchequer of a
prince. Camerlengato, as Camerlengheria. Camescice, a kind of we^de or herb.
Camia, a kind of fish. Camice, a surples, or priests garment called a robe,
that is, plain without plaiting. Camicia, as Camiscia. Camiciara, as
Camisciara. Camiciata, as Camisciata. Camiciotto, as Camiscione. Camiciuola, as
Camisciuola. Caminate, to go, to walk, to march, to wander, to travel, to
waiefare. Caminante, going, walking, marching, wandering, a wandrer or
waiefaring man. Caminata, a chimney. Also a great chamber, or dyning hall.
Camino, a way, a highway, a path, a street. Also a chimney. Camiscia, a
shirt, a smock, a priests surples, a porters frocke, a long white garment.
Camisciara, a seamster or maker of shirts or smocks. Camisciare, to shirt or
put on a shirt, surples, smock or frocke. Camisciata, a sudden secret attempt
or surprise in time of war, so called because it is done and executed with
shirts over the soldiers armor, a camisado. Camiscio, as Camiscia.
Camiscione, a porters frocke, a body cote or great shirt. Camisciotto, as
Camiscione. Camisciuola, a little shirt or a waste-cote. Cammarugie, a kind of
shrimpe or praune. Camo, a bridle, a binding, a snaffle. Camoccia, Camozza, a
chamoy or chamoise, or wild goat. Camoccina, a chamoy or wild goats skin.
Camomilla, the herb Camomill. Camorra, an irish rugge. Also an upper cassock.
Camorro, a murre, a pose, a cold. Also a woman's frock. Camoscello, a kind of
buffin, sarge, rash, or such stuff. Campacchio, a kind of great basket to
carry haie or fodder in upon men's shoulders, used in Italy. Campale, pertaining
to the fields, fieldie. Campagna, a field or a champaine. Campagna rasa, a
razed plain, an open field without any hedge, ditch or other encumbrance.
Campana, a bell. Also a cover of a limbecke or still. Campana azzurrea, blew
birdweede. Campana a martello, to ring the bells backward as they use in Italy
in dangerous times. Campanaio, a bell-ringer, a sexten of a church, or a
bell-founder. Campanati, a kind of duck, wigin, or mallard that is wild.
Campanaria, a iangling, or ringing of belles. Campane, a kind of pear so
called in Italy. Campanella, a little bell, a hawks bell, a cover for a Still
or Limbecke. Campanelle, the herb called Bindweede. Also a worm that
deuoureth vines. Campanello, a campanell or roll in the mouth of the bit of a
horse in form of a bell. Also a kind of flower. Campanello con timpano piano,
when the broad end of the campanell is flat and plain. Campanello con timpano
a volta, is when the broad end of the campanell is compass like a cannon
mouth. Campanile, a steeple, or belfrie. Campare, to escape, to fly, to
avoid, to deliver, to free, to live. Also as Campeggiare. Campeggiare, to
beleagre, to encampe. Also to show well, to suit, to square, to become well.
Campestre, of or pertaining to the fields. Also a field hawke. Campicello, a
little field. Campignare, to rejoice, to make merry, to riot, to revel, to be
frolike, to swagger. Campione, a champion. Campo, a field, a camp, an army,
an host, a field in armorie. Also an escape, a escape. Camporeccio, fieldie,
that grows in the fields. fair and seasonable for the fields. Camuffare, to
stare, to swagger, to riot, to revel, to ruffle it out, to deal roughly, to
pack craftily. Also to put one out of countenance. Also to smooth stones.
Camuffo, a man out of countenance, having lost his speech for shame, or else
made a fool or a gull, and then laughed at by others. Camurra, as Camorra.
Camusino, a little pretty flat nose. Also a kind of pretty dog. Camuso, one
with a flat nose. Camussati, a kind of work in rings of gold. Camuzzone, a
kind of rack, or torture to make one confess. Can, Cane. Look Cane.
Canaglia, Canagliaccia, raskaliti^ (...) people, the skum of the earth,
raskal^^^ people only fit for dogs company. Canaia, a seller, or a butterie.
Canaio, a butler, a cater, a steward, a clarke of a kitchen. Canalano, a
grayhound, a harier. Canale, a channel, a gutter, a water-pipe, or course.
Canaletto, a little channel, gutter, or water-pipe. Canaparo, one that sels
hemp. Canapazzo, course hempen canuas. Also hempen hurds or sackcloth. Canape,
hemp. Also a hempen halter, or great cable. Canapetto, a little hempen roape.
Canapolo, a bough, or a branch. Canaria, houndgrasse, wherewith they provoke
vomit. Canarino, a dance called the canarie dance. Also a canarie man, or
bird. Canaruccio della gola, the gullet of ones throat. Canata, a fence made of
canes, or reeds. Canaua, a seller, a buttrie. Canauaccio, as Canapazzo.
Cancamo, a kind of gum or perfume like mirrh, brought out of Arabia.
Cancarire, to cancre, to rankle, to fester. Cancarito, cankred, festred,
rankled. Cancaro, a cankre, a curse or banning the Italians use to wish one to
another in anger. Also an interiection of denying. Also a sea-crab. Cancaroso,
Cancheroso, cankrie, full of the cankre, pockie, skuruie, festred, rankled.
Cancellare, to cancel, to abolish, to frustrate, to disanull. Cancellaria, a
Chancerie. Cancelleresca, pertaining to the Chancerie, a chancerie hand.
Cancelliere, a Chancellor. Cancello, a writing deske, a grate before a gate or
a door, a prying hole, or letteise. Cancello della poppa, the nipple of a
woman's breast. Canchero, as Cancaro. Cancherire, as Cancarire. Cancheroso, as
Cancaroso. Canciola, as Cancaro. Cancorso, a gray-hound. Cancrena, as Gangrena.
Cancro, as Cancaro. Candela, a candle, a light. Candelabro, a candle-sticke.
Candelaio, a Chandler. Candeliere, a candle-sticke. Candelosa, Candlemas-day,
the purification day, a month after Christmas day. Candelotti, the droppings
or runnings of candles. Candelotti di ghiaccio, Ise-sickles. Candidare, to
whitten, to blanch, to purify, to candie. Candidato, clothed in white,
bleached, whitened. Also such a one as stands or sues for an office, and is
like to speed. Candidezza, whitenes, purity, vnspottednes. Candido, pure,
white, unspotted. Candiotto, a kind of cheese made in Candie. One borne in
Candie. Candore, as Candidezza. Cane, a dog in general, an instrument to pull
out teeth, a snap hance, the name of a fish. Cane alano, a gray-hound, a
harier. Cane botolo, a cur, a sheapheards dog. Cane da rete, a Spaniell or
setting dog. Cane di gabbatelle, a tumbling dog. Cane da vccello, a faulkners
Spaniell. Cane e lupo, tra cane e lupo, cock-shut or twilight, as when a man
cannot discern a dog from a Wolf. Cane leuriere, a gray-hound, a harier.
Canella, as Cannella. Canellato, as Cannellato. Cane molosso, a mastiue-dog, a
bear dog. Cane sparaniero, as Can sparaniere. Canestro, a basket, a
hand-basket. Canestraio, a basket maker. Canestrino, Canestruccio, a little
hand-basket. Caneto, as Cannetto. Canetto, a little dog, a whelpe. Caneua, a
celler, a butterie. Caneuaccio, sackcloth or can^as. Caneuaro, as Canouaro.
Caneuella, the ankle of the leg. Caneuo, hemp. Also a hempen halter. Canfora,
a drug called Camphire. Also a kind of tree or wood thereof. Canforchio, a
narrow lane, a little ally. Cangiamento, Cangiatura, a changing, a change, an
exchange. Cangiante, changeable, as we say Tafeta of diverse colors. Cangiare,
to chance, to exchange, to alter. Cangiatore, a changer, an exchanger. Caniaro,
a kind of bird or foul. Canibale, a caniball, a man that eats men's flesh or
raw flesh. Canibello, a kestrell. Canicula, a fish so called. Also a star much
seen in the dog days, the dog star. Canicie, hoarines, whitenes. Also
gravity. Caniculare, canicular, doggish, dogged, the dog days. Caniglia,
bran. Also course bread. Canile, a dogs kennell. Canino, currish, dogged, of a
dog. The weed called Houndgrasse provoking vomit. A worm breeding in a
horse. Look Corcaiuolo. Also a little dog. Look Riccio canino. Can leuriere,
a grayhound, a harier. Canna, a cane, a reed, a pipe, a fishing or angling
rod. a barrel, a rundlet* a man's throat, a flute, a recorder, a pipe to play
upon. Also a fish called in Latin Orcynus. Also a leaden pipe or gullet to
carry water. Cannaca, a fish called a lamprey. Also a carkanet or billiment of
gold. Cannacca, a lamprey fish. Cannafoglia, a cane, a reed, or sedge.
Cannafossa, a gutter, a sluice or trench to let out water: a tool to let blood
with. Cannagola, a single yoke about a cowes neck or other beast to keep them
out of hedges. Cannaletto, a little channel or gutter. Cannamella, a kind of
musical instrument or pipe. Also a sugar cane. Cannara, a bin for bread, a
great wicker basket. Cannariccia, a place where canes or reeds grow. Also
gluttony or gormandise. Cannarola, a bird called a linnet. Cannarone, a
glutton, a gormand. Cannaruto, one well throted. Also a glutton or gormand.
Cannata, an enclosure, a fence or hedge of reeds or canes. Canneaguzze,
sharpe-pricking canes. Cannella, a little cane, pipe or reed, a flute, a
spigot. Also the arm bone of a man. Also Cinnamome. Cannellata, a kind of
meat or pottage dressed with much cinnamome. Cannellato, that is wrought
hollow, chamfured, or indented as a reed or pipe. Cannelli delle gambe, as
Cannoli. Cannello postremo, the chief bone in the rumpe or tail of a horse.
Also a weauers tool or shuttle. Cannetta, a little cane or pipe, a tobacca
pipe. Cannetto, a plot of ground bearing canes or reeds. Canneuaccio, canuas
or sackcloth. Canneuo, as Caneuo. Cannoli, the bones of either leg betwixt the
knee and the pasterne of a horse. Cannonare, to canon or batter with
artillery. Cannone, a canon or piece of ordinance, the barrel of any gun, a
condit pipe or gutter, a kind of wafer, a canon, a rule, or a law, a cannon
of a horses bit. Cannoniera, a spike hole, a loope hole to shoot out at. Also
the place where the canon is placed upon a bulworke. Cannoniere, a cannoniere
or a gunner. Cannonaro, a caster or founder of ordinance. Cannuccia, a little
reed or pipe, or cane, a small angling rod. Cannuole delle gambe, the ankles
of ones leg. Canoa, as Canoua. Canoa, a canowe or Indian bote made of one
piece. Canodello, a kind of fish. Canone, as Cannone. Canonicare, to make one
chanon of a church. Canonicato, a canon-ship. Canonico, a chanon of a church.
Also canonical. Canonizzare, to canonize. Canopa, a distaffe full of flax,
hemp, or wool. Canopo, a digger or worker about mines or minerals. Canoro,
shrill, loud, resounding. Canoua, a cellar, a vault, a buttrie. Canouaro, a
yeoman of the cellar, a cellar keeper, a butler. Canouo, hemp. Also a
hempenhalter. Cansare, to divide, to sever, to part, to go out of sight, to
overthrow, to go aslope, to give place, to cleave asunder. Can sparauiere, a
spaniell, a blood hound, a beagle, a hunting dog. Canso, divided, severed,
parted, gone out of sight, overthrown, gone aslope, given place. Cantacchiare,
to sing foolishly. Cantafauole, a singer of ballads or tales, a mountibanke.
Also a kind of quaffing glass. Cantafole, idem. Cantara, a fish of the color
of a chestnut, of a most unsavory taste. As Cantharo. Cantare, to sing, to
chaunt, to chirp as a bird, to crow as a cock. Cantarella, the treble string or
minekin of an instrument, a young frog. Also cantharides. Also a kind of pipe
or call to call birds to the net. Cantaride, a kind of blue and green fly
called Cantharides. Cantarini, such as sing three men's songs, common begging
singers. Cantarino, Look oro cantarino. Cantaro, as Cantharo. Cantaro, as
Cantharo. Cantaro forfori, Cantarozeroi, a weight called a kintall. Cantatore,
a singer, a chanter. Canterella, as Cantarella. Canteria, a chantrie. Cantharo,
or Canthero, a fish endued with great chastity as the turtle is, having an
unsavory taste. Also a beast whereof there is no female, a black beetle. Also a
kind of boat. Also a ring or hammer to knock at a door. Also a weight called
a kintall. Also a kind of measure of dry things. Also a tankard or iug that
houldeth much. Also a close stool. Cantiere, a tool with a vice in it that
ioyners use. Also a chanter. Cantilena, a ballad, a tale, a report, a flim-flam
discourse. Cantina, a seller, a butterie. Cantinaro, as Canouaro. Cantinbanco,
a mountibanke, a ballad-singer. Canto, a song, a singing, a sonet, the treble
string of an instrument. Also a side. Cantonare, to cozen, to deceive, to
conycatch, to give one the slip at a corner. Also to canton. Cantonato, a
conycatching trick, a corner of a house or street, a meeting at a corner.
Cantone, a corner, a nooke, a canton, an angle. Cantoniere, a cozener, a
conycatcher, a deceiuer, an affronter. Cantore, a chanter, a singer. Cantuccio,
Cantoncino, a little corner. Canudo, a fish called in latin Alphestus, or
Cynaedus. Canuolo, a bobbin to wind silk upon. Also the quill of a spinning
wheel. Canuto, hoarie-white. Canutezza, hoarines. Canzelleria, a Chancerie.
Canzelliere, a Chancellor. Canzona, Canzone, a song, a canzonet, a ballad, a
dittie, a lay, a roundelay, a virelaye. Canzonare, to sing, to chaunt, to make
songs, to write songs and sonets. Canzoniere, a maker or writer, or singer of
songs. Caos, as Chaos. Caosi, a kind of ravenous sea-foule. Caostelli, a kind
of fish. Capa, a kind of wild, black, hairie beast bigger then an ass
breeding in India. Capace, capable, ample, large, or able to receive or
contain. Capacita, capacity, amplenes, ablenes to receive and contain.
Capale, a gorget or piece of armor for the neck. It is also taken for a
skull. Capanna, a cottage, a bullie, a cabin, a cell. Capanella, a little
homely cottage, bullie, cabin, or cell, a stack or houell of bushes. Capanello,
a stake whereat malefactors be tide to be burnt. Capanetto, a kind of call,
pipe, or net for to catch birds. Also as Capanella. Capano, Capanotto, a poor
homely shepherds cloak, or such upper garment. Capanuccia, as Capanella.
Caparbio, froward, stubborn, headestrong, stiffenecked, wilful, obstinate,
humorous. Caparbita, frowardnes, stubbornes, obstinacy, fond selfe-conceite,
testines. Capare, to take, to lay hold or seize upon. Caparra, an earnest
penny given in hand upon any bargain. Caparrare, to lay, give, or leave
earnest upon any bargain. Caparrone, a pugge, an ape, a munkie, a babuine, a
gull, a ninnie, a mome, a sot. Capassone, a nickname as we say a ioulthead, a
gull, a loggarhead, a mome. Cape, it contains or it is capable of. Capecchio,
course hurds of hemp or flax, course towe. Also a hempen halter. Capeccina,
that part of a yoke that goes about an oxes neck. Capeccio, as Capecchio.
Capeccione, the name of a farriers tool. Also as Cauezzana. Capegli, as
Capelli. Capella, a chapel, a little church. Capellaccio, a filthy great
broad hat. Capellania, a chaplain-ship. Capellano, a chaplain. Capelletto, a
chaplet, a little hat, a hanks hood, the labell of a letter. Also the husk of
any fruit that is not altogether close as of the hasell nut. Also a little
tuffe upon a peacocks head. Also a kind of disease about a horses knee.
Capelli, Capei, the hairs of a man or woman. Also hats. Capelli di venere, the
herb Maidenhaire, Venus-haire, or our Ladieshaire. Capelli, ricci, crespi,
inannellati, curled, frizled or crisped hairs. Capellina, a little chapple.
Also a bush or lock of hair before. Also a little hat that women use to wear
in their houses in Italy. Also a kind of lark with a bushe or tuffe on his
head. Also the foreskin of a man's priuities. Capello, a hat, a hood, a hawks
hoode, the dignity of a cardinal. Also a hair. Also a cover of a Still or
Limbecke. Also as Boccata. It is also taken for a check, a taunt, a rating of
one with authority, Fare un capello ad vno, to give a check or rating to one.
Capelluta, a lark with a tuffe on his head. Capelluto, hooded, covered,
hatted, hairy, or full of hairs. Capeluenere, as Capelli di venere. Capere,
Capio, Capei, Caputo, as Capire. Capestrare, to hang or tie with a rope or a
halter. Capestrarie, knaueries, villenies, raskallie or gallows tricks.
Capestratura prima, the first haltring of a coult when he is first taken up.
Capestrature, hurts or gals in horses legs. Capestro, a rope, a halter, a
headstall. Also a wag, a halter-sack or gallowes-clapper. Also a shoomakers
strap. Capeuole, capable, able to contain. Capezza, as Cauezza. Capezzale, a
bolster for a bed. Capezzadi moro, black like a moore, cole black. Capezzolo,
the nipple of a woman's breast. Also a stalk, a stale, or a stem. Capide, a
kind of little Persian measure. Capidieci, a kind of magistrate in Venice.
Capifosso, as Caponegro. Capidio, Capidolio, a kind of great whalefish, or
hurlepoole. Capigliare, to dress, to tresse, to plaite, to curle, to frizle,
to lace, to tie up hairs. Capigliata, the fore-lock of a man or woman's head.
Also hairie. Capigliuto, a man that has good store of hair on his head.
Capidoglio, the fish called a whale. Capifogli, the herb woodbine, bearing
the honnie-suckle. Capifuochi, andirons, rangers, or racks for a chimnie,
brandirons. Capifuori, as Capifuochi. Capillato, hairie, having hairs on his
head. Capillare, the name of a vain in any body. Also the herb called
maidenhaire. Capillatura, the hair of any man's head. Capimaestro, a chief
workman, a suruayer or controuler of others. Capinero, a kind of little
singing bird. Capio, the sliding of a knot. Capire, Capisco, Capito, to
contain, to conceive, or be capable of, to take, to hold, to receive.
Capiromante, a diuiner by looking-glasses. Capirota, a kind of dainty potage
or sauce used in Italy. Capistorico, the staggers in a horse. Capitale,
capital, chief, mortal, principal. Also a man's wealth, goods, worth, or
stock. Capitana, the admiral ship of a fleet or navy. Capitanato, a
captaine-ship, the place or dignity of a captain, a government. Capitano, a
captain, a chiefetaine, a leader, a chief. Capitare, to come, to happen, to
chance, to fall, or light to any place by fortune. Capite, a kind of white
stone. Capitello, the head of any pillar, a little head, a nipple of a woman's
breast. Also frets in any roof, or knobs in any work. Capitolare, to
capitulate, to covenant, to condition. Capitolatione, a capitulation,
condition, or covenant. Capitolo, a chapter. Also a meeting place for any
society, a convocation house. Capitomolo, a tombling trick, or cast, a
downfall. Capitone, a kind of course silk called sleaue silk. Also a fish
called a cur, a gull, a bull-head, or a millers thumb. Capitoni, as
Capifuochi. Capitonzo, an Item with a great letter, or beginning of a chapter.
Capitulare, as Capitolare. Capitulatione, as Capitolatione. Capitulo, as
Capitolo. Capituto, a loggar-head, a ioult-head, a great-headed fellow.
Capnomante, a diuiner by smokes and fumes. Capnomantia, divination by air,
smoke, and fumes. Capo, Cao, a chief, a head, a leader. Also a pate, a nole, a
skonce: a cloue of garlike: an end or beginning: a chiefetaine or principal: a
cape or but of any lands end. Also a fish called a cur, a gull, a bulhead, or a
millers thumb. Capocaccia, a master hunter, a chief hunts-man. Capocchia,
the foreskin or prepuce of a man's privy member. Capocchio, a doult, a noddie,
a loggarhead, a foolish pate, a shallow skonce. Capocerro, the staggers in a
horse or other beast. Capo d'angolo, a chief corner stone. Capo d'anno, the
years end. Capo di latte, the cream of milk. Also clouted cream. Capo di
squadra, a ringleader, a chief, a head master. Capofronte, the forefront of
a horse. Capogatto, a kind of foul evil or falling sickness in a horse. Some
conster it to be a swelling over all the horse head, possessing the eyes, the
throat, and all parts, so as for the time he can receive no food. Capogirli,
foolish, fantastical, sudden, humorous toys, fancies or conceits, giddines
in the head, or qualmes over the stomach. Capoletto, the testerne, or canapie,
or head of a bead, a sparuise or vallance of a bed. Capolino, a little head or
pate. Capolo, a certain instrument about a plough. Caponara, Caponera, a
coope, a pen or cage for capons or poultrie. Caponato, Caponiera, a poultrer,
or seller of poultrie. Caponato, guelded, caponed, splaide, libd. Capone, a
capon. Also a kind of shellfish. Also one that is guelded. Caponegro, a
titlin, a titmouse, or an oxeye. Capoparte, a ringleader, a head or chief of a
faction, or side. Caporale, an officer in a band of men, called a Corporal.
Caporione, a Marshall of a camp, a Corporal of the field, a Iealour, a
Sheriff, a Justice. Capotorto, a bird called a wrynecke. Some take it for a
hickway. Capotto, as Cappotto. Capostorno, the staggers in a horse or other
beast. Cappa, a cape, a cape-cloke, a spanish cloak, the shell of any fish.
Also a kind of veil that women wear about their heads in Italy. Also an
angle, a canton, or a pile in a coat of arms. Also a coape for a priest.
Cappacciolo, a kind of dressing of meat, so called in Italy. Cappanella, a
rout, a crew, a troop, or flock of people. Cappanelli, a kind of gives,
fetters, or shackles for prisoners. Cappare, to cloak or hood one, to snatch
and filch up, to choose or train up men, to give or lay an earnest penny in
hand for any bargain. Cappari, a kind of sallet called capers, an
interiection of admiring or refusal. Capparocchiole, a kind of cockles, or
paireawinkles. Capparole, a kind of little cockles, or winkles. Capparone, a
gull, a sot, a patch, a ninnie, an idiot. Cappati, chosen or trained men for
any actio^ or attempt. Also cloked or hooded. Cappe, clokes, spanish clokes, or
capes, all manner of shellfish, as oysters, cockles, muscles, or scallops.
Cappelong^e, a kind of long skallops or cockles. Capperi, as Cappari, those
marks upon the playing cards called spades. Capperone, a hood, frocke or
garment for the rain. Also a Fench-hood. Capperoni, a kind of great capers
for sallets, called caperons. Capperuccia, a poor silly cloak or such
gabardine. Cappesante, as Cappelonghe. Cappetonde, a kind of round cockles or
such shell fish. Cappi, the claws of any crab-fish. The knots or steps that be
upon the cords or shrouds of a ship, by which mariners climb up, sliding
knots. Cappio, a snare, a ginne, a spring to catch birds with, a sliding knot.
legata a Cappio, is a joint in the middle of a port or vpset of a horses bit,
where one end of the iron claspeth another like two single hooks. Cappio
scorridore, a sliding knot in a cord, which being drawn will shut and open.
Cappocchio, as Capocchia or Capocchio. Capponara, as Caponara. Cappone, as
Capone. Cappotto, a short Dutch cloak, a Spanish cape cloak, a hood or a coule.
Cappucciare, to hood. Also to slip, trip or stumble. Cappuccio, a hood or a
cowle. Capra, a goat in general. A kind of rack or torture to make one
confess. Capragina, goats Rue or Italian fitch. Capraio, a goat heard, a
keeper of goats. Capranica sapie^tia, foolish, gotish wisdom. Capreccio, as
Capriccio. Capreola, as Capriola. Capreolo, as Capriolo. Capretta, a little
young goat or faune. Capretto, a kid or a young faune. Capretio, beastly, of
the nature of a goat. Capriata, a cheese-cake or such other meat made of
goats milk. Capricciare, to grow or be humorous, toish or fantastical.
Cappriccio, a sudden toie, a self conceit, a fantastical humor. Also a
chilling cold. Capriccioso, toysh, humorous, fantastical, conceited, wavering
in mind. Capricorno, one of the twelve signs in heaven, called Capricornus, a
beast bodied like a stag, and footed and horned like a goat. Caprificatione, a
seeking of that which may not be. Caprifico, a wild Fig tree, or wild Fig
that will never be ripe. Caprifoglio, Woodbinde or Honysuckle. Caprigno,
Caprino, goatish, rammish, wild, humorous, lecherous. Capri mulgo, a bird or
skrich owl, that in the night sucketh the goats vdders. Also a milker of
goats: some take it for a night raven. Caprina, gotish. Also a cheurell skin.
Also goats dung. Caprinella, the herb Dogs-tooth. Caprino, cheese made of
goats milk. Also gotish or rammish. Capriola, a caper or lofty trick in
da^cing A faune, a kid, a calue of a hind, a young hind, a capriole, a sault
or goats leap that cunning riders teach their horses: an herb called
Dogs-tooth. Capriolare, to caper in dancing. Capriolo, as Capriola. Capriolo
delle vite, a with of willowe wherewith they bind and tie up vines, the
twinding of a vine about a pole. Capro, a bucke or he goat. Caprone, a great
goat or bucke, a goats or chamois skin. Also a dull pate, a shallowe sconce.
Captiuare, to captiuate or take prisoner. Capto, taken, caught, it has been
used for Preso. Capucciare, as Cappucciare. Capuccini, an order of friars
called Capussins wearing hoods. Capuccio, a hood or cowle. Capula del capello,
the head of a hat without the brims. Caputo, a kind of sea fish. Cara, a kind
of herb in India, which mingled with milk makes a kind of bread.
Carabattola, a box wherein a shoemaker keeps all his implements, with what
soever belongs to it, upon the right hand of the stool where he works.
Carabaccia, as Carabozzada. Carabo, a kind of fish that is a great enemy unto
the fish Polypo. Carabozzada, a kind of dainty dish or quelquechose used in
Italy. Caracca, a kind of great ship in Spain called a caricke. Carabrone, a
Scarabe fly, a horse fly, a beetle, a hornet. Caraccia, as Characcia.
Caraffa, a kind of viol glass. as Inghistara. Caraffoni, great bottles of
glass. Carafullo, a gull, a noddie, a ninnie. Caragnola, a snaile, a
periwinkle. Caramaio, as Calamaio. Caramellata, worme-eaten, ouerworne, rugged.
Caramote, a kind of shrimps or praunes. Carampana, a little house, a homely
cottage, a mean place. Caramusolina, a kind of ship or hulke. Carantano, a
kind of coin^ or money. Caranto, a green finch. Caraza, the herb called the
Balsam apple. Carattare, to touch or try gold, to refine or make perfect, to
caract. Caratello, a ship of Crete. Also a little cart, wheelebarrow or
tumbrell. A kind of measure for liquid things. Caratte, a kind of fruit in
Italy. Carattero, a character. Carattero, a carter. Carato, the touch or
resining, or loye of gold: a weight or degree called a caract. Caratto, a violl
of glass. Also a certain fee which every man paies in Venice to Saint Mark
that obtaines any suite by law. Paying so much the hundred, it is called in
Rome la Sportula. Caraua, a knot, a pack, a rout or crew of knaves. Carauana,
a carauan: properly a company of men and horses marching together, as they use
to travel in Egypt with camels. Carauella, a kind of ship called a carauell.
Also a kind of pear so called in Italy. Carbonaia, a cole-pit or place where
coals are made. Carbonare, to besmeare as black as coals, to besmother.
Carbonaro, a collier. Carbonata, a carbonada, meat broiled upon the coals, a
rasher. Carboncello, Carboncino, as Carbonchio. Carbonchio, a precious stone
called a Carbuncle: an infirmity so called: a blaine, a pock, a plague sore, a
bile, a botch, a swelling in any part of the body. Also a little cole. Carbone,
any kind of cole: a carbuncle. Carbone aquatico, a cormorant. Carbone di
terra, seacole, or smiths cole. Carboncolo, as Carbonchio. Carcasso, a quiver
for arrows. Carcassone, a kind of course stuff so called, whereof sailers
make frocks. Also a sailers frocke. Carcare, as Caricare. Carcerare, to
imprison, to lay in prison. Carcerato, a prisoner. Also imprisoned. Carcere, a
prison. Carcidonio, as Calcedonio. Carcioffi, hartichocks. Carciocchi,
Carcioffoli, Hartichocks. Carco, laden, charged, burdened, fraighted: Also a
load, a charge, a burden, freight. Carda, as Cardo. Cardamomo, grains of
paradise. Cardare, to card, to teasell wool, or bumbase. Also taken to
backbite or to rail upon any man behind his back. Cardarelle, a kind of
Mushrums or tode stools. Cardassare, to card or teazell wool. Cardassone,
Cardaturo, cards to card wool or flax. Cardassore, a carder of wool.
Cardatore, a carder of wool. Cardellino, Cardello, Carderino, a Gold-finch or
a Thistle-finch. Cardiaca, the herb Motherwoort. Cardinale, a cardinal or
chief man. Cardinalato, the office and dignity of a cardinal, a
cardinalship. Cardinalesimo, the order and function of cardinals. Cardine, the
hinge or hook of a door. Cardine del cielo, heavens axle tree. Cardini del
mondo, the four corners of the world. Cardo, any kind of Hartichock or
Thistle or Teazell. Cardoino, a goldfinch. Cardo santo, the blessed Thistle or
Cardus benedictus. Cardoncello, a little Thistle: but properly an herb growing
on walls and tyles, and is hairie in summer with red stalks, called Groundsell.
Cardone, a great Thistle: the husk of a Chessenut. Also a kind of tree in the
east Indies that grows up straight about a quarter of a mile, and no bigger
then the body of a man, and has but few leaves, of the root whereof they
make wine, honey, vinegar, sugar, with many other things: with the leaves they
cover and tile their houses: it is also called Magnei or Meth. Cardonetta, the
herb stinking weed. Careggiare, as Accarezzare. Careggie, as Carezze.
Carello, a square cushion made of diverse pieces as tailors and beggars use to
sit upon. It is also a hassocke or a mat to stop a privy with. Carena, the
keele or bottom of a ship. It is also taken for a whole ship. Carestia, dearth,
penury, want, scarcity. Carestiolo, penurious, full of dearth, want, or
scarcity. Caretto, a weauers tool or loome whereon he warpeth his web.
Carezzare, as Accarezzare. Carezze, cherishings, friendly entertainments,
flatteries, fawnings, blandisments. Carezzeuole, cherishing, making much of
one, blithe, kind, buckesome, gentle, fawning, blandishing. Carfagna, base,
vncared for, neglected, not set by. Cari, Carowaies. Cariaggio, carriage,
baggage, luggage. Carica, a charge, a burden, a weight, a freight* a lode, a
lading. Carica l'asino, a play at cards which we call lodam. Caricare, to
charge, to lade, to lode, to burden, to freight. to impute, to wrong. Carice,
the herb Sheare-grasse or sedge. Carico, as Carica. Also laden or charged: a
wrong, an imputation, an injury. Cariega, a chair or a sear. Cariglionare, to
chime the bells. Cariglione, a chime of bells. Cariera, a careere of a horse.
Carierare, to careere a horse. Carina, as Carena. Cariola, as Carriuola.
Caristio, a kind of green marble. Also a bird that will fly through the
fire and not burn his feathers. Carita, charity, love, agreement. Caritatiuo,
Cariteuole, charitable, loving. Carlina bianca, a kind of little Thistle
wherewith Charles the great cured the plague, and of him took the name: it is
also taken for a Fullers teazell. Carlina nera, the common Thistle with a long
stalk wherewith they curde milk to make cheese. Carlino, a small money so
called. Also a fish like a Tench. Carlona, plainly, dunstable way, homely
fashion. Alla carlona. Carlotto, a bird called a Curlue. Carme, a verse or a
rhyme. Carmeggiare, to versifie, to rhyme. Carmelle, locks, tuffs, or bundels of
wool. Carminare, to pick, to teaze wool: to card or kembe as they do flax:
to tug, to beat, to bang, to twang, to bumfeagle. Carmosino, as Cremisino.
Carnadino, a carnation color. Carnagione, the hew or color of any bodies
flesh or skin. Carnafau, the brat-getting place or hole of content.
Carnafistola, a kind of drug coming out of India. Carnaio, Carnario, a
lardrie or place to hang and keep meat in. Also a place to cast bones into.
Also a shambles. Carnale, carnal, fleshly. Also lawful issue of children.
Also a weauers tool. Carnali, some part about a weauers home. Carnalita,
carnalitie, fleshlines: alliance in blood. Carname, all manner of flesh meat.
Also carrion or dead carcases. Carnario, as Carnaio. Carne, all manner of flesh
or meat. Carne bouina, di porco, di castrato, di capretto, et cet. beef,
porke, mutton, kidde. Carnefice, a hangman, a heads-man, an executioner.
Carneggiare, to flesh it, to feed upon flesh: to follow the lust of the flesh.
Carnero, Carniero, a net-bag to carry meat in, a hawking bag. Carnesciale,
Carnosciale, as Carneuale. Carneuale, Shroue-tide, shrouing time.
Carneualeggiare, to shroue it, to be merry and revel as they do at
shrouetide. Carnicella, Carnicina, young tender flesh growing upon any sore.
Carnizzo, sinews or threads of parchment to make size or glue. Carnosa, a fish
so called in Rome. Carnosita, carnositie, fleshines. Carnoso, fleshie, brawnie,
full of flesh. Carnosso, flesh and bone together. Caro, dear, beloved,
precious, costly, gratefully, acceptable, leefe. Also caruwaie seed. Also a
dearth or penury. Caroba, Carobola, a fruit or pulse called Fenugreeke:
properly the fruit or tree called the Carob tree, which bears a kind of
sweet cod or husk. Carobia, Carobio, an highway that turns or goes four
ways, a crosseway. Carobo, a carob tree. Carogna, stinking carrion. Carola, a
caroll or a song. Also a kind of dance. Carolare, to caroll, to revel, to
sing and dance, to be merry. Also to make hollow, to worm or moth-eate. Also
to devour or fester with any gnawing sore, to grow to a cuntbotch. Caroliccio,
moth-eaten, worme-eaten, rotten as timber and old wood will be. Carolo, a moth
or timber-worme. Also a cuntbotch or winchester goose. Also dust or powder of
rotten timber used about young children against fleaing. Caromano, a kind of
fine steel so called. Carone, a Carob tree. Carosa, a young maid, a less, a
girl, a wench, a maiden servant. Carosare, to sheare as they do sheep.
Carota, a carot root. Look Cacciar carote. Carouana, as Carauana. Carouelle,
a kind of pear so called in Italy. Carpa, a fish called a carpe. Also a
kind of worm or moth that consumes clothes. Carpano, Carpeno, a fish called a
carpe. Carpare, to creep, to craule. Carpea, a kind of dance used among the
Grecians. Carpentiero, a carpenter. Carpesia, an herb that is poison. Also a
kind of apothecaries ware called cubebs. Carpetta, a carpet for a table.
Carpiccio, a canuasing, snatching, tugging or shifting* for, a snatching from
one. Carpignare, as Carpire. Carpinare, as Carpire. Carpino, the utmost or last
tree of any rank. Also a charm. Also the Horne-beame, Hard-beame, or
Yoke-elme tree. Carpionato pesce, fish that is marlde, as they use at Hampton.
Carpione, a fish called a carpe. Also creepingly. Carpire, Carpisco, Carpito,
to snatch, to filch, to prowle, to pilfer, to shift for, to get by hook or
crook, to clime or grapple for. Carpita, a snatch and away, a filching, a
prowling, a pilfring, a shifting for, an assent, a mounting or climing up.
Carpo, a way, a path, a street or high way. Carpone, groping in the dark in
creeping or crauling sort. Carra, carts, wagons or waines. Carraguoli, a kind
of cockles or mushles. Carraiuolo, Carraro, a carter, a wheel wright or cart
maker, a waine-man. Carrareccia, a slough or rut that the wheel of a cart
makes in soul way. Carratello, a tumbrell, a wheelebarrow, a little weight
called a caract. Carrattiero, as Carraiuolo. Carreccia, as Carrareccia.
Carreggiare, to bring or carry by carts or waines: to lode or pile up in a
cart. Carreggiata, a cart way, or the rut or slough of a cart wheel.
Carreggiatore, as Carrettaro. Carrera, as Cariera. Carretta, a cart, a wagon,
a waine. Carrettare, to cart or carry by cart. Carrettaro, Carrettiero, a
waggoner, a carter, a car-man, a waine-man. Carrettata, a cart full, a cart or
wagon lode. Carretto, the frame of a weauers loome. Also a childs standing
stool to learn to go by. Carriaggio, as Cariaggio. Carriera, a careere of a
horse. Carribo, manner, form, rule, fashion, sort or guise. Carriola, as
Carriuola. Carriolaro, a bearer or maker of Cariuola. Carriuola, a trundle bed,
a wheel barrow, a stool with wheels that children learn to go by, a standing
stool. The root of a horses tail. Also a kind of chair covered, used in
Italy for to carry men up and down by porters, unseen of any body. Carro,
a car, a chariot, a waine, a wagon. Also a pageant. Also a kind of measure.
Carrocchiero, a coche-man, a coche-maker. Carroccia, Carrozza, a caroce, a
coche, a chariot. Carrocciaro, Carrozzaro, a coch man, a coche maker. Carruca,
Carrucola, as Carrucula. Carruccio, a little cart or wheel barrow, but
properly those little carts or sleds as have low wooden wheels as they use
at Bristow. Carrucula, as Carriuola. Also a pullie of a well or ship. Also the
rumpe of a horses tail. Carrucolare, to trundle or roll or draw upon little
wheels or pullies. Carta, all manner of paper, a leaf of a book, a folio, a
card, a map, a type, a playing card. Also a paste board. Cartaccia, filthy,
course, waste paper. Also a play at cards so called. Carta di figura, a cote
card. Carta da nauigare, a sailing card. Carta da straccio, waste paper.
Carta di punto, any other card beside a coat card. Carta pecorina, vellume
made of sheep skin. Carta pergamina, parchment. Carta sciuga, sucking paper
that will bear no ink. Cartaro, a carder, a card maker, a seller or maker of
paper or cards. Carte, cards, leaves of books, maps, paste boardes.
Cartecca, as Colatro. Also Dogs-gras. Carteggiare, to play at cards. Also to
card silk or wool. Cartellante, a chalenger, a libeller against one with
cartels. Cartelle, a pair of tables, writing tables. Also the side posts of a
door. Cartello, a cartell, a challenge, a defiance, a libell. Cartesimo, the
art or play at cards. Carti, carding cards. Cartiero, a carder or player at
cards. Also a carter. Cartilagine, a gristle. Also a little leaf.
Cartilaginoso, gristly, full of gristles. Carto, a card, to card wool withal.
Catoccio, a piece of waste paper to put any thing in. Also a kind of yonike
work in building so called among masons. Also a charge of powder to put into a
cannon or musket. Cartoliere, a paper seller. Cartolina, a little skin or thin
caul over any thing, a little sinewie or gristly piece of flesh. Cartone,
paste board. Caruca, as Carrucula. Caruola, as Carrucola. Caruolo, Taruolo, a
kunt botch. Also a moth or consuming timber worm. Carza, the bramble bush or
black berrie bush. Carzerino, as Cardellino. Casa, a house. Also a family, a
name or blood, a manor, a dwelling place. Also a point in the playing tables.
Also a house or point upon the chesse boorde. Casacca, a cassocke, a frocke, a
horse-mans cote, a long cote. an habitation or dwelling. Casacchino, a ierkin,
a mandillion. Casaccia, a filthy, old, ruinous house. Casale, a hamlet, a
little village, a manor house, a farme-house. Also a dayrie house. Casalengo,
as Casalingo. Casalingo, homely, household, pane casalingo, household bread. Also
tame or belonging to a house or a home. As Colombi casalinghi, house or tame
pigeons. Casamatta, a kind of fortification called in English a Casamat or a
slaughter house, and is a place built low under the wall or bulwarcke, not
arriving unto the height of the ditch serving to skoure the ditch, annoying the
enemy when he enters into the ditch to skale the wall. Casamento, a building,
a house frame, a manor or farm house. Casare, to marry, to wed, to house.
Casata, married, wedded, a household. Casatelle, a kind of paste-meate used in
Italy. Casato, as Casale. Also a house, a stock, a blood or race of a house.
Cascaglio, a kind of course cheese that clownes eat in Italy. Cascante,
falling or pining away, drooping, frail, crased, ready to fall. Cascapeli, a
disease called the shedding of the hair. Cascare, to fall. Cascata, a fall.
Caschetto, a caske or headpiece. Casciare, to squice, to crush, to press, to
wring out. to curd to cheese. Casciaro, Casciaruolo, a cheese-munger, a cheese
maker. Cascina, a country cottage, a houell, a stacke of hay, a shelter of
boughs, a booth, an arbor, a thatcht house. Cascio, Cacio, cheese or a cheese.
Cascio cauallo, a kind of cheese made of mares milk. Casciolo, Caciolo, a
little cheese. Cascio marzolino, a kind of cheese made about Florence.
Cascose, a kind of dride paste-meat used in Itali, as Tagliarini. Casearo, as
Casciaro. Caseo, as Cascio. Caselle, little houses or holes for pigeons.
Casenda, a custom or tole house, where a Princes custom is paid. Casetto, a
little fresh cheese. Caserino, a little, poor house or cottage. Casese,
Cassese, a fellow that keeps home and never goes abroad: a kind of measure.
Casiacca, as Casacca. Casiccio, Cassiccio, a tame Lamb bred up by hand in a
house. Casipula, a little house or cottage. Casma, a flash of fire from heaven,
a lightning. Caso, fate, destiny, chance, lot, fortune, venture, hap,
accoumpt, estimation, reckoning, a casualtie, a case, or manner how a matter
is. Casoche, if so be that, put case, admitting that. Casolana mela, a red or
queen apple. Casolare, a ruinous decayed house, a farm house, any dwelling
tenement or house, a mesenage, a manor house. Casonada, a kind of dressing of
meat so called. Casone, a great house, a country thatcht house. Caspo, a
bush, or shrub, a bramble, a briar, a brake, a thorn. Cassa, a chest, a
coffine, a shrine, a trunk, a hutch, a binne, a chase at tennis, a blot in the
tables. Also a beehiue. Also a case of any thing. Also the stock of a caliuer
or other piece of ordinance, a merchants cashe, or counter. Cassare, to cross
or blot, or casheere out of a book, to cancel, to annull, to put out of
check roll, to discharge, to frustrate, to make void. Cassatura, a crossing
of any account or writing, a casheering. Casse, chests. Also the frames of a
weauers loome. Also cases. Casselletta, a little chest, coffine, or box,
namely such as printers keep their letters in. Also a little basket. Casserta,
a little chest or coffine, a forcer. Cassettare, to enshrine or lay up safe in
some casket. Also a box, a casket, a case, a shrine, a cabinet. Also a kind
of musical instrument. Cassettino, as Cassetta. Cassia, a drugge, called so in
english. Cassiafistula, a pudding pipe fruit, or tree, or Cassia fistula.
Cassiere, Cassero, a casheer, or factor, a purcer, one that keeps a merchants
accoumpts, or money. a trunke-maker. Casso, Cassato, void, or deprived. Also a
body from the neck to the thigh, the stomach. Also crossed, blotted,
casheered out of a book, put out of check-roule, cancelled, anulled,
frustrated, or made void, discharged. Cassone, Cassione, a great chest, or
standard. Casta, chaste, temperate, continent, modest. Castagna, a chestnut.
Castagnato, chestnut color. Castagne, is a piece of iron in likeness of a
scallop shell standing up in the midst of a bit, not used now adays.
Castagnette, little shells, such as they use that dance the canaries, to make a
noise or sound or clack with their fingers. Castagnetto, a grove of chestnut
trees. Castagnuole, little wild chestnuts, a kind of fig so called in Italy.
Castaldia, a bailie-weeke for husbandry. Castaldo, a bailie for husbandry, an
ouerseer of a man's lands. Also a hind, a swain. Castanco, a bay or chestnut
color. Castellania, a castleship, the privileges or territories of a castle.
Castellano, a captain, commander, or keeper of a castle or cittadell, a
keeper, or iailour. Castelletto, a little castle. Also a play that children use
called cobnut. Castello, a castle. Castello della naue, the poupe, or upper
walk of a ship. Castigare, to punish, to chastise. Castigatore, a punisher, a
chastiser. Castigo, Castigamento, a punishment or chastisement. Casto, chaste,
honest, temperate, continent. Castoreo, a kind of oil made of beuer stones,
which stinks. Also a fish that lives on the land, as in the water. Castoria,
idem. Castorio, an herb which makes a man's nose to bleed but touching it.
Castorre, a brock or badger. Also a beuer. Capello di Castorre, a beuer hat.
Castracane, a dog gelder. Also the Indian fitch or goats rue. Castrametare, to
pitch a camp, to encamp, to lodge an army, to pitch tents. Castrametatione,
the pitching of a camp, maine battle, or of tents. Castramento, a libbing, or
a guelding, or a splaying. Castrangola, the herb figwort, or kernel wort.
Castrare, to gueld, to splay, to lib. Castrato, guelded. Also ewe or wether
mutton, a turpe. Carne di castrato. Castratore, a guelder, a libber. Castra
porcelli, a sow-gelde^. Castrense, of or pertaining to a castle or a camp,
vide Corona. Castreo, a fish that never eats other fishes, and can be taken
with no bait. Castro, that part of a ring wherein the stone is set.
Castronaggine, foolishnes, grossenes, simplicity, fondnes, sheepishnes,
foolish, simple, sheepish tricks. Castrone, a gelded man. Also a wether or ewe
mutton. Also a noddie, a meacocke, a cuckold, a ninnie, a gull. Castroneria, as
Castronaggine. Casuale, casual, by fortune. Casualita, casualtie, chance.
Casupula, Casucula, a homely simple poor little house. Catacresi, a figure
when one word is abused for lack of the proper word. Catafalco, Catafarco, a
stage, a scaffold. Also a hearse. Catafratta, a kind of engine of war, a
forte or fence against the assault of the enemy. Catalogare, to register, to
put in record. Catalogna, a country in Spain. Also an Irish rugge for a bed.
Catalogo, a catalogue. Catalessi, a disease, whereof they that be sick have
the holes of their eyes wide and deep, and their body stiff. Cataletto, as
Cadaletto. Catamito, a ganimed, an ingle, a boie hired to sin against nature.
Catanace, an herb used of witches to provoke love and lust. Catapano, the
trial of waights. Catapasma, as Cataplasma. Catapecchie, entanglings,
ensuarings, cranklings, turnings in and out, clifts, crags, holes or dens, or
downfals in rocks or mountains. Catapiromantia, divination by looking in a
glass. Cataplasma, a plaster or cataplasme or green salve laid upon a sore.
Catapotio, a kind of pill to be swallowed for physic. Catapulta, a warlicke
engine to shoot darts or long quarrels out of. Also a sling. Cataputia,
Catapuzza, the herb spurge. Also an instrument which Surgeons use to search the
bladder and to open the passage to urine when it is stopped. Cataratte,
cataracts. Also purculleises. Also sluices, or violent falls of waters.
Cataratto, purculleised or cataracted. Cataro, a close stool. Catarro, a
catarre, or rheum. Catarroso, rheumatike, flegmatike. Catasta, a pile or heap
of any thing, as of billets. Also a measure whereby wood is sold in Florence: a
wood stack. Catastare, to pile up as billets are. Catastato, piled up.
Catastrophe, the end or shutting up of a comedy, or any thing else. Catatrata,
a pair of secret stairs, a backway to d^^^nd. Catedra, Catr^^a, any kind of
chair. Catedrale, cathedral. Catedrante, a professor or reader in a chair.
Categorematico, that is predicable. Categoria, a predicament, an accusation.
Categorico, categoricall, predicable. Catena, any kind of chain. Catenaccio,
a boult or bar of a door. Catenare, to chain or link, to bind in chains.
Catenazzi, a kind of ravenous sea foul. Catenella, a little chain. Caterata,
the lattice of a window, a grate of iron. Also a window in the roof of a
house. Also a trap-dore. Cateratta, as Cataratta, and Caterata, Also a disease
in the eyes called a pin and a web. Caterua, a company, a flock, a crew, a
rout, a shole, a troop, a heard. Cateto, a kind of yonike work in building.
Also a beuie, a knot of any thing of an uncertain number. Cathechizzare, to
catechize, to inform, or teach by mouth. Cathechismo, a catechism, an
instruction or teaching by mouth or by the book. Catino, as Cadino. Cato, a
little water mill. Catoblepa, a serpent in India so venomous that with his
look he kills a man a mile off. Catocchia, the neathermost part of the belly
or pauche. Catochite, a stone so clammie that it will stick to his hands that
does but touch it. Catolico, catholic, universal. Catollo, a logge, a block,
a stock. Also a tormenting instrument called a griper or pincher. Also a sow
of lead, a gad of steel, a lump of metal, or such unwrought piece.
Catorcio, a bolt or stang of a door. Catotta, euen-now, at this hour.
Catrafosso, a deep, hollow, ugly or dreadful ditch, hole, pit, den, trench,
gulf, dungeon or downfall. Catramessi, a kind of perfuming pot or pan.
Catriosso, the bone called the merry thought. Cattabriga, a pickthank, or
pick-quarrell, a busy fellow. Cattaletto, as Cadaletto. Cattanei, such as hold
a princes basin when he washes, and therefore are reputed for noblemen and
such as are chiefly favored of the prince. Cattani, chief or principal
officers among gentlemen, men honored with some place or dignity. Cattare, to
get, to obtain, to purchase, to acquire, to make shift for. Cattaratte, as
Cataratte. Cattasta, as Catasta. Cattiuanza, as Cattiuita. Cattiuare, to
captiuate. Cattiuello, a sly, subtle, crafty, bad, shrewd: fellow.
Cattiueria, knauerie, shrewdnes, craft, badnes, naughtines. Cattiuezza, idem.
Cattiuita, captivity, bondage. Also as Cattiueria. Cattiuo, captive, bond,
bad, naughty, crafty, subtle, sly, caitife, shrewd. Cattiuo di nido, bad,
shrewd, naught or crafty by nature from his youth. Catto, caught, taken,
ouer-reacht. Also a getting or a borrowing. Cattura, a taking, a captiuating, a
captivity, a catching. Catuno, every one, each one. Caua, a seller, a cave, a
vault, a ditch, a furrow, a pit. Also hollow. Caua', Cauai, horses, iades.
Cauadenti, a tooth-drawer. Cauagna, a basket, a flasket, a dosser, a fishers
basket, or haske. Cauagnare, to knead dowe for bread. Cauagliere, a knight or
gentleman serving on horseback: but in fortification it is a mount or
platform of earth built or raised high, either within or without the wall for
to plant great ordinance upon. Also it is taken for a silk worm or spinner.
Also a kind of sea crab or lobster. Cauagliere a cauallo, is a high mount or
platform of earth, raised very high that the artillery upon the same may
shoot over the walls and bulwarks to scour and clear the fields all about.
Cauagliere marino, a sea horse. Caualcare, to ride, to stradle. Caualcare a
ridosso, to ride a horse barebackt. Caualcata, ridden, strided or stradled on.
Also a troop of horse men. Also a riding. Caualcatore, a rider, a horseman.
Caualcatoria art, the art of ryding or horsemanship. Caualcatura, a riding.
Also a hackney. Caualcionare, to ride stradling. Caualcioni, stradling, as men
ride. Caualla, a mare. Cauallaro, a carrier or driuer of horses. Cauelleresco,
knight-like, like a good horseman, cheualrous. Cauellerizza, a princes quierie
or stable where his horses of service are kept and ridden. Cauallerizzo, a
rider of great horses, a professor of horsemanship. Caualliere, as Cauagliere.
Caualleria, horsemen, cauallerie. Also knighthood, cheualrie, horsemanship.
Caualleriato, a knighthood. Caualleressa, a ronciuall woman, a huge bosse of
Billingsgate. Cauallessa, a filthy iadish mare. Cauallette, locusts,
grasse-hoppers. Caualletti, haycocks, or round heaps. Caualletto, a stay, a
prop, a tressell. Also a bedstead. Also a little pretty nagge. Also a sadlers,
or ioyners, or armorers, or such little wooden horse. Caualli, Cauagli, Cauai,
horses. Caualli delle velette, light horses in war that go to discover.
Cauallina, an herb called Horsetaile. Also horse-dung. Caualline, a kind of
biting horse fly. Cauallino, a little nagge, a pretty horse, a tit. Also
greedy, desirous or longing for. Cauallo, a horse in general, a knight in
chesse-play, a kind of fish. Also a beating or whipping of a school boy.
Cauallo di mezza sella, a horse that is but half taught and is not yet come to
his perfection. Cauallo di portante, an ambling nag. Cauallo di rifiuto, a
spare horse. Also a cast horse. Cauallo di posta, a post horse. Cauallo di
trotto, a trotting horse. Cauallo di tutta sella, a horse fully taught, and
ready brought to his perfection, a ready horse. Cauallo di Christo, an ass,
because Christ rode upon an ass. Cauallone, Cauallaccio, a great filthy
horse, a filthy lubberly jade. Cauallotto, a handsome well-fauoured, and well
trust nag. Caualluccio, a poor silly lean horse. Caualocchi, such as are
appointed or hired to receive and gather up money of detters, and are very
importunate and earnest upon them: so termed because it is thought that they
grieve and molest the eyes of them. Cauamento, a digging, a hollownes. Cauana,
a warehouse, a storehouse, a place covered over where they build or keep
little boats or barges in, a shed or shelter. Also a hole or den under ground,
a lurking or starting hole. Cauardina, an upper frocke, a gaberdine. Cauare, to
dig, to make hollow, to get or draw forth, to put off, to take away: to cave,
to mine. Cauar denari, to get money of any thing. Cauar fuori il limbello, to
begin to speak and utter the worst that a man knows against any body. Cauar
la voglia, to have ones longing. Cauar il capello, to put off the hat. Cauar
sangue, to let blood. Cauar macchie, to take or get out stains. Cauatore, a
digger, a pit maker, a miner. Cauatura, a digging, a pit, a grave, a making
hollow, a mining. Cauauena, as Chili. Cauazzana, a cauetzan or head strain.
Caucalida, an herb called bastard Parsley. Caudatarij, such as hold up
princes or bishops trains or trailes. Cauecchia, as Cauicchia. Cauedale, a
man's maine stock, wealth or worth. Cauedano, as Cauezzale. Cauedoni, as
Capifuochi. Also as Capitoni. Cauelle, as Couelle. Cauello, a nipple of a
teate. Also a little stalk or stem. Cauconi, as Capifuochi. Cauerna, a cave, a
den, a cauerne, a grot, a pit, a hole. Cauernoso, full of caves, holes, dens,
pits or cauernes, hollow. Cauestro, as Capestro. Cauestrolo, a wag, a
haltersacke. Cauezza, a halter, a rope, a horse collar, a headstraine. Cauezza
di mero, a brown bay color of a horse. Cauezzale, a fish called a pollard or
a chieuen. Cauezzana, a cauetzan or headstraine. Cauezzare, to halter a horse.
Cauezzone, as Cauezzana. Cauiale, Cauiaro, a kind of salt meat used in Italy
like black soap, it is made of the roes of fishes. Cauicchia, as Cauiglia.
Cauicchiare, to string silk. Also to peg or pin in, to wrench. Cauicchiatore,
a stringer of silk. Cauicchina, a little pin or peg. Cauiglia, any ring or peg
fastened in the wall to tie horses to, any peg or prick, a pin or dibble.
Also taken for a man's yard, the ankle bones of a man's leg. Also a carpenters
tenno^ to fasten timber. Cauigliare, as Cauicchiare. Cauigliatore, as
Cauicchiatore. Cauigliuolo, as Cauiglia. Also a setting stick or dibble. Also
a poking iron or setting stick. Cauillare, to cavil or use deceit, to dodge
to wrangle, to contend. Cauillatione, cauilling, dodging, wrangling,
contention. Cauillatore, a cauiller, a dodger, a wrangler, a contentious
person. Cauilloso, cauillous, dodging, wrangling, contentions. Caula, a kind
of musical instrument. Cauli, as Cauoli. Caulicolo, a piece of architecture
composed of Ionike, of Dorike, and of Corinth work. Cauo, hollow: also a
hollownes. Cauoli, Caoli, Coleworts, Cabbages. Cauoli fiori, a kind of
Colewoorts, called Colli-flowers. Caura, as Capra. Cauretto, a kid or young
faune. Also che^rell or kids skin. Cauriola, as Capriola. Cauriolo, a fawn.
Also a kid. Also a kind of ravenous sea foul. Cauro, the northwest wind.
Some take it for the west wind. Caurone, a cheuron in Armorie. Also a great
goat. Causa, a cause, a means, an occasion. Causale, casual, subject to
chance. Causare, to occasion, to cause. Causatiuo, efficient, that is the
cause. Causia, a broad cap or hat that harvest folk use to keep them from
the sun. Also a kind of hat that the kings of Macedon were wont to wear.
Caustico, costiue, hardbound or stopped in the belly. Cautela, a cautell, a
taking heed, a provision. Cauteloso, cautelous, full of cautles. Cauterio, an
iron which surgeons use to cauterize or sear with: a searing iron.
Cauterizzare, to cauterize or sear or burn with an iron. Cautionare, to
caution, to assure, to pledge, to bail. Cautione, a caution, a surety, a
pledge, a bail, an assurance, a shift or starting hole: an obligation. Cauto,
caute, weary, wise, witty. Cazude, a magistrate in Venice. Cazza, as Caccia.
Also a skoope or a ladle. Cazzaforata, a skimmer. Cazzafrusto, a slinge.
Cazzare, as Cacciare. Cazzarenga, a kind of sparow. Cazzaria, a treatise or
discourse of pricks. Cazzaride, a certain rope in a ship about the misensaile.
Cazzica, an interiection of admiration and affirming, what? gods me, god
forbid, tush. Cazzo, a man's privy member. As Cazcica. Cazzolata, a kind of
country musical instrument without strings. Cazzomarino, a pintle-fish. Cazzo
ritto, a stiff standing prick. Cazzuola, Cazzetta, a little ladle. Also a
bricklayers trowell. Cazzuto, a man that has a prick. Ce, an aduerbe of
place, there, in that place. Also a pronoune primitive of the Dative,
Accusative, and Ablative cases, to us, us, from us. C'e, there is, there is in
that place. Cecca, a minte or coining place. Ceccardola, a philip with the
fingers. Ceccare, to coin, stamp, or mint. Ceccaro, a minter, a coyner, a
monier. Cecare, to blind. Cecatello, somewhat blind. Cechita blindness. Ceci,
fitches, ciches, chichlings, or wild tares. Cecia, the east northeast wind.
Some say the northwest wind. Cecita, blindness. Ceco, as Cieco. Cedere, Cedo,
Cedei, Cesso, or Ceduto, to yield, to give place, to grant, to resign, to
surrender, to afford. Cedebonis, a game at cards so called, as we say are you
pleased? Cedra, a drink of apples called cider. Cedriolo, a little cedar tree,
it has bin used for a cucumber. Cedro, a cedar tree. Also a citron. Cedrone, a
citron, a pomecitron. Also, a kind of wild hen. Cedronella, baulme mint, or
baulmegentle. Cedula, a bill, a schedule, a note, a ticket, an obligation, or
any handwriting, a docket. Cefaglione, leaves of the wild date, which be good
to eat. Cefalica, the humerall or shoulder vain. Cefalo, Cefaro, a fish
called a mullet. Some take it for the fish pollard. Some have in mockery used
it for the bill or beak of a bird: and also for a man's priuities. Cefalu, a
scornful nickname, as we say, a limlifter. Cefaut, a key in music. Ceffare,
to take by the snoute. Ceffata, a box, a clap, or blow given on the mouth.
Ceffo, a snoute, a mussell of any beast. Also a foul called a whitecob, or
seameaw. Cefo, a kind of ape, monkie, or marmoset. Cegolite, a kind of
blackish stone. Ceice, a bird called a kings-fisher. Celabro, as Ceruello.
Celadone, a great skull, helmet, morion, or headpiece. Celaga, a sparrow.
Celare, to hide, to conceal. Celata, a scull, a helmet, a morion, a sallat, a
headpiece. Celeberrimo, most renowned, honorable, or much spoken of. Celebrate,
to celebrate, to solemnize, to make famous, to renown, to frequent.
Celebratione, a celebration, a solemnity. Celebre, famous, renowned, glorious,
noble, honorable, frequented. Celebrita, fame, renown, glory, solemnity,
good name, or report, an honorable assembly. Celebro, as Ceruello. Celega, a
sparrow. Celerare, to speed, to hasten. Celere, hastic, speedy, swift, light,
nimble. Celerita, haste, speed, swiftnes, lightness, celeritie. Celeste,
heavenly, celestial. Also skie-colour, or azure and watchet. Celeste arco,
the rainbow. Celestiale, celestial, heavenly. Celestino, as Celestro.
Celestro, azure, watchet, or skie-colour. Celato, a kind of fish. Celibato,
single, or unmarried life. Celibeuita, an unmarried or single life. Celidonia,
the herb Celandine, swallowwort, or tetter-wort, or silken cisley. Cella, a
cell, a cave, a cabine. Also a seller or butterie. Also those hedge berries
which we call black-berries. Cellaro, a butler, or cell keeper. Cellara^o, an
ouerseer of friars cells. Celo, as Cielo. Celoma, the mariners cry when they
pull up ankre, or hoise sail. Celomare, to cry together as mariners do when
they are earnestly at work. Celone, a testern for a bed. Celoni, course
hangings, or rugged clothes. Celsa, a mulberie. Celsita, loftines, hautines,
height. Celsitudine, highness, nobility, excellency. Celso, a mulberie tree.
Also high, noble or bright. Celsomino, a gelsemine flower. Cembalo, a cymball,
or timbrell. Cementare, to cement, or fasten together. Cemento, cement, a kind
of glue. Cemeterio, a Churchyard, or burying place. Cemmanella, as Cennamella.
Cena, a supper. Also the sacrament of the Lords supper. Cenabrio, cinaber, or
vermilion. Cenacolo, a parior, or a supping place. Cenare, to sap. Cenarella, a
little light supper. Cen', Cene, to us of it, us thereof. Cenci, rags, clouts,
tatters, filthy shreds. Cenciglio, a little rag or clout. Cencio, a rag, a
clout, a tatter. Cencione, Cengione, a ragged, torn, beggarly, rogish
companion. Concioso, ragged, tottered, rent, torn, full of patches, beggarly,
sluttish, filthy. Cencri, certain serpents or snakes that be spotted.
Cendalo, Cendaletti, as Sandalo. Ceneraccio, the ashes that a buck has been
washed with. Also the finest silver that can be tried out with fire. Cenerare,
to cover with ashes, or make of the color of ashes, to cinder. Cenere, ashes,
cinders. Cenere aspersa, the herb Ethiopian mullem. Cenericcio, Cenerino,
ashcolour, or one that lies in the chimnie corner. Cenghia, a girt or cingle.
Cenghiare, to girt or cingle a horse. Cennamella, a kind of musical
instrument. Cennare, as Accennare. Cenno, a nod, a beck or sign or a glance
or touch at any thing, an inkling. Cenobio, a convent or religious house, a or
house where people live in common. Censale, a receiver or customer of fines,
subsidies, tribute, taxes or valuation. Censo, tribute or rent. Also a fee or
rate, or estimation, or valuation of a man's whole substance: a sessing, a
taxing, a rating or a subsidy. Censore, a censor, a judge, a corrector, a high
constable, a doomer, a reformer of policies and disorders. Censuale, by
denumberment or valuation, that is, to be taxed, sessed, rated, fined or
valued. Censura, censure, judgment, reformation, correction. Censurare, to
censure, judge, reform or correct. Centa, a girdle. Centaura, Centaurea, the
herb Centorie. Centauro, a centaure, half a man and half a bull. Centenaia,
hundreds. Centenaio, an hundred or five score. Centesimo, the hundred. Centina,
an hundred. Centinella, a centinell or watch. Cento, an hundred. Centocapi, an
herb that causes him that has it about him to be beloved. Centonaia,
hundreds. Centone, an herb called Mouseare or Chickweede. A kind of quilt
which in war was used for a defense against slings or bows. Also a course
couerlet made of shreds and listes. Also a quilted jack or iacket. Also as
Centoni. Centoni, a mingle-mangle of many kinds of verses gathered from diverse
authors. Cento gambe, as Centopiedi. Centonocchio, the herb Perwinke or
Lesseron. Centonodia, the herb knotgrasse. Centopiedi, a fish having an
hundred feet. Also a worm called a palmer having an hundred feet.
Centoplicare, to multiply by hundreds. Centoplicato, an hundred fold.
Centorio, the herb Moniewort or two penny grass: Some have taken it for
Clarie or Centorie. Centouirale, of an hundred men. Centro, the center or
middle point of any thing. Also the depth. Centrone, the herb Clarie. Centura,
a girdle. Centurare, to gird or compass about. Centurino, a little girdle, a
waste band. Centurione, a captain of an hundred men. Centurola, a little
girdle or garter. Also a horn book for children to learn to read hanging at
their girdle. Cepea, some take it for sea Purslaine, and some for Brookelime.
Cephalea, a long continuing bead^^^. Cephalica, as Cefalica. Cephalo, as
Cefal^. Cepo, a wild beast or monster having feet like a man. Cepocapite, or
Cepite, a stone that does reject all whitenes. Cepola, a kind of cheese cake.
Ceppa, a kind of chirping sparrow. Ceppo, a stock, a block, a log. a branch,
a graffe-fetters, stocks, shackles, manicles, gives boults. Also the stock,
blood, house, family or pedigree of any man. Also the trunk of a tree. A
footetrap. Also a stock of a plane, and of a pistol and such. Cera, wax of any
kind. Also fare, cheer, countenance, look or aspect. Ceraginoso, like wax
or full of wax. Ceraiuola, a woman that sells wax candles, or has care of
wax candles in a nunnerie. Also Candlemas day. Ceraiuolo, he that has the
looking to the wax lights in a convent. Also a wax chandler. Ceramela, a pipe
or bagpipe. Ceramento, a waxing together. Cerare, to wax or to seal up.
Ceraro, a wax chandler, a maker of wax. Cerasciuolo, a wine between white
and claret, as we say pallet wine. Cerase, all manner of cherries. Cerase
d'inuerno, a lote tree or nettie tree. Cerasta, a kind of snake or serpent,
said to have horns as a ram. Cerasuolo, as Cerasciuolo. Ceraunia, Ceraumo, a
kind of blackish and bluish stone, which put in vinegar and salt peeter will
in time grow to have a bright glittering star in the center of it, and taken
out will just in so long time lose it again. It is said to fall out of the
clouds, and who wears it about him cannot be drowned. Some have taken it for a
kind of glittering pearl. Cerauro, as Ceraunia. Cerbiatto, the calfe of a
stag, but properly a staggard or a brocke. Cerbia, a h^nd of a stag. Cerbio, a
stag or heart. Cerbottana, as Ciarbattana. Cerca, a search or inquiry. Also
touching, concerning, about. Cercamento, an inquiry, a seeking, an inquest.
Also a combat, a fight, a fray. Cercare, to seek, to require, to enquire.
Also to fight, to strive, to contend. Cercare partito, (...) seek
entertain^^^^. Cercari, as Cercati. Cercati, searchings, enquirings, devises.
Cercatore, a seeker, a searcher. Cerceglio, a cir^^et, coronet, wreath,
chaplet, or garlande about the head, a necke-lace, an ear-ring. Also a
hoopering or carkanet, or billiment, or border that women wear upon their
heads. Cercegne, a kind of ravenous foul. Cerceuolo, a kind of small ducke,
called a Teale or a wigin. Cerchiare, to hoope, to circle, compass or enuiron
about. Cerchiaro, a hooper, a cooper. Cerchiello, Cerchietto, as Cerceglio.
Cerchij, Cerci, circles in a horses hoof. Some take them for another disease
also about the feet. Cerchio, a hoope, a circle, a chaplet, a garland. Also a
troop of men, a round of men, a circuit, used also for a tavern or alehouse
bush. Cercolare, round, circular, sphericall. Cercone, the turning or becoming
sower of wine, beer or ale by thunder or heat, a sudden turning of wine.
Cercopiteco, a marmoset or monkie. Cereale, pertaining to the gods of harvest
or to harvest. Also smooth as wax. Cerebro, as Ceruello. Cerebattana, as
Ciarbattana. Cerefoglio, the herb tooth-picke or cheruill. Ceregia, a cherie.
Ceregio, a cherie-tree. Ceremony, as Cerimonie. Cereo, a pale yellow like
wax. Ceretanarie, babbling, foolish, skoulding tricks. Ceretanare, to play the
prating mountibancke or idle iester. Ceretano, as Ciaratano. Cerfoglio, as
Cerefoglio. Cerica, Ceriga, a shaven pate or nole, a shaueling. Cerico, Cerigo,
a clerk or clergy man, a shaueling. Cerigone, a kind of wild beast in
India with a great bag under his belly, wherein in times of danger he carries
his young ones. Cerillo, a kind of dainty wine so called in Rome. Cerimonia, a
ceremony, a complement. Cerimoniale, ceremonial, ceremonious or pertaining to
them. Cerimoniare, to use ceremonies or complements. Cerimonioso, ceremonious,
full of ceremonies or complements. Cerino, Cerigno, a kind of color like
yellow wax. Cerio, Ceri, a taper, a torch of wax: wax sises. Ceriolo, a fish
called a ruff. Cermisone, a gull, a fool, a bold bayard, a ninnie. Cerne, a
fish called a ruff or gilt head. Also as Cernita. Cernede, as Cernite,
Cernere, cerno, cernei, cernu^o, to discern, to pick, choose or cull out, to
sise, to bolt. Cernire, as Cernere. Cernicchio, a picker or culler or deuider
of any thing, but properly a bodkin, which women use to part their hair on
their heads withal, a crisping wire. Cernita, Cernitura, a choice, a culling
or election or picking out, a sifting out. Pane di cernitura, ranged bread.
Cernite d' Italia, the choice trained soldiers in Italy. Cernitore, a chuser,
a culler. Cero, Zero, a sipher of naught, a null^, as Cerro. Ceroto, Cerotto, a
fear cloth. Cerretta, basebroome, woodwaxen, greening weed or diers weed
Cerro, the tree like an oak that bears maste, called the holme oak. It is
also taken for a bush of hair. Also a fish called a cakrell. Certame, a
conflict, a fight, a combat, a contention, war, strife. Also the prize for
which men strive in any bod^l^e exercise. Certanita, certainty. Certano,
certain, sure. Certatore, a combatant, a contender, a striuer. Certezza,
certainty, assurednes. Certificare, to assure, to warrant, to certify, to
ascertaine. Certificatione, a certificate or assurance. Certificatore, an
assurer, a certifier. Certificato, a passeport or certificat. Certo, certain,
certes, true, fast, firm, sure. Also surely, truly, verily, indeed, sycker.
Certosa, a charterhouse, an order of friars or munkes so called. Certosino,
Certogiano, a Carthusian, one of the Carthusian order. Certusino, Certugino, as
Certosino. Cerua, a hind or she heart, a Do. Ceruato, of the color of a
stagge, a speckled dun or russet. Ceruellaccio, a mad fantastical wit.
Ceruellato, a kind of dry Sausage. Ceruelli^ra, a fond fantastical humorous
^end. Ceruellino, a fond humorous wit. Ceruello, brain, wit, conceit,
discretion: Also the brain of any creature: the pith, the head. Cerue^to,
ch^mois or bucks-skin. Ceruice, the hinder part of the neck, the shoulder.
Also the neck or crest of a horse. Ceruicuto, thick necked. Also intractable,
or stiff necked. Ceruiero, as Lupo ceruiere. Ceruina pelle, a stagges or bucks
skin. Ceruino, of a stagge or heart. Ceruito, a calfe or staggard. Cerugia, the
Art of Chirurgerie. Cerugico, Cerusico, a surgeon. Ceruleo, sky color,
azure or watched. Ceruo, a heart or stagge. Ceruosa, Ceruogia, the drink Beer
or Ale. Ceruogiaro, Ceruosaro, a beer brewer. Cerussa, as Cirossa. Cesana, a
kind of swan. Cesarane, a kind of linkes or chain work that goldsmiths use
in Italy. Cesare, a proper name. Also an Emperor. Cesareo, Imperial,
maiesticall. Cesca, used of Bocace for Francesca. Cesendello, a lamp. Cesila,
Cesilla, a swallowe. Cesio, a kind of color that painters use. Cesoie, a pair
of sheares or cezers. Cesone, a kind of ducke. Cespite, Cespo, as Cespuglio.
Cespuglio, a^bush, a shrub, a brake, a briar, a bramble, or a busket. Cessare,
to cease, to leave, to relinquish, to linne, to give over, to stint. Cessio
occh^o, a kind of whale eye, as some horses have. Cessione, a cession, a
yielding, a resignation, a ge^ing place. Cessite, a kind of whitish stone.
Cesso, a privy, or close stool. Also a scroule of paper. Also yielded. Look
Cedere. Cesta, a basket, a flasket, a panni^^. Cestaro, Cestaio, a
basket-maker. Cestaruolo, a basket-bearer, or a porter. Cestella, a Seamsters
worke-basket, a little basket. Cesti, foiles, wa^^lers or cudgels that fenters
use in schools. Cestino, a kind of measure of liquid things. Cesticillo, a
wispe, a wase or wreath of clonts or straw which women use on their heads to
carry things upon. Cesto, a basket, a pannier, or a flasket. Also a bush or
shrub. Also a kind of heavy flaile, a kind of weapon. Also a marriage girdle
suil of studs, that the husband gave his wife, and guirded her with the first
day, and at night took it from her again: poets speak much of them. Cestone,
Cestotta, a great basket. Cestopilotto, a kind of basket so called. Cestra, a
battle^xe, or poleaxe. Cestuto, bushie, thick, leauie, shrubbie. Cesura, the
cutting, breaking, or falling of a verse in reading it. Cetara, Cetarella, a
citterne, a gitterne, a crowd, a kit. Ceta, as Ceto. Also a hatchet. Cetacei
pesci, whale-fishes. Cetaredo, a player upon a citterne or gitterne. Cetarei
pesci, pond or poole-fishes. Cethera, Cetera, Cetra, as Cetara. Ceterare, to
play upon a citterne. Ceteratore, as Cetaredo. Cetola, a fish, in latin, faber
marinus. Ceto, a whale, or such other great fish of the sea. Cetrino, a
pome-citron, a citron. Cetro, a scepter, a mace of dignity. Cetrone, a citron,
a pome-citron. Cetronella, an herb called balme-mint. Cetruolo, a little
citron, a cucumber. Cetta, a hatchet. Also an axe. Cettina, a little hatchet, a
chopping-knife. Cettolino, as Cettina. Ceualo, as Cefalo. Ceuera, a fish called
a mullet. Ceuole, oinions, skallions, ciues, or ciuets. Chalcide, a kind of
serpent or lizard. Also a kind of fish that hisseth like a serpent. Chalco, a
little greek weight, half a carrect. Chalta, as Calta. Cham, a persian word,
signifying a great Lord or Prince, or a mighty one. Chambrone, the shrub we
call priuet, or prime print tree. Chaos, a chaos, a confused lump, a formelesse
mass, a mishmash. Characcia, or Guado, or Pastello, the herb called woad,
good for dyers. Charate, a precious stone like crystal, good against the
dropsy, and makes him eloquent and well spoken that wears it about him.
Charita, as Carita. Charta, as Carta. Che, that, which, then, than, what, when,
because, for, to the end, except, saving, but, but only, who, wherefore, a
nothing, whereof, so that, the which, in the which, in whom, what? what thing?
since, since that, for so much as, nothing, no whit, least, least that, a
somewhat. Chebuli, a kind of mirobalane plum. Checcalare, to cackle as a hen.
Ch'eche none, a manner of speech used very often in talk, as we say, I know
not how it came to pass, but soon after, but presently. Che che, what soever,
what thing so ever. Che chi, that who, that whosoever. Chec'e? Che ci e? what
news? what is there? Che domin? what a gods name? what a good year? Che e del
fatto tuo? what becomes of thee? how do thou? Cheggiere, as Chiedere, or
Chieggere. Chel, Chello, that he, to the end that he. Chele, the cleyes or
forepart of the celestial sign Scorpio. Chelidonia, a kind of stone sound in
a swallow, or a swallow. Also a kind of serpent. Also the herb Celandine the
great. Some take it for fig-wort, or pilewort, or tetterwort. Also a west
wind. Chelindro, Chelidro, an adder, or water snake. Chella, that she, to the
end that she. Chelonia, or Chelonitide, as Chelonite. Chelonite, a precious
stone like unto a tortoise shell and taken out of a tortoise head, good against
storms. Chemele, Chemite, a kind of stone like iuorie, as hard as marble, the
bodies buried in them are never consumed. It is said that Darius king of Persia
was buried in a tomb made of such stones. Chemerison, a kind of salt for
alchimists. Chema, a greek measure of liquid things. Chene, a kind of stone
found in the eye of an old Heart, good against poison. Chenero, a kind of snake
or serpent. Chenica, a greek dry measure. Che no? Che non? I hold not, what
will you lay not? not so. Che non, if a verb follow, then, least, least that,
that not. Also in any comparison if a second verb follow it affirmith, and
signifies the^, as for example, Il sauio sa piu che non sa il ma^to, the wise
man knows more then the foul. Chente, how much? how? how long? how far?
Also, as, as much, as well. Also a kind of fine linen cloth. Chente fi fia,
how much soever it be. Cherere, chero, chesi, chiesto, as Chiedere. Chergna, a
fish called a ruff or goldhead. Cherica, as Chierica. Chericato, as
Chiericato. Cherico, as Chierico. Chernite, a stone like Iuorie. Chero, I
require, I request, I seek, I demand, I sue for. Chersea, as Chersidro.
Chersina, a land snaile. Chersidro, a serpent that lives as well in the water,
as on the land. Cherubino, a Cherubin. Chesta, Chesto, used for questa.
Chetare, to appease, to assuage, to pacify, to still, to put to silence, to
quiet, to calm, to allay, to whusht. Chete, a kind of stinging waspe.
Chetichegli, Look Fare a chetichegli. Cheto, whusht, still, quiet, silent,
calm, gentle. Chi, who, which, he the which, who that, who? Chi chi, Chi che,
whosoever, what man soever. Chia, a white earth which gives an amiable color
to the whole body being applied unto it. Chiacchiara, a chatte, a prittle
prattle. Chiacchiarare, to chat, to prate, to prattle, to babble, to tittle
tattle, to skould. Chiaccherata, as Fagiolata. Chiaccheria, Chiacchere, a
prating, a prattling or tittle tattle, a babbling. Chiaccherone, a pratler, a
chatter. Chiacco, a letteise window, a drawing window, a tooting, lurking or
prying hole. Also a snare, a spring, a ginne. Also a smacking with the tongue.
Chiacchi bichiacchi, higgledepiggle, heltershelter, tut, tushe. Also prating,
meerie lads or tatling companions that will utter all they know. Chiaga, a
kind of ravenous water foul. Chiaggia, a sink, a gutter, a common shore to
conuaie filth away. Chiamare, to call, to hight, to na^^, to cla^^e, to inuoke,
to adiourne. Chiamore, a clamor, a calling, a cryers call. Chiana, a standing
poole. Also a watring place. Also a carpenters plane. Chianare, to plane, to
make smooth. Also to stand or grow to a poole. Chianca, a shambles, a
butcherie, a slaughter house. Also a torturing place. Also a pauement, a floor
that is planked or paued. Also a trap for birds. Chiancara, as Chiaranzana.
Chiancasano, a kind of horse-shoe for a horse that has a tender hoof, used
for horses that have false quarters, being shorter on the one side then on the
other. Chianetta, a helmet, a caske, a head piece. Chiantare, as Schiantare.
Chiappa, an earthen pan, a dripping pan. Also a buttocke, a bum. Also a ship, a
piece of timber. Also a step of a ladder or stairs. Chiappare, as Acchiappare.
Chiappe, the buttocks or hips. Also splints or rugged stones divided by nature,
clifts, crags. Also a kind of tyle. Also the part of a knife that goes into
the handle. Also the breech of a cannon or musket. Chiappedi bue, a kind of
horse-shoe. Chiappeggiare, to clap or beat on the buttocks: to pinch by the
hanch. Chiappeggiata, a clap, a stroke or pinch on the buttocks or hanch.
Chiappetine, little buttocks or hips. Chiappole, foolish, wanton, riggish
wenches. Also a huddle or a bead roll. Chiappone, that which is called the
port in the mouth of the bit. Chiara, clear, thin, apparent, bright,
shining, famous. Chiara del'vuouo, the white of an egg. Also according to
Alchimists quick silver. Chiaramella, a kind of musical instrument.
Chiaranzana, a kind of leap, or hopping or dancing, as the Alman leap.
Chiarea, a kind of sauce used in Italy made of grains. Also the herb
Clarie. It is properly wine made of spices called Ipocrasse. Chiarello,
chiaretto, claret wine. Also somewhat clear. Chiarezza, cleerenes, thinnes,
brightness, light, shining. Chiarificare, as Chiarire. Chiarire, Chiarisco,
Chiarito, to clarify, to clear, to rarifie. Also to resolve, to put out of
doubt. Chiarita, as Chiarezza. Chiaro, clear, apparent, certain, resolved,
out of doubt, thin, rare. Also bright, shining, noble famous. Chiarore, as
Chiarezza. Chiaroscuro, a kind of dark puke color. Chiassare, to spot, to
blur, to dash with dirt. Also to follow whore houses. Chiassetto, Chiassolino,
a little lane, a little alley: a little bawdie house. Chiasso, a narrow lane,
or an alley where poor folks dwell: an out nooke in any town. Also a
brothell, a stews, or bawdie house, or vaulting house. Chiattare, to squat on
the ground, to grouell. Chiatto, a squatting on the ground, grouelling. Also a
toade. Chiaualli, a kind of wooden boultes or keys to lock or open doors.
Chiauare, to lock with a key: but now a days abusiuely used for Fottere.
Chiauardi, a disease in a horse. Chiauarina, as Chiauerina. Chiauarino, as
Chiauaro. Chiauaro, a locke-smith: a porter or keykeeper: an usher.
Chiauaruola, the name of a principal wheel or spring in a clock. Chiauatore,
a locke-smith, a locker. Also as Fottitore. Chiauatura, a lock with a key.
Also as Fottitura. Chiauattiere, as Chiauaro. Chiaue, a key. Also the root of
a horses tail. Also a clif in music. Chiaueca, a mother, a dame. Also a
beldame. Chiauellare, to fumble or grope about a keyhole, or woman's priuities.
Chiauesca, Chiaueuole, Chiauante, of like, or pertaining to a key, or locking.
Look Chiauare. Chiauerina, a little spear or lance, or pike staff.
Chiauichetta, a gutter or pipe to conuaigh water. Chiauicola, the chanelbone of
the throat, the neckbone or crawbone. Chiauistello, a lock for a door. Also a
bolt. Chiauisterio, an occupying house, a baudy house. Chiazzare, as Chiassare,
Chiazzate, as Chiazze. Chiazzato, spotted with diverse colors. Chiazze, spots
of dirt, or mire. Chicchera, a flurt or fig with ones fingers in derision or
contempt. Chicchirillare, as Anfanare. Chichi, Chi che. Look Chi. Chiedere,
Chieggio, Chiedo, Chiesi, Chiesto, to require, to request, to ask, to demand,
to sue for. Chiedibile, that may be required. Chiega, the lining of a garment.
Chiegge, splints, shiuers, riuings or spalls. Also the ridges of a hill.
Chieggere, as Chiedere. Chiendena, a nit. Chiendinoso, nittie, lousie. Chiepa,
as Chieppa. Chieppa, a kind of fish called in latin Lupea, that for desire of
a vain in a tunnies iawe, kills him. Chiepino, Chieppino, a dissembling
hypocritical puritan. Chieresia, the whole body of the clergy. Chierica, a
priests shaven pole or pate, or nole. Chiericante, clarkelike. Also perching,
crowing, or prating over one. Chierica rasa, a shaven pole, a shaueling.
Chiericato, a benefice, or ecclesiastical living. Also shaven or notted, a
clearks living, the clergy. Chierico, a clerk, a priest or religious man, a
clergy man. Chieri chetti, little nouices, or young clerks. Chierigni, a
kind of fish. Chiero, as Chero. Chiersi, a kind of duck, wigin, or mallard.
Chiesa, Chiesia, a church, a temple. Chiesetta, Chiesicciuola, a little church.
Chiesta, a request, an inquiry, a demand, a suite, a vaunt or vye in gaming.
Chiesto, required, asked, demanded, entreated, sued for, requested. Chietarie,
dissembling, hypocritical tricks. Chieti, dissembling hypocrites. Chietino, an
hypocritical Puritan. Chietinare, to dissemble hypocriticallie, to play the
hypocrite. Chieuegli, a gull, a sot, a ninnie. Chili, the mother of all other
veins in our bodies, called Caua vena. Chilo, a white juice coming of the
meat digested in the stomach, which engendered the blood. Chilosi, Chilosetti,
a kind of ravenous water foul. Chimedio vespertino, as Draconite. Chimere,
foolish toys, fond imaginations, castles in the air. Also monsters.
Chimerino, a circle, whereto when the sun comes the days be at the
shortest, winterly. Chimerizzare, to build castles in the air, to rave.
Chimia, the art of alchimie. Chimicho, a chimicke or an alchimist. Also
chimicall. Chimista, a chimike or an alchimist. Chimo, the phisicions take it
for the secon^ digestion in the liver. Chimosi, a moisture in the skin
enclosing the eyes. Chimus, a kind of fish that foreseeth storms, and then
hides himself under some stone. China, a fullers teazell, or Venus basin.
Chinance, Chinanche, the squinancie. Chinare, to incline, to stoop, to bend,
to make a curtsie, to bow, to lowte low. Chinea, a hackney, a guelding, an
ambling or pacing nag. Chineuole, bending, enclining, stouping. Chino, bended,
bowed low, stouping or lowting, etc. Also a reverence, a curtsie. Also down
hanging as a hill. Chinoceto, a precious stone good to expel evil spirits.
Chintana, a quintan, a sport used in the country, a running at the ring. Chio,
a skriche-owle. Chiocca, a lock or handful of wool, a bush or lock of hair.
Also a cowring or squatting down. Also a clocking hen. Chiocca a chiocca, by
locks, by peecemeale, in number and quantity. Chiocciare, to whiske or yarke
as a whip does. Also to cowre or squat down, to reduce into locks or bundles.
Chioccare, as Chiocciare. Chioccia, a clocking or sitting hen, a brood hen or
a clucke hen. Also hoarse in the throat. Chiocciare, to clock, sit or brood
as hens do. Also to be hoarse. Chioccio, hoarse or snorting. Chiocciola, a
cockle, a scallop or any shell fish, but properly those black snailes with
horns and without shells. Chiodare, to nail up. Chiodaro, a maker of nails.
Chiodaruolo, a tenter man. Chiodo, a nail, a spike. Chioma, the whole hair.
Also the maine of a horse. Also a peruwig. Chiomazzuoli. Look Far
chiomazzuoli. Chioppa, a dripping pan. Also a splint or spall of some broken
stone. Chioppare, to clack or snap with ones fingers as barbers use, or such as
dance the canaries. Chioppo, a clacke, a snap, a clicking with ones fingers
ends. Chiosa, a gloss, an interpretation or exposition. Chiosare, to gloss upon
any thing, to interpret, to expound. Chiasatori, glosers, expounders. Chioso,
molten, thawed. Chiostra, Chiostro, a cloister or enclosure. Chiostrare, to
cloister up, to lock up, to coope or shut up, to pen up, to immure. Chiotta,
close, squat, hushed as a hen over her chickens, lurking, secret. Chioua, a
kind of great weight in Italy. Chiouara, tenters for to dry and stretch
clothes upon. Chiouarda, the spokes of a cart or wheel. Chiouardo, a swelling
and vlcering at the cronet of a horses hoof, proceeding of a hurt in the foot
by a nail, or such like accident. Chiouaro, Chiouaruolo, a tenter man or
keeper of tenters. Chiouiale, a sleeuelesse garment. Chiouo, any kind of
nail, peg, tacke or spike. Also a disease in the eyes. Chiouola, the knee pan
of any creature. Chiozza, a sluice to let out waters at, a water gate. Chipassa,
the name of a galliard. Chirade, ruptures or chaps in the hands and feet.
Chiragra, the gout in the fingers or hands. Chiribizzare, as Ghiribizzare.
Chiribizzo, as Ghiribizzo. Chiricoccola, a wagtaile. Chirografo, an obligation
or bill of ones hand, a bond for any debt. Chiromante, a palmester, a diuiner
by the palm of the hand. Chiromantia, palmestrie. Chironie. Look^ Vlcere
chironie. Chiroteca, a flower called our Ladies glove. Chiruca, a little beast
with ears, skin, tail, and shape like a mouse, having under his belly a great
bag, wherein he carries his young ones. It does much hunt after hens and such
poultrie: but there be two sorts of them, one bigger than another, and
somewhat like a fox with a great tail. Chirugia, the art of chirurgerie.
Chirugico, a surgeon. Chitarra, a gitterne, or such instrument. Chistetto, a
kind of deep measure of dry things used in Italy. Chiu, has been used for
Piu. Chiuca, as Chiruca. Chiudara, a turner^ or ioyners, or sadlers tool.
Chiudere, Chiudo, Chiusi, Chiuso, to shut, to lock, to close, to make fast, to
pen up, to coope up, to enclose, to cloister. Chiudenda, Chiuditura, an
enclosure, a close, a park, a ground impaled, any locking or shutting. Also a
lock, a padlocke or horselocke. Chiunque, Chiunche, whosoever. Chiusa, a
little hole, a little shop, an vnderstall, a water sluice. Chiusarello, a bird
so called. Chiuso. Look Chiudere. Also a close, an enclosure, a park, etc.
Chiusura, Chiuco, as Chiudenda. Chizza, a gill, a gicksie, a minx, a trull, a
strumpet. Also old and withered. Chizzuola, a whitepot, a pot pudding. Choe, a
Greek measure of liquid things. Choro, a quire, a company, a chorus. Also a
musical instrument. Chorista, a querister, or singing boy in a church. Chrich,
a creaking noise. Also a clicking, a snapping or lirping of the fingers, as
they use that dance the canaries. Chrisantemo, an herb so called. Chrisocollo,
as Crisocollo. Chrisi, the conflict of nature and sickness. Chrisolito, a
chrisolite stone. Chrisopazzo, a kind of precious stone. Christalloide, as
Cristalloide. Christallina. Look Tunica. Christeo, a glister. Christianesimo,
Christendom, Christianisme. Christianita, Christianity. Christiano, a
Christian, one professing Christ. Christo, our savior Christ. Chronica, a
history or chronicle. Chronichista, a chronicle writer. Chronico, idem. Ci, an
aduerbe of place coming with a verb. there, in that place, here, in this
place. Also a pronoune primitive of the dative, accusative, and ablative cases,
to us, us, from us. Cia, a bird called a yellow hammer or golden hammer, or a
yowlring. Ciabatta, an old ^^erworne shoo. Ciabattare (...) ^lout, to tacke or
cobble shoes. Ciabattarie, rascallie foolish things, paultrie, not worth an
old shoo, trash. Ciabattinesco, rascally, foolishly, cobbler like. Ciabattino,
Ciabattaro, a cobbler, a clouter, a sowter. Ciacco, a hog, a bore or swine. Also
a hogs stie, a slouenly hoggish churlish fellow, a gormand or glutton.
Ciaffare, to catch by the shoulders, to snatch violently, to arrest suddenly.
Ciaffo, a catchpole, a base sergeant. Also the bung hole of any but or pipe of
wine. Ciagola, a chough, a cornish chough. Cialdaro, a wafrer or wafer maker.
Cialde, bread made with honey, sugar bread. Also wafers or simnels. Also flakes
of snow. Cialdonaro, Cialdaro, a wafer maker. Cialdoni, wafers, long wafers
that are rouled up. Ciallone, a kind of canopie, sparuis or covering.
Cialtrare, to chat, pratile, brabble, babble, prate, tattle. Cialtrone, a
babbling, prattling, tatling fellow. Ciamarra, a habit or garment worn over a
gown as graduats wear in universities. Ciambaglione, a caudle or drink made
for a sick man. Ciambellaro, a maker of wafers, simnels or buns. Ciambelle,
little manchets, rowles, buns or cakes of bread. Also wafers. Ciambelotto,
Ciamelotto, chamblet. Ciamberta, a fish called in Latin Zygena. Ciambetta, as
Ciamberta. but properly when the horse does hold up his forefoote on the same
side that he is to make his turn. Ciambudelli, a kind of pudding like our
haggas or liuering. Ciamorro, a disease in horses called the mourning of the
chine, issuing at the nosthrils. Ciampoline, a kind of dainty pear in Italy.
Cianciafera, a durtie draggletaile, a filthy slut, a dunghill queen. Also
dung. Cianciare, to chat, to prattle, to babble, to tattle, to scolde, to play
the mountibanke. Cianciatrice, Cianciatore, a babbler, a tatler, a chatter, a
pratler, a scould, a tittle tattle. Ciancie, Cianciume, chattings, bablings,
tatlings, fables, tales, leasings. Ciancione, a babbler, a tatler, a pratler, a
flattring song. Cianeo, a kind of bright blewe or azure color. Cianfrogna,
gibrish, pedlars french, roguish language, fustian tongue, prittle prattle.
Cianfrognare, to speak cianfrogna. Cianfrognone, one that speaks fustian,
pedlers french or gibrish, a pratler. Cianfrone, as Zanfrone. Cianfrusaglia,
rascallie people, a huddle, a gallimaufrie, a hotchpoch of absurdities.
Cianfrusagliume, idem. Ciangola, a wooden tray. Also a basen or a washing
bowl. Also a pisse-pot or a pan for a close stool. Ciangolare, as
Cinguettare. Ciano, a flower called blew-bottles. Ciantolo, Ciantolino, a
little scantling. Ciaperone, a french-hood or bonnet, a lettuce cap. Ciappola,
a gold smiths tool. Ciarabattana, as Ciarbattana. Ciaramella, a bagpipe. Also
a chatting, a prattling or a babbling. Ciaramellare, to play music, to fiddle,
to be blithe, as Cinguettare. Ciaramiglia, as Ciaramella. Ciaratano, a
mountebanke, a pratler, a tatler, a babbler, or a foolish prater. Ciarbattana, a
trunk to shoot pellets with ones mouth. Also a kind of mortar, chamber or
short bumbard. Ciarla, Ciarleria, a chat, a prattle, a tittle tattle, or
scoulding. Ciarlare, as Chiacchiarare, as Cianciare. Ciarlatore, Ciarlatano, as
Ciaratano. Ciarliere, as Ciaratano, or Ciancione. Ciarlone, as Ciancione.
Ciarma, a charm. Ciarmare, to charm. Ciarmatore, a charmer. Ciarpa, a
scarffe. Also any filth, trash, rabble, matter, or stuff. Also a flurt, a
slut, a baggage, a trull, a minxe, a gill, a gickesie, a queen. Ciarpame,
trash, rifraffe, baggage things, pelf, things of no worth, luggage.
Ciarperaccia, a filthy souterly ragged queen, a flurt, a driggled ragle.
Ciascuno, echone, every body, every one. Ciascheduno, Ciastuno, as Ciascuno.
Ciato, Ciatho, a measure to sell oil in. Ciauarello, a kid, a cheurell.
Ciauariare, to vary, to waver, to be inconstant, to rave. Ciauariamento,
wavering, inconstancy, mutabilitie, rauing in sickness. Ciauattare, to play the
cobbler to patch old shoes. Ciaula, a bird called a chough. Ciaulella, a little
breakefast or nunchions. Cibaglie, any food, victuals or meat. Cibali, the
name of an herb. Cibare, to feed, to sustain, to find with food. Cibario,
a larderie or place where meat is kept. Cibatta, as Ciabatta. Cibattone. as
Busbacone. Cibecca, an owl, an owlet. Cibega, a kind of boys play in Italy.
Cibo, Cibi, food, sustenance, or meat. Cibibi, dried raisins of the sun.
Cica, as Boccata. Cicada, a Grasshopper: also a Cricket. Cicadestra, a kind of
noisome waspe. Cicala, as Cicada. Cicalaccia, a common skould or pratler.
Cicalare, as Cianciare. Cicalarie, Cicalamento, as Ciancie. Cicalata, a
prattling noise, a prating. Cicalatore, Cicalone, as Ciancione. Cicalatrice,
Cicaliera, as Cianciatrice. Cicaleccio, Cicalino, a prattling, a babbling, a
tittle tattle, a slim-slam tale. Cicatrice, a skarre, a mark or sign of a
sore or hurt. Cicatrizzare, to cicatrice or close up a hurt, to scarifie.
Cicardola, a phillip or flurt with the fingers. Ciccantona, an old, cast,
forsaken, ouerridden whore. Ciccune, a slood-goose or a wild goose. Cice, as
Ceci. Cicerbira, a Sowthistle. Some take it for the Hares-Lettuce. Ciceri,
Cicerchia, as Ceci. Cicerlandia, a boys play used in Italy. Cicigna, a kind of
serpent or snake. Cicindile, the nose or socket of a candlestick. Cicogna,
Cigogna, a storke. Cicolina, a little pushe, pimple or whelke. Cicomero, a
cucumber or water Melon. Cicorea, Cicoria, Cicorella, the herb Cicorie.
Cicoriara, a woman that sels herbs or salads. Cicorlia, a chirping of birds, a
chatting, a prattling. Cicottola della testa, the nape of the head. Cicrone, as
Cicomero. Cicuta, the herb Hemlocke, Kex or herb benet. Cicutaria,
mock-cheruil, or the herb asseparslie or kexes. Cidari, a wreath or cap that
the Kings and priests of Persia were wont to wear, a Turkish tuffe or
turbant. Cidrioli, Cidriuoli, cidrons, citrons. Cieco, blind. Also a blind
man, yblent, hidden, ignorant, invisible. Also the fourth gut which because it
has diverse enfoldings and turnings, seems to have no end. Ciefalo, as
Cefalo. Cieffare, Look Ceffare. Cieffo, as Ceffo. Ciego, as Cieco. Cielabro,
as Ceruello. Cielo, heaven, the sky, the firmament or welkin. Also a canopy or
testern of a bed. Also the seeling, vpper-face or rooffe of a house. Ciembalo,
as Cembalo. Ciera, as Cera. Cierio, as Cerio. Ciertosino, a Carthusian. Ciese,
a brake, bramble or bryer, a firbush, a hedge, a quick-set-hedge. Ciesso, a
privy, a close stool, a iakes. Cieualo, as Cefalo. Cifarista, a cipherer, an
Arithmetician. Cifello, a piper, a crouder, a whistler. Cifera, Cifra, the art
of ciphering. Ciferare, Cifrare, to cifer. Ciferatore, Cifratore, a cipherer.
Cifi, a kind of sweet perfume dedicated to the gods. Cifolo, Ciffoletto, a
whistle. Cifolare, Ciffolare, to whistle. Cifrante, a cipherer. Cigare, as
Cigolare. Cigliadigratia, a tree, of whose wood chains and beads are made of
rare virtues to procure love. Cigliare, to seele, as pigeons or hawks eyes are
seeled. Ciglio, Ciglia, the eiebrowes, or eye lids. Ciglione della grotta, the
lips or brows of a cave, the side or front of a hill. Ciglioso, Cigliuto, he
that has bushie eyebrowes. Cigna, Cigne, a girt or cingle for a horse.
Cignale, a wild boar. Cignare, to girt a horse, to cingle. Cigno, Cigni, a
swanne, swannes. Cignere, cingo, cinsi, cinto, to girt or compass about.
Cignetto, a cignet, or little swanne. Cigolare, to riue, to crack, to splint,
to creake or make a noise as the wheel of a cart. Also to blow or whistle.
Cigola, a creaking or shrill speaking woman. Cigogna, a Storke. Cilecare, to
drop. Also to dash with dirt. Cilecca, a flap with a fox tail, foolerie,
jesting, deceit. Cilecchi, jests, toys, newfangles. Cilestro, azure, blewe,
skie-colour, or watched, Also a kind of lilly so called. Cilicio, a kind of
rugged hairecloth. Cilindro, a kind of dial or square figure, a long pearl
fashioned like an egg. Also a long plaster made like a cover. Ciloma, as
Fagiolata. Cillone, a kind of color. Cima, the top, or upper part of any
thing. Cimara, as Ciamarra. Cimare, to cut off the top, to lop trees, to sheare
cloth. Cimatio, Cimasa, things or rooms that be foure-square, the upper ledge
of any waineskot work. Cimatore, Cimadore, one that sheareth cloth, a clothe
worker. Cimature, shearings of woollen clothes. Cimba, a fishers boat, a
cockboate, a ferrie boat. Also an herb growing on stone walls somewhat like
Iuie. Also the name of a bone in ones legs. Cimbale, as Cimba. Cimbalista, one
that plays upon a Cymball or Timbrell. Cimbalo, a Cymball or Timbrell.
Cimbanello, as Cimbalo. Cimbello, a whistle. Also a bait for birds or fish.
Cimbottolo, a tumbling cast, or trick. Cimedia, a kind of precious stone.
Cimentare, to cement, or fasten together. Also to try, or experience. Cimento,
cement. Cimiere, Cimera, the crest or timber of a helmet. Cimici, a kind of
vermin in Italy that breeds in heads and biteth sore, called punies, or
wall-life. Cimino, the seed or herb comin. Ciminide, a kind of hawk or
faucon. Cimitara, Cimitarra, a Cimitar, a Turkish sword. Cimitero, Cimiterio, a
churchyard, a burying place. Cimolare, to sheare off the top of any thing, to
sheare clothes. Cimolia, a kind of medicinable earth. Cimolo, a stalk, a
stem, a sprig, a bud, a sprout, or little top of any thing. Cimossa, the
seluage or list of any cloth. Cinabro, Cinapro, a color that painters use
called cinabre, or vermilion. Also that which Apothecaries call sanguis
draconis. Also a soft red stone found in minerals. Cinadella, a fish like a
perch. Cinalopia, a bird, which to save her young ones if she see fowlers, will
show her self to be taken. Cinamomo, the spice Cinnamom. Cinchio, a guirt.
Also a round iron that keeps in any thing. Cineigliare, to tipple square, to
quaffe or to bib. Also to pratile, babble, prate, or scolde. Cinciglione, a
tipler, a quaffer, a tatler in drinking, an ale-knight, a prater, a scolde.
Cincinnare, to curle, or thrum any hair. Cincinno, Cincino, a tuffe or lock of
hair. Also a curled or frizled head. Cincischiare, to minse it or bride it in
eating or speaking. Also to spoil or cut in small pieces. Cinedo, Cinedulo, a
bardarsh a buggring boy, a wanton boy, an ingle. Cinedulare, to bugger, to
bardarsh, to ingle. Cinerigno, ash color, friars gray. Cineritio, Cinericcio,
idem. Cinerugia, something about keeping of silke-wormes. Cinforniata, as
Fagiolata. Cingallegra, a kind of little singing bird. Cingani, Cingari, the
roging Gipti^ns that go filching about the countries. Cingere, cingo, cinsi,
cinto, to guirt or compass about. Cinghia, a guirt or surcingle. Cinghiale,
Cinghiaro, a wild boar. Cinghiare, to girt or cingle a horse. Cinghio, a
trench, or girting about. Cingiale, a wild boar. Cingiare, as Cinghiare.
Cingolo, a girdle or a garter, an engirdling. Cingottare, as Cincigliare.
Cinguetta lingua, a prattling tongue. Cinguettare, as Cincigliare. Cinice,
imbers or cinders. Cinico, Cinisk, doggish, currish. Cinizza, a sparckle.
Cinocefalo, a kind of monkie or ape having a face like a dog, that pisseth
every hour just, it does much observe the moon, and reioiceth at it. Cinodie,
a kind of fish, out of which is taken a stone called Cinodio, that has the
property to be clear and bright before calm and fair weather at sea, but if
any storm be at hand it will look duskie and cloudie. Cinoglossa, the herb
hounds-tongue, or horsepisse. Some take it for a kind of buglosse. Cinomia, a
horseflye, or a dog fly. Cinosura, a figure of stars in heaven. Cinquanta,
fifty. Cinquantesimo, the fiftieth in number. Cinque, five, a cinque. Cinque
cento, five hundredth. Cinquefoglio, cinkefoile, fiue-leaued gross, or
fiuefinger grass. Cinquine, numbers of fiues. Cinta, guirt, girded or
compassed about. Also a belt, a wast-band, or girdle. Cintimularo, a miller.
Cinto, guirt, girded, or compassed about, a girdle, a girdle stead, a waste.
Cintola, a girdle, a belt, or wast-band. Also a garter. Cintolare, to gird
about, to garter. Cintolini, garters, or little girdles. Cintura, a girdle, a
belt, a wast-band. Cinturaio, Cinturaro, a girdler. Cio, that, that same, that
which. Ciocca, a tuft, a lock, a tassell or bush of hair. Also a hadfull of
flax or hemp or wool, a bunche, a cluster. Ciocco, a stock, a stump, a log,
a block, a truncke of wood. Also hoarse in speaking. Cioche, that which,
whatsoever. Cio e, that is, that is to say, to wit. Cioffo, a horse collar, a
halter. Cioncare, to maime, to curtallanie lim. Also to tipple, to bouze, to
swill, to quaffe. Cioncia, a woman's privy parts. Cioncio, Cionco, the tail,
bum or fitting place. Cionco, curtalled, wanting a lim, maimed, halting or
lame. Also drunk, or tippled. Cioncola, a filthy, iadish, scabbed queen.
Cioncolare, as Cioncare. Ciondolare, to drop or thaw, to hang down dangling
as ice-sickles. Ciondoli, ice-sickles, danglings, labels. Ciondoloni,
dingle-dangle, hanging down, as ice-sickles. Cione, a peg or pin, to play at
nine pinnes withal. Also a bird called a fieldfare. Cioppa, a sheapheards cap,
a scottish cap, a knit cap, a frocke, a safeguard. Also a dripping pan. Ciorro,
a horse collar or halter. Ciotto, maimed, halting, lame. Ciottola. Some take it
to be a dish that beggars use to beg drink in or a broken dish. Also a pibble
stone or flint stone. Some think it to be a potshard. Ciottoso, lame,
crooke-backt. Also cockled or puckred, as sometimes clothes will be. Ciparisso,
a Cipresse tree. Also a proper name. Cipellina, as Capelluta. Cipero, the herb
Galingale or Galangale. Cipolla, an Oinion or chiboll. Cipollaro, one that sels
Oinions or a plat of Oinions. Cipollata, a flim-flam tale, a tittle tattle, a
skoulding, a railing. Also a kind of meat or tansie full of oinions. Cipolle
maligi, a kind of chibols or scalions or oinions that are eaten green in
salads in the spring time. Cipollette, little young oinions or ciues. Cipone, a
beast like a panther. Also a kind of bird. Ciporro, as Granchi porro. Cippero,
a thrush or fieldfare. Cipresso, a Cipresse tree or Cipresse wood. Cipress^ro,
a thicket or grove planted with Cipresse trees. Ciprio, a foot of a verse of
five syllables. Circa, about, touching, concerning. Circea, a kind of herb.
Circhi, windings, turnings or circles. Circhiello, that which is called a
feather in a horse. Circinare, to tear or rent or desheuell the hair, to tug
by the hair. Circio, a whirle-winde, a vehement southern-winde. Circoire,
circoisco, circoito, to go or trauerse about. Circoitione, a going or
traversing about, a circling. Circoito, a circuit. Also gone or trauersed about.
Circolare, to encircle or enuiron. Also to go talking from one matter to
another. Also circular, round or sphericall. Circolatione, a circulation or
encircling. Circolatore, a visitor or goer from place to place. Circolatorio, a
kind of serpentine or winding Limbeck. Circolo, a circle or compass, a hoop,
around. Also a knot or crew of good fellows. Circolopolare, that circle which
is described by the pole of the zodiac, being carried about the pole of the
world. Circonnauigare, to sail or go about by sea. Circoncidere, cido, cisi,
ciso, to circumcise, to cut about. Circoncisione, circumcision or cutting
about. Circondare, to compass about, to enuiron about, to circumpasse.
Circondurre, to lead or guide about. Circonduttione, a leading or guiding
about. Circone, a kind of hawk or faulcon, as Cercone. Circonferenza, a
circumference or compass about. Circonflesso, bowing or bending about, or
round. Circonflessione, a bowing or bending about. Circonfuso, wet round about.
Circonfulgere, to shine about. Circonlocutione, a circumlocution.
Circoncursare, to gad about idly. Circonscriuere, scriuo, scrissi, scritto, to
define, to write about, to circumscribe, to appoint, to institute, to
circumuent, to deceive. Circonscrittione, a circumscription, a circumuenting.
Circonuenire, vengo, venni, venuto, to circumuent or come about.
Circonuicinare, to border or neighbor near about. Circonuicino, near
neighboring. Circonstantia, a circumstance. Circonstanti, bystanders,
standers about. Circonstare, to stand by, to stand about. Circopiteco, a
munkey or marmuset. Circospetto, circumspect, wary, subtle. Circospettione,
circumspection, wariness. Circostanti, bystanders, standers about.
Circostanza, a circumstance. Circostare, to stand by or about. Circuire, as
Circoire. Circuitione, as Circoitione. Circuito, as Circoito. Circulare, as
Circolare. Circulo, as Circolo. Circustanzia, a circumstance. Ciregia, a
cherrie. Ciregiaro, one that sels cherries, or an orchard of cherries. Ciregio,
a cherrie tree. Cirella, a pullie, such as ropes go through in ships.
Ciribrustolon, as Verbesco. Cirnicchio, a sieue to sift corn. Ciro, a hog, a
swine, a filthy fellow. as Ciacco. Ciroico, a surgeon. Cirossa, ceruse or
white lead that women use for painting. Cirro, a bush of hair or a lock.
Cirsio, the herb Langue-de-beuf or great buglosse. Cirugia, the art of
chirurgerie, surgerie. Cirugico, a surgeon, or surgeon. Cirussa, as Cirossa.
Cisca, a paile or a bucket. Ciscilla, a kind of swallow or marten. Ciscranna,
a footestoole, a low stool. Cisellare, to pounce with a chizell. Cisello, a
chizel or caruing tool, a pounce Ciserchia, as Ceci. Cisone, a bird so called.
Cispa, withered, faded. Also a kind of game at cards. Also waterish matter in
sore eyes. Cispare, to fade, to wither. Cispo, withered, wrinkled, shrunk up
with dryness. Cissa, the longing or lust of a woman with child. But properly
a corrupt appetite or desire to eat earth, coals, candles or such things.
Cissare, to long, to desire, to lust as a woman with child after strange
meats. Cista, a basket, a pannier, a flasket. Cistarella, a little basket.
Cistellaro, a basket maker. Cisterna, a cesterne for water. Cisto, a kind of
bramble growing on rocks. Cistone, a great basket, or a binne for bread. Cita,
a wench, a less, a young girl. Also a sign or word to command silence,
Citade, Citta, a city or walled town. Citadella, Cittadella, a citadell,
castle, or spacious fort built not only to defend the city, but also to
keep the same in awe and subjection. Citara, a gitterne, a citterne, a crowd.
Citaredo, a fiddler, a musition. Citare, to cite, to call, to sommon, to
convent. Citaro, a fish whose teeth are like a saw, called a sharke.
Citatione, a citation, a sommoning, a conuenting. Citatorie, citations,
processes, enditements. Citella, a young wench, a little less, a pretty girl.
Citello, as Cittino. Citeriore, nigher or near to us. Citharista, Citharello,
one that plays on such instruments. Cithera, Citera, a citterne, a gitterne, a
croude, a kit. Citiscare, as Citire. Citi, as Frinfri. Citire, Citisco, Citito,
to move the lips or tongue for to whisper, to hush or be still. Cito, a young
boy or lad. Citri, toys, baggage things, trifles, fancies, humors, conceits,
fooleries. Citrinella, a kind of goldfinch with yellow feathers. Citrino, a
pale yellow limon color. Also a citron. Also a kind of mirabolane plum.
Citriolo, Citriuolo, a citron. Citronata, a kind of sauce made of citrons, a
tart made of citrons. Citrone, a citron, a pome-citron. Citta, Cittade, a city
or cities, a walled town. Cittadella, as Citadella. Cittadinanza, the
comminaltie of a city. Also a franchise or liberty of a citizen. Cittadinare,
to denison or make free of a city, to dwell in a city. Cittadinesco,
citizen-like. Cittadino, a citizen, a denison. Citta di Dite, limbo or hell.
Cittino, a young boy, a lad. Citto, a word to bid children hold their peace, as
we say whusht, hushed. Cittolo, a kind of fish. Cittona, a big wench.
Citusella, the herb sorrel. Ciuadera, the name of a sail in a ship. Ciuaie,
all sorts of herbs in the market, herbage. Ciuanza, profit, gettings, gain,
advantage, overplus, a forecast. Ciuanzamenti, profits, gettings, vailes or
gains. Ciuanzare, to profit, to get, to gain, to prevent or forecast. Ciuffa,
a braule, a contention, a strife, a brabble. Ciuffare, to braule, to contend,
to strive, to snatch, to tug. Also to take by the snout, to lug by the face.
Ciuffetto, a tuft or lock of hair. Also a little snoute, a forehead or front.
Ciuffo, a kind of staff big at one end, wherewith porters hold up their
burdens when they rest. Also a snoute or muzzle of a beast. Also a lock of
hair before. Ciuffolare, to whistle. Ciuffole, Ciufole, toys, trifles,
fooleries, nifles, vanities, foolish tricks. Ciuffolo, a whistle. Ciuetta, an
owl. Look Occhio di ciuetta. Ciuettare, to pry or look narrowly about, to
sneake up and down. Ciuettini, effeminate, wanton, bawdie lads. Also young
owlets. Ciuico, of a city, civil. Look Corona. Civil, civil, modest,
gentle, courteous, temperate, meek, kind. Ciuilita, Ciuilta, civility,
courtesy, modesty. Ciuilire, isco, ito, to grow civil, to tame, to make
courteous. Ciuillari, a common iakes in Florence, or place where all filth and
dung is cast out. Ciuire, isco, ito, to barter, to change, to trucke. Ciuogne,
a kind of device to draw water out of a deep well, as it were with two
buckets. Ciurlo, a twirle or round trick in dancing. Ciurma, the common
rascalitie of gallie slaves, a base route. The mariners call it in English
ghing. Ciurmaglia, as Ciurma. Ciurmare, to play the common base fellow: to
persuade or allure with craft or deceit: to charm: to in^eagle, to prate, cog
and foist, to brag with intent to cosen one. Ciurmarie, cosening or cheating
houses. Also cosening or cheating tricks, trifling baggages, trash, luggage.
Ciurmatore, a bragger, a pratler, a conicatcher, a rogue, a scoundrell, a
swaggrer, a swabber. Ciutaccia, a flurt, a trull, a harlot. Ciziceno, a Greek
coin of gold. Cizza, a dug, a teate, a pap, a woman's breast. Cizzarca, a kind
of peason. Cizzare, to suck a teate or dug. Cizzuta, having great teates or
dugs. Clamore, a clamor, an outery, a noise, a shout, a roaring. Clamoso,
Clamoroso, clamorous, exclaming. Clandestino, secret, hidden, close, by
stealth. Clango, a kind of kite or buzzard. Clangore, a clangor or sound of a
trumpet. Also the cry of an eagle or goose. Clanugine, as Lanugine. Clarea,
the herb Clarie. Claretto, a claret color. Claua, a club. Claudo, lame,
halting, ^reeping, feeble. Clauicembalo, a kind of instrument like our rigols
or virginals. Clauicola, a little key, a little club. Also the neck bone or
crawe bone. Also ground Iuie. Clauicordo, as Clauicembalo. Class, a degree or
form in a school, a company. Also a navy or fleet at sea. Claustrale,
cloister like. Also a cloister man, pertaining to a cloister. Claustro, a
cloister. Clausula, a clause or conclusion: an end, a sentence which does
conclude. Clausura, a clause. Also a close, an enclosure or a park. Clematite,
Saracens herb. Clemente, clement, pitiful, merciful, benign, gentle,
meek. Clementino, a gentle, kind, loving body. Clementia, clemency, pity,
mercy, gentleness, meekenes, benignity. Clepsiambo, a kind of musical
instrument. Clepsidra, a water dyall, a vessel measuring hours by the running
of water or sand out of it. Also an astronomicall instrument to measure the
stars. Also a water pot to water a garden. Clericale, clarke-like, of a clarke
or pertaining to a clarke, religious. Clerico, a clarke or clergy man. Clero,
the clergy or spirituality. Cleromantia, a soothsaying or divination by lots.
Clibano, an armor for a horse which armeth the neck and crupper. Cliente, a
client, or a suitor. Clientela, a protection, a maintenance, or a countenancing,
or bearing out. Clientulo, a client, or a suitor. Clima, a climate, the dividing
of heaven and earth, a clime. Climaterico, the dangerous and perilous year of
ones life: commonly the year 63. Climeno, water Betonie: according to some
Tutsain or Parke-leaues. Climo, a kind of measure used of yore in Greece.
Clindri, a kind of tool about a plough. Clinica medicina, the Art of
Physic healing by diet or medicines. Clinico, a physicion that heals by
diet or medicines. Clinopalia, overmuch letcherie or occupying. Clinopodio, the
herb Puliall-mountaine, or Horse-time. Clipeo, a kind of shield or target
that footmen were wont to wear. Clisi, declination or bending. Clitia, a
flower into which Clitia was transformed. Cliuo, a little hill, a hillocke.
Also steep, difficult, hard, a going down or pitch of a mountain. Also a
bending down of any thing. Cliuoso, steepie, bending down, hanging, full of
hills, cliffes, crags, or hardness. Cloaca, the channel, sink, or gutter of a
town whereby all filth does pass: a common shore. Clocitante, gaggling or
prating idly. Clocitare, to gaggle as a goose or a duck. Clora, a small nut, a
filberd. Clupea, a fish that pursues the tunie to death, biting him in a vain
in the iawe. Some take it for a Blaie or a Bleake. Co^ used for Congli, with,
or with the. Co, used for Capo. Coa, a Greek measure of liquid things. Coaca,
as Cloaca. Coadunare, to gather, to assemble. Coadunanza, an assembly, a
gathering. Coagulare, to congeale, to curde, to join together. Coagulo, a
kind of salt in alchimie, a curding, a congealing. Coaiutore, a evadiutor, a
fellow helper. Coaliotto, a kind of water snake. Coassare, as Coazzare.
Coazzare, to cry or croke as a frog. Also to scould or rail: to blurt with
ones tongue. Cobacello, a noddie, a cods head, a gull, a patch, a fool, a
cockscombe. Coca or Cocahe, an herb in India, the leaf whereof being carried
in ones mouth does quench hunger and thirst. Cocatrice, a Coccatrice. Cocagna,
as we say Lubberland. Cocalli, a kind of water foul. Cocca, Cucca, the nut or
nocke of a crossebowe, or of an arrow, a dent, a chinke, a nocke. Also a
cockebote or a little skiffe: the ni^^ of a pen. Coccale, a gull, a ninnie, a
sot, such a one as will believe the moon is made of green cheese. Coccare, to
fasten upon one. Also to cut off, or to shoot off, to give a snap. Coccaro, a
quiver for arrows. Coccea, a kind of shell fish like a cockle. Cocche, the
berries as of bays, juniper, or iuie. Also cockbotes or little skifs.
Cocchiara, a ladle. Also a long spoone. Cocchiaro, a spoone or a ladle.
Cocchiere, a coche man. Cocchiglie, all manner of cockleshels. Cocchio, a
coche, chariot, a caroze. Cocchiume, a bung or stopple of a vessel. Also a bung
hole. Coccij or Coccy, a kind of fish that cries as a cuckoo. Also broken
pieces of potshardes. Coccia, the shell of a tortoise or snaile. Coccineo, died
in grain, scarlet or crimson, of a scarlet color. Coccino, a scarlet robe or
vesture. Cocco, grain to die scarlet withal. Also the blew flower among corn
called cockle. Also cockring, sport, dandling, delight or glee. Also scarlet,
or scarlet die. Coccole, berries or grains, as of laurel or juniper trees, or
oke-apples, and such like gals or fruits growing upon some leaves. Also bables,
toys or jests. Coccolone, cowring, sitting or squatting down. Coccone, a bung
of a barrel. Coccoueggia, as Cuccoueggia. Coccoui, a kind of serpent in
India. Cocenti, boiling, scalding, burning, smarting, hot. Cocere, Cuoco,
Cocqui or Cocei, Cotto, to boil, seethe, roste or bake. Also to smart, ache,
itch or burn, to be sore, grievous, painful or aching. Cocige, the name of a
bone in ones legs. Cocina, a kitchen. Also a scullerie. Cocinare, to dress
meat or play the cook. Cocinatore, a cook or dresser of meat. Cociniglia, a
kind of rich fly or grain coming out of India to dye scarlet with, called
Cutchenele. Cocciore, a smarting, itching or burning. Cocituro, a boiling or
dressing of meat. Also a smarting, a burning. Coclee, a round warlike engine of
war. Coclerio, a small Greek measure. Cocodrillo, a crocodile. Cocolla, a
munks coule or hood. Also a nuns upper garment or attire. Also a silke-worme
cod. Cocole, as Cocche. Cocoma, such brazen vessels as butlers use to put in
pots by the cupboord. Cocomero, a cucumber. Also a citron. Cocone, as Caccone.
Cocos, a precious and rich kind of tree in India, of the nature of the palm.
Cocozza, a wild gourd or Pompilion. Cocume, the top or height of any thing.
Cocumero, as Cocomero. Cocuzza, as Cocozza. Coda, a tail, a train, a traile.
Also taken for a man's privy member. Codacinciuola, a wagtaile. Codacciuola,
idem. Codacciuto, well tailed, having a tail. Also a man well tooled. Coda da
mosca, a stick with a horse tail in it or a fox tail to beat away flies. Coda
di cauallo, the herb Shauegrasse or horsetaile, a horse tail. Coda di leone,
as Orobanche. Coda di pesce, an herb. Codale, a docke for a horses tail.
Codare, to set a tail on, to put on a tail. Codardia, cowardice,
dastardlines. Codardo, a coward, a dastard. Codatremola, a wagtaile. Codazzo, a
great train of servants following or of idle retainers. Codega, the tail or
rump of a loyne of mutton or such like. Coderinzo, the tail where the sting
is. Coderizzo, as Coderinzo. Codica, a man's skin. Codicillo, a codicill, a
book, a libell. It is a word used by lawyers. Codile, a birds rump or where
the tail is fixed. Codillo, the nape or pole of the head. Codilungo,
Codirosso, a kind of singing bird. Codirone, the rump of a tail, the stump of
a tree. Codognata, marmalade of quinces. Codolo, a small round pibble stone.
Codotaria, one that bears up a princes train. Codurza, the rump or skue of a
bird. Coetaneo, one of the self same age, of the same time, equal in years.
Cofaccia, a cake, a whitepot, a cheesecake. Cofano, Coffino, a cofin, a ^runke,
a coffer. Coforona, a tortoise, or a shell-crab. Cofrate, a brother with one, a
fellow friar. Cofrateria, a brotherhood. Cogitabondo, musing, or in a brown
study. Cogitare, to muse, to think, to imagine, to mind. Cogitatione,
musing, thinking, cogitation. Cogiuvanella, a Wagtaile. Coglia, a man's
ballocks. Cogliandro, Coriander seeds. Coglicumero, an idle, lazy, slothful
fellow. Cogliere, Colgo, Colsi, Colto, to collect, to assemble. Also to hit, to
take napping. Coglionare, to cousin, to cog, to foist, to deceive. Coglionarie,
foolish toies, deceitful things, knaueries. Coglione, a noddie, a fool, a
patch, a dolt, a meacock. Coglioni, the stones or testicles of men. Coglitore,
a gatherer, a collector. Cogliuto, one that has a good prick. Cognare, to
cleave wood, or to coin. Cognata, a sister in law. Cognato, a brother in
law. Also cleaued or coined. Cognatore, a cleauer of wood. Also a coyner.
Cognitione, an acknowledgement, a recognison. Cognito, known, acknowledged.
Cogno, a wedge to cleave wood. Cognome, a surname, a nickname. Cognomento,
idem. Cognoscere, as Conoscere. Cognoscenza, as Conosenza. Cogola, a pan, or
caudron, or kettle. Coherede, a coheire, a ioint-heire. Coheredita, a
coinheritance. Cohereditare, to inherit together, or with one. Coherenza,
coherence, affinity, sticking or cleaving to. Cohorte, a band or troop of
men, whereof a Roman legion contained ten. Coi, with the, with, together.
Coincidente, coincident, incident with or unto. Coinfiammato, enflamed with or
together. Coio, Coiro, Cuoio, leather, or fell. Coiraro, Coiaio, a tanner, a
fellmonger, a currier, a cord wainer. Coito, carnal copulation. Col, with,
with the. Cola, glue. Cola, there, thither, yonder, in that place. Colabacco, a
fish, of whose skin water glue is made. Coladura, a colander. Also as Colatura.
Colafo, a buffet, a whirret or blow given with ones hand. Colanza, Corcalle, a
kind of bird. Colare, to glue together. Also to strain or sift through a
colander. Also to drop, or to trill. Also to honor or embrace, to hug, to coll.
Also a band, collar, or carcanet. Also to leake as a ship does. Also a kind of
sparrow. Also a cape for a cloak or any collar. Colarino, a little band or
collar. Also a gorget piece. Colaterale, colaterall, of the side. Colationare,
to collation, copy, or draw from the original. Colatione, a breakefast,
drinking, nuntion, or beuer. Also a collation, a joining together, a coping, a
conferring or comparing. Also a task, a sise, or collection. Colatoio, a
colander or strainer. Also a sink, or a gutter. Also a leake in a ship.
Colatura, a gluing, or straining, a dropping, a running, a leake in a ship or
other, a trilling. Colcare, to lie down, to rest. Colcata, a lying down, a
down lying. Also laid down. Colcetra, a fetherbed. Colcitra, a little couch
or bed, a pallet. Coleganza, Colegamento, as Collegamento. Colegare, as
Collegare. Colei, she, that woman. Colendo, honorable, to be respected. Colera,
choler, anger, wrath, indignation, or flowing of the gall. Colerico, choleric,
angry, wrathful. Colere, Colo, Colei, Coluto, to honor, to embrace, to
respect, to coll, to hug. Colfo, a kind of drug that burns. Also taken for
brimstone. Colfonia, as Colfo. Coli, Coleworts. Coli, there, yonder, in that
place. Coliambi, verses made of the foot of meetre, called Iamb^. Colica, the
winde-colick, the colike passion. Colicello, a hillock, a little hill. Col^^o,
as Collirio. Col^eo, a spire steeple. Also a man's bum. Colla, a strappado. Also
a cord wherewith they give the strappado. Also glue. Also with her, with the, a
kind of rack or torture to make one confess. Collagrimare, to weep together.
Collana, a chain about ones neck. Collanella, a little chain. Collare, to
embrace about the neck, to behead, to give the strappado, to glue together, to
torture, to torment. Also, a collar, a band about ones neck, a gorget, a
neckercher, a carcanet. Collarino, a gorget of plate, a little band. Also a
little collar. Collaterale, collateral. Collatione, as Colatione. Collatore,
he that conferreth or lays his portion with other. Collaudare, to praise with
or together. Colle, a hill, or a hillock. Also with the. Colleganza,
Collegamento, a combining, a league, confederation, ligament, affinity,
alliance, coherence, a knitting or unity together. Collegare, to colleague, to
bind, to combine, to confederate or knit together. Collegati, confederats.
Collegiale, of one college, or a collegiall man, of one company, or
corporation. Collegio, a college, a company, a brotherhood, a fellowship, a
fraternity, or corporation. Colleppolarsi d' allegrezza, to shuckle, to chuck
or rouse ones self to gladness and mirth. Collera, Collerico. Look Colera.
Collerina, the deaw-lap of a bull or cow. Colletta, a collection, a gathering.
Collettione, a collection or gathering. Colletto, a leather ierkin. Also
collected. Collettore, a collector or gatherer. Colli, coi, co', coni, congli,
with the, with them. Colli, hills, hillocks. Collibetti, quodlibets, every
one, any body, it is no matter who, who so list. Collico dolor, the colic
passion. Colliganza, as Colleganza. Colligere, as Cogliere. Collina, a little
hill or hillock. Collirio, a medicine for eyes, or for horses and oxen to slake
their bellies, or a kind of earth in Samia. Collisione, a breaking, brusing,
knocking, or dashing together. Collo, a neck. Also with the. Collocare, to
place or settle in a place: to bestow, to stowe. Collo d'oca, a kind of bit
for a horse made like the neck of a goose. Colloquio, as Coloquio. Collotorto,
as Capotorto. Collottola, the nape of the neck. Collubra, a serpent so called,
a snake. Collumellari denti, the sharp teeth or eye teeth. Collurione, a bird
called a Fieldfare or Juniper. Collusione, collusion, fraud, deceit. Colmare,
to heap or fill up. Colmestra, a kind of hawk or falkon. Colmezza, the top,
fulness or height of any thing. Colmo, the top or height of any thing. Also
heaped or filled up. Also a heap. Colocasia, the Egyptian bean. Also the
herb Calves foot or Cuckow-pintle. Colofoni, a kind of foot in meter or
verse. Colomba, Colombo, a dove or pigeon, or a culuer. Also a fish called a
lump. Colombara, Colombaio, a dove house, a pigeon house, a culuer house.
Colombino, dove color: colombine color. Also a young dove. Also a kind of
blew marble. Colommo, a kind of fig that is soon ripe. Colonna, a column,
a pillar. Also a kind of pipe like a recorder. Colonnare, like a pillar, to
underset or adorn with pillars. Colone, a colon or point in writing, the
member of a sentence. Also the fifth gut or great gut rising from the left side
to the right, in which is the disease called the colicke. Colonella, a little
pillar. Colonello, a coronell of a regiment. Colonellato, a coronell-ship, the
office of a coronell. Colonia, a colony of people as the Romans were wont to
send into any place to dwell. Coloquintida, a kind of wild gourds purging
fleame. Coloquio, a talk, a conference or communication. Colora, as Colera.
Colorare, Colorire, to die or to color. Color, a color, a hue. Coloritore, a
painter, a dier, a limmer. Coloro, those, them-same, those-same men. Coloroso,
full of color, high colored. Colosso, a colossus, a great high and huge
statue, bigger then any man. Colostra, the first milk that comes in the
teates after a birth in woman or beast, called beestings. Colostratione, a
disease in young children by sucking ill or curded milk. Colpa, a fault or
blame, a want, an error, a defect. Colpare, to accuse, to blame, to make
faulty. Also to commit a fault. Colpeggiare, as Colpire. Colpesce, as
Colabacco. Colpeuole, faulty, cul pable, guilty. Colpire, colpisco, colpito,
to strike, to hit, to touch, to smite. Colpiscere, as Colpire. Colpo, a blow, a
stroke, a hit, a venie. Also one time, one cast. Also a trick, a jest, a
cast, a pranke, a throw. Also a draught at chesse. Colta, any rent, tithes,
or payment that is gathered by collection: a harvest. Coltare, to grub or
harrow land. Coltellaccio, a curtelax, or chopping knife. Coltellata, a blow
with a knife, or any cutting weapon. Coltelli, knives. Also the second
feathers of a hawk. Coltellinaio, a pen knife maker. Coltellino, a little
knife or a pen knife. Coltello, a knife, a whittle. Cotellone, as Coltellaccio.
Coltiuabile, as Cultiuabile. Coltiluoghi, grounds that are tilled, eared or
manured. Coltiuare, as Cultiuare. Coltiuatore, a husbandman, a plowghman.
Colto, of Cogliere, taken, hit, collected, gathered. Also for Culto, worship or
honor. Also a garden or any ground that is tilled about a man's house. Also
honored, embraced, respected. Also labored, manured, tilled. Also trim,
choice, or fine. Coltre, Coltrice, a quilt for a bed. A counter-point. Coltro,
a ploughs share or culter. Coltura, tillage, manuring, husbandry. Colubrina, a
culuerine. Colubro, a kind of venomous snake or scorpion. Colui, he, that man,
the same man. Coluore, a hasell nut, a filbert tree. Coluri, great circles
imagined in heaven, meeting in the poles of the world; of which there are two
principal. Coluurina, a culuerine. Coma, a man's or woman's hair of the head.
Also a horses maine. Also a point in oration or writing called a Coma.
Comalange, a fruit like a musk Melon. Comandare, to will and command, to
impose, to inioine, to bid. Comandamento, a commandment, a command, a behest,
a bidding. Comandella, as Commandella. Comante, bushie or full of hair.
Comarca, a shire, a county or division of a country. Comare, Comadre, a woman
gossip. Also to comb, to dress or polish ones head or hairs. Combaciare, to
kiss, to clip, to colle or embrace together. Combattere, batto, battei,
battuto, to fight, to combat. Combattitore, Combattente, a fighter, a combater,
a combatant, a fighting man. Combattimento, a fight, a combat. Combiatare, as
Comiatare. Combiato, as Comiato. Combilia, a composition or argument framed to
ones self in his mind, with purpose to discourse upon it. Combinare, to
combine or join together. Also to spell in reading. Combinatione, a combining
or joining together. Also a spelling of letters. Combricca, a confused crew or
rout of od strange fellows met together. Combricche, foolish, ignorant
assemblies, base haunts. Also as Combilia. Comburere, buro, bursi, busto, as
Combustiare. Combustiare, to burn, to blaste, to parche. Combusteuole,
Combustioso, that will burn or may be burned. Combusto, burnt, combusted,
parched. Come, when, how? so soon as, even as, since that, as much as, in what
sort? whilst, then, so long as, like as, in such sort, when as, as. Also as
chiome. Come che, howbeit, although, though, albeit, howsoever. Come domine?
how a gods name? Come Iddio vel dica, a phrase, as we would say: God himself
tell you, I cannot. Come se, as if. Come si sia, Come si voglia, howsoever it
be, howsoever, in what manner you will. Comedia, a comedy, a merry play, an
interlude. Comediante, a comediant, a stage-pla^er. Comediare, to play an
interlude. Comena, a cable of a ship. Comenda, a co^mendum, a custody of any
ecclesiastical living put to ones trust. Comendabile, Comendeuole,
commendable, praise-worthie. Comendare, to commend or praise. Comendatione,
commendation, praise. Comendatoria lettera, a letter of commendations.
Comendatitie lettere, idem. Comendatore, one that has commendoes put to his
charge. Comendeuole, Comendabile, commendable, praise-woorthie. Comensale, a
fellow boorder, a fellow commoner, a fellow tabler. Comentare, to comment or
expound. Comentatore, a co^menter or expounder. Comento, a comment or
exposition. Comercio, traffic, intercourse, commerce. Cometa, a comet, a
blazing star. Comiatare, to license or give leave, to dismiss, to discharge.
Comiato, leave, congy, license, or a passeport to depart. Comico, comicall,
pertaining to comedies. Also a writer of comedies. Comignolo di tetti, a gutter
or pipe to convey water from the top of an house. Comiliton^, fellows in
arms, fellowemates in arms, fellow soldiers, companions in service of war.
Cominatione, a commination, a threatening, a menacing. Cominciare, to begin to
commence. Cominciamento, a beginning, a commencement. Cominciante, a beginner
or a commencer. Comino, cumin seed. Comisto, Commisto, mixed or mingled
together. Comitij, an assembly of people, or place where the assembly is.
Also a parliament house. Comitiua, a train or following of men. Comito, the
masters mate of a ship. Comissure, as Commessure. Commandare, as Comandare.
Commandella, a kind of play used among boys in Italy. Commando, as Comando.
Commare, a woman gossop. Commemorare, to remember, to commemorate, to mention.
Commemoratione, a remembrance, a commemoration. Commendare, Commendabile. Look
Comendare. Commensale, as Comensale. Commentare, as Comentare. Commentatore, as
Comentatore. Commento, as Comento. Commessa, a bet, a lay, a wager.
Commessario, a commissarie. Commessione, a commission. Commesso, a committy or
an arbitrator, an vmpier. Also a kind of semsters work or a low stitch. Also
wrought or put together. Commesurare, to measure together. Commessura,
Commettiture, as Commissura. Commettere, metto, misi, messo, to commit, to
inioine, to impose. Also to lay a wager, to bette. Also to join, put, or set
close together. Commiatare, as Comiatare. Commiato, as Comiato. Comminatione,
as Cominatione. Comminella, a little cable, a little rope. Commiserare, to
pity, to have compassion of. Commiseratione, commiseration, pity, ruthe.
Commisereuole, pitiful, rufull. Commissiua lettera, a letter importing any
commission or iniunction. Commissura, a chinke a creuisse, a cleft in a wall,
or joints. Also a commixture. Commistione, commixture or medlie. Commodare,
Comodare, as Accommodare. Commodita, Comodita, commodity, ease, leisure,
opportunity, fitnes, means, occasion. Commodo, Comodo, commodious, fit,
proper, at ease, at leisure, profitable: also ease, leisure, profit or
commodity. Commonicare, as Comunicare. Commosso, moved, stirred, commoued,
out of order, out of frame, or out of joint. Commotione, Commoto, a commotion,
a stir, a moving. Commouere, mouo, mossi, mosso, to move or stir
together. Commune, as Comune. Communale, as Comunale. Communicabile, as
Comunicabile. Communicare, as Comunicare. Communicanti, as Comunicanti.
Communione, as Comunione. Communita, as Comunita. Commutabile, as Comutabile.
Commutare, as Comutare. Commutatione, as Comutatione. Comodezza, as Commodita.
Comolanga, a fruit like a musk melon. Compagna, a she fellow. Compage, the
conioining or knitting together. Compagnare, to accompany, to associate.
Compagneuole, sociable, gentle, conversant. Compagnia, company, society,
fellowship. Compagno, a companion, a mate, a fellow. Compagnone, a good
crafty, subtle, sneaking companion, a merry lad. Companaggio, as
Companatico. Companatico, all cates, food or victual besides bread and
drink: meat as we say. Comparabile, comparable, ^atchable. Comparare, to
compare, to match. Comparatione, a comparison. Comparatico, gossoping, or
gossopship, a gossops meeting, a knot of good fellowship. Comparatiuamente,
comparatively. Comparatiuo, the comparatiue degree. Compareuole, seemly, of a
good presence, comely in show. Comparere, paio, parsi, parso, to appear.
Compare, a he gossop, a compeer. Comparire, parisco, parsi, parso, to appear.
Comparigione, a man's appeerance being cited. It is a word of law.
Compariscente, as Appariscente. Compartire, parto, partito, to impart, to
divide. Compartimento, a compartment, a partition. Compassionare, to
compassionate, to take pity or commiseration. Compassione, pity, compassion
or ruthe. Compassioneuole, compassionable, pitiful. Compassare, to compass
about. Compasso, a compass. Also a pair of compasses. Compatire, tisco, tito,
to suffer with an other. Compatibile, compatible, suffering or abiding one
another. Compellere, pello, pulsi, pulso, to force, to compel, to constrain.
Compendio, brevity, an abbreuiate, an epitome, a short way. Compendioso,
compendious, short, brief. Compensa, a recompense, a reward. Compensare, to
recompense, to reward. Compenso, a remedy, a foresight. Also a recompense.
Compera, a purchase or a buying. Comperare, to buie, to purchase. Compestoio, a
tool that a weauer uses. Competentia, a competencie, sufficiency or
conueniencie. Competente, competent, sufficient or convenient. Competere, peto,
petei, petuto, to contend or strive for any suite, office, place or dignity.
Competitore, a competitor or rival, or concurrent. Compiacere, to please, to
delight, to gratify, to content. Compiaceuole, pleasant, pleasing.
Compiacimento, Compiacenza, a delighting, gratifying, content, pleasing, or
satisfaction with others. Compiagnere, to bemone, to moan, to bewail or lament
with one. Compiangere, as Compiagnere. Compianto, a wailing together in
company, a complaint. Compiere, as Compire. Compieta, comlines. completorie, a
piece of service among Roman catholics. Compilare, to compile. Compilatione, a
compilation, a heaping or gathering together in one. Compimento, an end, a
finishing, a fine, a complement. Compire, pisco, pito, to finish, to end, to
make an end, to complete, to fulfill or to accomplish. Compitamente, at full,
fully, accomplishedly. Compitare, to spell in reading. Compitura, an end, a
fine, a finishing, a fulfilling. Also a man's spending. Complessi, as Amplessi.
Complessionato, complexioned. Complessione, a complexion. Also a containing, or
compass. Also an agreement in words. Complesse parole, comprised words, words
well described. Complessotta, a good handsome trull or wench. Completo,
complete, accomplished, full. Complice, a partaker, a complice, a confederate,
a coherent. Complimenti, complements, ceremonies, courtesies, kind offices, a
fulfilling or furnishing, a making perfect of that which is wanting.
Complimentoso, full of complements, courteous, ceremonius. Complire, plisco,
plito, to use or accomplish all complements. Componere, pongo, posi, posto, to
compose, to frame, to endite, to agree, to accord, to appoint, to compromize,
to order. Comporre, as Componere. Componimento, as Compositione. Componitore,
Compositore, a compositor, a framer, an agreer, a maker, a composer.
Comportamenti, sufferings. Also the behavior, carriage, or government of a man.
Comportare, to suffer, to bear, to abide, to behave, to govern himself, to
brook. Comporteuolmente, tollerablie, indifferently, so so, to be borne with.
Compositione, composition, agreement, or an accord. Compositore, as
Componitore. Compositura, a composition. Composta, any kind of wet sucket.
Compra, a purchase, a buying. Comprare, to buie, to purchase. Compratore, a
buier, a chapman. Comprauendi, retailers, hucksters. Compreda, a buying, a
purchase. Compredomine, profit, thrift, gain. Comprendere, to comprehend, to
conceive, to understand. Comprendente, comprehending, conceiving. Comprensione,
a comprehending. Comprehensibile, comprehensible, that may be comprehended.
Compreso, comprehended, conceived, understood. Compressione, a crushing
together, used as Complessione. Compresso, hardened, crushed or pressed together,
well trust, well compact, handsome. Comprimere, to press together, to harden.
Compro, Comprato, bought, purchased. Comprobare, to approve, to allow.
Comprobatione, an approbation, an allowing. Compromettere, to compromise, or
arbitrate. Compromessario, an arbitrer or vmpier to compromise a thing.
Compromesso, compromised, or a compromise. Compulsione, compulsion, constraint.
Compulso, compelled, constrained. Compuerta, a perculleis. Compungere, to prick
together, to provoke. Compuntione, a compunction. Compunto, pricked together,
provoked, touched with compunction. Compuntare, to prick, or provoke.
Compurgare, to purge, to quit, to clear. Computare, to compute, to reckon.
Computatione, a computation, calculation, reckning, or casting of accoumpts.
Computista, a computator a reckoner. Comulgare, to communicate. Comunale, a
common popular man, a vulgar man. Also a comminaltie. Comunanza, a comminaltie,
a commons. Also a corporation. Comune, vulgar, public, commune, the commons.
Comunella, an imparting, a commoning. Also a common wench. Comunicabile, that
may be imparted or communicated to others. Also receiving the communion.
Comunicare, to communicate, to impart, to reveal, to common. Also to take the
communion. Comunicanti, communicants, receivers of the holy supper.
Comunicatione, a communication. Comunione, communion, or community. Comunita,
a comminaltie, a community. Comunque, Comunche, howsoever. Comunquemente, in
what manner soever. Comutabile, that may be changed or altered, mutable.
Comutare, to alter or change with. Comuratione, a change or alteration, a
shifting. Con, with, together, withal, in company. Conbuon ricordosia,
welfare all good tokens, in good time be it spoken. Con autorita, with
authority. Con licenza, with your leave. Con mappa mondo, with all iolity,
with the world at will. Con reuerenza, saving your reverence. Con tanto di
naso, to have the canuaze or overthrow in any suit, to remain as one ashamed.
Cona, a painted table or board. Conaglio, rennet to curd milk, and make cheese
with. Conato, a thing whereabout labor has bin taken. Also he which
endeavors himself to do any thing. Conca, a tray, a bowl, a basin, a pan.
Also any fish shell, a grave, a tomb. Also a greek measure of liquid things.
Also a treene dish, a wooden bowl. Concatenare, to chain or link together.
Concatenatione, Concatenamento, a chaining or linking together. Concausa, a
cause joined with another cause. Concauita, concauitie, hollownes, or bowing.
Concauo, concaue, hollow, bowed, crooked, caued. Concedere, cedo, cessi, cesso,
or ceduto, to grant, to yield unto, to consent, to give place, to surrender,
to resign, to afford. Concento, a consort, or concordance in music.
Concentrare, to grow or incorporate, or concentre hard together. Concentrice, a
circle within an orb, having the same superficies. Concepere, cepo, cepei,
ceputo, or cetto, to conceive with child. Concepito, Conceputo, conceived.
Concernere, cerno, cernei, cernuto, to concern. Concernente, concerning,
touching. Concertare, to agree, or tune together, or proportion or accord
together, to sing or play in consort. Concerto, as Concento. Concessione, a
grant, or yielding, or a gift. Concesso, Look Concedere. Concettione, a
conception, or conceiving. Concetto, a conceit or apprehension of the mind.
Also conceived. Conchiglie, fish-shelles, as of cockles, muscles, oysters, or
skallops. Conchile pesce, all manner of shellfish. Conchiudere, chiudo,
chiusi, chiuso, to conclude. Conchiusione, a conclusion. Concia, a dressing, a
reforming, a repairing, a refining, a washing or perfuming of gloves. Concia
lauezzi, a mender of old pots, pans, posnets, or pipkins, a Tinker.
Conciamenti, mendings, reformings, dressings, or repairings, orderings.
Conciare, to dress, to mend, to settle, to order, to reform, to repair, to
dight, to pight, to attire. Conciastagni, a Tinker, or mender of pewter.
Conciatetti, a Tyler, a Thatcher. Conciatore, a dresser, a mender, a reformer,
an orderer. Conciatura, any kind of dressing, mending, or perfuming.
Conciatura di testa, a head attire, or dressing. Concidere, Concido, Co^cidei,
Conciduto, or Conciso, to cut or back small. Also to chop, to iag or pounce.
Also to beat, to kill, to slay. Also to fall down, to dye or faint.
Concidentia, a cutting, a hacking, a chopping, a iagging, a pouncing, a
beating, a killing, a falling, a dying, a fainting. Also a kind of disease in
the eyes. Conciero, an attire of hair or other things for a woman's head. Also
any dressing, ornament, or decking: it has been taken for a hearse, or stately
funeral. Conciglio, Concilio, a council general. Conciliabolo, a council
place, a council house. Conciliare, to reconcile, to atone. Conciliatione, a
reconciliation. Concime, all manner of dung to dung the ground with.
Concinnita, propernes, seatenes, aptnes, iollines, galantnes. Concino, a
reformer, a find fault, a corrector of magnificat. Concio, dressed, mended,
settled, ordered, reformed, dight, plight, attired, repaired. Also fitnes.
Concio fosse, for so much as it was, because, for why. Concio fosse che,
for so much as that it was, for why. Concio fosse cosa che, as Concio fosse che.
Conciosia, for so much, because, for why. Conciosia che, for so much as,
because, for why. Conciosiacosa che, for so much as that, for why. Concipere, as
Concepere. Concipiente, conceiving. Concistorio, a consistory, or a council
house. Concitare, to provoke, or stir up against. Concitatione, a provoking
or stirring up. Conclaue, a place where the Popes are chosen. Also a
congregation, a consistory. Also a closet, a private room, or inner chamber.
Conclauista, a fellow-chooser of a Pope in Conclaue. Concludere, cludo, clusi,
cluso, to conclude. Conclusione, a conclusion. Conclusiuo, concluding,
conclusiue. Concobina, a concubine, a leman. Concola, as Conca. Concolla, as
Concola. Also a ridge or green soard between ploughed lands. Concone, any
kind of great tray, or wooden bowl. Concordanza, an accordance, an accord.
Concordare, to agree, or accord together. Concordeuole, agreeable, concordable,
Concordi, agreed, of one consent. Corcordia, agreement, concord, peace, unity.
Also the herb called wild poppie. Concorrente, a concurrent, a rival, a
competitor. Concorrenza, a concurrencie or agreeing in one, or running
together. Concorrere, corro, corsi, corso, to concur or flock together.
Concorso, concurred or flocked together. Also a concurse of people or running
together. Also an ouerflowing of humors in man or beast. Concottione, a
concoction. Concotto, concocted, baked together. Concreato, created together.
Concretare, to grow, join, clotter, compact or congeale together.
Concretatione, a joining, clottring or congealing together. Concreto, grown,
clotted, congealed or compact together. Concubina, a concubine, a leman.
Concubinare, to match or love or entangle himself with a whore. Concubinario,
one that lies with a concubine. Concubuire, isco, ito, as Concubinare.
Conculcare, to conculcate or press down or tread down, to suppress.
Concuocere, cuoco, cossi, cotto, to concoct, to bake together. Concupiscenza,
concupiscence, lust, filthy desire. Concupiscere, pisco, piscei, pisciuto, to
desire or long for with great lust and earnestnes. Concupiscibile, lecherous,
lustful. Condannagione, a condemnation, a doom, an amercement. Condannare, to
condemn, to cast, to damn, to sentence, to judge, to doom, to amerce.
Condannatione, a condemnation. Condecente, decent, beseeming, seemly.
Condegno, condign, worthy, with others. Condennaggione, as Condannaggione.
Condennare, as Condannare. Condennatione, as Condannaggione. Condennata, a game
at cards so called. Condensare, to condense to thicken. Condenso, condense,
thick, spisse. Condensita, a thicknes, a densitie, a spisnes. Condescendere,
scendo, scesi, sceso, to condescend, to consent or yield unto. Condilomati, a
swelling in the fundament proceeding of an inflammation. Condimento, a
dressing, a seasoning, a tempring or confecting of meats. Condire, Condisco,
to dress, to season to sauce, to comfite, to temper meats. Condito, dressed
as meat, seasoned, sauced, comfited, tempered. Also the dripping of roste
meat. Condiscepolo, a fellow-scholler. Conditore, a seasoner, a cook, a
temprer, a comfiter. Conditionale, conditional. Conditionare, to condition, to
covenant. Condition, a condition, a quality, a covenant, an estate.
Condoglienza, a condoling or grieuing with others. Condolere, dolgo, dolsi,
doluto, to condole, to bemone, to moan or bewail together. Condonare, to
pardon, to remit, to forgive. Condotta, a conduct, a charge, a leading, a
guide. Condottiere, Conduttore, as Conducitore. Condotto, brought, guided,
conducted, led to any place. Also a conduite, a privy, a iakes, a sink.
Condrilla, wild Endive, or gum Cicory, or rush Cicorie. Condro, a bone or
gristle that comes over the mouth of the stomach for defense of the same.
Conducimento, a conduct, a leading, a guiding. Condurre, Conducere, duco,
dussi, dutto, or dotto, to conduct, to lead, to guide to a place, to bring.
Conducitore, a guider, a leader, a captain, a conductor, a chiefetaine, a
bringer. Condutto, as Condotto. Conduttura, a conduct, a guiding, a leading.
Conegliera, a waren or conie-grea for conies. Con esso meco, with me, or with
my self Conestabile, Connestabile, a constable. Conetto, a disease in a horse.
Confabulare, to talk or fable together. Confaceuole, convenient, behoouefull,
expedient. Confaceuolezza, conueniencie, or agreeing in nature. Confaloniere, a
standerd bearer. Confalone, a chief standard. Confare, Confacere, feci, fatto,
to agree, to make together. Also to be convenient, fit, or seemly, to become,
to suit, to proportion or agree together. Confederare, to confederate or agree
together. Confederatione, a confederacy, a combination. Confederato,
confederate, agreed, combined. Conferentia, a conference: an aduowson of a
living, a comparing, a conferring. Conferire, risco, rito, to confer, to
bestow, to impart. Confermare, to confirm, to establish. Confermatione, a
confirmation, an establishment. Confertini, a kind of spice or sugar bread.
Confessare, to confess, to shriue, to acknowledge. Confessionale, a
confessionall, a book of confession. Confessione, a confession or shriuing.
Confessore, a confessor, a shriuer. Confettare, to comfite or to candie, to
preserve with sugar. Confettaro, a comfit-maker. Confetti, Confettioni,
comsets. Confettiera, a sugar box, a comfet box. Confettinaro, a comfet
maker. Confettionale, confectionall. Confettionario, a confectionarie, or
confet maker. Conficcare, to thrust or drive in fast, to fix hard together.
Confidanza, confidence, or trust. Confidare, to trust or put in feoffie.
Confidente, confident, trusty, true. Confidenza, confidence or trust.
Configere, figgo, fissi, fitto, as Conficcare. Confinare, to confine, to limit,
to bound, to banish, to exile. Confinante, confining, bounding, neighboring,
bordering. Confinatione, an exile, a banishment, a confining. Confini,
confines, limits, bounds, mearestones. Confino, near bordering, near
bounding, neighboring. Confiscare, to confiscate, to forfeit. Confiscatione, a
confiscation, a forfeiture, a fine. Confitente, confessing, acknowledging,
bewraying. Confittaro, as Confettaro. Confitti, Confittioni, as Confetti.
Confitto, fixed, obstinate, beadstrong. Also as Conficcato. Confiutare, to
confute. Confiutatione, a confutation. Conflitto, a battle, a conflict, a
skirmish, a fight. Also afflicted. Confluentia, confluence, flowing together,
or meeting of two or diverse rivers in one. Confondere, fondo, fondei, fuso, to
confound, to disturb. Conformare, to conform. Conform, Conformeuole,
conformable or like. Conformita, conformation, conformity, or affinity.
Confortare, to comfort, to persuade. Confortatiuo, comfortable. Confortatore, a
comforter, a perswader. Confortini, a kind of simnell or ginger bread. Also
little comforts. Conforto, comfort, persuasion, help. Confrateria, Confratria,
a brotherhood: a fricrie, a convent where men live in a fraternity together.
Confratre, a sworn brother with one, a fellow friar. Confrontare, to confront
or compare together: to butte or shock together. Confrustagno, some tool about
digging of mines. Confuggere, to fly in company or run away with others.
Confusione, confusion. Confuso, confused, troubled, disturbed in mind,
confounded, or adawed. Confutare, to confute, to confound. Confutatione, a
confutation. Confuteuole, that which may be confuted. Con garbo, with a grace,
handsomely. Congedo, leave, license, a dismission. Congegnare, to work or
frame together. Congelare, to congeale. Congelatione, Congelatura, a
congealing. Congelatori di mercurio, Alchimists. Congenerato, begotten or
engendered together. Congenito, begotten with, or engendered with. Congerie, a
heap, a pile or mass of diverse things, a huddle. Congettura, Congiettura, a
surmise, a conjecture. Congetturare, to surmise, to conjecture. Congettureuole,
coniecturable. Congio, a measure holding about a gallon. Congiongere,
Congiognere, giongo, gionsi, giunto, to cunioyne, to combine. Congiongimento, a
conioyning or combining. Congiontione, Congiuntione, a conjunction or
combination. Congiontura, a conioyning. Also a joint or iointing of any lims
together. Congionto, Congiunto, conjoined, conbined. Also a kinseman.
Congiugale, that is or may be joined to the male. Congiugare, to conioyne or
couple together, to marry. Also to coniugate verbs. Congiugatione, a
conjugation, a coupling a marriage. Congiura, Congiuramento, a conspiracy, a
coniuration. Congiurare, to conspire, to conjure. Congiurati, conspirers,
coniurators. Congiuratore, a conspirer, a coniurator. Congola, a fish so
called. Also a traie, a washing bowl or such vessel. Congratia, with grace,
kindly, graciously. Congratulare, to congratulate, to rejoice together.
Congratulatione, congratulation, a rejoicing together. Congregare, to assemble
together. Congregatione, an assembly or congregation. Congresso, an assembly,
a resorting together, a congresse. Congrio, Congio, the fish congre.
Cong^uentia, meetnes, likeness, agreeablenes, accord. Congruita, fitnes,
decorum, congruitie. Congruo, fit, proper, meet, agreeing together. Coniare,
to coin, to mint money, to stamp, to brand or mark: to devise, to forge.
Coniatore, a coyner, a minter, a stamper, a deviser, a forger. Coniella, the
herb winter sauorie. Coniettura, a conjecture, or surmising. Conietturare, to
conjecture or surmise. Conigliera, a conigrea or waren for conies. Coniglia, a
doeconie, or rabet. Coniglio, a buckcony, or rabet. Conio, a coin, a stamp, or
mint. Also a wedge to cleave wood. Coniugio, marriage, matrimony, wedlock,
copulation. Conizza, the herb fleabane. Conlegare, to bind or tie together.
Conlettione, a choice or election made together. Connaturale, conaturall,
joined to nature. Conne, a coniunctiue letter for Con. Connesso, annexed or
joined unto. Connisa, an herb, the smoke whereof kills fleas, and chaseth
serpents. Conno, a woman's privy parts or quaint as Chaucer calls it.
Connocchia, Conocchia, a rock or distaffe. Also a kind of squib of wild
fire. Connocchiare, Conocchiare, to spin. Also to wind upon a distaffe.
Connubiale, of or pertaining to wedlock or marriage. Connubiare, Conubiare, to
wed, to marie, to couple together, to spouse. Connubio, Conubio, a wedding, a
marriage, a matrimony, a conioining, a bridal. Connumerare, to number
together. Conoscere, nosco, nobbi, nosciuto, to know, to wot, to acknowledge,
to understand, to ken. Conoscenza, knowledge, witting, acquaintance.
Conoscente, an acquaintance or friend, a known man. Also grateful.
Conoscibile, that may be known. Conoscimento, knowledge. Conoscitore, an
acknowledger, one that knows. Conquassare, to toss, to beat, to hull up and
down, as a ship upon the sea. Conquassatione, Conquasso, a tossing a tumbling,
a shaking, a rouling, as a ship at sea. Also havoc, ruin, spoil, or
dissolution, a hurlie-burly, a commotion. Conquesta, a conquest, a victory.
Conquestare, to conquer, to subdue. Conquidere, to conquer, to subdue.
Conquisitore, a commissioner to enquire for any thing, a muster master.
Conquistare, as Conquestare. Conquistatore, a conqueror, a subduer, a victor.
Conquiso, conquered, subdued. Conquisto, a conquest, a victory, a subduing.
Consacrare, to consecrate. Consacratione, a consecration. Consagrare, to
consecrate. Consanguineo, a kinse-man, one near in blood, cosen, kin.
Consanguinita, consanguinitie, neerenes in blood, kindred. Consapeuole, of
counsel, knowing, witting, guilty. Conscientia, a conscience.
Conscientieuole, as Conscientioso. Conscientioso, conscientious, full of
conscience, conscionable. Conscinomantia, divination with sieues or searces.
Conscinante, a diuiner by sieues or searces. Conscio, guilty, witting, of
counsel, accessarie. Conscritti padri, enrolled, or registered among the
fathers or senators. Conseco, with him. Consecrare, to consecrate.
Consecratione, a consecration. Consegnare, to appoint, to assign, to resign,
to deliver. Consegnatione, an appointment, an assignation, a resignation, a
delivery, an assigning. Conseguente, a consequent. Conseguentemente,
consequently, by consequence. Conseguenza, a consequence. Conseguire, guisco,
guito, to get, to atchieue, to attain, to follow with. Conseguimento, an
atchieuance, an obtaining, an attaining. Conseguitare, as Conseguire.
Conseguitore, an atchieuer, an obtainer. Consegurta, surely, with security or
safety. Consenso, a consent, a voice or grant. Consentaneo, convenient,
agreeing, consenting. Consentimento, a consent, a grant. Consentire, Consento,
Consentito, to consent, to assent or grant unto with others. Consertare, to
reduce to order, form, tune or proportion. Consertatamente, proportionably,
tunably, in order. Conserto, a consort or unison in music. Conserua, a
buttrie, a larderie, a pantrie or spicerie, a comfet-house. Also a storehouse,
a wardrobe. Also any conserve or preserve. Conseruare, to keep, to conserve,
to preserve. Conseruatiua, preserving. Conseruo, one that serves with other, a
fellow-seruant. Considerabile, to be considered, considerable. Considerando, as
Considerabile. Considerare, to consider, to bethink. Consideratione,
consideration. Consigliare, to counsel, to advise. Consigliere, a counselor.
Consiglio, counsel, advice, persuasion. Consignare, as Consegnare.
Consignatione, as Consegnatione. Consiligine, an herb: thrust an iron through
the root thereof, and thrust that iron through the ear of any poisoned or
infected beast, all the poison and venom will void at that place, and the
beast live. Consimigliare, to be alike and semblable. Consimile, all alike,
semblable, like to others. Consistenza, a standing fast or a consistence, a
settling. Consistere, sisto, sistei, sistuto, to consist. Consistorio, a
consistory or council assembled in such a place. Consobrino, a cofin germain,
or sisters son. Consolare, to comfort, to persuade. Also pertaining to a
consul, or one that has borne the office of a consul. Consolato, comforted,
persuaded. Also the office of a consul, the consulship. Consolatoria lettera, a
letter of comfort. Consolatione, consolation, comfort. Consolatore, a
comforter, a persuader. Consolida, the herb Larks-foote. Consolida maggiore,
the herb Comfrie, Knit-backe or backwoort. Consolidare, to consolidate, to
harden, to make solid, to make tough: to confirm, to establish.
Consolidatione, a confirmation, a consolidation, an assuring. Consolidatiuo,
that will consolidate, confirm, assure, make fast or solid, or whole again.
Consolido, hard, solid, tough stiff, confirmed. Consolo, Console, a consul, a
burgamaster or portreeue. Consonante, consonant, agreeing. Also a letter called
a consonant. Consonantia, a consonance or agreement in voices or sounds.
Consonare, to agree in voices. Consono, a concordance in sounds or sounding.
Consonto, consumed, wasted, spent. Consopportatione vostra, with your
toleration, by your leave. Consorte, a wife, a companion, a fellowmate. Also a
consort, a fellow, a mate, make or a husband. Consortio, company, society,
fellowship or consort. Consortire, tisco, tito, to consort together.
Conspergere, spergo, spersi, sperso, as Cospargere. Conspetto, the presence or
view of a man. Conspicuo, conspicuous, open, clear, manifest, plain.
Conspira, a conspiracy. Conspirare, to conspire. Conspiratione, a conspiracy.
Constante, constant, steadfast. Constanza, constancy, stedfastnes. Constare, to
persist, to consist, to continue, to persevere, to stand together. Consternare,
as Costernare. Consternatione, as Costernatione. Constituire, tuisco, tuito, to
constitute, to institute, ordain, establish or appoint. Constitutione, a
constitution, institution or ordinance. Constituto, a constitute, an institute.
Constitutore, a constituter, an establisher. Constorcere, as Contorcere.
Construrre, Construggo, Construssi, to conster, to build, to frame, to
construct, to erect, to set up. Construtto, construed, built, framed. Also a
construction. Construttione, a construction. Construttore, a framer, a builder,
a construer, a maker of construction. Consueto, accustomed, used, wont,
enured. Consuetudine, Consueto, custom, wont, use, fashion, habit, ure.
Consulta, Consultatione, a consultation. Consultare, to consult, to deliberate.
Consultore, a consulter. Consumabile, that may be consumed. Consumare, to
consume, to waste, to spend. Consumamento, a consuming, a wasting Consumatione,
a consummation. Consumato, absolute, perfect, consumed, spent, wasted. Conta,
recounted, manifest, known, declared, counted, numbered, told. Also a dwelling
place. Contadina, a country maid, a country woman, wench, homely wench or
less. Contadinelle, country songs, gigs, madrigals or pastoral sonets.
Contadino, a clown, a peasant, a country man, a swain, a hind, a borrell.
Contadinozza, a handsome country less. Contado, a county, an earldom, a
shire, a region. Also the country. Contagio, contagion, infection. Contagione,
as Contagio, an infection. Contagioso, contagious, infectious. Contaminare, to
contaminate, to pollute, to corrupt, to infect. Contaminatione, contamination,
corruption, infection. Contana, a disease in a horses forelegs. Contanti,
ready money. Contare, to count, to reckon, to cast, to number, to tell, to
report. Contastare, as Contrastare. Contasto, as Contrasto. Contatore, a
reckoner, a numbrer, a teller, an auditor, a keeper of account. Contatto, a
touching or feeling with or together. Conte, an earl, a count. Also noted,
reported, known or famous. Contea, a county, an earldome, a shire.
Conteggiare, to account, to reckon. Contegno, coins, nicenes, pecuishnes,
gravity, sobriety. Contegnoso, coie, nice, peevish, scrupulous, grave, sober.
Contemperare, to temper, to moderate, to accord, to tune with. Contemplare, to
contemplate, to speculate. Contemplatione, contemplation, speculation.
Contemplatiuo, contemplative, speculatiue. Contemptibile, contemptible, base,
to be skorned. Contenaro, a kind of huge great weight or measure. Contendere,
tendo, tesi, teso, to contend, to strive, to debate, to wrangle. Contenenza, a
containing, continence. Contenente, containing, the continent. Contenere,
tengo, tenni, tenuto, to contain or hold. Contenuto, contained, held.
Contentare, to content, to please. Contentione, a contention, a debate, a
strife, a wrangling. Contentioso, contentious, full of debate. Contentatura, a
content or contentment. Contentezza, content, contentment. Contento, content,
pleased, satisfied. Also contentment. Contenuto, contained. Also the thing
contained. Contermine, a concordance, an unity, a being together. Also
bordering, limiting or joining with or near. Conterraneo, one of the same
town or country. Contesa, a contention, a strife, a debate or wrangling.
Contessa, a countess, an earls wife. Contessere, tesso, teslei, tessuto, to
weaue or work together. Contestabile, a Conestable. Contestare, to strive, to
debate. Contesto, Contesso, or Contessuto, inwrought or wouen together,
enterlaced or entrailed together. Contezza, account, information, certainty,
advertisement, familiarity. Contigiare, to dight, to adorn, to trim.
Contigie, leather hose, such as our elders were wont to wear. Also trimming,
deckings, ornaments, garnishings. Contiguita, neighborhood, contiguitie, that
ioineth near together. Contiguo, adjoining near or touching one another.
Continenza, continency, chastity, a countenance. Continente, continent,
chaste. Also the maine land or continent. Contingente, that chances or
fortuneth, happening. Also that may be or not be. Continuare, Continouare, to
continue. Continuatione, Continouatione, perseverance, continuance.
Continuanza, as Continuatione. Continuo, Continouo, Continuale, continual.
Contista, an arithmetician, a caster of accoumpts. Conto, known, noted,
counted, cast, numbered, told, reported, related, proclaimed. Also an accoumpt,
a reckoning, a report, an estimation. Also a tale, a discourse, a count.
Contorcere, torco, torcei, torto, to wriggle, to writhe, to turn, to toste, to
wrest, to wind up with, to spraine, to wrinch. Contornare, to encompas, or
encircle about. Contorno, a place near about, a circuit. Also the purlies
about a wood, or forest. Contorta, a wrinching or a spraining of ones limbs.
Contorto, wrigled, wreathed, turned, tossed, wrested, wrinched, sprained, wound
up with. Contra, against, opposite, contrary. Contrabandiere, a forfaiter, one
that meddles to buy or sell forbidden wares or goods, a transgresser of the
laws. Contrabandito, counterbanished, b^^ properly, one that does against
laws. Contrabando, a forfeiture against any statute, unlawful dealing,
forbidden marts, what is done against proclamation. Contrabasso, a false base
in music, a counterbase, voice or string of any instrument. Contrabatta, a
counter-buffe. Contracambiare, to counterchange. Contra cambio, a
counterchange. Contracifera, a countercifer, a cifer that does answer another.
Contracolpo, a counterbuffe. Contrada, a high way, a parish, a street, a
neighborhood, a cuntrie, a precinct. Contradetta, a contradiction.
Contradetto, contradicted, gainesayd. Contradicente, contradicting,
gainesaying. Contradire, dico, dissi, detto, to contradict, or gainesay.
Contradistinto, distinguished moreover and besides. Contradittione,
contradiction, gainesaying. Contradittorio, a contradictorie. Contradiuieto, a
countermand, or counterbidding. Contrafare, faccio, feci, fatto, to
counterfeit, to imitate, to do against. Contrafatto, a counterfeit, a false or
not right thing. Also counterfaited, transgressed, done against, imitated.
Contrafattore, a counterfaiter, an imitator, an offender. Contrafodera, a
counterlyning. Also a false skabberd. Contraforte, a counterfort, or skonce.
Contrafronte, a spur, or the inner part of a bulwark. Contraggere, to
contract, to covenant, to bargain. Contra lettera, a countermand, a letter
written against another. Contralto, a counter treble in music. Contramaglie,
crowns or coin in gibrish or rogues language. Contramandare, to countermand.
Contramezzana, the name of a sail in a ship. Contramina, a countermine.
Contraminare, to countermine. Contramuro, a countermure. Contraoperatione, a
counterworke, a contrary operation. Contrapassare, to do or to forfait against
any edict. Contrapasso, a forfaiture against any statute, a law as we should
say limme for limme, as if one kill another with a stone or a fall, he must be
killed so himself; it is a word of law. Contrapelo, against the hair.
Contrapesare, to counterpoise, Contrapeso, a counterpoise. Contrapoliza, a
countermand, a counterbill. Contraponere, Contraporre, to oppose, or lay
against. Contrapositione, an opposition, a contrariety. Contraposta, an
opposition, a contradiction. Contraposto, opposed, or laid against, foreanenst.
Contrapuntare, to counterpoint. Contrapunto, counterpointed. Also a back-stitch
in sowing. Contrariare, to contrary, to impugn. Contrarieta, contrariety,
opposition. Contrario, contrary, opposite, against. Contrarispondere, to
answer against another. Contrarre, traggo, trassi, tratto, to contract, to
treat together, to pull together. Contrarondo, a certain number of commanders
or officers going to visit the corpse de guard watches, sentinels, or the
round, to see if they perform their duty. Contrascarpa, a counterscarffe, a
countermure. Contrascritto, a counterwriting. Contrasegno, a token, a mark, a
sign. Contrastare, to resist, to withstand, to strive, to contend. Contrasto,
a contention, a withstanding, a strife, a contecke. Contratenore, a
countertenor in music. Contratondo, as Contrarondo. Contrattare, to contract,
to treat together. Contrattatione, a contract, a contracting. Contratto, a
contract. Also contracted, couenanted, bargained. Contrauenire, vengo, venni,
venuto, to come against, to transgress. Contrauenimento, a transgressing, or
breach of law. Contribuire, buisco, buito, to contribute. Contribuli, men
borne in the selfsame parish, of the same tribe. Contributione, a
contribution. Contributore, a contributor. Contristare, to be sorrowful with.
Contristame^to, a sorowing with others. Contritione, contrition, penitence,
repentance, remorse. Contrito, contrite, penitent, sorrowful. Contro, against,
opposite, contrary. Controuersia, a controversy. Contubernio, a tent, or a
pauillion, a fellowship in a house. Also a camerada of soldiers. Contumace,
disobedient, stubberne, wilful, selfwilled, headstrong, stiffnecked.
Contumacia, disobedience, stubbornes, wilfulnes, frowardnes, contempt.
Conturbame^to, a perturbation, trouble, hinderance, or disquietnes. Conturbare,
to trouble, to vex, to molest, to hinder, to disquiet, to confound.
Conturbato, conturbed, or troubled with. Contusione, a bruise, or bruising of a
man's body. Contutto, with all, for all that. Contuttoche, withal that,
howbeit, for all that, notwithstanding. Contuttocio, as Contuttoche.
Conualescente, in health, in good estate. Conualescenza, health, good estate.
Conubiare, as Connubiare. Conubio, as Connubio. Conuegna, a covenant, a bargain
or condition. Conueneuolezza, Conueneuolita, as Conuenienza. Conuenente, as
Conueneuole, Also a covenant. Conueneuole, convenient, meet, proper,
beseeming, expedient, necessary. Conueniente, as Conueneuole, a conuenience.
Conuenienza, conueniencie, expediencie, meetenes. Also an agreement. Conuenire,
to behooue, to be convenient, to be expedient. Also to come or meet together.
Also to convent, to cite, to sommon. Also to appear. Also to agree together,
or condition together. Conuentare, to convent, or enter into a religious house.
Conuenticulo, a conuenticle, a conspiracy, a complot. Conuentione, a covenant,
an agreement, or a bargain. Also a condition. Conuento, agreed upon. Also a
convent or religious house, a meeting place: sometimes it is joined with Per, as
Per conuento. In such sort or manner, so. Also a covenant or agreement.
Conuentuale, of a convent or religious house. Conuenuto, come or met together,
conuented or cited, agreed or conditioned together. Conuersare, to converse or
frequent ^^gither. Conuersatione, conversation, society. Conuerseuole,
conuersable, sociable. Conuersatiuo, conuersable, sociable. Conuersione, a
conversion or change, a transformation. Conuerso, converted. Conuertentia, a
converting or turning. Conuertire, tisco, tito, to turn, to change, to
transform, to convert. Conuertito, Conuerso, converted, turned, changed,
transformed. Also a conuertite. Conuessita, the bending of a hollow thing
turning downward. Conuesso, crooked and bending down as the heaven does.
Conuiare, to convey, to lead, to conduct. Conuicino, near by, about,
neighboring with. Conuiene, it behooves, it is requisite, it is necessary.
Conuincere, vinco, vinsi, vinto, or vitto, to convince, to convict. Conuinto,
convinced, convicted. Conuitare, to inuit, to bid, to feast, to banquet.
Conuitati, invited, bidden, feasted or banquetted. Also guests. Conuitatore, an
inuitor, a bidder, a feaster, a banquetter. Conuito, Conuiuio, a banquet, a
feast, a guest-meale or eating together. Conuittione, Conuittura, a conviction,
or conuicting, a vanquishing. Conuitto, vanquished, convicted, convinced.
Conuiuare, to feast or banquet, or make good cheer together. Conuiuenza, a
conuiuencie, a living together. Also a conviction. Conuiuere, viuo, vissi,
viuuto, to live, to eat and drink together. Conuiuio, a feast, a banquet, or
eating together. Conuocare, to conuoke or call together. Conuocatione, a
convocation or assembly. Conuolgere, volgo, volsi, volto, to ouerturne, to
ouertosse, to divert. Conuoluoli, any twinings or windings about, a rumbling in
ones belly. Conuoluere, as Conuolgere. Also to turn or twine together or
about. Conuulsione, a conuulsion or shrinking up of the sinews. Conzare, as
Conciare, etc. Conzi^ro, as Concier^. Coorte, as Cohorte. Copella, as Coppella.
Copellare, as Coppellare. Copercero, a kind of upper frocke, or such garment.
Coperchia, a couerlid, a hilling, a shroud, a shelter. Coperchiare, to cover,
to shroud, to shelter. Coperchio, a cover, a lid, a shroud, a shelter. Coperco,
a kind of coin or money. Coperticula, the herb water-lillie. Coperto, a
cover, a lid. Also shrouded, hilled, covered or sheltred. Copertoio, a cover, a
lid, a covering, a hilling. Copertura, a couerlet or covering. Copese, as
Colabacco. Copetelle, the name of an herb. Copetta, a kind of sweet bread
made of honey and spice. Copettaio, that makes such bread. Cophino, a coffin,
a chest. Also a panier, a maund, a bin. Copia, store, plenty, abundance. Also
a couple, or pair, or brace. Also a copy, an original, a pattern, a
transcript. Copialettere, a clarke, a secretary, a book keeper. Copiare, to
copy or write out. Also to ensample or match. Copiba, a tree in India, the
bark whereof being cut yeeldes forth precious balsamum. Copiere, Copiero, a
cup bearer, a fillcup. Copila, a be hiue. Also the hole at which the be goes
in. Copioso, copious, plentious, large, great. Copista, a copy writer, a
register, a remembrancer. Copistaccio, a foolish writer, scribler or
note-gatherer. Copistare, to write, copy or scribble from book to book.
Copistuzzo, as Copistaccio. Copoiello, a pullie. Copola, a kind of hunting
staff used in Italy. Coppa, a cup, a bowl, a goblet: the nape of the head.
Some part of a saddle. Also the test of any metal. Coppadi gioue, a kind of
high growing weed, which every morning as the sun rises it bends his tops
to him, and so soon as the sun is risen it stands up again, and bends
again at his setting: and being set it rises again looking westward, and in
the morning eastward. Coppare, to knock out the brains, to kill, to quell, to
slay. Copparella, a little cup, a little goblet. Coppe, cups, bowls, goblets.
Coppella, a refiners word, called the test or loye of silver or gold. Also a
kind of wheelebarrow. Also a dosser or panier. Coppellare, to bring to the
test, to refine as silver and gold. Coppetta, a little cup or goblet. Also a
kind of country cake or sugar bread. Coppi, tiles over houses. Coppia, a
couple, a brace, a cast, a pair. Coppiere, Coppiero, a cup bearer, a filcup.
Coppo, a tile over a house. Coppola, a shepherds cap, as we say a Scottish
cap. Copriletto, a couerlet for a bed. Coprimento, a covering, a protection, a
shroud or shelter, a hilling, a head attire. Copritura, a couerlet, a covering.
Coprire, Copro, Copersi, Coperto, to cover, to hill, to protect, to shroud, to
shelter, to cloak. Copritesta, a cap or hat, or any cover for the head, a
couer-sheafe. Copso, a fish called in Latin Cops. Copula, a couple. Also a
copulation or doubling. Copulare, to join or couple together. Copulatione, a
copulation or joining together. Copulatiuo, that coupleth or may couple
together. Coquo, a cook. Cor, Core, the heart or core of any thing. Coraccia,
Corazza, Coraccina, a cuirace, a brestplate, a vantplate. Some take it for the
arming of the body, and back. Coracino, a little heart, a bright raven or
crowe-blacke color. Also a kind of blackish sea fish with a head shining like
gold. Coraciesia, as Calicia. Corada, Corrada, the pluck, the geither,
hasselet or midriffe of any beast. Coradella, a little pluck, midriffe,
geither or hasselet. Also a goose giblets, or vmbles of a dear. Coraggio,
courage, stoutnes, hardiness. Coraggioso, courageous, hardy, stout. Corale,
hearty, cordial. Corallina, the herb Male pimpernel. Also Coral or mountain
coralline. Corallino, Coral color, a little Coral. Corallo, Coral, which
grows in the sea like a shrubbe, and taken out waxes hard. Corame, leather
tanned or dressed. Coranta, Corranta, a kind of French-dance. Coratiere, a
broker for any bargain. Corba, a basket, a flasket. Also a kind of measure of
liquid things. Corbacchione, a filthy raven. Also a filthy fellow, a gull or
a ninnie. Corbacchio, a filthy great raven. Also the name of a worm breeding
in horses. Corbastro, a water raven. Corbella, Corbetta, a little basket.
Corbetto, a fish called in latin Glaucus. Corbezzolo, Corbezzuolo, a kind of
wilding or crab tree or the fruit thereof. Also a kind of wild tree in Italy,
bearing a fruit much like a strawberrie; and therefore some call it strawberrie
tree or an Arbute tree. Also the fruit of that tree. Corbine, a kind of wild
black cherries. Corbita, a great ship or hulke for burden and carriage. Corbo,
a raven or a crow. Also a kind of sea fish. Corbona, hell or a place whence no
redemption is. Also such a place as we call, little ease in our prisons.
Corcalle, Colanza, a kind of bird. Corcaiuolo, a kind of worm breeding in
horses: whereof cunning ferriers say there be eight kinds. Corcare, to lie
down, to rest, to lie along. Also to bray as a stag or a bucke. Corda, a rope,
a cable, a cord, a halter, a line, a string. Also a torment or strappado. Also
a kind of measure used in Italy. Cordaglia, Cordaggi, the shrowdes or
tacklings of a ship, all manner of cords or cordage. Cordapso, the wringing and
torment of the small guts in ones body. Cordare, to cord or string. Cordaro,
Cordaruolo, a rope-maker, a roper. Cord, strings for instruments. Cord di
minugie, strings made of guts, as lute strings. Cordegliere, Cordigliere, a
friar. Cordella, as Cordicella. Cordelline, little strings, twists, laces or
shirt strings. Cordialita, hartines. Cordicella, a little cord, a string, a
line, a tape, a lace, a ribond, an inkle, a binding, a twine or a fillet.
Cordiglio, a certain habit that Spanish Friars use. Cordini, little thongs or
latchets of leather. Cordilla, a kind of fish. Cordoglio, hearts grief, teene,
sorrow. Cordoncella, as Cordicella. Also the name of an herb. Cordouano,
Cordoano, Spanish leather or cordouane. Also as Corribo. Cordogliere, as
Cordegliere. Cordoncini, as Cordelline. Cordone, a great cord, a hatband. Also
the name of a certain gut in a horse. Core, a heart, a core. Also a Greek
coin of four dragmes. Corecino, Coresino, a little ha^t or core. Coreo, a
foot in meetre of two syllables; the one long, the other short. Corgna, the
fruit of the tree Corgno. Corgnialc, a wood called dog wood. Corgno, a tree
called a dog tree. Corgnola, a kind of red stone worn in seal rings called a
cornix. Cori, an herb which boiled in wine and given to any body in a swoune,
he will presently sweat and come to himself again. Coriaginoso, sick of the
hide-bound. Coriagmea, sickness in cattle called hide-bound, that is when the
skin does clean so fast to their sides that they cannot stir. Coriambi, a
foot in meetre having the first and last long, and two in the middleshort.
Coriandoli, Coriander comfets. Coriandro, a shrub bearing Coriander grains.
Coricante, couchant, a word of armory. Coricare, Corigare, as Corcare. Corila,
a hasell nut or filbert. Corilo, a hazell nut or filberd tree. Corimbi, a kind
of loope rings. Corinca, the snarling of a dog. Corintha, an herb the juice
whereof is present poison. Corinthi, the small raisons, we call them corans.
Corio, a foot in meter of two syllables one long, the other short. Corintho, a
kind of Architecture. Corione, a thin skin or membrane under Dura matter.
Coriza, a catarrhe or rheum in the nose. Corlare, to wind or reele silk upon
bobins. Corlo, a bottom or clue of thread. Also a reele, a winder or rise to
wind silk with. Also a top or gigge that children play withal. Cornacchia, a
chough, a dawe, a rooke. Cornacchiare, to chat like a dawe. Cornacchione, a
great filthy iackdaw. Also a pratler, a railer. Cornamusa, a bagpipe or a
hornet. Look Fare cornamusa. Cornamusare, to play upon a bagpipe or
hornepipe. Also to call aloud to one that will not hear. Cornare, to horn, to
set horns upon ones head. Also to shocke or but as rams do. Also taken for to
call aloud, or importune one that will not hear. Cornaro, Corniere, a horner.
Corn^a, the hornie tunicle of the eye, wherein the apple of the eye is placed.
Corneggiato, bowing or bending as a horn, horned. Corneo, hard, hornie, of,
or like a horn. Cornetta di caualli, a cornet or troop of horses, or their
ensign. Cornetta, a kind of min^^er ho^d^ (...) scholars and masters of Arts
wear (...) Universities for honor. Also the ensign which is carried by the
Lanciers. Cornettaro, a cornet maker. Also one that winds a cornet. Cornetto,
a fish so called in Genoa. Also a cornet or little horn, a bugle, an
inckhorne. Also a cupping glass. Cornice, a chough, a daw, a rooke. Also a red
Cornix stone. Also the ledge whereon they hang tapistrie in any room. Also an
out-ietting piece or part of a house or wall. Cornicello, a little horn, or
bugle. Cornicina, as Corniola. Cornicine del fagiano, the red gilles of a
phesant. Cornicione, as Cornice. Cornifero, Cornigero, one bearing horns.
Cornio, Corniola, Corniolo, the cornell or long Cherrie tree: Hounds tree:
Dogs-berrie tree: Pricke-timber tree, or gater trull tree, or wild cherrie
tree. Also a red precious stone called a Cornix. Also a kind of Shepherds cur
or mungrell dog. Cornisone, as Cornice. Cornizaro, a kind of water foul or
sea raven. Corno, a horn. Also a kind of brazen instrument like a horn. Also
the horns or hard bones growing under the saddle in the side of a horse. Also
as Cornio. Cornobio, a kind of little fish. Cornola, a carobe or carobe bean
cod. Corno d' homone, one of the most precious stones or gems in Ethiopia,
inform like a rams horn. Cornolo, a carob tree. Cornuola, as Corgnola.
Cornuoluzza, a little cornix stone. Cornuto, horned. Also a cuckold. Also a
fish so called. Also a kind of loaf, bun, or roll of bread. Coro, the south
wind. Also a Quier of a church, or company of people. Corognale, as Cornio.
Corografia, the description of a region or country. Corografo, a describer of
regions or cuntries. Corolario, Corollario, correspondent, agreement with the
matter spoken before. Also an advantage, an addition, a little gift, or
overplus above measure. Corona, a crown, a chaplet, a garlande, a diadem or
circlet wherewith princes be crowned. Also a company, a crewe: a circle or
round of persons standing round together about one. Also a pair or set of
beads. Also a piece of coin called a crown. Also a round circle or compass
about the moon, a sign in heaven upon the shoulder of Artophylax. Also the
round circle between the white and the apple or sight of the eye. Also the
browe of a wall or a pillar to cast off the rain. Also the beginning, joining
or crown of the hoof of a horse. Also a thick and pointing process of bones
much like to the snagge of a Hartshorne. Also a garland of flowers. Also the
brim, tip, or edge of a pot. Corona regia, the herb Melilot. Corona regale, as
Coppa di Gioue. Corona della terra, ground Iuie. Corona castrense, a crown
given to him that first invaded the enemies camp. Corona vallare, idem. Corona
murale, a crown given to him that first scaled the walls. Corona ciuica, a
garland of oak given to him that saved a citizen, by him that was so saved.
Corona nauale, a crown given to him that first boarded a ship. Corona
rostrata, idem. Corona ossidionale, a crown given to a captain that raised a
force. Corona triomfale, a crown sent to an Emperor or captain general in
honor of triumph. Corona ouale, a crown given to a prince or captain for a
victory without slaughter of men. Corona mirtea, idem. Corona donatica, a
crown given for valor and prowes. Corona prouinciale, idem. Coronale, that
future or seame which is in the forepart of the skull, compassing the forehead
like a half circle. Coronale vena, a vein which being a branch of Chilis
enuironeth the heart like unto a crown. Coronamento, a crowning, a coronation.
Coronare, to crown, to engarlande, to encircle. Coronatione, a coronation.
Coronella del piede, the upper part of the foot. Coronetta, a coronet, a
circlet, a chaplet, a garland. Coroniere, a crowner, a maker of beads or
crowns. Corossolo, a robin red breast, or red-taile. Corpacciata, a panchfull,
a glutting. Corpo, a body, a corpse, a corporation, a volume. Corpo di guardia,
a corp de guard, the maine watch, a court of guard, the body of a watch
consisting of a certain number of soldiers. Corpolente, Corpulente,
corpulent, big of body. Corpolenza, corpulencie, greatness of body. Corporale,
corporal, pertaining to a body, a box wherein priests keep their hostias or
sacrament. Corporeo, having a body, corporeal. Corporatura, as Corpolenza.
Corre, Colgo, Colsi, Colto, Look Cogliere. Corredare, to adorn, to equip, to
rig as ships be, to tackle, to furnish, to adorn, to dight. Corredi,
ornaments, equipage, tacklings of a ship, furnitures, or dightings. Corredo, is
properly those things that a bride has given her by her friends at her
marriage. Correggere, reggo, ressi, retto, to correct, to punish, to chastise,
to control. Correggia, a girt, a cingle, a stirrup leather, a strap, a
scourge. Also a latchet of a shoe. Also a girding loud fart. Correggiare, to
girt, to scourge, to strap. Also to fart aloude. Correggiata, a blow with a
scourge or a strap. Correggiati, Correggiali, the straps of a flaile, or of a
stirrup. Also flailes. Correggiaro, Correggiere, a farter, a guirder.
Correggimento, a correction. Correggiola, Correggiuola, a little girt, strap,
scourge or fart, the squirt or laske. Also a kind of boys play used in
Italy. Also swine-grasse, or knot-grasse, or bloud-wort. Correggitore, a
corrector, a controuler. Correllatiuo, correllatiue, having relation to
another. Corrente, running, current. Also a stream or channel of a river, a
tide. Correre, corro, corsi, corso, to run. Correre il palio, to run a race.
Correre la lancia, to tilt, to run at tilt. Correre fortuna, to suffer
shipwreck, to be in danger. Correre l'istessa fortuna, to run one same
fortune. Correre pericolo, to run in danger. Correria, an excursion, an
outrode. Correspondere, to answer to, to be correspondent, to be answerable, to
agree unto. Also to answer for. Correspondente, that agrees with, that
answers to, a surety, correspondent. Correspondenza, a correspondencie, an
agreeing with. Corresponditore, that agrees with, that answers for, a
surety, a correspondent. Correttione, correction, punishment. Corretto,
corrected, punished, chastised, controuled. Correttore, a corrector, a
punisher. Correzza, as Correggia. Correzzuola, as Correggiuola. Corr'huomo, as
Corrihuomo. Corribo, as Corriuo. Corricale, a tree, the male whereof is ever
barren, and the female ever fruitful. Corrihuomo, the noise and cry that men
make when they raise hue and cry for help. Corridore, Corritore, a runner, a
swift horse. Also a long terrase or gallerie. Also the upper deck of a ship.
Corriero, Corriere, a post, a carrier, a messenger, a pursiuant, a runner.
Corriggibile, that may be corrected. Corrispondere, as Correspondere.
Corrispondente, as Correspondente. Corrispondenza, as Correspondenza.
Corriuale, a rival, a coriuall, a competitor. Corriuare, to arrive or come to
a place together. Also to be or play the coriuall in love. Also to bank, to
land, or come near the shore. Corriuo, hasty, foolish, headlong, fond, rash,
fond-hardie, foole-hardie, violent. Also a hasty lover. Also a fellow that
will be persuaded to do or say any thing that no body else will do, a simple
gull, a credulous gull, one more rash then wise. Corrizza, a rheum, or
catarrhe, or running at the nose. Corroborare, to corroborate, or strengthen.
Corroboratione, a corroboration, or strengthening. Corrocciare, to anger, to
vex, to chafe, to fret, to move to wrath. Corroccio, anger, vexation, wrath,
chafing, ire, fretting. Corroccioso, angry, subject to anger, wrathful,
irefull, fretfull. Corrodere, rodo, rosi, roso, to gnaw, to fret, or corrode.
Corrompere, rompo, ruppi, rotto, to corrupt, to putrify. Also to bribe.
Corrompimento, a corrupting, a corruption. Also a bribing. Corrompitore, a
corrupter, a briber. Corrosiua, a corosiue. Also corosiue. Corroso, gnawne,
fretted, or corroded. Also as Caroliccio. Corrottione, a corruption, a
putrefaction, a bribing. Corrotto, corrupted, rotten, putrified, bribed. Also
mourning or sorowing for the dead. Corruca, a bird called a tittling. Also the
bird which hatcheth the c^ckoes ^g^. Corrucciare, as Corrocciare. Corruccio, as
Corro^^^^. Corruccioso, as Corroc^ioso. Corruscare, to lighten* (...), to
flash, to brandish. Corrusco, Corruscatione, a lightning, a sparkling, a
flashing, or fire in the air. Corrutt^la, a corruption, a corrupting.
Corruttibile, corruptible. Corruttione, as Corrottione. Corrutto, as Corrotto.
Corruttore, as Corrompitore. Corsa, a running or race, or course of horses.
Corsaldo, a horse called a courser of Naples. Corsale, Corsaro, a pirate, or
rouer by sea. Corsalare, to rob by sea, to commit piracie, to play the pirate.
Corsaletto, a corselet, or an armor of a foote-souldier complete.
Corseggiare, to roue, to run, to gad, or range up and down, to play the
pirate. Corsesca, a kind of darting or shooting weapon, some take it for a
partisan or iauelin. Corsia, a crane in a ship. Also the upper deck of a ship,
a planke, or the hatches in a ship. Corsiere, Corsiero, a fleede or courser of
Naples. Corso, a course or running or race of a horse, a place where races are
run. Also a kind of wine in Corsica. Also the participle of Correre, run.
Corsore, as Cursore. Also a kind of rundlet or firkin or little barrel for
dry things. Corta, short, brief, curtald. Cortalda, a kind of short bumbard,
chamber or pot-gun. Cortaldo, a curtall, a horse without a tail. Cortare, to
shorten, to curtall, Corte, a court or palace of a prince, a guild (...)
magistrates sit. Also a yard. (...) true of magistrates (...). A court of
alder^ ^^^^^cia, the rind or bark of a tree. Also a hide, a skin or a fell.
Corteccioso, rugged as the bark of a tree. Cortegiana, a curtezan, a harlot, a
strumpet, a whore. Cortegianare, to court it, to play the curtier, to play the
curtizan or to follow harlots. Cortegianamenti, courtings,
courtiers-hollie-water tricks, curtezans prankes or devises. Cortegianesco,
courtier-like or curtezan-like. Cortegiania, courtier-ship. Cortegiano, a
courtier. Corteggiare, to court or faune upon one, to blandish or make love
unto. Cortellaro, a knife-maker, a cutler. Cortellata, a blow or lash or cut or
wound with a knife. Cortellino, a penknife, a little knife. Cortello, any
kind of knife, a whittle. Cortesana, as Cortegiana. Cortesano, as Cortegiano.
Cortese, courteous, loving, mild, kind gentle, meek, affable. Corteseggiare,
to show courtesy, louingnes, or kindness, to faune upon one. Cortesia,
courtesy, kindness, mildnes, meeknes, affability, gentleness. Cortezza, as
Corteccia. Also shortness or brevity. Corticcia, as Corteccia. Cortice, the
smooth bark of a tree good to carue or grave in. Corticella, a little court,
yard or backeside of a house. Cortigiana, as Cortegiana. Cortigianare, as
Cortegianare. Cortiglio, as Cortile. Cortile, a court, a yard or backside of a
house. Cortina, a curtain of a bed. also a curtain of a long wall running
level from one bulwark to another. Cortinaggio, the curtains or valance of a
bed. Also a sparuis of a bed. Cortinare, to encurtine, to flank or fortify
about with a wall. Corto, short, brief, succinct. Coruare, to bend, to stoop,
to make crooked. Corue, Corbe, as Curba. Coruetta, a coruet, a fault, a
prancing or continual dancing of a horse. Corue^^^e, to coruet or prance as
horses of s^^ice are taught to do. Coruia, Coruina, a stone of many virtues,
which they say is found in a ravens ^est, fetch thither by the raven: if in her
absence a man have sodden her eggs and laid them in the nest again to make them
raw again. Coruo, crooked, bent, hooked. Also a raven or crow. Also a kind of
fish called a cabot. Coruzzo, some take it for the rail, and some for another
bird. Cosa, a thing in general, gheare, a matter. Cosalina, Cosaretta, as
Cosetta. Cosaria, as Ceretta. Cosche, a kind of venomous shrubbe or weed.
Coschinomante, a soothsaier by sieues or searces. Coscia, a thigh, a hip, a
hanch, a gammon. Cosciale, a piece of armor called a cuishard, because it
couers the thigh. Coscie, thighs, hips or hanches. Coscieggiare, to clap on the
thighs or buttocks. Also to dally, to dandle, to play, or grope on the
thighs or hips. Coscienza, as Conscientia. Cosciette, Cosciettine, little
pretti^ thighs, hips, or hanches. Coscietto, a leg of mutton, or a pestle of
porke. Coscinello, as Cossinetto, Coscinetto, as Cossinetto. Coscino, a cushin,
a cushinet. Coscuta, as Cuscuta. Coscioni, cuishards, armor for the thighs;
it has been used for breeches or slops. Coserta, Cosalina, a little thing, a
toy, a trif^e, a jest, a babble. Cosi, so, thus, as, like, as well, as much.
Cosiche, so that. Cosicome, even as, so as, like as. Cosi cosi, so so,
indifferently, in mean sort. Cosifattamente, in such sort, thus. Cosifatto,
thus, such, like, so made. Cosino, as Coscino. Cosmico, of the world, or
worldly. Cosmico nascer dellestelle, the arising of any star in the day
time. Cosmico occaso, the falling of any star in the day time. Cosmografia, the
art of Cosmographie, or describing of the world. Cosmografo, a cosm^grapher,
or describer of the world. Cosmologia, a description of all things created, or
discoursing of the world. Cospargere, spargo, sparsi, sparso, to sprinkle with
or together, to scatter, to strew, to mingle with. Cosparso, Cosparto,
sprinkled with or together. Cospergere, spergo, spersi, cosperto, as
Cospargere. Cospetto, the presence, view, or aspect of a man. Cospi, wooden
pattins, or pantofles, shoes with wooden soles, startops, or galages.
Cospirare, Cospiratione, as Conspirare. Cossetti, little pesties of porke, or
legs of mutton, or such. Cossi, a kind of noisome vermin, or hoglouse. Also
wrinkles in ones face. Cossico, belonging to the art of figurate numbers.
Cossino, a cushion, a cushinet. Cossinello, as Cossinetto. Cossinetto, a little
cushion, or cushinet, a seamsters cushion, a post pillion. Also a little pillow
or boulster for any thing, a stuffing or bumbassing. Cosso, a kind of fishers
basket to catch fish in. Cossolo, the cod or shale, or husk of any pulse.
Costa, there, thither, in yond place. Costa, a rib or coast of any body. Also
a coast of a country, an habitation, or dwelling place, a little hill or
craggie hillock. Also a side. Also the back of a knife. Also a stalk or stem
of a leaf. Costa canina, the herb dogs rib. Costaggiu, there below, or
beneath. Costana, a disease upon a horses back. Costante, constant, steadfast,
firm, resolute. Costanza, constancy, stedfastnes, perseverance. Costare, to
cost in price. Also comelines. Also a side or rib of a man. Costato, ribbed,
that has ribs. Also the side, the breast, or whole ribs of any creature.
Costeggiare, to coast, or go along any coast. Also to approach. Costei, this
woman. Costellatione, a constellation. Costernare, to trouble, to vex, to
astonish, to abash, to affright, to overthrow in mind. Costernatione, a
trouble, fear, sorrow, anguish, amazement, or astonishment of the mind.
Costeuole, Costoso, costly, chargeable, dear in price. Costi, there, yonder,
in that place. Costiale, a cuishard, or piece of armor for the thighs.
Costiero, aslope, sidelin, wide, askew. Costinci, thence, from thence.
Costionare, to question. Also to contend or quarrel. Costione, a question, a
contention, a quarrel. Costioneuole, questionable, quarelsome, contentious,
litigious. Costituire, as Constituire. Costitutione, a constitution. Costo,
cost, or charge. Also the herb Coaste or herb Marie. Costola, the stalk or
rib of any leaf, the back of a knife. Costoluto, that has good ribs, that is
strong, tough or hard. Costoro, these men. Costoso, costly, chargeable.
Costrengere, as Costringere. Costretto, constrained, forced, compelled, urged.
Costringere, stringo, strinsi, stretto, to constrain, to force, to compel, to
urge. Construggere, struggo, strussi, strutto, to conster, to frame, to build,
to construct. Construttione, a construction, a framing, a building. Costrutto,
construed, built; framed, constructed. Also a construction. Costui, this man,
this same man. Costumare, to teach nurture, manners, or civility, to
accustom, to use to be wont, to enure. Costumatamente, mannerly, ciuilie.
Also by wont, c^stome, or habit, wontedlie. Costumatezza, mannerlines, or
civility. Costumato, accustomed, used, wont. Also mannerly, civil, well
brought up. Costume, Costuma, custom, fashion, use, guise, wont, habit, ure.
Costumi, manners, education, nurtures, good fashions. Costura, a seame or
sowing of any garment. Costure, comelines, handsomnes. Also seames. Cotaio, a
piece of an old shoe that mowers use to hang at their girdle, and keep their
whetstone in. Cotale, such, like, so made. Also as we say what you call it.
Also taken for a man's or woman's priuities. Cotalina, a little pretty thing, or
quaint. Cotanti, so many, thus many. Cotanto, so much, thus much. Cotare, to
quote, or to note. Cotatione, a quotation, or a noting. Cotatoio, as Cotaio.
Cote, a whetstone, or a touchstone. Cotecha, as Cotenna. Cotegia, a
touchstone. Cotenna, the skin or hide of any creature. Also the soard of
bakon. Cotenella, a little thin skin, hide, or filme. Cotesta, this, this same
woman or thing. Coteste, these things or women. Cotesti, these things or men.
Cotesto, this, this same thing or man. Cotestoro, these men. Cotestui, this
man, this same man. Cothurno, as Coturno. Cotica, as Cotenna. Coticola, a thin,
little, tender skin or filme. Coticone, a great gull, sot, patch, lubbar,
lourdain, or meacock. Cotidiano, daily, cotidian. Cotigie, leather hosen, or
trusses such as our elders were wont to wear. Cotila, a Greek dry measure of
four Osibasi. Cotonare, to cotton, to bumbace, to thrum, or set a nap upon.
Cotone, cotton, bumbace, a nappe or a thrum. Cotonea, an herb like Orgament.
Cotognare, to preserve, to conserve, or candie as marmalade is. Cotognato,
preserved, conserved, candied. Also Marmalade made of Quinces. Cotogni,
Quinces. Cotremola, as Cotretola. Cotretola, a bird called a Wagtaile.
Cotretula, as Cotretola. Cotronise, a Quail. Cotta, any kind of coat or
upper garment. Also a haking, rosting, or seething. Cotta delle arm, a
heralds coat, a coat of armor. Cottame, any thing that is baked, boiled, or
rested. Cottigli, all manner of boiled meats. Cotto, boiled, sodden, baked,
roasted. Also drunken or tipsie. Also a kind of sodden wine called cute.
Cottoia, a quotation or perfecting of any thing. Cottone, as Cotone. Cottura, a
boiling or dressing of meat. Also a smarting, a burning, or scalding. Also a
concoction. Also a nealing or baking of glasses when they are made. Coturnice,
a Quail. Coturno, a kind of buskin. Also a lo^^i^ tragic style. Also a
wanton or effeminate garment. Coua, as Couata. Couadori, a kind of bird
always sitting. Coualle, a valley, a dale, or a low between two hills.
Couamele, a base abject swain or groom. one that milkes a cows in the stable.
Also a nickname of disgrace for a rascal, or a dastard. Couare, to has, to
couie, to brood^, to coure as a hen does over her eggs or chickens. Couarella,
as Capelluta. Couata, a couie of partridges, a beuie of phesants, a brood of
chickens, an ayrie of hawks: or any birds hatching or sitting, a nestfull, a
layrie, an eyas. Couaticcio, an addle or rotten egg. Couatremola, a bird
called a Wagtaile. Couelle, trifles, nifles, or matters of nothing.
Couerchiare, as Coprire. Couerchiate fiche, a kind of fig so called as our
frail figs be. Couerta, a couerlet, a cover, a hilling, a lid. Couertoio, the
testern of a bed, or of a Well. Couertura, a couerture or covering. Couiglio,
as Couile. Couile, a dog kenell, a hogs stie. Also a roosting place, a dog
hole. Couo, a hatching upon eggs, a couie, a hens sitting. Couolo, a kind of
fowling net, spring or gin, or pipe to call birds. Also a kind of trays or
wooden bowl. Couone, a great nest, a couie, a beuie, a brood, a squatting
cowring fellow, a couch, a rooste. Courire, as Coprire. Cozzare, to but, to
shocke, to thumpe, to iumpe, or shoulder as rams do. Cozzo, a butting, a
shocke, an encounter, a shouldring. Also a blanket to wrap a child in that
nurces use. Cozzolo, a certain iron instrument in a ship. Also a knuckle bone.
Cozzonare, to break horses, to play the horse-courser, or knauish knave.
Cozzonato, broken, beaten, dressed, well tugd, past all danger, knauish. Cozzone,
a horse-courser, a horse breaker, a crafty knave. Crai, has been used for
Domani, to m^ro^e. Craizo, a kind of Dutchmonie. Crambetta, at^rne, a sal^, a
(...) or pransing of a hoos^. Craneo, as Cranio. Crangini, little shrimpes, or
pr^^^es. Cranio, the pan o^ (...) wherein the brain lies. Cranocolatte, a
kind of spid^^. Crapula, Crapola, furfeit, excess, gormandizing, o^
gulletting. Crapulare, Crapolare, to surfeit, to gormandize, to commit excess
in meat and drink^. Crapulatore, a surfeiter, a gormand, a glutton, a
gullie-gut. Crapulone, idem. Crassame, any thick dreggis matter. Also the
thicknes of any thing, a spissenes. Crasso, thick, spisse, gross, clubbish.
Crasta, as Grasta, a flower pot, a lilly pot. Crate, a hurdle. Some take it
for a Harrowe. Crategono, the herb arse-smart, or cullerage. Craticula, as
Graticula, or Gratuggia. Cratitia, that is made of reeds, rods, or sticks,
wrought like a hurdle. Crea, Creta, chalk, claie, or (...). Creado, creat^d.
Also a servant or foster child. Also civil, mannerly, or well brought up.
Creanza, nur^une, manners, education, civility. Creare, to create, to
eng^nder, to beget, to make, to frame. Creatione, a creation. Creato, created,
begotten. Also as Creodo, a servant of ones bringing up. Creatore, a creator, a
maker, a framer. Creatura, a creature. Crebbi, Crebbe, Crebbero, of Crescere,
I, he, or they did grow or increase. Crebe, Crebre, oftentimes, many times,
frequented, thicks, full of. Also I find it used for shoulders. Credentiere, a
cupboards keeper, a butler, a steward. Also a creditor, one that trusts. Also
a princes taster, cupbearer, or assaier. Credential^, a letter of credence or
trust. Credenza, credence, credit, trust, confidence, safe-cond^it. Also a
taken, a pledge, a pawn. Also a cubbo^^d^ of plate, a butterie, a court
^ubbo^^de of plate in a chamber. Also the taste or assaie of a pr^^es meat and
drink. Also a fault that some horses have, who turn not so readily on the one
side as on the other, a refusing to turn of one hand. Credente, credulous,
believing, trusting. Credere, credo, credei, creduto, to believed, to trust, to
credit, to affie. Credibile, credible, that may be believed. Credibilita,
belief, crediblenes. Crediti, debts, credites. Credito, credit, trust,
belief, affiance, loyalty, truth, faith. Creditore, a creditor, one that
belieueth or trusts. Credo, a belief, a creed. Credulita, credulity,
belief. Credulo, credulous, believing. Crema, the cream or best of any thing.
Cremastice, two long and slender muskles by which the stones of a man are
drawn upward, least by loose hanging down, the seminary vessels should be
ouerladen. Cremento, increase, an increasing. Also the seed of man or any other
male creature. Cremesi, Cremesino, crimson, skarlet, stamell in grain.
Cremore, yeast, barme, quickening, gods good, good speed. Also the cream or
simpring of milk when it seethes. Crena, a notch in a score, a nocke in a bow
or arrowe: the nib, slit, or clift of a pen. Also ^ags or notches above the
edges of leaves, indentures or such like. Crenedi, a kind of beast in India.
Crepa, as Cranio. Crepacci, the scratches, cratches, or rats tails in a horse.
Some construe it to be little chaps or rifts about the cronet of the horses
hoof. Crepacuore, hearts bursting, hearts grief or sorrow, or any other passion
of the heart. Look Acrepa cuore. Crepaggine, might and maine, hearts bursting.
Also a bursting or cracking. Crepanella, the herb leade-woort. Crepare,
Creppare, to burst, to crack, or riue a sunder, to chap. Crepatura, a
bursting, a cracking, a riuing a sunder, a chap. Crepitacolo, a shrill
timbrell, a rattle for children. Crepitante, cracking, crackling, rattling.
Crepitare, to crack, to crackle, to rattle. Crepito, a crack, or a crackling,
a rattling, a rush, a rap, or any violent sound. Crepito di denti, a chattring
of the teeth. Creppare, Creppatura, as Crepare. Crepusculo, as Crepuscio.
Crepuscio, the twilight either in the evening or morning. Crepuscie, things
borne about twilight. Crepuso, a vanter in speech, one that speaks with
majesty. Cresce, or Crescinmano, the name of a saint used wantonly by Bocace,
as much to say as saint standing or growing in a woman's hand. Crescenta, a
kind of whitepot or tarte. Also meat to cram pullets. Crescente, growing,
increasing. Also the half moon or a croisant. Crescentine, a kind of cakes
with spice and butter in them. Crescenza, a growing, an increase. Also the
flowing of the sea. Crescenza di carne, a kind of carnositie, or growing of
knobs of flesh about some men. Crescere, cresco, crebbi, cresciuto, to grow, to
increase, to flow, to wax. Crescimento, a growing, an increase, a flowing, a
waxing. Crescinmano, as Cresceinmano. Crescioni, the weed water Cresses.
Cresima, a crisum used at christening of children. Also an unction. Look
Mandar a cresima. Cresimare, to crisum or anoint. Crespa, a curling, a
frizling, a crisping, a wrinckling. Also curled, frizled, crisped, or
wrinckled. Crespare, to curle, to frizle, to crispe, to wrinckle, to plaite, to
wither, to pucker. Crespatura, a curling, a frizling, a crisping, a wrimpling,
a withering, a plaiting. Crespello, a kind of bird. Crespine, an herb or a
weed. Also gooseberries, some use it for berberies. Crespo, wrinkled, withered,
frizled, curled, puckered, crisped. Cresta, a coxe-combe or a creste. Also a
bunch of feathers in a helmet. Also a disease that comes in the fundament of man
or woman, called the piles or hemorrhoides. Also money in gibbrish or rogues
language. Cresta di gallo, the herb cox-combe or yellow rattle. Also a
cox-combe. Creste, the disease called the piles or hemorrhoides. Crestoso,
creftie, full of the piles on hemorrhoides, rugged, skuruie, full of sores or
scabs. Crestuto, as Crestoso. Creta, chalk, claie, loame. Also the weed
called Sampier. Cretale, a plot of chalk, loame or claie. Creta marina, the
weed Sampier. Some take it to be the Semper viuens. Cretica, as Alima.
Creticolatio, a kind of verse or foot of six syllables. Cretoso, loamie,
chalki^, clayish. Criare, to create, to foster, to ^^^ture or bring up.
Crianza, as Creanza. Criado, Criato, as Creado. Cribare, to sift, to searce, to
fan, to winnow. Cribo, a s^eue, a searce, a fan, a winnow. Cribrare, as
Cribare. Cribro, as Cribo. Cricca, a game at cards used in Italy. Also a
Printers tool so called. Also a rout, a crew, a troop or knot of good
fellows. Chricchiare, to creake as a cart wheel, to cricke. Cricco, a crick.
Also as Capriccio. Criccoso, as Capriccioso. Criccone, a game at cards so
called. Crida, Crido, a cry, a report, a proclamation, a crying. Cridare, to
cry, to whine, to chide, to proclaim. Criminale, criminal, faulty or
capital wherein is offense. Crimine, a crime, a fault. Crinale, a hair lace.
Also a crispin-wier or bodkin that women use about their hairs. Crine, the
hair of man or woman. Crinita stella, a blazing star or a comete. Crinuto,
hairie, bushie, shaggie. Crippione, a rack, a manger or stale in a stable.
Crisaria, a scab in horses called the crown scab. Crisi, the conflict between
nature and sickness. Also the unction or anointing. Crisima, Crisimare, as
Cresima. Crisite, gold foam coming of tried lead. Also a precious stone.
Crisoberillo, a kind of precious stone shining like gold. Crisocollo, a
mineral found like sand in the veins of brass, silver or gold or boras that
goldsmiths use to solder with. Crisocomo, a kind of stone to try the goodness
of gold. Crisocome, Crisogono, a kind of herb. Crisolampo, a precious stone
dark and pale by day, clear and fiery by night. Crisoletro, a precious stone
that draws amber unto it: if it come in sight of fire it will fly into it.
Crisolito, a stone called a chrisolite. Crispino, crisped, curled, frisled.
Also a kind of glistring stone. Cristallino, christalline, transparent, clear,
sounding. Cristallo, crystal. Cristalloide, the light, the clear or
transparencie or sight of any bodies eyes. Cristegio, a glister or a
suppositorie. Cristella, a bird called a howpe. Cristeo, cristiere, a glister a
suppositorie. Critica, an art of cutting of stones. Criticale, critical, which
judges by observations written. Critico, critic, judging men's acts and
works written. Criuellare, to sieue, to sift, to searce, to winnow.
Criuellaro, a sifter. Also a sieue maker. Criuello, a sieue, a sift, a winnow,
a searce. Criues, a kind of trout or Salmon trout. Criuo, as Criuello. Criuola,
a coupe or pen to keep poultrie under. Crocalle, a precious stone much like a
cherie. Crocalo, a foul called a Seamew. Crocare, to croke as a raven does.
Crocca, a croche, a snap, a creake. Also a sickle. Croccare, as Crocchiare.
Crocchiare, to halt or go on crutchets. Also to snort at the nose. To keep a
great showting or clapping of hands. Also to crackle, to creek, to snap. Also
to crake or brag. Also to stagger or shake. Also to strike as the clock.
Crocchiate, clappings of hands, houtings or shoutings. Crocchio, a shaking, a
crackling. Also one that goes on crutchets. Also a croke, a snap, a creaking or
clicking. Also a snaphance of a piece. Also some part about a man's nose.
Crocciare, to vex, to fret, to be moodie, to be wrathful, to anger. Also to
clock as a hen does that has young chickens. Crocciata, as Crociata.
Croccicchiare, to crutch or go on crutchets. Croccicchiero, a crutchet-Fryer or
one going on crutchets. Also a crutching fellow. Croccicchio, a crutch, a
crutchet. Croccie, crutchets. Crocciette, haycocks or such heaps. Also little
crosses or crutchets. Also croslets. Also a Bishops crosier. Crocciola, the
handle or hold of a sieth. Also a silk winders reele or rise. Also a perch or
a stock to remove and set hawks upon. Crocciolare, to croke or cry as a
crow or a raven. Also to knead paste. Crocciole, crutchets that lame men use to
go with. Crocco, as Crocchio. Croce, a cross, a torment. Croceare, to cross,
to mark with a cross. Crocefiggere, as Crocifiggere. Crocefisso, as
Crocifisso. Croceo, a saffron color. Croceola, a kind of weed growing
amongst corn. Also a little cross. Crocette, croslets. Also as Crocchiette.
Also a kind of sling to shoot stones with. Crocheggiare, to strout it and put
out the neck, as a turkie-cocke does being angry, to strut or rouse up.
Crociata, a crusado. Also a crosse-way. Also the herb crossewort or golden
mugwet. Also a kind of torture or torment. Crocietta, a little cross or
croslet in armorie. Also a crutchet or a crotchet. Crocifero, a bearer of the
cross. Also a knight of any order of the cross. Crocifiggere, figgo, fissi,
fislo, to crucify, or martyr, or torture. Crocifissione, a crucifying, or
torturing. Crocifisso, a crucifixe. Also crucified. Crocifissore, a crucifier.
Crocigeri, crutchet friars. Crociola, a hawks perch, or little stock to set a
hawke upon. Crocioli, cruses, or little melting pots for goldsmithes.
Crocitante, croaking as a raven, or cackling as a hen. Crocitare, to croke like
a raven. Also to cackle as a hen. Croco, saffron, or the flower of saffron.
Crocodillo, a Crocodrill, or Crocodile, which only stirs his upper iawe or
chap. Also an herb, that touching any bodies nose with it, it will presently
gush out with blood. Crocoton, a kind of garment of the color of saffron.
Crocuta, a beast gotten between a Lioness and a Hiena, having his row of
teeth of one piece alone. Crogioli, as Crocioli. Crogliare, to cry and chafe as
a turkey cock when he is angry. Croglio, the anger or fretting of a beast, as
of a turkey cock when he is angry. Croiare, to wax hard, to harden, to bake
or make in crust. to speak in the throat. Croio, foul, fat, greasy, gulchie.
Also harsh speaking in the throat. Crollare, to shake, to toss, to tremble, to
wag, to tot, or totter. Crollare il pero, to shake a pear tree, but taken, to
tickle a woman's roundly. Crollatura, a shaking, a wagging, a tossing. Crollo,
a shaking, a fall, a tossing, a totting. Croma, a burning iron. Also pleasant
and delightsome music with descant, faining or quauering. Cromatica musica,
music divided by half notes. Cromatico, one whose color is tanned in the
sun, or one who never blusheth. Crome, a crotchet in music, that is the
fourth part of a note. Cromi, a kind of fish. Cronaca, as Cronica. Cronica, a
chronickle, a note of acts done, with the time expressed. Croniche, a kind of
lingering fever or ague in a horse. Cronica nascer della stelle, the arising of
any star in the day time. Cronista, Cronichista, a Chronicler. Cropa, a rump
of a bird. Cropiera, a crupper of a horse. Also a dock for a horse. Croppa, a
crupper. Crosata, as Crociata. Croscere, Croscuito, as Crosciare. Croscia di
acqua, a storm, a gale, a berrie, or flaw of winder, a tempest or blustering of
many storms together bringing water. Also a sudden shower. Crosciare, as
Crollare, but properly the clashing, or clattering, or falling of hail and
rain with violence upon the tiles of a house. Also to crush. Crosolo, a
goldsmiths melting pot, or cruse. Crosserone, a robin redbrest. Crosta, a
crust. Also a scurfe or skab. Also used for ice. Crostacei pesci, as Crostarei.
Crostame, chippings, or crusts. Crostare, to crust, to scurffe, to grow hard.
Crostarei pesci, rugged, hard, stony shell fishes. Crostata, a kind of
dainty pie, chewet, or such paste meat. Croste, crusts or parings. Crostelli,
as Crostata. Crostuta, the paring or pilling of a man's skin away. Crotalo, a
musical instrument, made like a great ring of brass, and beaten with an iron
rod makes a sweet harmony. Also a child's rattle or bell. Also a cimball, a
gingling rattle or clapper. Crotesca, a kind of antique work in any thing.
Also fretted or carved work. Crucciare, to vex, to anger, to fret, or move to
wrath, to molest, to torment, to torture, to rack. Croto, a bird like a Swanne,
with a bag under his chin, braying like an ass. Cruccicchiero, as
Croccicchiero. Cruccio, as Corroccio. Crucciolo, as Crosolo. Cruccicchio, a
crutchet. Also a cross way. Cruccioso, as Corroccioso. Cruciata, an herb
growing on mountains. Also as Crociata. Crucifero, as Crocifero. Crucifisso,
as Crocifisso. Crudele, cruel, fell, moodie, fierce or ungentle. Crudelire,
lisco, lito, to wax cruel or fell. Crudeleggiare, as Crudelire. Crudelta,
Crudelita, cruelty. Crudezza, rawnes, cruditie. Crudita, rawnes, cruditie.
Crudo, raw, crude. Also fell, moodie, cruel, surly. Cruente, bloody, moodie,
fell, cruel, bloody minded, blood thirsty. Cruentoso, as Cruente. Cruita,
rawnes of a wound, and blood coming out. Cruna, the eye of a needle. Cruore,
black gaore-blood. Crusca, bran of flower. Cruscata, a thing made of bran.
Also as Fagiolata. Crustacei, as Crostarei. Crustula, a pancake, a fritter.
Also a little crust. Cuba, a coope or pen to keep poultrie in. Also a bed, a
couch or horselitter. Cubaita, a kind of sweet cake or marchpane. Cubare, to
lie down, to lie in childbed. Cubebe, the fruit of an herb that apothecaries
sell, called Cubebs. Cubia, a slip or lesh for a dog. Also the couples for
spaniels. Cubiare, to couple up hounds or dogs. Cubiculario, a chamberlain, a
chamber or bedfellow. Cubiculo, a chamber. Cubile, a bed, a couch, a nest or a
den. Cubitale, a fore-sleeue for the arm no further then the elbow. Also a
cushion for ones elbow. Cubito, a cubit or an elbowt. Also from the elbow to
the end of the middle finger. Also a measure of a foot and a half or four
and twenty inches. Cubo, a cube or figure four square like a die. Cucagna,
the epicures or gluttons home, the land of all delights, so taken in mockery.
Cucca, a babie, a foolish toy or trifle. Cuccaia, a cuckoes nest, hole or
roost. Cucchi, money in gibbrish or rogues language. Cucchiaruoli da montagna,
a kind of country meat. Cucchiaio, Cucchiaro, a spoone. Also a ladle.
Cucchino, a knave, a varlet, a lout, a wag. Cucchio, a kind of small money.
Cuccia, a kind of ioyners fretted work: it is also a couch or trundlebed:
used also for an ape, a pug or monkie. Also a whelp or puppie. Cucciare, to
whelpe as a bitch. Cucciaro, Cucciaio, as Cucchiaro. Cuccietto, Cuccinolo, a
very young puppie or whelp, a playing dog. Cucciolo, a kind of snailes. Also
as Corriuo. Cucco, the bird called a Cuckoo, and idle, loytring, gasing gull.
Also a fish called a gournard, a red fish or a rotchet. Also taken for a
minion, a favorite or pigsneye. Cuccouaia, a place where cuckoes roost or
build. Also a flim-flam, cuckoes tale or song. Cuccoueggia, cockshoot or
twilight. Also an owl tide to a stock to catch other birds with.
Cuccoueggiare, to sing or play the cuckoe. Also to catch other birds with an
owl. Cuccuma, pouting, louting, mumping, frowning, chafing. Cuccuzza, a gourd,
a pompilion. Also a bottle or salt box made of a gourd. Also a paring of a
gourd or pompilion. Cucina, a kitching, a skullerie. Cucinare, to dress meat
or play the cook. Cucinaria, the art of cookerie. Cucinatore, a man cook.
Cuciniera, a woman cook. Also a kitching maid. Cuciniere, a man cook.
Cucire, cucio, cucito, to sow with a needle. Cucitrice, a shee-seamster or
sower. Cucitura, a seame or sowing. Cucitusa, a part of a man's priuities.
Cucuglio, Cuculio, a cuckoe bird. Also a kind of cowle or hood. Cucula,
Cuculla, a friars cowle or munks hood, as Cocolla. Cuculare, Cucullare, to hood
or attire a Friar. Also to cry, as a cuckoe. Cuculli, silk worms. Also
cuckoes. Also gournards or rotchets. Cuculo, a cuckoebird. Also a fish called a
gournard or a cur. Cucumero, a cucumber. Cucurbita seluatica, as Coloquintida.
Cucurma, a kind of three cornered rush or cane, so great that they make walking
sticks of them. Cucurire, risco, rito, to crow as a cock. Cucuzza, as
Cuccuzza. Cucuzzolo, the uppermost top, tip or spire of any thing; but namely
of a hill. Cueuri, Cuemari, a fish called a sardine: it is like a sprat.
Cuffia, a coiffe, a caul, a biggin, a nightcap. Cuffiare, to coyfe or put on a
coife, or a caul or a nightcap. Cuffione, Cuffiotto, a coiffe, a caul, a
biggin or woman's head night attire. Cufurma, a tortoise or shell crab. Cugino,
a cousin, a brother in law. Cugino germano, a cousin german. Cuglia, a pinnacle
or spire of a steeple. Cugno, a wedge to cleave wood. Cui, whose, to whom, of
whom, by whose, whom, from whom. Culabrese, as of Calabria we say Calabrese, so
of Culo we say Culabrese. Culacciare, to beat or clap on the arse. Culacciate,
claps on the arse. Culare, the arsegut or pertaining to the arse. Culatorio, a
word of mockery, as we would say arserie. Culate, the buttockes, the bummes,
the hippes. Culatta, the breech of a piece of ordinance. the seat of a saddle.
Culattare, to clap on the buttocks. Culattore, a beast having a rich furre or
skin. Culcitra, as Cultrice. Culd' asino, a fish called in latin. Vrtica.
Culdi, a Greek measure of liquid things. Culla, a cradle. Cullare, to lull or
rock the cradle. Cullura, a wad or wase of straw or rags to carry any thing
on upon the head with, as milk women use under their pailes or buckets. Culo,
the arse, tail, fundament or bum. Culobianco, a bird called a gnat-snapper.
Culpa, fault, blame, guilt. Culpeuole, faulty, blamewoorthie, guilty.
Cultiuabile, eareable, that may be manuned, tilled or husbanded. Cultiuare, to
till, to manure, to plough; to ear the ground, used of Bocace to occupy a
woman's hand. Also to polish, to correct, to ouersee. Cultiuatore, a ploughman,
a husbandman. Culto, husbanded, plowghed, manured. Also corrected, polished.
Also the worship or service of God. Cultore, a husbandman, a ploughman.
Cultremola, a wagtaile. Cultrice, a quilt, a couerlet or counterpoint for a
bed. Cultura, husbandry, tillage, manuring, ploughing. Cumatile, a kind of
color which painters use. Cumolanza, a heaping or hoording up. Cumolare, to
heap, to hoord up, to lay up in store. Cumolo, a heap, a mass. Also
increase. Cumulanza, as Cumolanza. Cumulatione, as Cumolanza. Cumulare, as
Cumolare. Cumulo, as Cumolo. Cuna, a cradle. Cunare, to rock the cradle.
Cuneato, in form of a wedge, sharp cornered. Cuneo, a wedge to cleave wood, a
coin or a corner of a wall in building. Cuniare, as Coniare. Cuniatore, as
Coniatore. Cuniculo, an undermining engine of war. Cunilaggine, the herb winter
sauory, or as some think Orgament. Cunno, a woman's privy part. Cunnuta, a
woman nocked. Cuntatione, slacknes, slownes, delaying, prolonging or lingering
of time, a demur in law. Also a staggering. Cuntatore, a lingrer, a prolonger,
a slower or deferrer of time. Cuoca, a woman cook. Cuocaria, the art of
cookerie. Also a cooks shop. Cuocere, cuoco, cocqui, cotto, as Cocere.
Cuociore, as Cociore. Cuocola, a pot to stew meat in, a pipkin or posenet.
Cuocome, a brazen vessel for pots to stand in at a cubboord. Cuocouaia, as
Cuccaia. Also a kind of bird. Cuogoma, a paile or bucket. Also a kettle.
Cuogola, a flint-stone or a pibble-stone Cuoiaio, Cuo^aro, a currier or tanner
of leather. Also a fell munger. Cuoio, leather, hides, or fell. Cuor, Cuore, a
heart or courage. Also a core of any fruit. Cuorame, any kind of leather dressed.
Cuoricino, a pretty little sweet heart. Cupella, a kind of bucket or skoope.
Cupere, cupio, cupei, cupito, to desire, to wish, to covet, to thirst after.
Cupeta, a march pane or sweet cake. Cupidigia, as Cupidita. Cupidine, desire,
lust, longing. Cupidita, covetousness, greedines, avarice. Cupido, the god of
love or lust. Also greedy, desirous or covetous. Cupillo, Cuppio, a hiue for
Bees or the hole or mouth of a Beehiue. Cupo, full, deep or high. Also a
Beehiue. Cupola, a spire-steeple. Cuppola, a chapel or a church. Cuppula, a
spire-steeple. Cupresso, used for Cipresso. Cura, care, thought or charge: a
care. Curabile, curable, that may be cured. Cura denti, tooth-picks. Cura
destri, a iakes goong or doong farmer. Cura orecchij, an eare-picke. Curante,
caring, regarding, healing, making clean. Curare, to cure, to care, to take
thought, to dress or cure a hurt, to heal, to cleanse, to make clean, to
pick. Curata, Curatella, as Coradella. Curatiere, a broker or spokes man.
Curatione, a cure, a charge. Curatiua medicina, curing or healing physic.
Curatore, a broker or spokesman. Also a curat or one that has a charge or
cure. Curba, a swelling in a horse called the curb. Curcume, the root of
Celandine. Curia, any court of Princes or justice. Curiandoli, Corianders.
Curiosita, curiosity, nicenes, diligence. Curioso, curious, nice, scrupulous,
careful, diligent, charie. Curro, a round piece of wood or roll that
carpenters use to lay under great pieces of wood or timber, with holes in it
near the end, to roll the timber with more ease. I find it also for a kind
of vessel. Currucca, the bird that hatcheth the cookoes eggs thinking they be
her own. Currucula, as Currucca. Curso, as course, a race, a carreer. Cursore,
a courser, an office sometime in Rome called a cursor. Also a runner: an
apparitor or a sumner. Cursoria, Cursorato, the office of a cursor. Curte,
knobs or wens growing upon a horse Curti, short. Also a fold or pen made of
sticks for sheep. Curto, short, brief or succinct. Curtola, a kind of tool
that braziers use. Curuare, to bow, to bend, to stoop, to crouch, to make
crooked. Curuatura, a bending, a stooping, a crouching, a bowing, a crookednes.
Curucca, Curuccula, as Currucca. Curuilineo, with crooked or bending lines.
Curuo, crooked, bent, bowed, stooped, crouched. Curuopiede, splaifooted, having
crooked feet. Curule, seats as our pewes in churches. Curulo, a little cart, a
wheelbarrow. Cuscino, Cuscinetto, as Coscino. Cuscire, cuscio, cuscij, cuscito,
as Cucire. Cuscitrice, a woman seamester. Cuscitura, a seame or sowing.
Cuscuta, a weed called dodder or withewind. Cuscusu, a kind of grain, pulse
or fruit coming out of Spain, called cuske. Cusire, as Cuscire. Cusioffola,
as Baccisaffiola. Cusso, an owl with standing feathers on his head called a
hornecout. Custodia, charge, keeping, custody. Also a case or box to keep
any thing in. Custodire, disco, dito, to keep or have in charge. Custode,
Custoditore, a keeper, a warder, a rector. Cute, the outward skin of man or
woman while they be living, a thin rind, pill or bark of any thing. Also a
whetstone. Cuterizole, a kind of ant, emmet or pismier. Cuticula, a filme, a
skin or skinles, a thin rind or pill. Cuticagna, the crown or skonce of ones
head. Cutretta, a bird called a wagtaile. Cutrettolo, as Cutretta. Cutta, a
chough, a cornish chough, a iakedaw, a kadow.
D
DA, joined with any number signifies about, as Da venti, about twenty. Da,
from, of, by, the sign of the Ablati^e case. Da, a preposition before Infinite
^oodes, as Da fare, to do, for to do. Da, a prepositio^ of the Ablati^e case,
from. Da, with the verb Andare, naming the party to whom you go, is for the
Dative case, as Dove andate? Io vado dal signor Andrea. Da, like or as, being
with a Noune of any profession, as Da huomo da been, like an honest man, an
Aduerbe of likeness. Da, of the verb Dare, he gives. Da baiante a ferrante,
from bad to worse out of gods blessing into the warm sun, out of the parlor
into the kitchen. Da banda, on the side, from the side. Da banda a banda, from
side to side, quite through. Da benaggine, honesty, goodness, virtue,
sincerity. Da been, good, honest, debonaire, as huomo da been, an honest man:
it is also taken for honesty. Da benissimo, very honest, most honest. Dabile,
that may be, or is to be given. Dabuda, a famous fool so called, as we
allege Will Summer in jests. Also a kind of musical instrument among
shepherds. Da burla, iestingly, in jest. Da canto, a side, a part, a toneside,
on the side. Da capo, again, a new, from the beginning. Da che, since that,
sithence, since, sith. Daccio, Dacio, for that, fit for that, of that.
Daccordo, agreed, attoned, accorded, tuned. Dadaro, a dice-maker. Also a dicer.
Dadeggiare, to play at dice. Dadi, dice to play with. Da hora inanzi,
henceforwarde, hereafter. Da huomo da been, like an honest man. Also an oath as
I am an honest man. Da douero, in sooth, in earnest, in truth. Da dosso, from
upon, or of from. Da duchi, certain priests of Ceres in Greece. Da fanciullo,
from a child, from infancy, like a child. Da fermo a fermo. Dafarina, a kind
of fullams or false dice. Dafino, even from the time. Dafnia, a precious stone
good against the falling sickness. Daga, a wood-knife, a short sword. Daghetta,
a little dagger. Dagioco, in sport, in jest, in play. Dagli, strike him, hit
him, beat him. Also from thee, of thee. Dai, from thee, of thee. Also thou
give. Daindi, from thence, thence. Daindi inanzi, from that time foreward. Da
indi in qua, since that time, from that time to this, or till now. Daina, a
fawn, a Do. Daino, a fawn, a pricket, a sore, a sorrel, a bucke, or fallow
dear. Da in poi, except, but, excepted, saving. Dal, Dallo, Dalla, Dagli,
Dalli, Dalle, from the, of the. Dal'altera part, on the other part or side.
Dalfino, Dalphino, a fish called a Dolphin. Dal'in fuori, except, but the thing
excepted must come between Dal and in fuori. Daltra maniera, after another
manner, otherwise. Dalli, hit him, strike him. Also from the, or of the. Dalli
dalli, to him, hit him, upon him. Dalmata, as Dalmatica. Dalmatica, a priests
surples, or such religious garments. Some take it for a shepherds long frocke.
Dalongi, Dalungi, a far off, from far. Daltrui, others, other men's, of
others. Dama, a dame, a lady, a mistres. Also a Do, a fallow dear. Also a
queen at the chesse. Also a man to play at tables with. Da mano in mano,
successively, in order, from hand to hand. Damarito, mariageable. Damascare, to
damask. Damaschino, damask work upon blades, or any thing of Damasco.
Damasco, the stuff called Damask. Dame, men to play at tables or chesse with.
Also ladies, dames. Dame, of me, from me, to me, by my self. Dameno, of less
worth. Dame stesso, by my self. Damiere, a pair of tables, a board to play
at draughts. Damigella, Damicella, a damsel, a waighting-woman. Damigello, a
batchelour, a waighting man. Damma, a Do or wild goat, a hind or fallow
dear. Damo inanzi, hereafter. Damolto, of much, of worth. huomo da molto,
donna da molti. Danaio, Danaro, a penny. Also money. Danaioso, Danaroso, full
of money, monied. Danari, pence. Also any money. Dandola, Dandolare, as
Dondola. Daneta, the herb wild Wormwood. Daniente, of nothing, of naught.
Danio, as Daino. Dannabile, damnable. Dannaggiare, as Danneggiare. Dannaggio,
as Danno. Dannaggioso, domeageable, dangerous. Dannare, to damn, to condemn,
to cancel, or cross any reckoning. Dannarpartite, to cross or cancel any
rekonings. Dannati, condemned or damned persons. Dannatione, damnation,
condemnation. Danneggiare, to damnifie, to endommage. Danneggieuole, hurtful,
dangerous. Danneuole, idem. Danno, hurt, loss, danger, damage, peril, skath.
Dannoso, as Danneggieuole. Da non dire, not to be spoken, unlawful. Da nulla,
of no worth, of naught. Dante, a kind of great wild beast in Affrike having a
very hard skin. Danza, a dance. Danzare, to dance. Danzatore, a dauncer.
Daparte, a part, a far off, a side. Also in the name or on the behalf.
Dapartito, common, venial, that may be had for money. Dape, meat, food,
viands for gods or princes. Daperme, te, se, lui, noi, voi, loro, by me, the,
him, us, you, or themselves, alone, or several. Daper tutto, each where, in
every place. Dapie, again, from the foot. Dapocaggine, simplicity,
foolishnes, grossenes, insufficiency, retchlesnes. Dapoco, of nothing, of
little, of small worth. Dapoco in qua, not long since. Dapoi, Dapo, since,
after, then, after that. Da poi che, since, or since that. Dapresso, near, at
hand, by, not far off. Daprima, at first. Daqua inanzi, hereafter,
henceforward. Da qui in poi, hereafter, henceforward. Dar al'arma, a kind of
march sounded upon the drum and trumpet, to strike up an alarm. Dardana, the
great clote-burre. Dardani, Dardanini, a bird called a woodpecker, or catebill:
some take it for seaswallowes. Dardeggiare, to cast a dart, to shoot, to
darte. Dardo, a dart. Also an arrow. Also a kind of serpent that will fling
himself from of any high place, without hurting himself. Also as Dardani.
Dare, Do, Diedi, Dato, to give, to present, to offer. Also to hit, to strike,
to beat, to deal. Dare a pigione, to let to rent or farm. Dare a diuedere,
as Dare a vedere. Dare a vedere, to make one believe, to persuade or give one
to understand. Dare baggiane, as Gonfiare alcuno. Dare cacabaldole, as Dare
l'allodola. Dar cartaccia, a kind of game used at cards. Dare carote, to make
one swallow a gudgeon. Dar di cozzo, to but, to chock, to frunt, to iussle
violently, to shoulder. Dar di piglio, to take hold of, to take by the hand.
Dar di mano, to lay hold on, to take by the hand. Dar del tu, to thou any man.
Dar de'calci a Rouaio, to be hanged, to kick the wind. Dar delle botte, to
give blows, stripes or strokes. Dar delle muccie, to give one a flap with a
fox tail. Dar di penna, to cross or blot out any thing. Dar delle bastonate,
to strike one with a cudgel, to give the bastonado. Dar di piatto, to strike
flat with a weapon. Dar di punta, to phoine or thrust at one. Dar di taglio, to
strike with the edge. Dar dentro, to sal to, to strike in, to hit in. Dare
finocchio, to give fennel, to claw, to cog, to foist, to flatter, to
dissemble. Dare fastidio, to trouble, to molest. Dare il passo alla macina, to
give the mill free passage. Dare il guasto, to give the spoil, to ransack, to
ruin. Dar la baia, to mock, to jest, to cog, to foist. Dar la berta, to
mock, to jest, to gibe. Dare le ceruella a ripedulare, to let ones wits go a
woolgathering. Dare l'allodola, to cog, to foist, to flatter, to give one
court-hollie water, to give a gudgeon. Dar le moss, to give the start, to set
forth. Dar la quadra, to give one a gudgeon, to flatter, to cog and foist
with. Dar la squadra, to sooth or smooth up a man's tale. Dar la buona mano, to
give a new years gift. Dar la mancia, to give something to drink. Dar le
carte, to deal the cards. Dar la corda, to give the strappado or torture. Dar
la stretta, to give the ierke or pinch to some body. Dar la traue, as Dare
l'allodola. Dar le pesche, to give ones tail, to consent to buggerie. Dar la
pinta, to give the thrust or push, to throw down headlong. Dar le calcagna, to
turn the heels. Dar le spalle, to turn ones shoulders, to run away. Dar
luogo al compagno, a kind of Christmas game called rise up good fellow, or
itch buttock. Dare moine, as Dare l'allodola. Dar nella ragna, to fall in the
net, to fall in a trap. Dar nelle mani, to fall into the hands. Dare noia, to
trouble, to grieve, to molest. Dare nelle scartate, to speak what has bin
spoken of before, for want of matter. Also to fall among ill company, as a man
would say among such as are discarded from others. Dare martello, to make one
jealous, or passionate. Dare panzane, as Gonfiare alcuno. Dare roselline, as
Dare l'allodola. Dare ombra, to give a suspicion or inckling of any matter.
Dare vna sinta, to give an offer, to feign to do a thing, to proffer and not
do. Dare vna borniola, to give false judgment of any matter referred unto one,
of gamesters and players, a phrase used in tenis courts and gaming houses. Dare
vna occhiata, to give a look, to cast an eye, to look about. Dar menda, to
find fault, or pick a thank. Dare pasto, to keep one in hope, to feed one
with words. Dare un cauallo, to breech or ierke one in a school. Dare un
stacci queto, to give one a box on the ear to make one be quiet. Dare un pax
tecum, to give one a good blow or a mark. Dare opera, to endeavor, to take
pains. Darsi vanto, to boast, to brag, to crake, to vaunt. Dare recapito, to
give entertainment, to deliver safely. Da riuolto, turning down as a falling
band, or a woman's rabato. Darmacco, a kind of coin. Da se, by himself. Da se
a se, by himself alone. Da senno, in good earnest, in good sooth. Da sezzo, at
last, in good sooth, lastly, at length. Da scherzo, in jest, in sport. Dasia,
thicknes of breath, pursines. Dasieme, asunder, from together, apart. Dasio, a
kind of verse consisting of five syllables. Data, the date, or dating of any
writing or letter. Datanto, of so much worth, of so much, of as much. Datare,
to date a letter or writing. Datario, be to whom one gives. Also a dignity
sometimes in Rome. Datarocco, foolish, gullish, wayward, froward, peevish.
Datiare, to set a tax, a tole, or a custom, to sesse. Datiaria, a custom
house, where customs are paid. Datiaro. Datiero, a receiver of any customs
or tolles, or tallages, a customer. Datilo, a fish so called in Venice, in
latin Bilanus. Datio, custom, tribute, toll, tallage, imposition. Datiuo
caso, the dative case. Dato, given, hit, stricken, dealt, beaten smitten.
Datoche, put case that, since that. Datore, a giver. Datorno, about. Dattero,
Datero, a date tree. Also a date. Also a kind of hard shell fish. Dattilo, as
Datero. Also a greek measure being about an inch. Dattili, a foot of three
syllables, the first long, and the two other short. Dattilo dogma, a greek
measure about four inches. Also a handful. Dattolo, as Dattero. Datrauerso,
overthwart, crossely. Dauantaggio, moreover, besides, more, beyond, with
advantage. Dauante, Dauanti, before, aforehand. Dauantino, a woman's apron, or
half kirtle. Dauanzo, too much, overplus, to spare, to leave, more then need,
enough and to spare. Dauco, a kind of hemlocke. Others have taken it for the
yellow carrots. Dauero, in sooth, in earnest, in truth. Dazaria, as Datiaria.
Daziaro, as Datiaro. Dazio, as Datio. De, a preposition of the genitive and
ablative case, of, from. Dea, a goddess. Deacrite, as Draconite. Debe, as
Debbe. Debere, as Douere. Debile, weak, feeble, faint. Debilita, feeblenes,
weakness, debilitie. Debilitare, to infeeble, to weaken. Debitare, to indebt.
Debiti, debts, duties, bonds, obligations. Also due, fit, seemly, orderly.
Debito, a debt, a duty, a bond, an obligation. Also due, fit, seemly,
orderly. Debitore, a debtor. Debbo, I owe, I ought, I shall, I should. Debbe,
Debba, he owes, he ought, he shall, he must. Also belike, or he is like.
Debole, weak, faint, feeble. Deboletto, somewhat feeble or weak. Debolezza,
weakness, faintnes, feeblenes. Debolire, as Indebolire. Decacordo, an instrument
of ten strings. Decade, Decades, as those of Titus Liuius consisting of ten.
Decadere, cado, caddi, caduto, to decline, to decay, to descend, to come down.
Decadenza, a declyning, a decaying, a cadence. Decagono, having ten corners or
angles. Decalogo, containing the ten commandments of God given to Moises.
Decamerone, the book of Bocace, so called of ten days works, or of ten parts.
Decanato, a Deanrie, or deaconrie. Decano, Decane, a deacon, or a deane.
Decantare, to sing out. Decapitare, to behead. Decembre, the month of
December. Decemuirato, an authority, or office of ten men, as was erst in
Rome. Decenne, of ten years. Deceno, the tenth. Decenoue, nineteen.
Decettione, a deception, an illusion, a deceit. Deche, as Decade. Dechiarare,
to declare or manifest. Dechiaratione, a declaration. Dechinare, to decline, to
descend. Decidere, cido, cisi, ciso, to decide, to determine, to define.
Deciferare, to decipher. Deciferatore, a decipherer. Decima, the tithe or
tenth. Decima, half a score, a number of ten. Decimare, to tithe or tenth.
Decimario, a tither. Decimero, a tither. Decimo, the tenth in number.
Decisione, a deciding, a defining, a determining, a decision. Deciso, decided,
determined, defined. Declamare, to declaime. Declamatione, a declamation.
Declinare, to decline, to descend. Declinatione, a declination. Also a
declension. Decliuo, down hanging, bending, or sidelin. Decondimento, as
Condimento. Decorso, past, run-ouer. Decottione, a decoction. Decotto,
decocted. Decrepito, very old, at the pits brinke, decrepite. Decrepita,
Decrepitudine, old age, decrepitie. Decrescere, cresco, crebbi, cresciuto, to
decrease, to wane. Decrescimento, a decreasing, a diminishing, a waning.
Decretale, decretall, according to decrees: the popes law books. Decretare,
to decree, to consult, to judge to enact. Decreto, a decree, a judgment, an
order. Decretorio, judicial, established, decreed. Decretorij giorni,
perilous, fatal, dismal, unavoidable days. Decurione, a decurion, a captain
of ten. Dedale, a thimble, a finger-stall. Dedicare, to dedicate, to
consecrate, to addict. Dedicatione, a dedication, a consecration. Dedicatoria,
a dedicatorie epistle. Dedito, given, addicted, dedicated, inclined. Dedurre,
duco, dussi, dutto, to deduce, to deduct. Deduttione, a deduction. Dee,
goddesses. Also he owes, he must, he shall. Deffalcare, to defaulke, to abate,
to bate, to deduce, to deduct. Deffalcatura, a defalking, an abating, a
deducing, a deducting, a bating. Deffendere, as Diffendere. Deffensore, as
Diffensore. Deffendeuole, that may be defended. Deffesa, as Diffesa. Deffesso,
wearied, tired, faint. Defetto, as Diffetto. Deffinire, nisco, nito, to define.
Deffinitione, a definition. Deffinitiuo, definitive. Deffinito, defined.
Defloratione, a kind of bloody flixe that young coults have. Defonto,
Defunto, dead, past out of this life, deceased. Deformare, to deforme, to
mis-shape. Defrodare, to defraude, to beguile. Degli, of the. Deggettione, a
deiection. Deggio, I must, I owe, I shall, I ought. Degenerare, to degenerate,
to grow out of kind, to change kind. Degeneratione, a degenerating.
Degenero, a degenerator. Degna, worthy. Degnare, to daine, to vouchsafe.
Degnita, dignity, office, authority. Degno, worthy. Degradare, to degrade.
Degradatione, a degrading. Degredere, gredo, gredei, gresso, to degresse from
the purpose. Degressione, a digression. Degresso, digressed. Degrignare, to
grin, to snarle. Degustare, to distrust. Deh, oh, alas, I pray you, oh that: an
interiection of wishing. Dehiscere, to gape and open wide. Dei, gods. Also De'
of the. Also thou owe or must. Deiettione, a deiection. Deificare, to deifie.
Deificatione, a deifying. Del, of the, with any diuisible thing, some, as
Dammidel pane, give me some bread. Delantera, the forepart of the horse.
Delapidare, to delapidate, to ruin or overthrow, to pull down stone walls.
Delapidatione, a delapidation, a ruin, an overthrow, a pulling down of stone
walls. Delatore, a spy, an eaues dropper, a telltale. Delcontinuo, continually,
still. Delegare, to delegate, or commit, or appoint, to assign to some charge
or office. Delegati, delegates, committies, men appointed. Also ambassadors.
Delegatione, a delegation, an appointment, an assignation to any charge or
office. Deleggiare, to mock, to flout, to scoff, to gibe. Deleuare, to levy.
Delfino, Delphino, a dolphin. Also that piece at chesse which we call a bishop.
Deli, there-away, that way. Delibare, to taste, to assay with the tongue.
Deliberare, to deliberate, to determine. Deliberatione, a deliberation, a
determination. Deliberatiuo, deliberatiue. Delicatezza, daintines, delicacie,
wantonness, nicenes, effeminacie. Delicato, delicate, dainty, wanton, nice,
effeminate, weak, a milkesop. Delicatura, as Delicatezza. Delinquente, an
offender, a man guilty of any fault. Delirare, to dote, to rave, to fable, to
become a fool, to go out of the right way. Delitio, a doting, a rauing, a
foolishnes, a bestraughting of the wit. Deliro, doted, raued, fabled, become a
fool. Also a fool, a sot, a gull, a dotrell, a swaruer from reason,
bestraughted of his wit. Also peevish and fond. Delitia, deliciousnes,
daintines, pleasure, reioicing, sport, wantonness. Delitioso, delicious, dainty,
delicate, wanton, effeminate. Delitto, an offense, a fault, a trespass. Della,
delle, of the. Dello, delli, idem. Del tutto, altogether, wholly. Delubro, a
temple, a church. Also an image or idol of woood. Deludere, ludo, lusi, luso,
to delude, to mock, to deceive. Deluso, deluded, mocked, deceived. Demaniale,
a man having demaines of lands. Also of or pertaining to demaines. Demanio,
the demaines of any land. Demensione, a demension, a body, a substance.
Demente, mad, foolish, doting, sance wit. Dementia, madness, fury, woodnes,
folly, lack of wit. Demeritare, to demerite or deserve thanks. Demerito, a
demerit or desert. Demerto, as Demerito. Demisso, demisse, base, submisse,
faint. Democratia, a free commonwealth, having no Prince or superior but
themselves, as Venice is. Demoniaco, Demoniato, endiuelled, possessed with an
evil spirit. Demoniare, to possess with a devil, to indiuell. Demonio, a
devil or evil spirit. Also a kind of precious stone of several colors like
the rainebow. Demostrare, to show by demonstration, to demonstrate.
Demostratione, a demonstration. Denaioso, monied, rich, full of money. Denari,
money, pence, coin. Denari contanti, ready money. Denaro, Denaio, a penie or
money. Dendritide, a kind of precious stone which put to the root of a tree,
the axe that cuts it cannot be dulled. Dendroide, a kind of spurge. Denegare,
to deny, to refuse. Denigrare, to obscure, to darken, to tax, to blacken, to
blemish. Denominare, to nominate, to name by. Denominatione, a denomination.
Denominatiuo, that is derived of a noune or some one case, a denominatiue.
Denontia, a denouncing, a denunciation. Denontiare, to denounce. Denotare, to
denote, to show, to mean, to signify. Denotatione, a denotation or meaning.
Densare, to thicken, to condense, to make foggie, duskie, obscure, bushie or
spisse. Densita, thicknes, densitie, spisnesse. Denso, thick, foggie, duskie,
obscure, spisse, bushie, condense, compact. Dentale, a rakes tooth or any great
tooth. Also a fish that hurts much with his teeth so called. Also the share
of a plough or the wood wherein the culter is closed. Also the herb
dogs-tooth. Dentare, to tooth, Dentaria, toothed violet or coral woort.
Dentato, that has teeth, toothed, snaggle or gogtoothed: also tanting and
spiteful. Dentatura, any man's toothing or rank of teeth. Dente, a tooth, a
dent. Dente caballino, a kind of herb. Denteggiare, to tooth. Dentelli, the
teeth of a rake or such. Also little spike nails, the dents or teeth of a saw.
Denti, teeth or dents. Dentice, a kind of fish which hurts much with his
teeth. Denti dauanti, the fore-teeth. Denti mascellari, eie-teeth or iaw-teeth.
Dentro, within, inward. Dentrouia, inaway, inward. Dentuto, Dentoso, as
Dentato. Denudare, to open, to reveal, to strip, to manifest, to make naked.
Deo, has been used for Dio, God. Depaisare, to vncontrie. Depalare, to
vnpole. Depanare, to reele or wind yarne. Depannare, to open, to clear.
Dependere, pendo, pendei, penduto, to depend, to rely, to be toward, to hang
by. Dependente, depending, relying, dependent. Dependenza, a dependencie, a
relying, a hanging by. Deplorare, to deplore, to bewail, to bemone.
Deploratione, a deploring, a bewayling, a bemoning. Deponente, deponent, laying
down. Deponere, pongo, posi, posto, to depose or to lay down. Depositare, to
leave in trust or feoffie, to pledge, to pawn, to enshrine. Depositario, one
that takes in trust or a feoffie, a shrine, a secret trusty friend, a
secretary. Depositione, a deposition, a deposing. Deposito, in trust or
feoffie, a pledge, a shrine. Also a toombe, a grave or sepulcher. Deprauare, to
deprave, to backbite, to mar to spoil, to corrupt. Deprauatione, a
deprauation, a backbiting, a corrupting. Deprauatore, a deprauer, a backbiter,
a corrupter. Depredare, to pray, to ransacke, to spoil. Depredatione, a
depredation, a pray, a spoiling, a spoil. Depressare, to depresse, to
suppress. Depressione, a depression, a suppression. Depresso, depressed,
suppressed. Deprimere, primo, primei, presso, to depresse, to suppress.
Deputare, to depute, to substitute, to appoint. Deputati, deputies,
substitutes. Deputatione, a deputation, a substitution. Deputatore, a
substituter, a deputer. Deramare, as Diramare. Derata, as Derrata. Derbio, a
kind of little fish. Deredare, to disinherite. Deredatione, a disherison.
Derelitto, left, forsaken, cast off, abandoned, relinquisht. Deretano,
Derettano, last, lag, latter, hindmost, behind. Deridere, rido, risi, riso, to
deride, to mock to floute. Derietro, hindermost, behind, lag, last, latter.
Derisiore, derision, mocking, flouting. Deriso, derided, mocked, flouted.
Derisore, a mocker, a derider, a flouter. Deritto, as Diritto. Deriuare, to
derive. Deriuatione, a deriuation or etymology. Deriuatiuo, a deriuatiue.
Deriuieno, a starting hole, an evasion, a shift to escape or go from ones word.
Derogare, to derogate, to diminish, to impair. Derogatione, Deroganza, a
derogation. Derrata, a cheapning, a bargain. Also cheap, a good peni-woorth,
good hansell. Some have also taken it for a kind of money or coin.
Descendere, scendo, scesi, sceso, to descend, to fall or come down, to alight.
Descesa, a descending, a fall, a coming down. Also a running rheum, a pose
or murre. Desceso, descended, fallen, come down, alighted. Deschetto, a little
deske, a little board, a little table. Descinare, to dine. Also a dinner.
Desco, a deske, a table, a board, a counting board. Descriuere, scriuo,
scrissi, scritto, to describe, to declare. Descrittione, a description.
Desertare, to make desert, to waste, to consume, to desolate. Deserto, a
desert, a waste, a wilderness, a heath. Deseruire, as Diseruire. Desiare, to
desire, to wish, to long for. Desiderabile, to be desired, to be wished.
Desiderare, to desire, to wish, to long for. Desiderata, a kind of comfet or
paste of Genoua so called. Desiderio, desire, wish, longing. Desidereuole, as
Desiderabile. Desideroso, desirous, wishing, longing for. Designare, to
desseigne, to appoint, to allot, to intend. Designo, a deseigne, an
appointment, an intent. Desinare, to dine. Also a dinner. Desinea, a dining, a
dinner space. Desinentia, a desinence, an end or termination of a word. Desio,
desire. Desioso, desirous. Desir, Desire, Desiro, desire. Desiroso, desirous.
Desistenza, a leaving off, or ceasing, or desisting. Desistere, sisto, sistei,
sistuto, to desist, leave off, cease, or give over. Despittare, to despite, to
spite. Despitto, despite, spite. Also despised, or contemned. Despittoso,
despightfull, spiteful. Despota, a Lord, a lordlike governor. Despotico,
lordlike, commanding wise. Dessa, she, the very same, the same. Desse, they,
the very same, the same. Desserrare, to unlock, to vnfasten, to set or let
loose. Desseruire, as Diseruire. Also to deserve. Dessi, they, the same. Desso,
he, the very same, the same. Dessolare, to make desolate, or waste.
Dessolatione, desolation, ruin, waste. Dessolatura, Dessolato, as Dissolatura.
Dessono, they might, would, or should give. Destare, to waken, to awake, to
stir up, to provoke, to rouse. Also to allure, to encourage. Destatoio, an
alarm, or larum to awaken one, an awaker. Deste, you gave. Destinare, to
destinate, to appoint, to depute, to allot, to ordain. Destinatione,
destination. Destino, destiny, fate, chance, lot. Destituire, isco, ito, to
make destitute. Destituto, destitute, void, wanting. Desto, quick, awakened,
stirred up, incensed, vigilant, awakefull. Destolo falcone, a kind of hawk or
falcon. Destra, the right hand. Also happy, fortunate, or luckie. Also
handsome, pretty, fine, and neat. Destramente, nimbly, quickly, with
agilitie, or dexterity, happily, fortunately, luckily. Destrezza,
nimblenes, quicknes, dexterity, agilitie, or slight. Destriere, Destrieto, a
horse, a courser, a steed, a palfrey, a swift running horse: it has bin also
taken for a man's privy parts. Destrino, a right-handed man. Destro, nimble,
quick, agile, sly, cunning, handsome. Also favorable, seconding, prosperous,
fortunate, necessary. Also a privy, or close stool. Also right-handed. Also
convenient, lively. Destrorso, on the right hand. Destruggere, as Distruggere.
Destruggitore, Destruttore, as Distruggitore. Destruttione, destruction.
Destrutto, destroyed, wasted, consumed. Desuano, a garret, or cockeloft.
Desuetudine, as Disuetudine. Desuiare, to entice, allure, or set out of the
way, to debauche. Detale, a thimble, a finger-stall. Detarello, a little
thimble, or finger-stall. Deteriorare, to make or become worse, more wicked or
unhappy. Deterioratione, a becoming or making worse, or more wicked.
Determinare, to determine, to resolve. Determinatione, a determination, a
resolution. Detestabile, detestable, abominable, loathsome, heinous.
Detestare, to loath, to abhor, or detest. Detestatione, abomination,
detestation. Detesto, detested, loathed. Also abomination. Deto, a finger, or
a toe. Deto grosso, the thumb. Deto alato al grosso, the finger next to the
thumb. Deto di mezzo, the middle finger. Deto a lato al piccolo, the wedding
finger. Deto picciolo, the little finger. Detrarre, to detract, to backbite, to
slander, to draw from. Detrattione, detraction, backbiting, slaundering.
Detratto, detracted, backbitten, slaundred. Detrattore, a detractor, a
backbiter, a slaunderer. Detrimento, detriment, damage, hinderance. Dettare, to
endite, to compose. Dettarello, a pretty saying or sentence. Dettatione, a
composition, or enditing. Dettato, endited. Also a saw, or saying. Dettatore,
an enditer. Detti, sayings, speeches, proverbs. Detti ferlini, counters to cast
accounts with. Detto, said, spoken, named. Also a saying, a speaking, a speech,
a proverb, a motto. Deturpare, to defile, to pollute. Deuastare, to waste,
spoil, subvert, or destroy. Deuastatione, a wasting, spoiling, desolation, or
destruction. Deuiare, as Desuiare, or to go or lead out of the way, to
digress. Deuio, a digression, or stay, or going out of the way. Deuoluere,
volgo, volsi, voluto, to deuolue, to fall, to come or happen from one to
another. Deuolutione, a deuolution, a tumbling or falling down. Deuotare, to
deuote. Deuotione, devotion, religion. Deuoto, devoted, religious, devout.
Deuer, Deuere, Debbo, Deuo, Deo, Deggio, Deuei, Deuuto, a verb impersonall, to
be indebted, to owe, to be convenient, to belong, or appertain, to shall, to
be due, to beseem, to be meet. Deuuto, due, owing, right, appertaining. Also
seemly, convenient, orderly. D'hora inanzi, from hence forward, hereafter.
D'hora in hora, from hour to hour, from time to time. Di', a preposition of
the genitive and the ablative cases, of, from. Also with any comparison it
stands for then, Maggior di te: with any infinite mood, to, for, for to. Also
a noune substantive, for a day, or morrow, buon di. Also the imperative mood
of dire, say thou. Diabolico, devilish. Diachilon, a kind of plaster or
ointment so called. Diacciare, to freese. Diaccio, a kind of goldsmiths work
hollow or transparent. Also ice or frost. Diacciuoli, ice-sickles dangling
down. Diacene, god forbid, gods forbode* an interiection, gogs nounes.
Diacete, a kind of thorn called in Latin Diachaeton. Diacodion, a sirup made
of poppie and water. Diacodo, a kind of whitish stone that c^niurers do use to
conjure up spirits. Diaconato, a deaconship, a deanerie. Diacono, a deacon, a
minister, a servant. Diacorion, a medicine made of onions. Diadema, a diadem, a
twist, a wreath for kings. Also a crown or coronet. Diademare, to crown with
a diadem. Diadocos, a precious stone, so pure and so unspotted that it can
abide no uncleanness or corruption near it. Diafanita, translucencie,
transparencie as through cristall. Diafano, transparent or clear like
cristall. Diafonia, a discord. Diaforesi, the figure dubitation. Also digestion
or euaporation. Diafragma, a round muscle lying overthwart the lower part of
the breast, separating the heart and lights from the stomach. Diagonale, a line
of Geometry from one corner to another. Diagono, having two corners or angles.
Dialettica, the art of Logic teaching to reason. Dialettico, a Logician, one
that teaches the art of reasoning to an fro. Dialetto, a manner of speech in
any language differing from others of the same countries. Dialgacitrino, a kind
of ointment so called. Dialgar, a drug so called. Dialhora, from that time.
Dialibano, a kind of medicament, medicine or sirup to oppiate one to sleep,
or to dead grief. Dialogare, to dialogue or dispute between two or more
persons. Dialogo, a dialogue or disputation between two or more. Dialtea, a
kind of drug used in physic. Di alto affare, of good worth, of high
account. Diamantaro, a diamond cutter. Diamante, a precious stone called a
diamond. Di-amante, of a lover, a lovers. Diamantina, a kind of herb the
leaf whereof is as hard as a diamond to be cut Diamantino, diamantine, as hard
as a diamond: also adamantine. Diambo, a kind of verse consisting of Iambikes.
Diametrale, diameter-like. Diametro, a diameter, or line dividing any thing
into two equal parts. Diamettere, metto, misi, messo, to shake, to toss, to
beat down. Diamone, a kind of many colored stone. Diamoron, a kind of
drug or herb, medicine or syrup. Diamusco, a kind of drug or perfume. Diana,
a kind of march sounded by trumpetters in a morning to their general and
captain. Dianzi, before, forward, aforehand. Diapanton, a rule or note in
music. Diapason, a diapason, a concord in music of all parts. Diapente, a
composition of five, of the number of five. Diaprasso, a kind of medicine or
syrup. Diaquilone, a drug so called. Diarodon, a kind of physic or syrup to
mitigate pain and grief. Diasatirion, a medicine to stir men to the lust of
the flesh. Diascane, Diascene, as Diacene. Diasene, a medicine to stir men to
lust of women. Diaspe, a kind of cruel serpent. Diaspro, a jasper stone, it
is of a green color. Diastema, a distance or space, a word used in music.
Diastole, a distinction in a sentence. Also a figure whereby a syllable that is
short by nature is made long: phisicions take it for the rising up of the heart,
the arteries and brain, which is sensibly felt by the pulses. Diatessaron,
consisting of four in number Diatonico, a certain concord in music, or
plain song between two. Diatono, D sol re, or G sol re ut. a plain song
between two. Diatragante, certain sugar pellets. Diaulo, a Greek measure of
two stadios, 250. paces a quarter of an Italian mile. Diauolarie, Diauolamenti,
devilish parts, or devices. Diauolo, a devil, a seende, an evil spirit. Also
a needle fish, or hornback, or horn-fish. Diauoloso, devilish. Dibalzo, to take
a ball at the bound. Dibarbare, to vnbeard, to vnroote. Dibattere, batto,
battei, battuto, to move, to stir, to wriggle or beat up and down.
Dibattersi, to bathe as a hawk does. Dibattimento, a moving, a shaking, a
wrigling or beating, or tossing, a stirring. Dibattito, a doubt, a confusion, a
debating with himself. Also debated. Dibattuto, moved, stirred, wrigled, or
beaten up and down. Also debated. Di been in meglio, from good to better. Di
botto, quickly, soon, out of hand. Dibrigata, with, together, all on a row.
Dibucare, to vnhole. Also to pluck out. Dibuccato, newly washed, white, clean,
sweet, newly huckt. Dibucciato, budded or burst forth as a flower or bean,
or chestnut out of the bud, cod, or husk. Di buon cuore, hartly, with a good
heart. Di buon hora, betimes, early, in a good hour. Di buona voglia, with a
good will, merrily disposed, joyful. Dicace, a iester, a scoffer, a railer, a
reprocher or mocker. Also a prater or babbler, a talking fellow. Dicacita,
jesting, scoffing, railing, reproching, prating, babbling or chatting.
Dicadenza, Dicaduta, as Decadenza. Dicadere, as Decadere. Dicaduta, a falling,
a decay, a declining. Dicantare, to sing out. Dicapitare, to behead. Dicare, to
vow, to dedicate, to addict, to promise. Dicatione, a vowing, a dedication, a
promise. Dicattiua voglia, ill disposed, sad, malecontent, with an ill will.
Dice, he says. Dicembre, the month of December. Dicesi, it is said, men say.
Dicere, dico, dissi, detto, to say, to speak, to tell. Diceria, a speech, a
saying, a speak, a discourse, a flim-flam tale. Diceruellare, to vnbraine, to
become foolish, doting or sottish. Dicesette, seauenteene. Diceuole, to be
spoken, seemly, decent, laudable, praise-worthie, commendable. Di che?
whereof? of what? whereat, of which. Di chi? whose? Dichiarare, to declare, to
manifest. Dichiaratione, a declaration or manifestation. Dichinare, to decline.
Dichinatione, a declination or declension. Dicidere, cido, cisi, ciso, to
decide, to determine, to resolve. Diciotto, eighteen. Dicisette, seventeen.
Dicilla, used for justice. Dicisione, a decision, a deciding, a determination.
Diciso, decided, resolved, determined. Dicitore, a sayer, a speaker, a
prolocutor, an auditor. Diclinare, as Declinare. Diclinatione, as Declinatione.
Di colta, taken at a vollie or hit as one does a ball. Di concordia, with love
and agreement. Di continuo, continually, always. Dicoreo, a kind of verse or
meetre consisting of two Trochej or six syllables. Di corto, shortly, briefly,
not long hence, out of hand. Dicosta, sidling. Also with the back of the
knife. Di costa, thereaway, that way, beyond. Dicotomo, that is divided in two
parts or in the middle. Dicouelo, Dicouel, I tell it you. Di dentro, within,
inward. Di di, by day. Di di festa, a holie-day. Di di lauoro, a workie-day. Di
magro, a fish day, a fasting day. Di grasso, a flesh day. Di dietro, behind,
after. Di di in di, from day to day, day by day. Didramma^, a Greek coin of
two dragms. Didurre, duco, dussi, dutto, to deduce, to deduct. Diduttione, a
deduction. Die, Diede, he or she gave. Dieci, the number of ten. Dierese, a
kind of figure in speech. Diesi, Diepsi, the quarter of a tune, the half of
half a tune in music. Di eta, of age. Dieta, a diet or abstinence from meat
or prescription when to eat. Also a parliament or general assembly of
estates. Dieteri, the space of two years. Dietro, behind, after. Dietro pasto,
fruit that is served after meat. Dietro punto, a back-stitch in seamstrie
work. Dietrouia, behind, after, backward. Difalta, a fault, an error, a miss,
a trespass, a default. Difaltare, to miss, to err, to fail, to want. Di
fatto, outright, out of hand, suddenly, indeed, in the nicke, ipso facto, in
good sooth. Difendere, fendo, fendei, or fesi, feso, to defend, to ward, to
protect, to shield. Difensore, Diffenditore, a defender, a warder, a protector,
a shielder. Difesa, Difensione, a defense, a ward, a protection, a shielding.
Difettare, to defect, to want, to blame or tax one with any defect, to
disable one. Difetto, a defect, a fault, an error, a want, an offense, a blame.
Difettoso, faulty, defective, erronius, wanting, sick, crazed, imperfect.
Difettuoso, idem. Diffalcare, to deduce or deduct in reckonings, to defulke, to
abate, to bate. Diffalcatura, a deduction or defalking. Diffalta, a default, a
fault, a want, an error. Diffaltare, to default, to fail, to want. Diffamare,
to defame or slander. Diffamatione, a defamation or sclaunder. Diffamatorio,
defaming, sclanderous. Diffamatore, a defamer or slanderer. Diffendere, fendo,
fendei, feso, to defend, to ward, to protect, to shield. Diffenditore, a
defender, a warder, a protector, a shielder. Diffensatore, Diffensore, as
Diffenditore. Diffesa, Diffensione, a defense, protection, shield or ward.
Diffenditrice, Diffensitrice, a defendresse. Diffensare, to defend. Differente,
different, diverse. Differentia, difference, diversity. Differentiato, with a
difference, differing, varied. Differire, risco, rito, to defer, to prolong.
Differrire, risco, rito, to differ or be diverse. Diffibiare, to loose or to
unbuckle, to untie. Difficile, difficile, uneasy, hard. Difficio, a building,
a frame, an edifice. Difficoltare, to make hard, difficult or uneasy.
Difficulta, difficulty, vneasines, hardness. Difficultoso, difficile, uneasy,
hard. Diffidanza, distrust, mistrust, diffidence. Diffidare, to distrust, to
mistrust, to defy. Diffidente, mistrustfull, diffident. Diffigurare, to
disfigure. Difiggere, figgo, fissi, fitto, to vnfixe, to launch out, to loose
out, to vnfasten. Diffinire, finisco, finito, to define. Diffinitiuo,
definitive. Diffinitione, a definition, a defining. Diffitto, vnfixed, lanched
out, thrust out, loosed out, vnfastened, in the nick. Diffondare, to vnbottom.
Diffondere, fondo, fondei, fuio, or fonduto, to defuse, to shed, to waste, to
riot, to scatter, to consume, to melt. Difformare, to mishape, to misforme, to
deforme, to disfigure. Difforme, misshapen, misformed, deformed, disfigured,
shapelesse, formelesse. Difformita, deformity, a mishaping. Diffrenare, to
unbridle. Diffundere, as Diffondere. Diffusione, a defusion, a confusion, a
chaos. Diffuso, defused, wasted, confused, shed, spread. Difilato, forthright,
outright, straight on, by line and measure. Also vnthredded. Difinitione, a
definition. Difio, a kind of meetre or verse, or the foot thereof. Difitto,
down right-streight down, right down, outright. Diformentata, of wheat, as
wheaten bread, cheat bread. Diformento, of wheat, or wheaten. Diforza, by
maine strength, perforce, of necessity. Difriges, a kind of ore or mineral
earth, that founders and finers use. Diftongo, as Diphtongo. Di fuora, Di
fuori, without, forth, abroad, out. Also from abroad or from forth.
Digenerare, as Degenerare. Digeneratione, degeneration. Digenero, one that does
degenerate. Digerire, risco, rito, to digest, to brook. Digesteuole, that may
be digested. Digestibile, as Digesteuole. Digestione, digestion. Digestiua,
digestive or digestion. Digesto, digested, disgiested, considered, viewed,
brooked, disposed, trimmed, ordered. Digiesto, idem. Digiorno, by day. Digiorno
in giorno, day by day, from day to day. Digitale, a thimble, or thumstall. Also
the herb foxegloues. Digito, a finger. Digiu, below, beneath, from below.
Digiunabile giorno, a fasting day. Digiunare, to fast, or abstain from meat.
Digiuno, a fast, a fasting, also abstinence, one that has not broken fast.
Also a gut in man's body called the hungry gut, because it is always empty.
Dignare, to daine, to vouchsafe. Dignita, dignity, authority, superiority,
worthiness. Dignitoso, worthy, full of dignity. Digno, worthy, deserving.
Digrandinare, as Grandinare. Digran senno, of great wit, of high understanding.
Digradare, to degrade. Digradatione, a degradation. Di grado in grado, from
degree to degree Di gran lunga, by a great deal, by much. Di gratia, I pray
you, in courtesy, of kindness. Digredere, gredo, gressi, gresso, to digress, to
transgress, to trespass, to go from the purpose, to swerve. Digressione, a
digression, transgression, or trespass, a swaruing. Digrignare, to grinne, to
s^arre, to yarre as a dog does. Digrignire, gnisco, gnito, as Digrignare. Di
grossa pasta, of no worth, of no account, of gross conceit. Di grosso, by
great, by much, in gross. Diguazzare, to paddle or dash in the water. Also to
brandish in the air, to lavish. Dignazzo, a padling, a dashing. Also a
brandishing in the air. Di hora in hora, hour by hour, from hour to hour.
Di huopo, D'huopo, necessary, meet, convenient, behoofull. Dij, Gods. Di la,
that way, beyond, on the other side. Dilaccare, to rent, to tear, to hauock in
pieces, to open, to vnbarre. Also to vanish out of sight. Dilacerare, to rent,
to tear in rags. Dilagare, to ouerflow with water. Dilaniare, to rent, to
tear, to break, to tug in pieces. Dilapidare, as Delapidare. Dilapidatione,
as Delapidatione. Dilatare, to dilate, to enlarge, to spread. Also to delay.
Dilatatione, as Dilatione. Dilatione, a dilation, enlarging or ouerspreading, a
delay. Dilattare, to weane, to vnmilch. Dilauatione, a washing away with
waters. Dilauia, that way, thereabout. Dileggiare, to mock, to scoff, to
flout, to jest at. Dileggieri, Dileggiero, easily, lightly. Dileguado, tried
sewet to frye meat with. Dileguare, to melt, to thawe, to consume, to waste,
to vanish, to disperse, to destroy. Also to depart out of sight, to avoid, to
undo. Dileticare, to tickle. Diletico, a tickling. Dileticoso, ticklish.
Dilettabile, as Diletteuole. Dilettanza, Dilettatione, delight, pleasance,
content, delectation, sport, liking. Dilettare, to delight, to please, to like.
Diletteuole, delightsome, pleasant, delightful, delectable. Dilettione, as
Dilettanza. Diletto, as Dilettanza. Dilettoso, as Diletteuole. Dili, thereaway,
that way. Diliberare, as Deliberare. Diliberatione, as Deliberatione. Dilibero,
free, frank. Dilicatezza, as Delicatezza. Dilicato, as Delicato. Diligentare,
to solicit, to hasten, to ply, to hye. Diligente, diligent, careful.
Diligenza, diligence, care. Dilinquente, as Delinquente. Diliscare, to vnhuske
or cleanse fish from bones. Diliueranza, deliverance. Diliuerare, to deliver.
Diliurare, to deliver. Dille, tell her, say unto her. Dilli, tell him, say unto
him. Dillo, tell it, tell the same. Diloggiare, to dislodge, to vnlodge.
Dilollare, to weed corn from tares or cockle. Also to power from one vessel
into another, as wine. Dilombare, Dilombiare, to vnl^yne, to make lean or
lanke about the loins. Dilongare, to lengthen, to ^onge, to go far off, to
divide. Dilongo, forthright, forward, on along, straight on. Dilontanare, to
separate, to elonge, to go far off, to divide, to remove. Di lontano, a far
off, distant, far. Dilucidare, to declare or make plain to be understood.
Dilucida, plain to be understood. Dilucidatione, a declaring, or explaining.
Diludio, the space between plays. Dilungi, far off, far, distant.
Dilungo, as Dilongo. Diluuiare, to ouerflow with waters. Also to denounce, to
swallow, or to waste and consume wastfullie, and riotouslie. Diluuio, a deluge,
a flood, an inundation. Diluuione, a waster, a consumer, a destroyer, a
spendthrift, a glutton, a gullie gut, a deuourer, a gormand. Dimacerare, to
macerate, to mortify. Dimacchiare, to vnspot, to take away spots, to pull or
rouse out of bushes. Dimagrare, to make lean, to become lean, to take down
the flesh. Di mala voglia, ill disposed, out of order, sad, malecontent. Di
male in peggio, from bad to worse. Dimaliare, to vnwitch, to vncharme. Di mal
pelo, bad of condition, of a bad hair. Dimanda, a demand, a question, a
request. Dimandare, to demand, to question, to ask, to request. Dimane,
Dimani, to morrow. Dimaniale, as Demaniale. Dimanicare, to vnhandle, to vnhaft,
to vnsleeue. Dimaniera, in such sort, in such manner, so that. Dimani'altro, to
morrow next, next day after to morrow. Diman' in mano, from hand to hand,
successively. Dimantellare, to vnmantle, to dismantell, to raze the walls of a
town. Dimarchesarsi, to be delivered of the monthly flowers that women have.
Dimaritare, to vnmarrie. Dimasta, a governor, a ruler, a potentate. Dimastia,
government, might, rule, or power. Dimatina, to morrow morning, in the morning.
Dimattonare, to vnpane, to vnbrick. Dimmelo, tell it me, tell me it. Dimenare,
to move, to stir, to wriggle, to shake up and down, to bestir, to tumble, to
wagge. Dimenamento, a moving, a stirring, a wrigling or shaking. Dimembrare,
to dismember, to disioynt, to cut up, to carue, to tear, to divide.
Dimensione, a measuring, a demension. Dimenticaggine, forgetfulness, oblivion.
Dimenticanza, forgetfulness, oblivion. Dimenticare, to forget. Dimentichiuole,
forgetful, obliuious. Dimentire, mento, mentito, to belie ones self, to give
a lie. Dimentita, a belying. Dimesticare, to tame, to become or make familiar
or gentle. Dimestichezza, familiarity, gentleness, tamenes. Dimestico,
familiar, gentle, tame. Dimessione, forgiveness, submission, lowlines. Dimesso,
demitted, intermitted, submisse, lowly, humble, base, demisse. Also forgiven.
Dimesticare, Dimestichezza, as Domesticare. Dimetro, a kind of verse or
meetre. Dimettere, metto, misi, messo, to demit, to intermit, to forgive.
Dimezzare, to divide in halfes, to sever, to cut in sunder. Dimezzo, between,
in the midst. Dimicare, to fight it out as enemies. Dimito, a kind of course
cotton or flanell. Dimmi, tell me. Diminuire, nuisco, nuito, to diminish, to
abate. Diminuito, Diminuto, diminished. Diminutione, Diminuimento, a
diminishing, a diminution. Diminutiuo, a diminutiue. Dimisciare, to waken, to
awaken. Dimira, point blanke, level. Dimitriare, to vnmitre. Dimoccare, to
snuff, as a candle. Dimoccolare, as Dimoccare. Also to put out of joint.
Dimollare, to vnsteepe. Dimone, Dimonio, a devil, a spirit. Dimora, a stay, a
demurre, a delaie, a pause, a lingering, a slownesse. Also an abiding, a
dwelling, a remaining. Dimoranza, idem. Dimorare, to stay, to delay, to
demurre, to linger, to pause, to dwell, abide or remain. Dimostranza, a
demonstration, declaration. Dimostrare, to show, to demonstrate, to declare,
to discover, to manifest. Dimostratione, as Dimostranza. Dimostratiuo,
demonstratiue. Dimprouiso, on a sudden, unprovided, extempore, unlooked for.
Dimucchiare, to vnheape. Dinanzi, Dinanti, before, foreward. Dinari, pence,
money or coin. Dinaioso, Dinaroso, monied, rich. Dinaro, a penie. Also money.
Dinascoso, Dinascosto, secretly, hiddenly, in hugger-mugger. Dinaspare, to
vnrecle, or wind yarne. Dindi, thence, from thence. Also a childish word for
money, as we say chinke. Dinegare, to deny, to refuse. Dinetto, cleanly,
handsomely, neately. Dino, an open place for air. Dinoccare, as Dinocciolare.
Dinocciolare, to vnhuske, to vnshell, to untie, to vnknot, to crash or snap, or
spraine out of joint: to crack as some make their knuckles to do. Dinoccolare,
as Dinocciolare. Dinobilitare, to unnoble, to put from nobility. Dinodare, to
vnknot, to untie. Dinontiare, to denounce, to declare. Dinontiatione,
denuntiation. Dinominare, to denominate, to name. Dinominatione, denomination.
Dinotare, to denote. Dinotatione, denotation. Dinotte, by night, in the dark.
Dinotte tempo, idem. Dinouo, Di nuouo, again, a new. Dinubilare, to vncloud,
to clear up. Dinudare, to strip, to make naked, to unclothe. Dio, God,
almighty God. Diobolo, a Greek coin about two pence farthing sterling.
Diocese, a diocese. Diodeo, the name of a certain tool that a surgeon does
use. Dio lo facia, God grant it, God make it. Dio me ne guardi, God shield me
from it, God defend me from it. Dio non voglia, God forbid. Dio voglia, God
grant. Dio voglia che, God grant that. Dio volesse, would to God. Dio volesse
che, would to God that. Dionisio, a kind of precious stone having red spots,
good against drunkenness being carried about one. Dipanare, to wind or reele
yarne or silk. Dipar, Dipari, Diparo, even hand, hand to hand, even, equally,
alike, quit. Diparangone, perfect, tried, able to stand to the touch.
Diparecchiare, to make unready. Dipari, Diparo, as Dipar. Dipartenza, a
departure, a going away, a diuidence, a separation. Dipartimento, idem.
Dipartire, parto, partito, to divide, to separate, to sunder, to divorce, to
impart. Also to depart, to go away. Dipartito, divided, separated, sundred,
divorced, imparted. Also departed, gone away. Dipartita, a departure, a going
away, a diuidence, a separation. Dipassaggio, in passing by, by way of
passage. Dipegnare, to vngage, to vnpawne, to redeem. Dipelare, to vnpill, to
vnhaire, to vnskin, to pull out hairs or feathers. Dipenare, to rid from pain.
Also to wind a bottom or clue of thread. Dipenna, written. Dipennare, to blot,
to blur, to cross out of any writing. Dipendente, dependent, hanging by.
Dipendenza, dependencie. Dipendere, pendo, pendei, penduto, to depend or hang
by. Diperse, by himself, alone, several. Dipeso, weighty, by maine weight,
full weight. Dipezzare, to vnpeece, to vnpatch. Diphtongo, two vowels contract
in one body or form, called a diphthong. Dipiato, secretly, lurkingly,
closely. Dipingere, pingo, pinsi, pinto, to paint, to depaint, to draw a
picture. Dipintore, a painter, a drawer. Depintura, a painting, a picture. Di
piuma, of feather, letto di piuma, a feather bed. Diplorare, as Deplorare.
Diploratione, as Deploratione. Dipoca leuatura, of small worth, scarce worth
the taking up. Dipocciare, to suck dry, to exhaust. Dipoi, afterward, after,
then, behind, moreover. Diponto, with a thrust or a foyne. Diponere, Diporre,
pongo, posi, posto, to depose or lay down, to gage down. Diponitore,
Dipositore, a deposer, a gager. Diportamenti, behauiours, solaces, disports.
Diportante, an ambling pace. Diportare, to disport, to solace, to behave.
Diporto, solace, sport, pastime. Dipositione, as Depositione. Dipositare, as
Depositare. Dipositario, as Depositario. Diposito, as Deposito. Diposta, at
vollie, to take the ball before it bounds. Dipredare, to depray, to pray, to
rob, to spoil, to strip. Dipredatione, a robbing, sacking, spoiling,
depredation or stripping. Dipresente, now, presently, by and by, at this
instant. Dipresso, depressed. Also near, by, or within a little. Diptoto, a
noune having two cases. Diputare, as Deputare. Diputati, as Deputati.
Diputatione, as Deputatione. Diputatore, as Deputatore. Di qua, on this side,
hereaway, this way. Also from hence or hence. Di qua et di la, this way and
that way, on this side and on that. Di quando in quando, from time to time. Di
quercia, of oak, made of oak, oken. Di qui, as Di qua. Di quinci, from hence,
hence. Di quindi, thence, from thence: Dira, as Diro. Diradare, to make thin,
to rarifie. Diradicare, to vnroote, to pluck up by the roots. Dirado, seldom,
seldom times. Diramare, to vnbranch, to vnbow, to loppe trees. Diraro,
seldom, seldom times. Dire, dico, dissi, detto, to say, to speak, to utter,
to tell or to report. Dire a Dio, to bid farewell. Dire il pater nostro ^ella
bertuccia, to curse, ban, swear, chase, fret or grumble in vain and to no
purpose to ones self, as an ape does grinning his teeth. Dire cio che pasquino
dice de'Cardinali, to rail, to exclaim, to speak all evil. Diredare, to
disinherit. Also to vntangle, to unfold. Direnato, broken backed, having the
back out of joint. Diretano, Direttano, last, lagge, hindmost. Diretro,
behind, after. Direttiuo, having or giving direction unto, directive. Diretto,
direct. Also directed or adrest. Direttore, a director, a leader, a guide: also
a carpenters ruler or squire. Direttorio, a directorie. Dire villania, to
revile, to chide, to rate one. Diricciare, to vnhuske, to vnshale chestnuts.
Also to vncurle or vncrispe. Dirieto, lag, last, hindermost. Dirietro, behind,
after. Dirimpetto, oueragainst, face to face, foreaneanst. Diritezza,
directnes, straightnes, vprightnes of living. Diritto, due, right, just,
straight, stif, forth right, upright, honest, good, direct. Also reason,
justice, right, law. Also directed. Dirittore, as Direttore. Dirittura,
rightnes, streightnes, vprightnes, honesty, goodness, Look Adirittura, reason,
right, justice, law. A dirittura, foorthright, point blanke. Diriuare, to
derive. Diriuatione, a deriuation. Diriuatiuo, deriuatiue. Dirizzare, as
Drizzare. Dirizzadore, as Drizzadore. Dirizzatoio, as Drizzatore. Diro, dire,
cruel, fell, severe, austere, remorceles. Diro, I will say. Dirobare, to
disrobe, to strip, to spoil, to steal, to filch. Diroccare, to tumble or
throw down headlong from a hill or rock. Also to flow out of a rock as
water does. Dirocciare, as Diroccare. Dirompere, rompo, ruppi, rotto, to break
down, to burst forth. Also to bruise or crush in pieces. Dironcare, to prune
a vine or tree. Dirosa, of a rose, acqua rosa, rosewater. Dirotta, a downeright
huddle or blow. Also broken or burst out. Dirottamente, outright,
foorth-right, amain without stop or let. Dirottare, as Dirizzare. Dirotto,
burst out, broken forth, bruised, crushed or broken. Dirou^ro, of oak, made of
oak. Dirtelo, to tell it thee. Dirti, to tell thee. Diruccare, as Diroccare.
Diruginire, to vnrust, to cleanse or skoure. Dirupare, as Diroccare. Also to
waste, to destroy, to shiuer, to riue, to splint, to break, to crush, to
rumble down. Dirupamento, a shiuering, a splinting, a riuing, a slattering, a
rock, a down rumbling. Dirupo, a rock, a cliffe or headlong down rumbling.
Disaccentato, vnaccented, without an accent or due sound. Disacerbare, to
vnsower, to sweeten, to ease, to assuage. Disacostumato, unaccustomed. Also
unmannerly. Disacrare, to unhallow, to degrade. Disadattare, to incommode, to
trouble, to displaie, to disorder. Disageuole, uneasy, hard, difficult.
Disaghiadare, to thaw, to vnfreese. Disagiare, to disease, to trouble, to
molest, to vex. Disagrato, diseased, troubled, incommoded. Also crased in
body. Disagio, trouble, inconvenience, sufferance, disease, molestation. Also
want, penury or lack. Disagioso, penurious, wanting, difficult, hard,
inconvenient. Disagrauare, to disburden, to ease, to lighten. Disaguaglianza,
inequality, disparagement. Disaguagliare, to inequall, to disparage.
Disaiutare, to vnhelpe, to hinder, to disfavor. Disaiuto, hinderance, vnhelpt,
let. Disalbergare, to vnlodge. Disamalare, to vnsicken. Disamare, to hate, to
vnloue. Disaminare, to examine or discourse upon. Disamorare, to disinamor.
Disamorato, out of love, disinamored. Disamoreuole, unloving, unkind.
Disamoreuolezza, unkindness, vnlouingnes. Disanimare, to discourage, to dissuade
from, to deprive of soul and life. Disanottare, to vnnight, to wax day.
Disapito, unsavory, tasting of nothing, wallowish. Disapricare, to set in the
cold again. Disarcare, to unbend, to vnarche. Disarenare, to clear from sand,
to vnsand, to vngrauell. Disarmare, to unarm, to disarme. Disascondere,
scondo, scosi, scoso, or scosto, to manifest, to vnhide, to reveal.
Disauantaggiare, to disadvantage. Disauantaggio, disadvantage. Disauantaggioso,
disaduantageable. Disastro, disastre, mischance, ill luck. Disastroso,
unfortunate, unlucky. Disauedere, vedo, viddi, veduto, to missee, to be
unwary, not to regard. Disaueduto, unwary, without regard, unadvised.
Disauedutamente, unwarily, at unawares, unadvisedly. Disauedutezza,
unadvisedness, vnwarines. Disauentura, a mishap, a misfortune. Disauenturato,
unhappy, unfortunate. Disauertenza, oversight, vnwarines. Disauezzare, to
disaccustome, to vnuse. Disauezzo, unaccustomed, unused, vnwoont. Disbalordire,
disco, dito, to leave or shake of dissines, giddines or staggering, to become
wise again. Disbarcare, to disimbarke, to land. Disbarco, a landing out of a
ship, a coming on land. Disbardare, to vntrap as a horse. Disbattezzare, to
unchristian. Disbiadare, to vnprouender a horse. Disbiauato, as sbiauato.
Disbottonare, to vnbutton. Disbollare, to clear from marks or plasters.
Disboscare, to vnwood, to unfurnish of wood or timber. Disbracare, as sbracare.
Disbramare, to have ones longing, to vnwish. Disbrattare, as sbrattare.
Disbrauare, to disadorne or spoil of bravery. Disbriacare, to become sober
again. Disbrigare, as sbrigare. Disbrigliare, to unbridle, to vnsnaffle.
Discacciare, as Scacciare. Discadere, as Decadere. Discaggere, as Decadere.
Discalciare, Discalzare, as Scalciare. Discadenacciare, to vnboult a door, to
vnbar. Discalcio, as Scalcio. Discancellare, as Cancellare, Discane, as
Diacene, or Diascane. Discapellare, as Scapellare. Discapigliare, as
Scapigliare. Discapitare, as Scapitare. Discaricare, as Scaricare.
Discarcerare, to vnprison. Discarlatto, of purple, of or with skarlet.
Discarnare, as Scarnare. Discaro, hateful, hated, odious, not dear, ill
beloved. Discasciare, Discassare, to make loose the teeth, to dismount
artillery, to unsettle any thing, to vnbreech, to vnchest. Discatenare, to
vnchaine. Discemare, as Scemare. Discendere, as Scendere. Discendente,
descending, declining. Also an allie, or kinsman. Discente, a disciple, a
learner, a scholar. Discendenza, a descendence, a descent, a petigree.
Discepolo, a disciple, a scholar, a learner. Discernere, scerno, scernei,
scernuto, to discern, to perceive, to know, to distinguish, to know a far
off, to ken. Discernente, discerning, perceiving, kenning. Discerneuole, that
may be discerned or distinguished, that is apparent. Disceruellare, as
Sceruellare. Disceruicare, to vnnecke. Discesa, a descent, a declining. Also a
rheum, a catarrhe, a pose, or murre. Disceso, descended, declined, come down,
alighted. Discettare, to disagree, vary, jar or square. Dischiauare, as
Schiauare. Dischiodare, as Schiodare. Dischiomare, to vnhaire, to vncoiffe, to
disheuell, to touze ones hair. Dischiudere, chiudo, chiusi, chiuso, to unshut,
to open, to unclose, to disclose. Dischiuso, unshut, opened, disclosed,
unclosed. Disciferare, to vncifer, to decifer. Discigliare, to vnhoode a hawke,
to vnseere a birds eyes. Discinare, to dine. Also a dinner. Discingere, cingo,
cinsi, cinto, to vnguirt. Discinto, ungirt, loose, free. Disciogliere, as
Sciogliere. Disciolare, to open or uncase a slouen, to put off hose and doublet
without undoing of points. Disciolto, as Sciolto. Discioperato, not idle,
busied. Discipare, to dissipate, to waste, to consume, to riot away. Discipito,
unsavory, tastlesse, without salt, wallowish. Also simple minded. Disciplina,
discipline, correction, instruction. Disciplinanti, a religious order of such
as will scourge themselves, docile. Disciplinare, to discipline, to teach, to
correct, to instruct. Disciplinario, disciplinarie, pertaining to discipline or
correction. Disciplineuole, disciplinable, docile, corrigible. Discipolo, as
Discepolo. Discluso, excluded, exempted, severed. Disco, a quoit to play with.
Also a great ring of iron, lead, or stone, which men used to cast up in the
air for exercise, as we use to throw the sledge or pitch the bar. Discolare,
to vnglue. Discolmo, a kind of color in a horse. Discolo, disobedient,
stiffnecked, wayward, naught, shrewde. Discolorare, to discolor. Discolorire,
risco, rito, to discolor. Discolpare, as Scolpare. Discolpeuole, vnguiltie,
blameless. Discomodare, as Incomodare. Discomodo, as Incomodo. Discompagnare,
as Scompagnare. Discompiacere, to displease, to dislike. Discomposto,
vncomposed, shapelesse, formelesse. Discomunale, that which is not common.
Discomunare, to appropriate that which is common. Disconciare, as Sconciare.
Disconciatura, as Sconciatura. Disconcio, as Sconcio. Disconfermare, to
vnconfirme, to disestablish. Disconficcare, as Sconficcare. Disconfidare, to
distrust. Disconforme, uncomfortable. Disconfortare, to discomfort, to
dissuade. Disconforto, disswasion, discomfort. Disconocchiare, to empty or
spinne from a distaffe. Disconoscenza, vnacknowledging, unthankfulness.
Disconosciuto, unknown. Disconsigliare, to discounsell, to dissuade.
Disconsecrare, to degrade, to profane, to vnconsecrate. Disconsertare, to bring
out of order, frame, tune, or proportion. Disconsolare, to discomfort.
Disconsueto, unaccustomed, unwont, unused. Disconsuetudine, an unwont.
Discontare, to vnreckon, to abate in reckoning. Discontentezza,
discontentednes. Discontento, discontent. Discontinua, discontinuall.
Discontinuare, to discontinue. Disconuenire, vengo, venni, venuto, to
misbeseeme, to be inconvenient, unseemly, unlawful, or unmeet, to disagree.
Disconueneuole, disconuenient, vndece^t, unseemly, misbeseeming, inconvenient.
Disconueneuolezza, an inconueniencie, or vnseemelines. Disconuersare, to
vnfrequent, not to converse together. Discoppiare, to uncouple, to unyoke.
Discoperta, a discovery. Discoperto, discovered, open, manifest, revealed,
uncovered. Discoprire, copro, copersi, coperto, to discover, to uncover, to
reveal. Discordanza, a discord, a iarring, a squaring, a disagreement,
forgetfulness. Discordare, to disagree, to vntune, to contend, to jar, to
square, to forget. Discordante, Discordeuole, Discord, discordant,
disagreeing, differing. Discordia, discord, jar, squaring, contention.
Discordo, a disagreement, a discord, a jar, a squaring. Discorrentia, a
discourse, a tale, a speech. Also a loosenes in the body, a laske. Discorrenza,
a running, a flixe or flowing of humors. Discorrere, corro, corsi, corso, to
discourse, to reason, to run to and fro. Discorribanda, a glance or touch at
any thing in discourse, a word and away. Discorrimento, a running to and fro,
a gadding up and down, a discoursing. Discorrucciare, to pacify from anger,
to forget, or forgo ones anger. Disco^siuamente, by way of discourse. Discorso,
discoursed, reasoned, run or gadded to and fro. Also reason, wit, discourse,
consideration, or foresight. Discortese, discourteous, uncivil. Discortesia,
discurtesie, inciuilitie. Discorzare, to shave, to pare, to pil, to vnrine.
Discoscendere, as Scoscendere. Discosceso, as Scosceso. Discostare, to
separate, to disioine, to sever, to sunder, to eslonge or go far off. Discosto,
far, far off, distant, far a sunder. Discotennare, to flea, to vnskin, to
gall or rub off the skin. Discourire, as Discoprire. Discouerta, as Discoperta.
Discouerto, as Discoperto. Discozzare, as Scozzare. Discredente, misbeleeuing,
mistrustfull, unbelieving, a miscreant. Discredere, credo, credei, creduto, to
misbeleeue, to vnbeleeue, to distrust, to be a miscreant. Discrepante,
different, disagreeing. Discrepantia, difference, or disagreement. Discrescente
luna, the waning or decreasing of the moon. Discrescere, cresco, crebbi,
cresciuto, to vngrow, to diminish, to wane. Discrespare, to vncurle, to
vnfrizle, to vncrispe, to vnwrinkle, to smooth, to sleeke. Discretezza, as
Discrettione. Discretione, discretion, judgment, wisdom, consideration,
discreetnes. Discreto, discreet, wise, wary, considerate, circumspect.
Discrittibile, that may be described. Discriuere, as Descriuere. Discrostare,
as Scrostare. Discrudelire, lisco, lito, to become from cruel, gentle and
mild. Disculminare, to vntop, to vnroofe, or until a house. Discumulare, to
vnheape. Discursione, a discourse, a discoursing. Discuscire, as Scuscire.
Discuscito, as Scuscito. Discussiuo, which has strength to dissolve or break,
discussiue. Discusso, discussed, searched, related, dissolved. Discutere, cuto,
cussi, cusso, to discuss, to relate, to search out. Disdebitare, to vndebt, to
come out of debt. Disdegnare, as Sdegnare. Disdegno, as Sdegno. Disdegnoso, as
Sdegnoso. Disdentato, as Sdentato. Disdetta, a forespeaking, an ill luck, a
misfortune, a gainsaying, a foreboding. Disdetto, vnsaide, recanted, revoked a
saying, gaine-saide, withstoode, forespoken, misbeseeming, vndece^t, unmeet, a
controversy or contention. Disdiceuole, unseemly, indecent, not to be spoken.
Disdire, dico, dissi, detto, to vnsaie, to recant, to gain say, to
forespeake, to be indecent, to misbeseeme, not to become. Disdogliare, as
Sdogliare. Disdolorare, as Sdogliare. Disdottorare, to vndoctor, to degrade a
doctor. Disdossa, alla disdossa, loosely on ones back, a pick-apack.
Disdossare, to take from ones back. Disegnante, a map or modle maker. Also a
desseigner, a complotter, a contriuer, a drawer, a painter. Disegnare, to
purpose, to intend, to desseigne, to draw, to modle, to plot, to contriue, to
paint, to pourtraie. Disegnatore, as Disegnante. Disegni, purposes, desseignes,
draughts, modles, plots. Disegno, a purpose, an intent, a desseigne, a draught,
a modle, a plot, a picture, or pourtrait. Disegualita, inequality,
disproportion. Disellare, Disellato, to vnsaddle. Disenfiamento, an vnswelling.
Disenfiare, to vnswel, to vnpuffe, to alay, to assuage. Disensato, senceles,
mad, frantike, out or reason. Disenteria, as Dissenteria. Diseparare, as
Separare. Disera, in the evening, by night. Diserrare, to unlock, to unshut,
to open. Disertare, to make desert, to waste, to spoil, to reduce to a
wilderness. Also for a woman to miscarie in childe-bed or come before her time.
Diserto, a desert, a waste, a heath, a wilderness. Also eloquent, well spoken,
of good utterance. Diseruire, seruo, seruito, to vnserue, to disobey, to be
unthankful, to injury. Diseruito, unserved, offended, disobeyed, bin
unthankful, wronged. Diseruitio, a shrewd turn, a bad service, an offense.
Disfacendato, as Sfacendato. Disfacimento, as Sfacimento. Disfaldare, to
unfold, to vnplait. Disfaltare, to miss, to err, to trespass, to default.
Disfalta, an error, a default, a trespass. Disfamare, as Sfamare. Disfangare,
to cleanse from dirt or mire. Disfantare, to vanish out of sight, to free or
take away infanterie, ^o become from a footeman a horseman. Disfare, faccio,
feci, fatto, to undo, to spoil, to waste, to mar, to unmake, to defeat.
Disfaretrare, to vnquiuer, to empty a quiver. Disfarinare, to vnmeale, to
vnflower. Disfattione, as Sfaccimento. Disfatto, undone, spoiled, wasted,
unmade, defeated. Disfasciare, as Sfasciare. Disfauore, a disfavor, a
disgrace. Disfauoreuole, unfavorable, disgraceful. Disfauorire, risco, rito,
to disfavor or disgrace. Disferrare, as Sferrare, Disfiancare, to vnflanke, to
vnhip, to vnhanch. Disfibbiare, as Sfibbiare. Disfida, as Sfida. Disfidare, as
Sfidare. Disfigliare, to fillie as a mare, to eawe as a sheep, to be brought a
bed as a woman. Disfigurare, to disfigure, to misshape. Disfilare, as Sfilare.
Disfocare, as Sfogare. Disfoderare, as Sfodrare. Disfogare, as Sfogare.
Disfogliare, as Sfogliare. Disfoiato, as Sfoiato. Disforato, without holes,
vnbored. Disforcare, to vnforke, to free from the gibet or gallows.
Disformare, as Sformare. Disfornare, to vnfurnace, to pull out of an oven.
Disfornire, as Sfornire. Disfrancare, to vnfranchise, to unbind.
Disfranciosato, as Sfranciosato. Disfrangiare, to vnfringe, to vnlase, to
vngard, to disadorne. Disfratare, as Sfratare. Disfregiare, as Sfregiare.
Disfrenare, as Sfrenare. Disfrondare, as Sfrondare. Disgangherare, as
Sgangherare. Disgannare, as Disingannare. Disgelosire, sisco, sito, to resolve
or free from ielosie. Disghiacciare, to vnfreese, to thaw. Disghirlandare, to
vngarlande, to vncrowne. Disgiogare, to unyoke, to free. Disgiongere, giongo,
gionsi, gionto, to disioyne, to disunite, to divide. Disgiontione, a
disioining, a disiointing, a division. Disgiontiuo, a disjunctive. Digionto,
Disgiunto, disioyned, disunited, divided, severed. Disgiouare, to disauaile, to
hurt. Disgiugnere, as Disgiongere. Disgoluppare, as Sgominare. Disgombrare, as
Sgombrare. Disgomentare, as Sgomentare. Disgommare, as Sgommare. Disgonfiare,
as Disenfiare. Disgouernare, to misgouerne, to misrule. Disgradare, to degrade.
Disgradire, to dislike, not to take in worth. Disgrassare, to vnfatten, to make
lean. Disgratia, a disgrace, a mishap, a misfortune. Disgratiare, to disgrace.
Disgratiato, disgraced, unhappy, graceless, bad, shrewed, naughty.
Disgrauare, as Sgrauare. Disgrauidare, as Sgrauidare. Disgrauio, a discharge, a
disagrauating. Disgregare, to divide, to scatter. Disgroppare, as Sgroppare.
Disgrossare, as Sgrossare. Disgustare, as Sgustare. Disgusteuole, apt to
conceive a hard opinion or unkindness, distrustful. Disgusto, as Sgusto.
Dishabitato, disinhabited, unfrequented, vncothe. Dishabilita, dishabilitie,
unableness, insufficiency. Dishabilitare, to disable, to disinable, to
disparage. Disherbare, to vngrasse, to weed out. Disherbeggiare, as
Disherbare. Disheredare, to disinherite or disherit. Dishereditare, idem.
Disheritare, to disherit or disinherit. Dishonesta, dishonestie, unhonesty.
Dishonesta, dishonest, dishonest. Dishonestare, to dishonest, to shame, to
defame. Dishonoranza, dishonor, shame. Dishonorare, to dishonor, to shame.
Dishonore, dishonor, discredit. Dishonoreuole, dishonorable. Dishorreuole,
idem. Dishumanare, to shake off all humanity, to become inhumaine, cruel or
moodie. Dishumano, inhumaine, cruel, fell, moodie. Dishumile, proud, high
minded, haughty, without humility. Disianza, a desire, a wish. Disiare, as
Desiare. Disiderare, as Desiare. Disiderio, a desire, a wish. Disideroso,
desirous, wishing. Disiecorare, to panch or pull out the entrails of any
beast. Disiecore, the vmbles, pluck, midriffe, panche, entrails, garbish,
hastlet, giblet or geither of any beast. Di si fatta maniera, in such sort, so
that. Di si fatta sort, idem. Disigilare, to unseal, to pull off the seal.
Disimbarcare, to disimbarke, to vnship. Disimboscare, as Sboscare.
Disimbrattare, as Sbrattare. Disimbriacare, to become or make sober again.
Disimparare, to forget, to unlearn. Disimpegnare, to vnpaune, to redeem.
Disimpiastrare, to vnplaister. Disimpiccare, to vnhang. Disinamorare, to
disinamoure. Disinare, to dine. Also a dinner. Disincantare, to vncharme, to
disinchant. Disincarcerare, to free out of prison. Disintendere, tendo, tesi,
teso, to misunderstand. Disinebbiare, to vncloude, to clear up. Disinebriare,
as Disimbriacare. Disingannare, to vndeceiue, to clear, to free or resolve
from any doubt. Disinsegnare, to vnteach again. Disintonare, to vntune, to
disagree. Disintricare, to vntangle, to unfold. Disinuescare, to vnsnare, to
vnbaite. Disinuitare, to vnuie at any game, to vnbid, to disinuite. Disinuolto,
loose, free, vntangled, vnwrapt. Disio, a desire, a wish. Also I wish or
desire. Disioso, desirous, covetous. Dislacciare, as Slacciare. Dislagare, to
vnflow, to ebb or fall as waters do, to dilate as water does. Dislattare, to
weane from sucking. Dislauare, to vnwash. Dislegare, to untie, to unbind.
Dislendinare, to vnnit, to vnlouse. Disleale, as Sleale. Dislealta, Disleanza,
as Slealta. Dislenguare, to vntoong. Dislinguare, idem. Dislocare, as Slogare.
Dislodare, to dispraise, to discommend. Dislogare, as Slogare. Dislogatione, an
vniointing of any lim or joint, a displacing. Disloggiare, to vnlodge, to
dislodge. Dislombare, to vnloyne, to back-breake. Dislongare, as Allontanare.
Dislustrare, to darken, to obscure. Dismacchiare, as Smacchiare. Dismagare, as
Smagare. Dismagliare, as Smagliare. Dismalare, to vnsicken, to recover health.
Dismanda^si, in Grison is taken when a horse does fly or depart out of the
ring or compass where he is ridden. Dismanicare, as Smanicare. Dismatire, to
become wise from foolish. Dismembrare, as Smembrare. Dismenticanza,
forgetfulness. Dismenticare, to forget. Dismenticheuole, forgetful.
Dismetriare, as Smetriare. Dismettere, metto, misi, messo, to dismish, to leave
off, to renounce. Dismiare, to wake, to awaken. Dismisciare, Dismisiare, to
awaken. Dismissione, a dismissing or dismission. Dismisura, an vnmeasure, out
of measure. Dismisurato, as Smisurato. Dismonacare, as Disfratare. Dismontare,
as Smontare. Dismontata, as Smontata. Dismorbare, as Smorbare. Disnebbiare, to
vncloude, to clear up. Disneruare, as Sneruare. Disnidare, to vnroost, to
vn-nest. Disnodare, as Snodare. Disnodatione, as Snodatura. Disnore, dishonor,
dishonestie. Disnottare, to wax day or clear again. Disobligare, to free from
bonds. Disobligo, no bond nor duty. Disocupato, vnocupied, idle, waste,
unused. Disolare, to make desolate, to vnsole. Disolatione, as Desolatione.
Disonante, dissonant, disagreeing. Disonanza, a dissonance, a discord, or jar
in music. Disonare, to disaccord, to jar, to disagree in sound, to dissent.
Disonghiare, to vn-naile, or to vnhoofe. Disonnare, Disonniare, to awaken, to
free from sleep. Di sono, Di suono, by the sound, sounding. Disopra, above,
over, aloft, over and above, from above, moreover, besides, above hand.
Disopracalcie, as Sopracalcie. Disoprauia, as Disopra. Disorbitante, absurd,
irregular, out of order, square, or measure. Disorbitantia, absurdnes,
irregularitie, disorder, confusion. Disordinare, to disorder, to confound, to
commit disorder, riot or excess. Disordine, disorder, confusion, riot,
excess. Disornare, to disadorne, to vndeck. Di sort, in such sort, in such
manner. Disorte che, so that, in such manner as. Disossare, to vnbone, to pull
out the bones. Disotterra, from under ground. Disotterare, to vnburie, to dig
from under the ground. Di sotto, from under, under, underneath, below, from
below. Disouerchio, superfluous, overmuch, excessive. Dispagliare, to winnow or
rid from chafe or straw. Dispaiare, to vnpaire, to uncouple. Disparare, as
Sparare. Disparere, a disopinion, a diversity in conceit. Also a disgust or
unkindness. Also not to seem. Dispargere, as Dispergere. Dispari, uneven,
unlike, not match. Also ods in number. Disparire, as Sparire. Disparita,
inequality, ods. Disparo, uneven, or od in number, unequal. Disparuccare, to
pull off ones hair or perawig, to vnhaire. Disparte, a part, a side, several,
remote. Dispartire, as Spartire. Disparutezza, as Sparutezza. Disparuro, as
Sparuto. Dispedire, as Spedire. Dispegnare, as Spegnare. Dispegolare, to
vnpitch, or vntarre. Dispelare, as Spelare. Dispendio, expense, charges, cost,
defraying. Dispensa, a dispensation, a distributing, an expense, a charge. Also
a buttrie, a pantrie, a cupboard, a lardrie, or storehouse. Dispensagione, as
Dispensa. Dispensare, to dispense, to order, to dispose, to distribute, to
spend, to defray, to discharge, or as we say commonly to find one meat and
drink. Dispensatione, a dispensation. Dispensiere, a spender, a cater, a
treasurer, a steward or butler of a household, a distributer. Dispendere, as
Spendere. Dispepsia, ill concoction or cruditie in the stomach. Disperaggine,
Disperanza, desperation. Disperare, to despair. Disperate, a kind of
waylefull songs. Disperatione, desperation. Disperato, desperate, mad.
Disperdere, perdo, persi, person, to disperse, to miscarie as a woman in
childbed. Disperdimento, a mischance to a woman in labor. Dispergere, spergo,
spersi, sperso, to despise, to contemn, to set at naught, to disperse.
Dispergiuto, despised, contemned, set at naught, dispersed, scattred. Dispersa,
Disperso, dispersed. Also miscarried in childbed. Dispersamente, dispersedlie.
Dispersione, an abortion or miscarying with a child, or such mischance, a
dispersing or scattering. Disperuccare, as Disparuccare. Dispesa, expense,
charge, defraying. Dispettare, to despite, to show spite unto, to despise, to
contemn. Dispetteuole, despightfull. Dispetto, despite. Also despised,
loathed, contemned. Dispettoso, despightfull. Dispiacenza, vnpleasantnes.
Dispiacere, as Spiacere. Dispiaceuole, as Spiaceuole. Dispiaceuolezza,
vnpleasantnes. Dispiccare, to vnhang, to vnfasten. Dispidocchiare, as
Spidocchiare. Dispiegare, as Spiegare. Dispietato, as Spietato. Dispingere, to
vnthrust. Dispiron, a kind of herb. Dispitto, despite, spite. Dispittoso,
despightfull, spiteful. Displicenza, vnpleasantnes, displeasing. Dispo, a
kind of venomous serpent. Dispogliare, as Spogliare. Dispolutione, a spoiling,
a robbing. Disponere, pongo, posi, posto, to dispose, to order, to settle, to
appoint. Dispondeo, a double spondeo of four long sillables. Dispontare, to
disappoint, to vnpoint, to vnbridge. Disporre, as Disponere. Dispositione,
Dispostezza, disposition, lustines, gallantnes, a mind or affection.
Disposare, to vnmarie, to vnwed. Disposto, disposed, ordered, settled. Also
lusty, strong, sound in health, blithe, gallant. Disprea, pursines, or
stopping of breath. Dispregiare, as Spregiare. Dispregieuole, contemptible,
skornefull, base, abject. Dispregio, as Spregio. Disprezzabile, as
Dispregieuole. Disprezzare, as Spregiare. Disprezzeuole, as Dispregieuole.
Disprezzo, as Spregio. Disproposito, as Sproposito. Disproportione, a
disproportion. Disprouare, to disprove. Disprouedere, as Sprouedere.
Disproueduto, as Sproueduto. Disprouisto, as Sproueduto. Dispuntare, as
Dispontare. Disputa, Disputatione, a disputation, a reasoning, or debating.
Disputabile, as Disputeuole. Disputare, to dispute, to debate, to reason, to
treat. Disputante, Disputatore, a disputer, a reasoner, a debater.
Disputeuole, disputable, that may be reasoned of. Disquagliato, melted,
vnthawed, liquified, vncurded. Disquietare, as Squietare. Disquiete,
Disquietudine, as Squietudine. Disquieto, unquiet, turbulent, stirring, sance
rest. Disquagliare, to vncurd as milk is. Disquartare, to vnquarter.
Disradicare, as Sradicare. Disredare, to disinherit. Disregolare, to disorder,
to confound. Disroncare, to grub or root up. Dissaco, a carde-teazell, or
Venus basin. Dissaccare, to vnsacke, to empty out of a sack. Dissacrare,
Dissagrare, to degrade, to unhallow, to vnconsecrate. Dissada, a kind of
venomous serpent all speckled with white spots. Disse, he said. Dissero, they
said. Dissecabile, that may be dried up. Dissecare, to exsiccate or dry up.
Dissecatione, exiccation or drying up. Dissediare, to vnbesiege, to free from a
siege. Dissegnare, as Disegnare. Disseminato, scattred, forlorn, sown here
and there, spread abroad. Dissenteria, a dangerous flixe with excoriation and
wringing of the bowels, and some blood coming with it. Dissentiente,
dissenting, differing, contending. Dissentione, dissension, contention, strife,
squaring. Dissentioso, dissentious, contentious, squaring, quarelsome.
Dissentire, sento, sentito, to dissent, to disagree. Disseparare, to separate,
to sever, to part asunder. Disserrare, to unlock, to unshut. Dissetare, to
quench or slake the thirst. Dissi, I said, I did say. Dissigilare, to unseal.
Dissimiglianza, unlikeness, difference in resemblance, diversity.
Dissimigliare, to differ in resemblance, to be unlike. Dissimilare, as
Dissimile. Dissimile, Dissimigliante, unlike, vnresembling, differente in show.
Dissimilitudine, as Dissimiglianza. Dissimulare, to dissemble, to cloak or
disguise. Dissimulatione, dissimulation, dissembling. Dissimulatore, a
dissembler, a cloker. Dissipare, to waste, to consume, to dissipate, to riot
unthriftily. Dissipatione, a dissipation, wasting, consuming or unthriftiness.
Dissipatore, a waster, a consumer, an unthrift. Dissipito, unsavory, tasteles,
wallowish, without savor. Dissitte, the Dixit, meaning him that said dixit
Dominus Domino meo. Dissitio, foolish, gullish, lubbarly, shallowe witted.
Dissiuare, to strain out of joint. Dissiuatione, a straining out of joint.
Also another disease in a horse. Dissolare, to loose, to sever, to sunder, to
part as the shoe from the sole, to vnsole. Dissolatura, is a pain in the
bottom of the horses foot proceeding of the pricking of a nail being not
well healed, or such like accident: which causes a concourse of evil humors,
bereauing the horse of his lim. Dissolato, the place in the horses foot pained
or grieved with Dissolatura. Dissoluere, soluo, soluei, soluto, to dissolve, to
loose, to unbind, to undo. Dissolutezza, dissolutenes, riotousnesse, lewdnes.
Dissolutione, a dissolution, a dissoluing. Also an abolishing or breaking, a
disorder. Dissoluto, dissolute, lewd, riotous, disorderd, dissolved, unbound,
loosed, abolished. Dissomigliare, as Dissimigliare. Dissomigliante, as
Dissimigliante. Dissomiglianza, as Dissimiglianza. Dissonante, as Disonante.
Dissonanza, as Disonanza. Dissonare, as Disonare. Dissorare, to divide or
share, or part. Dissoterrare, as Disoterrare. Dissugelare, to unseal.
Distaccare, as Staccare. Distante, distant, far off, far asunder, diverse.
Distantia, Distanza, distance of place, difference, space between. Distare, to
be distant or stand far off. Distemperare, to distemper. Distemperamento, a
distemperature. Distemperanza, idem. Distemperatezza, idem. Distemprare, as
Distemperare. Distendere, as Stendere. Distenere, tengo, tenni, tenuto, to
detain, to withhold. Disterrare, to vnburie, to dig from out the ground.
Distesamente, at large, abroad, extendedly, copiously, fluently. Disteso,
extended, spread, displaide, laid along, outstretched, out-reached,
out-sprouted, copious, fluent, at large. Distessere, tesso, tessei, tessuto, to
unweave, to rauell out. Distettare, to weane from the dugge. Distico, a double
meeter, two verses containing one matter. Also the herb called Smilax.
Distillare, to distill, to trill, to drop by little and little. Distilatione, a
distillation, a distilling, a trilling, a dropping. Also a consumption.
Distilatoio, a still or distilling house. Also a still or limbecke. Distinare,
to destinate, to appoint, to alot. Distino, Distinatione, destiny, lot, fate,
chance, or fortune. Distinguere, stinguo, stinsi, stinto, to distinguish, to
distinct, to divide, to separate. Distintame^te, distinctly, severally, pointed
in order: variablie. Distintione, a distinction, diversity or separation. Also
a point or a note. Distintiuo punto, a distinctiue point. Distirare, to stretch
out, to pull out, to stretch upon a tenter hook: to wrest in length.
Distirpare, to extirpe, to grub or pluck up by the root. Distiuallare, to
vnboote, to pull off boots. Distoccata, with a foyne or a thrust. Distogliere,
tolgo, tolsi, tolto, to remove, to withdraw, to divert from any purpose or
action. Distolto, removed, withdrawn, diuerted or taken from any purpose or
action. Distonare, to vntune, to disorder, to bring out of frame. Distorcere,
torco, torsi, torto, to extort, to writhe, to wriggle, to wrest and vnwrest.
Also to make crooked, to twist or untwist. Distornare, as Distogliere, to turn
back, to turn away from. Distorno, a back returning, a turning away from.
Distorre, as Distogliere. Distorto, extorted, wrigled, crooked, writhed, awrie,
winding, or crankling in and out. Distrarre, traggo, trassi, tratto, to
withdraw, to distract, to lead away, to misleade. Distratto, withdrawn,
distracted, led away, mislead. Distregare, to vnwitch. Distretta, a destraine,
a trouble, an inconvenience, a narrow pinch, an imprisoment, a durance.
Distretto, distressed, troubled, brought to a narrow pinch, imprisoned,
straight, bound, in durance. Also a precinct, a verge, a circuit, a bound, a
limit or narrow place, a prison. Also a wapentake or hundred of a shire.
Distrettuati, such as dwell in any limited precinct or bound. Distribuire,
buisco, buito, to distribute, to deal, to divide. Distributione, a
distribution, a dealing or division. Distributore, a distributor, a dealer, a
deuider: Also the master or chief gut in any body. Districare, to free, to
rid, to clear, to disintricate, to vntangle, to dissolve, to leuse.
Districamento, an vntangling, a riddance, a loosing. Distrigare, as Districare.
Distringere, stringo, strinsi, stretto, to distraine, to streighten, to bar of
liberty. Distruggere, struggo, strussi, strutto, to destroy, to waste, to
consume, to thaw, to melt. Distruggitiuo, destroying or consuming.
Distruggitore, Distruttore, a destroyer, a waster. Distruttione,
Distruggimento, a destruction, a destroying, a consuming. Distrutto, destroyed,
wasted, consumed, thawed, melted. Also clarified fat or sewet. Disturare, to
unstop, to open. Disturbo, Disturbio, a disturbance, a trouble, a molestation.
Disturbamento, as Disturbo. Disturbare, to disturb, to trouble, to molest.
Disu, Di suso, above, up, aloft, from above, Also say on, speak up. Disuadere,
suado, suasi, suaso, to dissuade. Disuantaggiare, to disadvantage.
Disuantaggio, a disadvantage. Disuantaggioso, disaduantagious. Di sua posta, at
his own will, of his own choice. Disuasione, a disswasion, a dissuading.
Disuasorio, dissuading, discouraging. Disubidiente, disobedient. Disubidientia,
disobedience. Disubidire, disco, dito, to disobey. Disubito, suddenly,
presently. Disuefare, to disaccustome. Disuelare, as Suelare. Disuellere, as
Suellere. Disuelto, as Suelto. Disuenire, as Suenire. Disuenimento, as
Suenimento. Disuentrare, as Suentrare. Disuerginare, as Suerginare. Disuestire,
as Suestire. Disuestito, as Suestito. Disueto, unaccustomed, unwont.
Disuetudine, an vnuse, an unwont. Disuernicare, to vnuarnish. Disuezzare, to
disaccustome, to vnuse. Disuezzo, unwont, disaccustomed. Disuguaglianza,
inequality. Disuguale, unequal. Disugualita, as Disuguaglianza. Disuiare, to
entice, to draw or go out of the way. Disuiamento, an enticement or drawing or
alluring out of the way. Disuiluppare, as Suilluppare. Disuiticciare,
Disuitticchiare, as Suilluppare. Disunghiare, to vnnaile, to pare the nails,
to vnhoofe. Disunione, disunion. Disunire, nisco, nito, to disunite. Di suo
capo, of his own head, of his own choice. Disuolere, as Suolere. Disuria,
inflammation of the bladder or hardness to piss. Disusanza, disuse, an vnusing,
an vnwoont. Disusato, unused, unwonted. Disuticciare as Suilluppare. Disutile,
unprofitable, vnprofit. Dita, fingers or thumbs. Ditaglio, to hit with the edge
of any weapon, edgeling. Ditale, a thimble or a finger stall, or herb
fox-gloues. Dite, is sometimes taken for hell or limbo. Also you say. Ditella,
the arm holes or arm pits. Diterminare, to determine, to resolve.
Diterminatione, a determination, a resolution. Ditestare, to detest, to abhor.
Ditestatione, a detestation, an abhorring. Ditesteuole, detestable, abominable,
loathsome. Ditirambo, a song made in honor of Bacchus. Ditirambico poeta, a Poet
singing in praise of Bacchus. Dito, a finger, an inche, a thumb. Ditono,
having or making two sounds or two parts in music. Ditrahere, as Detrarre.
Ditrattione, as Detrattione. Ditratto, as Detratto. Ditrattore, as Detrattore.
Ditrauerso, athwart, sideling, askaunce, askew. Ditre cotte, perfect, three
times tried, of three bakings. Ditrocheo, a double trocheo verse. Dittamo, the
herb dittanie, dittander or gardenginger. Dittare, as Dettare. Dittatore, an
inditer. Also a dictator, a chief imperial commander. Dittaura, a
dictatorship. Dittella, as Ditella. Dittionario, a dictionarie. Dittione, a
saying, a mot, a word, a brief. Ditto, said, spoken, told. Also a speech or a
saying. Diua, a goddess. Also divine, heavenly. Diuallare, to fall or descend
down. Also to flote down the water. Diuallire, lisco, lito, as Diuallare.
Diuampare, as Anampare. Diuantaggio, as Dauantaggio. Diuario, a separation or
stradling. Diuedere, vedo, viddi, veduto, to divide, to separate. Also to wind
silk, to perceive, to be aware of. Look Dare a diuedere. Diueduta, Diuista,
by sight, by the eye. Diuellere, as Suellere. Diuenimento, a becoming.
Diuenire, vengo, venni, venuto, as Diuentare. Diuentare, to become, to betide,
to chance, to be fall, to happen. Diuerbio, the first part of a comedy or a
part wherein many persons are occupied. Also an old said saw. Diuersare, to
differ, to be diverse. Diuersificare, to differ. Diuersione, a diuerting, a
turning away. Diuersita, diversity, difference, contrariety. Diuersiuoco,
signifiyng diverse things. Diuerso, diverse, different, differing, strange,
unwont. Diuerticolo, a narrow by-lane or side-way, a turning, winding lane or
river. Also a crafty slip. Diuertire, tisco, tito, to divert or remove, to
turn away. Diuertiua, diuertiue or removing, Guerra diuertiua, diuertiue war.
Diui, saints, sacred, holy, godly. Diuidare, to wind silk or reele yarne.
Diuidatrice, a silk winderesse. Diuidente parlare, a distinct, lesurely
speech. Diuidere, vido, viddei, viso, to divide, to separate, to part, to sever
or sunder. Diuiduo, separable, a diuisible thing, that that may be divided.
Diuietare, to forbid, to prohibit. Diuieto, a forbiding, a prohibition.
Diuimare, to unbind any thing bound with twigs or osiers. Diuinare, to divine,
to guess, to fortell, to presage, to prophecy. Diuinatione, divination,
guessing, foretelling. Diuinatore, a deuiner, a soothsayer. Diuinatoria art,
the art of divination, or sooth-saying. Diuincolare, as Nicchiare. Diuinita,
divinity, deity, Godhead. Diuino, divine, heavenly. Also a preacher or
professor of divinity. Also of wine, tasting of wine. Diuisa, a divise, a
liuerie, an invention, an emprese. Also a manner, fashion, or form. Also
divided. Diuisamento, a devise, a talk, a partition, a dividing, a blazoning
of arms. Diuisare, to devise, to talk, to confer, to invent, to discourse,
to surmise, to seem, to think, to blazon arms. Also to divide or part
asunder. Diuisato, partie-coloured, party perpale. Diuisibile, separable,
diuiduall, that may be divided. Diuisione, division, partition, separation.
Diuiso, divided, devised, separated. Also a discourse, a tale, a speech.
Diuitia, plenty, store, riches. Diuitioso, rich, plenteous, abundant. Diuo,
divine, heavenly, a saint, a God. Diuolgare, to publish, to make common, to
diuulge or make known. Diuolgatione, a publishing, or publication, a
proclamation. Diuolgatore, a publisher, a proclaimer. Diuoluere, voluo, volsi,
voluto, to reuolue, to revolt, to turn back, to deuolue. Diuoluto, reuolued,
revolted, turned back, ouerturned, deuolued. Diuolutione, a revolution, a
deuolution. Diuorare, to devour, to glut, to gorge up, to swallow up.
Diuoracita, gluttony, deuouringnes, Diuoratore, a deuourer, a glutton, an
engorger. Diuotare, to deuote. Diuotione, devotion, earnestnes, religion.
Diuoto, devoted. Also devout, religious. Diuortiare, to divorce, to part
asunder. Diuortio, a divorce or separation. Diuorzare, as Diuortiare. Diuorzo,
a divorce or separation. Diurno, daily, continual, lasting. Diurnita,
continuance, dailines, lastingnes, perpetuity. Diuturnale, continual,
lasting, daily, perpetual. Diuturnare, to continue, to perpetuate. Diuturnita,
as Diurnita. Diuturno, lasting, continuing. Diuulgare, as Diuolgare.
Diuulgatione, as Diuolgatione. Diuulgatore, as Diuolgatore. Diuulsione, a
diuulsion, vnioyning, cutting, or dividing. Do, of the verb Dare, I give. Also
for Dove, where, whether? Doaggio, a kind of course garment, or shepherds
cloth. Doana, as Doga^a. Doaniere, as Doganiere. Dobba, a kind of dressing of
meat so called. Dobbiamo, we owe, or we ought, or we must, or we shall.
Dobbiendo, owing, of Douere. Doble, Dobre, a kind of coin, a double double
ducket. Dobletta, a kind of silken stuff worn in doublets. Dobretto,
Dobletto, a kind of white garment, like a mandilion. Doccia, a water pipe of
lead, under the ground, a damme of a mill, a spout. Docciare, to spout out as
water does out of a cock. Docciatura a spouting of waters. Doccio, a kind of
waterpot that barbers use to let water trill upon men's heads to wash it with.
Doccione, a great water-pipe under ground. Also a great spout or cock for water
to run out. Docere, has bin used to teach, to instruct. Dochimo, a foot of
five sillables, a short, two long, a short, and a long. Docile, docile,
tractable, that will learn. Docilita, docilitie, easines in learning.
Documentare, to teach, or instruct. Documento, a document or instruction.
Dodeci, Dodici, the number twelve. Dodicina, a dozen, but properly that which
we call a gross, 12. dozen. Doga, a deal board to make hogsheads with. Dogale,
Ducale, pertaining to a Duke. Dogana, a common storehouse, a magazin or custom
house. Also the custom that is paid for merchandise. Doganiero, a customehouse
keeper, a customer, a receiver. Dogare, to join barrels bords together.
Dogatore, a cooper, or barrel maker. Dogato, the Duke of Venice his Dukedom,
place, or reign. Dogaressa, the Dukes wife of Venice is so called, of Doge, as
much as Duchess. Doge, a title which only the Dukes of Venice and Genoa have.
Doglia, as Dolor. Dogliare, to grieve, to molest, to aggrauate, to vex, to
adolorate. Also to ache, to smart, to pain. Doglienza, as Dolor. Doglio, a
barrel, a tub, a wooden vessel, a bruing vat, a pipe: in some places of
Italy it is taken for an earthen pot to keep oil in, with us a jar.
Doglioso, sorrowful, grievous, dolorous, full of pain, smarting. Dogma, a
greek measure, about four inches or a handful. It is also a decree or
determination. D'ogni hora, at all times, at all hours. D'ogni in torno, round
about, in every place about. D'ogni part, on all parts, on all sides. Dohana,
Dohaniere, as Dogana. Dola, a carpenters plane. Dolare, to plane timber or
boords. Also to polish or smooth. Dolatoia, a carpenters plane. Dolatoio, a
carpenters or ioyners bench to work upon. Dolatore, a planer of boords. Also
a plane to plane withal. Dolce, sweet, soote, pleasant, pliable, gentle,
tractable, nulde, easy, flexible, delicious, toothsome. Dolcemelle, a kind of
musical instrument called a dulcimer. Also taken for a man's pilicock.
Dolcetto, somewhat sweet or pleasant. Dolcezza, sweetness, pleasantnes,
gentleness. Dolciare, as Dolcire. Dolciata, sweetenes, a kind of sweet sauce.
Dolcibuono, as Dolcemelle. Dolcigno, sweetish, somewhat sweet. Dolcime, a
kind of disease in a horse. Dolcire, cisco, cito, to sweeten. Also to appease,
to alaie, to mitigate. Dolciore, Dolcitudine, sweetenes. Dolcitudine,
sweetenes. Dolgo, I grieve, I sorrow, I pain, I smart, I ache. Dolente,
grievous, sorrowful, paining, smarting, aching. Also poor, silly, wretched,
wailefull. Dolenza, as Dolor. Dolere, dolgo, dolsi, doluto, to be sorrowful,
to ache, to smart, to pain. Dolfinio, the herb Larkes-heele, Larke-sp^rre,
Larkes-clawe, or Munkes-hood. Dolico, a Greek measure, containing 12. stadij
or furlongs, 1500. paces, a mile and a half. Dolio, as Doglio. Dolo, deceit,
fraud, guile, treachery. Dolorare, to grieve, to adolorate. Dolor, greese,
pain, dolor, smart, ache, vexation, anguish, teene, sorrow, aching. Doloroso,
dolorous, grievous, sorrowful, painful, malcontent, silly. Dolubri, used
for temples. Dolzaina, as Dolcemelle. Dolzolina, the herb Galingale. Dolzore,
as Dolcezza. Doma, tamed, submitted, overcome, quelled. Domanda, a request, a
dema^nd, a question. Domandare, to request, to demand, to question, to ask,
to name, to call. Domandatore, a demander, a requester, a questioner, an asker.
Doman da notte, to morrow night. Domane, Domani, Doman', to morrow. Doman
l'altro, to morrow next, next day after to morrow. Domare, to tame, overcome,
vanquish, quell, or submit. Domaschino, damask work. Domasco, as Damasco.
Domatina, to morrow morning. Domatore, a tamer, a vanquisher, a queller, an
ouercommer. Domatura, a taming, a vanquishing, a quelling, a submission. Domene
dio, our Lord God. Domenica, sunday. Domenicale, dominicall, chief.
Domenticare, to forget. Domenticanza, forgetfulness. Domentico, forgotten,
forgetful. Domentre, whilst, so long as. Domentre che, whilst that.
Domesticare, to tame, to make familiar, mild or gentle. Domesticabile, as
Domesticheuole. Domesticheuole, familiar, that may be tamed, homely, gentle,
reclaimed. Domestichezza, familiarity, homelines, gentleness, conversation,
acquaintance, tamenes. Domestico, tame, familiar, gentle, homely, household,
mild, conversant, tractable, acquainted. Dometa, an old word for a shitten
fellow, or goodman turde, for meta is a heap of turdes. Domicilio, an
habitation, a dwelling, a mansion place. Domila, two thousand. Dominare, to
rule, to govern, to domineere, signorize or swaie. Dominatione, Dominanza,
domination, government, lordship. Dominatore, a ruler, a governor, a lord, a
swayer. Domine, Sir. Also an admiration or sign of wonder, as we say good
Lord! or Gods! Domin fallo, good Lord is not this strange? why, what a good
year? Dominica, sunday. Dominicale, dominicall, chief. Dominicanti frati,
friars of saint Dominicks order. Dominio, dominion, lordship. Domisella, a
kind of water snake. Domitare, as Domare. Domitatore, Domitore, as Domatore.
Domito, tamed, overcome, vanquished, quelled, submitted. Domo, as Domito. Also
as Duomo. Domo petri, used in mockery for a prison or stone house. Don, a
lord, a commander, a sir, a Don. Donadello, a dilling, a darling, a wanton.
Also a fiddle or a croude. Donare, to give freely, to present. Donatica, vide
Corona. Donatione, Donagione, a gift, a donation, a present, a deed of gift.
Donatore, a giver. Donatorio, he to whom a gift is given. Donde, whence, from
whence, why? wherefore? whereby, whereupon. Dondola, a babie, a puppie, a pugge,
a conceit, a humor, a fancy, any foolish sport or solace. It is also a kind
of play at the ball. Also dandling or dangling. Dondolare, to play the babie,
puppie, or gull. Also to dandle or dangle. Dondolo, a gull, a fool, a thing to
make sport. Donmeta, as Dometa. Donna, a woman, a lady, a mistres, a wife, a
lover, a dame, a queen at chesse. Donna Beatrice, Dame Bettrice, it is taken
in mockery, and ironically, for an idle huswife. Donna che fa le fusa storte,
she that makes her husband cuckold. Donna che manda il marito in cornouaglia
senza barca, idem. Donna che silascia scuoter' il pelliccione, idem. Donna da
been, an honest woman. Donna da molto, a woman of account. Donna da molti,
taken in ill part for a woman of many. Donna da poco, a woman of no esteem.
Donna da partito, a woman that will accept of any condition, a venale or
mercenarie woman. Donna nouella, a new married wife, a bride. Donnazucca al
vento, a foolish fond woman, a lasie huswife, a light headed wife. Donnaria,
womanhood, womanishnes. Donneare, to man, to court, to usher, to squire, to
marshall, to wait, to attend, or follow women. Also to rule or swaie, Also to
play the wanton woman. Donneggiare, as Donneare. Donnesco, womanish. Donnetta,
a little woman. also as much as goodie flurt, or goodie driggle-draggle.
Donnicella, Donnina, a little pretty woman. Donniciuola, a poor silly woman.
Donno, a sir, a lord, a commander, a Don. Donnola, the beast called a weazell.
Donnolino, a little weazell. Dono, a gift, a present, a grant, a deed of gift.
Donola, as Donnola. Donzella, a damzell, a maiden, a virgin, a waiting woman.
Also a fish called in Latin Alphestus. Donzellare, as Donneare. Donzellesco,
maiden-like, like a maiden. Donzello, an appointer, an officer, a sergeant, an
apprentise at the law, a clark. Also a bachelor, a waitingman, an unmarried
man, a page, a squire, a custrell, a waiter, a seruingman. Dopo, Dopoi, after,
then, behind, since. Dopoche, Dopoiche, after that, since that. Dopodescinare,
an afternoon. Also after dinner. Dopo non molto, not long after. Dopo nona,
afternoon, or since noone. Dopo l'untume, after dinner, after meat, since
meat. Dopo pasto, after meat. Also dishes after the first or second service,
as fruit. Dopo un non nulla, after a trice, by and by. Doppia, a doubling, a
foulding, a double, a copy. Also any counterfeit precious stone, a foil for
stones. Also a lining. Doppiamento, a doubling, a falsehood. Doppiare, to
double, to couple. Also to line any thing. Also to yoke. Doppiezza, doublenes,
a doubling. Doppio, double, false, corrupt, twofolde, ambiguous. Also a copy
or pattern of any thing. Doppione, Doppiere, a kind of great torch of wax,
which we call a quarrier. Also a double silk cod. Doppio piu, double again,
as much more. Dorare, to gilde, to cover or beset with gold. Dorarie, gold
works, works of gold. Doratore, a gilder. Dorcade, a Do, or a bucke. Dorcheo,
the name of a dog, hunt Do, kill bucke. Also spy all, or quick sight.
Dorialtide, a precious stone found in a cocks head: some others say it is
found in another beasts head. Dorica, one of the four Greek toongs that were
commonly spoken in Greece. Also a kind of grave solemn music. Also a kind
of architecture, called dorike work. Doricnio, as Dorienio. Dorico, a grave
solemn musition, representing gravity. Dorio, a musition that plays grave
music. Dorienio, a venomous herb wherewith they poison arrow heads and
darts, called dogs grass. Dormacchiare, to slumber, to droope, to slug.
Dormacchione, a sleeper, a slumberer, a drouser, a lazy boodie, a sluggard.
Dormente, Dormiente, sleeping, slumbring, sluggring. Also dormant, or couchant,
a word in armorie. Dormetorio, as Dormitorio. Dormia, any drink or physic to
provoke sleep. Dormigliare, as Dormacchiare. Dormiglione, Dormicchione, as
Dormacchione. Dormioso, Dormitore, as Dormacchione. Dormire, dormo, dormito, to
sleep, to slumber. Dormire della bruna, the first sleeping of silk worms.
Dormire della bianca, the second sleeping of silk worms. Dormire della
grassa, the third sleeping of silk worms. Dormitorio, Dormitoio, a sleeping
chamber, a dortor in religious houses. Dormitura, a sleeping, a slumbring, a
lying with one. D'oro, of gold, golden. Dorone, a Greek measure about four
inches or a handful. Doronico, a root or weed good and wholesome for the
stomach called piss in bed or cray-fish. Dorra, he shall grieve, smart, or
ache. Dorrai, thou shall grieve, smart or ache. Dorrei, Dorrebbe, I or he should
grieve or smart. Dorro, I shall grieve, smart or ache. Dorrupare, as Dirupare.
Dorso, a man's back, the back or ridge of any thing. Dossare, to charge, lay
or load upon ones back. Dosso, a back or ridge of any thing, the back of a
knife. Also a kind of course homespun cloth. Also a beast bearing a rich sur.
D'osso, of bone, made of bones. Dotale, belonging to a dowry or a woman's
ioynter. Dotare, to endow, to give a dowry, to make a iointer, to endue.
Dotato, endowed, given a dowry, made a iointer, endued. Dotatione, as Dote or
Dota. Dote, Dota, a dowry, an endowment, a iointer, a gift. Doti, gifts,
dowries, endowments. Dotta, learned, wise. Also doubt, fear, mistrust or
suspicion. Also a small time, even now, at this time. Dottanza, doubt, fear,
suspicion, mistrust. Dottare, to fear, to suspect, to doubt, to distrust.
Dotto, learned, wise, clarke-like. D'otto, of eight, consisting of eight.
Dottoraggine, doctorship, foolish doctorship. Dottorare, to take or give the
degree of a doctor. Dottorato, the degree of a doctor, a doctor-ship, doctored.
Dottoratico, a doctor-ship. Dottoratura, as Dottoratico. Dottore, a doctor, a
learned man. Dottrina, doctrine, learning, scholer-ship, science, knowledge.
Dottrinale, a book of doctrine, containing doctrine. Dottrinare, to
endoctrine, to learn, to teach, to instruct. Douana, as Dogana. Douaniere, as
Doganiere. Dove, where, whether. Dove che, whereas whetheras. Dove si sia,
wheresoever it be. Dove si voglia, wheresoever. Douere, as Deuere, to owe, to
be endebted. Douero, earnest, good sooth, good earnest. Douinadoio, Douinatoio,
a reele or rise to wind silk or yarne with. Douitia, store, plenty, riches,
abundance. Douitioso, rich, plentious, abundant, storefull. Douungue,
wheresoever, in whatsoever place. Douutamente, duly, rightly, lawfully.
Dozzena, a dozen or twelve, a kind of comminaltie or boording together of
scholars in some house. Dozzenale, a common fellow, such as a man may buy
whole dozens of, that lives at liuerie with others. Dozzenalmente, commonly,
familiarly, good cheap, by whole dozens. Dozzenante, a commoner or boorder
with others as scholars are, one that stands at liuerie. Dozzenare, to board
or common in company, to put up in dozens, to stand at liuerie. Dozzina, as
Dozzena. Dozzinale, as Dozzenale. Dozzinante, as Dozzenante. Dozzinare, as
Dozzenare. Dozzino, a kind of small coin. Draba, an herb having a tuft like
elder at the top. Draconite, Draconio, a stone taken out of a dragons head,
good against poison. Dragante, a kind of gum or drugge that burns. Drago, a
dragon. Dragona, ^arren, fruitles, fierile. Dragoncella, as Dragontea.
Dragoncelli, little dragons. Also galls or kernels growing in the throat of
some. Dragone, a great dragon, a kind of fish so called. Dragontea, the herb
dragon w^rt, or dragon serpenti^e or Taragon. Dramma, a small weight called a
dram. Also a kind of Greek coin worth seven pence sterling. Drappello,
Drapello, a company of men, a beuie of women, a crew of good fellows. Also an
ensign, a baneret, a baneroll, a little cloth, a little sheet. Drapperia, a
draperie or street where cloth is sold. Drappetto, a little cloth, narrow
cloth. Drappi, all manner of clothes, vestures apparel, vestments or attires.
Drappiere, Drappiero, a draper, a seller of cloth, a clothier. Drappo, any kind
of cloth. Drappo alto, bread cloth. Drappo basso, narrow cloth. Drappo di
lino, linen cloth. Drappo d'oro, cloth of gold or tissue. Drappo di seta, all
manner of wouen silk. Drento, Dentro, in or within. Dresso, a thrush or
fieldfare. Driadi, certain wood-nymphes so called. Drieto, Dietro, behind,
after, backewards. Drieto punto, as Dietro punto. Drijno, a kind of venomous
serpent or worm. Drinire, nisco, nito, to cry as a weazell. Driotteri, a kind
of weed or herb growing upon trees. Dritta, right, straight, direct, honest,
upright. Also the right hand. Drittamente, duly, directly, uprightly,
straightly, forthwith. Dritti, right handed blows, down-right-blowes. Dritto,
just, right, due, upright, standing, straight, reason. Also a right handed man,
a down right stroke. Drittorare, to make straight or right, to right.
Drittura, rightnes, iustnes, vprightnes. Also out right, straight on. Drizzare,
to direct, to erect, to streighten, to adresse, to raise, to rear, to stand
up, to set upright. Drizzata, a directing, an adressing, a raising, a rearing.
Drizzatore, a glouers stick to stretch out gloves with: a shoomakers piece of
wood to stretch a boot or shoe with, or knock his work upon. Also as
Calamistro. Dromedario, a beast called a dromedary: it is marvelous swift, and
is a kind of cammell. Dromone, a fish so called. Also a place to run horses
in. Dropaci, a medicine to take away hair, or to make one balde. Drudo, a
wanton lover, a secret letcher. Druidi, certain learned priests or prophets
that were wont to be in France in the times of ignorance. D^, has bin used for
Dove, where, whether, whereas. Also whence. Also a kind of serpent. Dua, the
number two, of the feminine gender. Duaggio, a kind of course homespun
clothing, or russetting. Duale, of or pertaining, or consisting of two. Duana,
as Dogana. Duanero, as Doganiero. Duare, to double, to couple, to pair, to
yoke, to put two together. Duassi, two aces at dice. Dubbiare, to doubt, to
fear, to suspect. Dubbio, doubt, suspect, fear, uncertainty. Also as Dubu.
Dubbioso, doubtful, uncertain. Dubbiosita, doubtfulnes, uncertainty.
Dubitabile, that may be doubted. Dubitante, doubtful, uncertain. Dubitanza,
doubt, fear, suspect. Dubitare, as Dubbiare. Dubitatione, as Dubbio, or
Dubitanza. Dubiteuole, as Dubbioso. Dubitoso, as Dubbioso. Dubu, a monstrous
beast somewhat like a Wolf, that has feet like a man, breeding in Africa.
Duca, a duke, a captain, a chief, a leader, a chiefetaine, a general.
Ducato, Ducado, a dukedom, a duchy. Also a coin called a ducket. Ducati,
ducats, crowns, ^onie. Also dukedomes. Duce, a Duke, a chief, a leader, a
captain, a general, a cheefetaine. Ducento, two hundredth. Duchessa, a lady,
a Duchess. Duco, a night owl. Due, Duo, Dui, Dua, the number two. Due cotanti,
twice so many. Duellare, to fight one to one. Duellista, Duellante, a man
skillful in combats, or the laws of them. Also a combatant or fighter with
another. Duello, a single combat, a fight between two. Duerno, of the number
two. Dugento, two hundredth. Dugentesimo, the two hundredth in order. Dughi, a
roguish or fustian word for crowns. Also night owls. Duini, two dewses at
dice. Dulia, the service of a bondsman or slave. Dumi, brambles, briers, brakes,
thorns, shrubs, firzes, bushes. Dumoso, thornie, shrubbie, full of bushes,
briers, brambles or brakes, shrubbish. Dune, the downs or plains. Dun' in
vno, from one to one. Dun' in altro, from one to another. Dunque, Dunche, then,
an aduerb of concluding. Duo, the number two. Duodeci, the number twelve.
Duodecimo, the twelfth in order. Duodeno, the mawe or stomach gut, the gut that
is fastened next to the nether mouth of the ventricle. Duole, it greeueth,
paineth or smarteth. Also as Dolor. Duolo, Duol', grief, sorrow, smart,
pain, affliction, care. Duplicare, to double. Duplice, twofold, double. Duplo,
double, twofold. Dura, as Cornea, for that it comes from dura matter.
Durabile, lasting, durable. Durabilita, lastingnes, continuance, durance.
Duracino, lasting, during, of continuance, fruits so called, as aples deusans,
because they last long. Dura matter, the brainepan, or the skull. Duramente,
hardly. Durante, lasting, continuing, during. Duranza, lastingnes, durance,
sufferance, continuance. Durare, to harden, to obdurat. Also to last, to
endure, to continue. Also to suffer, to sustain, or to abide. Durar fatica, to
endure labor, to take pains. Durata, as Duranza. Duratione, as Duranza.
Durelle, a kind of hard stone pear in Italy, choke pears. Durengo, an ox
pizell, or a salt eeleskin to beat one with. Dureuole, lasting, enduring,
thoroughly. Durezza, hardness, roughness, ruggednes. Duro, hard, tough,
marble minded, inexorable, surly, cruel, hard-harted. Duro di bocca, a horse
with a hard mouth, or naturally hard in the curb place. Dusolino, the color
of a horse. Duttile, pliable, that may be wrought by hand, or that will abide
the hammer.
E
E' used for Egli, he, or they, it. E' mi fu detto, it was told me. E', of the
verb Essere, he or she is, it is, it is, the conjunction and, and, both. E'
bisogno, it is needful, it is requisite. E' forza, it must needs be, of
force, of necessity, perforce. E' d'uopo, it is need, it is necessary. E'
mestieri, it is convenient, it is behoofull. Eale, a beast in India, of the
bigness and like a horse, with great horns, and they be loose in his head.
Ebano, Ebeno, a kind of black wood called Ebanie, or Ebene. Ebb, he, or she
had or has bad. Ebbrezza, dronkennes, tipsines. Ebdomadario, consisting of
seven times seven. Ebio, a kind of tree or shrub. Ebriacare, to be or make
drunk. Ebriachezza, dronkennes, tipsines. Ebriaco dronken, drunk, tipsie.
Ebriare, to be or make drunk. Ebrieta, dronkennes, tipsines. Ebrio, Ebro,
dronken, tipsie. Ebulo, the weed wallwort, or dan^wort, or dwarf elder.
Eburneo, of iuorie, or like iuorie. Eccedere, cedo, cessi, cesso, to exceed,
to excel, to out-goe. Eccedenza, an exceeding, an excelling. Eccellente,
excellent, notable. Eccellenza, excellence, excellency. Eccellere, cello,
celsi, celso, to excel, to outgo, to advance, to raise. Eccelso, excelled,
outgon, advanced, raised, excellent, haughty, high, lofty. Eccelsitudine,
excellency, excelsitude, highness, loftines. Eccene? is there any of it? is
there some? Eccentrici, circles, one enclosing another, yet not having one
common center. Eccessiuo, excessive, immeasurable, immoderate. Eccesso, an
excess, a surfeite, a superfluity, an oversight, a fault. Eccettione, an
exception, an excepting, an exempting. Eccetto, except, save, saving, excepted.
Eccetto che, except that, saving that. Eccettuare, to except, to reserve.
Eccettuatione, as Eccettione. Ecci, there is, is there? Eccidiare, to burn, to
havoc, to destroy, to slaughter, to spoil, to ruin. Eccidio, burning,
hauock, destruction, slaughter, spoil, ruin. Eccio, or Ecchio, vipers herb,
or vipers buglosse. Some take it for a kind of tree. Eccitare, to incite, to
provoke, to egg on, to set on. Eccitatione, an inciting, a provoking.
Eccitatore, an inciter, a prouoker. Each? and what? and that. Echenea, as
Echino. Echino, a fish that is said to have the power to stay a ship, called
a suck-stone or sea lamprey. Echinometro, a kind of Echino that has prickles
like a hedge-hogge. Echo, an eecho, an answering or resou^ding of the voice
back again. Ecco, behold, lo here, at hand, here. Eccoci, behold us, here
we are. Eccomi, behold me, here I am. Eclesiastico, a man of the church, a
clergy man, ecclesiastical. Ecliptico, eclipticke, pertaining to the
eclipse. Eclissare, to eclipse, to obscure, to darken, to ouercast, to wane or
fall. Eclissi, an eclipse, a darkning, an ouercasting, a waning or failing.
Eclittico, pertaining to the eclipse, eclipticke. Eclittica linea, the
ecliptike line, the circumference of the circle wherein the sun finisheth his
yearly motion, a line in the middle of the Zodiake wherein the sun does keep
his course, in it is measured the length of heaven. Ecloga, an egloge or title.
Also election, choice, or communication. Also an abridgement or gathering made
out of any author that one has read. Ecmeli, as Emmeli. Eglogario, a short
breuiarie gathered out of a long work. Ecneide, a kind of fish. Eco, Echo, an
echo, as Echo. Ecoare, Echoare, to echo or resounde a voice back again.
Economia, economie, the government of a private house or family. Economico,
economicall, pertaining to the government of a private house. Economo, a
housekeeper, a master or steward of a house. Eculeo, a sharp stake whereon
the offender being put, is tormented and racked so that his bowels are almost
crushed out. Ed, Et, the Conjunction copulative, and used before vowels. Edace,
an eater, a deuourer, a greedigut. Also eating, consuming or gluttonnes.
Edacita, insatiable feeding, gourmandizing. Edera, the herb Iuie. Edeti, a
chief magistrate or president of the council among the Grecians. Edicola, a
little house, a chapple, a cottage, a shelter, a shroud. Edificare, to build,
to frame, to edify. Edificatore, a builder, a framer, an edifier. Edificatoria
art, the art of building or architecture. Edificio, an edifice, a building, a
frame. Edile, an officer among the Romans whose charge was to ouersee the
buildings of the temples: a churchwarden, or ouerseer of high ways. Edilita,
the said office to ouersee the building of temples. Edilitio, what pertaines
to the surueying of that office. Edi mestiere, it is needful, expedient, or
necessary. Editione, a setting forth, a publishing, a creating or an edition.
Edittare, to edict, to decree, to enact, to consult. Editto, an edict, a
decree, an act, a statute. Educare, to teach, to instruct, to nurture, to bring
up. Educato, taught, instructed, nurtured, brought up. Educatione, education,
instruction, nurture, bringing up, manners. Educatore, a teacher, a nurturer,
an instructor. Edulio, cates, food, sustenance and other victuals besides
bread and drink. Ee, has been used of Dante for E of the verb Essere, is.
Efemera, a fever during but one day. Also Daie-flies which live but one days
space. Effabile, that which may be spoken or expressed. Effemero, as Ephemero.
Effeminare, to effeminat or grow womanish. Effeminato, effeminate, womanish,
delicate, base minded. Efferita, fiercenes, madness, cruelty, felnesse.
Efferrato, fierce, cruel, fell, raging, rude. Effestide, Effestite, a stone
sound in Corinth, that as a looking glass will reflect any image; if it be put
in cold water it will presently heat it, lay it before the sun, and it will
presently set any matter a sier, that is able to receive it. Effettiuo,
effectual, effectiue. Effetto, effect, or working. Effettuale, effectual.
Effettuare, to effect, to effectuate, to bring to pass. Efficace, effectual,
forcible. Efficacia, efficacy, force. Efficiente, causing, making, bringing to
pass, efficient. Efficientia, efficience, force or power to do. Effigiare, to
figure, to shape, to form. Effigy, a figure, a shape, a picture. Effimera, a
fish that is borne in the morning, and dies at night. Effiocare, to grow, to
be or make hoarse. Effrenato, as Sfrenato. Effundere, fundo, fusi, fuso, to
shed blood, to scatter, to melt, to cast, to power out, to spend riotously.
Effusione, effusion or blood shed, shedding or scattring, wastefull spending.
Effuso, shed, effused, scattred, melted, cast or powered out. Eforza, it is
necessary, perforce, it must needs be. Eftimemeri, a kind of fall or
breaking of a verse. Efula, a kind of garden herb. Egide, a shield with
Medusaes or Gorgons head in it spoken of in histories and poets. Egilopa, the
herb bean trifoli^. Also an infirmity in the eyes. Egiptila, a kind of
blackish stone. Egiziachi giorni, unlucky, fatale, unfortunate days. Egli,
he. Also it. Egli vien detto, it is said. Egli doueua essere, belike he was.
Eglino, they, them. Egli stesso, he himself, himself. Egloga, an eglogue, a
choice discourse. Eglogare, to write or sing eglogues. Egredere, gredo, gressi,
gresso, to go forth. Egregio, egregious, excellent, singular, passing.
Egresso, an egresse, a going forth. Also gone forth. Egritudine, sickness,
malady, infirmity. Egro, sick, crazed, ill at ease. Egrotare, to fall sick.
Egroto, sick, crazed, ill at ease. Eguagliare, to compare, to equal, to
match, to even. Eguaglianza, equality. Egualare, to equal, to match. Eguale,
equal, even, matched. Egualita, equality. Ei, he, it. Ei si dice, it is said.
Eime, aye me, alas, aye is me, woe is me. Eh, an interiection of entreating or
of sorrow, alas, I pray you, or oh. Ehugola, a kind of wild beast. El, the
letter L. Also he or they. Elafabosco, olive phyllon or maidens Mercury.
Elande, as Alce. Elasso, past, ouerworne or consumed. Elatine, running
buckewheate or bindecorne, a weed growing among corn. Elce, Elcia, a tree like
unto an oak. Also a holme. Elciario, as Alzaniere. Eleboro, a kind of drug or
herb to purge melancholy or madness. Eleboro bianco, the herb lingwort or
neesewort. Eleboro nero, bearefoote, tetterwort or tettergrasse. Elebroth, as
Elembroth. Elefante, an elephant. Elefantia, a disease in a horse called the
farcine. Also a disease in a man called the leaprie proceeding of melancholy,
choler or fleame. Elegante, elegant, clean, neat, handsome, trim, fine,
eloquent, gracious, gorgeous. Elegantia, elegancie, cleannes, neatnes,
handsomnes, finenes, eloquence, graciousnes. Eleggere, leggo, lessi, letto, to
elect, to choose, to cull, to pick out. Elegia, an elegy or mournful verse.
Elegiaco, an elegiacal or mournful verse. Elegiare, to sing or make elegies in
wailfull verse. Elegidio, a kind of lamentable verse. Elego, a lamentable verse
or writer of elegies. Elembroth, a kind of salt that alchimists use.
Elementale, elementall. Elementi, the grounds of any art or beginnings of all
things. Also the skies or firmaments. Elemento, an element as water, earth,
fire, air. Elemi, a kind of gum dropping from the olive tree in Syria.
Elemosina, an alms. Elemosinare, to give alms. Elemosinario, Elemosiniere, an
almner or an alms giver. Elenco, an argument subtly reproouing. Also a table
or index in a book to show places by letters. Eleno, an herb the juice
whereof does poison arrow heads. Eleomele, a kind of liquor or gum that
apothecaries sell. Elepodi, as Ellepodi. Elera, Ellera, the herb Iuie.
Elescof, cosa medcinale. Eletta, a choice, a culling. Elettionario, by election
or that may be chosen, electionarie. Elettionare, to call, name or appoint by
election or choice, to elect. Elettione, an election, a choice. Eletto, chosen,
culled, picked, elected. Elettore, an elector, a chuser. Elettro, a kind of gum,
but properly Amber whereof beads are made. Also a mixture of gold and silver,
the fifth part being silver. Elettuario, an electuarie. Eleuare, to eleuate, to
raise, to lift up, to advance, to heave or rear up. Eleuatione, an elevation,
a raising, an heauing or rearing up, a preferment or advancing. Eliaco,
belonging to the sun. Elice, he sucketh or draws forth: he extracteth,
chooses or culleth. Also a barren, scarlet oak or holme oak tree. Elicere,
lico, licei, lito, to suck or draw out, to extract, to allure, to cull or
choose or to draine out. Eligmato, a kind of medicament or medicine. Elio, a
kind of music or concord. Eliopia, a kind of green stone. Eliocriso, the
gold flower or herb Aurelia. Elisio, a place of pleasure where poets feign the
souls of good men to dwell. Elissero, elixer or the quintessence of any
extraction. Elito, sucked or drawn forth, extracted or drayned out. Also
allured, culled, chosen. Elitropia, as Helitropia. Elitropio, as Helitropio.
Ella, she, that woman. Elle, Elleno, they, those women. Ellepadi, a kind of
warlike instrument to batter a city. Ellera, the herb iuie, Elmettato,
helmed, having a helmet or a caske on. Elmetto, a little helmet, headpiece or
caske. Elmo, a helm, a helmet, a caske, a headpiece, a burganet. Ello, he,
that man. Eloquente, eloquent, well spoken. Eloquenza, eloquence, grace in
speaking. Eloquio, eloquent speech or eloquence. Elsa, Elso, Elza, Elzo, the
hilt or ward of a sword or dagger. Eluro, a fish whose eyes increase and wane
as the moon does. Eluuione, a spring tide, an ouerflowe of waters above their
banks. Emancipare, to make free, to free, to enfranchize, to denize, to free
out of ward. Emancipatione, the making of a bond-slaue free, an enfranchizing.
Emanite, a kind of stone called a bloud-stone, because it stancheth blood.
Emarite, as Emanite. Embadi, a kind of shoes that princes were wont to
wear. Emblemma, an emblem. Emblici, a kind of Mirabolan plum. Embolio, the
argument or first entry into a comedy. Embolismo, the adding of a day in the
year. Embriacare, to be or make drunk. Embriachezza, drunkenness, tipsines.
Embriaco, drunk, drunken, tipsie. Embrice, tiles, gutter tiles. Also the
tiling or covering of a house. Embrione, the womb of a woman with child. Also
the child in it before it have perfect shape. Embrioretto, a crook or hook
used to draw dead children out of women's wombes. Embrochi. Look the latin
Embroche, a physical word. Emenda, amends, redress, amendment. Emendabile,
that may be amended. Emendare, to amend, to redress, to reform, to dress,
to correct. Emendatione, an amendment, a redress, a reforming, a correction.
Emendatore, a mender, a dresser, a reformer. Emergere, mergo, mersi, merso, to
swim out, to issue or come forth of the water. Emerso, swimde forth, issued
out of the water. Emetren, a precious stone much esteemed of the Assyrians, and
used of Nigromants. Emfasi, emphasis, an express signification of that which
is intended. Emfatico, emphaticall. Emigranda, an ache or pain in half the
head. Some write it Emigrania. Eminente, eminent, apparent, high, in sight, in
view, a loft. Eminenza, eminency, apparantues, a high place. Also supremacy.
Emisphero, as Hemisphero. Emmeli, Ecmeli, a word of art about music. Some
take it to be low silent music. Emmi, it is to me. Emmisi scordato, I have
forgotten. Emolatione, as Emulatione. Emolia, a proportion or union in music.
Emolo, as Emulo. Emolumento, commodity, benefit or profit gotten by labor.
Emoroide, a kind of venomous serpent. Also a disease called the Hemorrhoides.
Empasma, a composition of diverse sweet powders to take away sweat and cause
itching. Empetro, the herb called Sampier. Empia, wicked, ungodly, impious,
unrighteous. Empiastrare, to plaster, to dawbe, to emplaysire. Empiastro, a
plaster, a dawbing. Empiastracciare, as Empiastrare. Empiastramento, as
Empiastro. Empiastricciare, as Empiastrare. Empieta, Empiezza, impiety,
ungodliness, unrighteousness, wickedness. Empio, as Empia. Empimachi, such as have
impostumations in their breasts within and unseen. Empimento, a fulfilling, an
accomplishment, a replenishing. Empire, pisco, pito, to fill, to replenish.
Empireo cielo, the chrystalline sky, the fiery heaven. Empirico, an empirike,
a practitioner in physic upon other men's receipts, having no great skill
himself. Empito, filled, full, replenished. Empito, fury, violence, force,
rashness, outrage, rage, a sudden motion or passion. Empitoio, a tunnell or a
filler. Empitoso, violent, sudden, forcible, passionate, raging, rash,
outrageous. Empitura, a filling or stuffing full. Empegnare, to engage, to
gage, to pawn, to pledge. Empegno, a pawn, a pledge, a gage. Emporio, a mart,
such a place as Rialto in Venice is, or the Royal exchange in London.
Empugnare, to gripe with the fist, to sease upon, to take hold with the hand.
Empusa, a supposed spirit that haunteth such as be unlucky, changing it self
into diverse forms. Emulare, to envy, to grudge, or seek to excel another
man in any thing. Emulatione, emulation, envy, a laudable grudging. Emulatore,
a competitor, a concurrent, a coriuall, an enuiour. Emulgente vene, two large
veins which springing out of Caua vena under the ventricle, are carried into
the raines. Emulo, as Emulatore. Enai, a fine white stone which being shaken
will seem to have something moving in it, as it were a rotten or addle egg.
Enante, a kind of herb or shrub. Enargia, evidence, perspicuitie, evident
representing of a thing. Enarmonico, a certain harmony and concord in music
of nine voices or nine strings. Enchiridione, a little portable book, as may
be carried in ones hand, a manuell. Encolesare, to estrange, to alienate, to
sequester. Encomenda, a comendum: an ecclesiastical living so called. Encomio,
a song of praise or commendations. Endego, blewe Inde for diers, to die blewe
with. Endecasillabo, a verse consisting of eleven syllables. Endelechia, a
continuing, an euerlastingnes. Endeuenare, to guess, to divine, to foretell,
to soothsaie. Endicaiuoli, retailers, hucksters, such as buie to sell again.
Endiuia, the herb Endive. Energia, efficacy, or effectual operation.
Energumeno, one possessed with some evil spirit, or lunatike. Eneruare, to
weaken, to enfeeble, to vnsinew. Enfasi, Emfasi, as Emfasi. Enfiagione,
Enfiatura, a swelling or a puffing up. Enfiamento, as Enfiagione. Enfiare, to
swell, to puff up. Enfio, swollen, puffed up. Enfiteotico contratto, a
contract for some yearly pension or rent, a kind of lease. Enghistara, a
glass to hold wine in, or to power wine out of. Engistara, Enhistara, as
Enghistara. Engonasi, a sign or star in heaven called Hercules. Enguinaglia,
Enguinaia, the groine or ham of a man's body. Engudre, a kind of little fish.
Enimma, Enigma, a riddle or doubtful speech. Enimmare, to tell riddles, or
speak obscurely. Enimmatico, enigmaticall, obscure, riddle like. Enimmatore, a
speaker of riddles, a ridler. Ennagonale, nine cornered, having nine angles.
Ennumeratione, a numbering, a reckoning or rehearsing. Enoa, Enola, the herb
Elicampane, Scabwoort or Horse-heale. Enontiare, as Annuntiare. Enorme,
heinous, wicked, foul, filthy, enormous, sinful. Enormita, enormitie,
wickedness, iniquity. Enothera, an herb which bound about any beasts neck
makes him loose his force and fiercenes. Ensiforme cartilagine, the brestblade,
or hart-blade, or the mouth of the stomach. Enthelechia, Entelechia,
perfection, that which moves it self. Enthimena, Entimena, an imperfect
syllogism wanting mayor or minor. Ente, a being. Enteriora, Entraglie, the
entrails, garbage, guts, panche or off all of any creature. Enteriore, inward,
interior, familiar, acquainted with. Enterocela, the disease of bursting when
the gut falls into the cod. Entimemo, as Enthimena. Entrante, entering, an
entrer. Entrare, to enter or go in. Entrar' in collera, to be angry. Entrar'
in mare, to take shipping, to put forth to sea. Entrata, an entry, an
entrance, an access. Also rents, revenues, incoms, commings in or profits.
Entratura, an entrance, an entry. Entro, in, within. Entromezzare, to
intermix, to interlard, to come or put between. Entromezzato, a pide horse, a
horse of diverse colors. Enudare, to strip or make naked, to interpret or
expound. Enumerare, to number, to tell, to count. Eoi campi, the eastern
fields, taken for the morning or where the sun rises, or the East. Eolica,
one of the four greek tongues that were commonly spoken. Eolio canto, a kind
of song or music. Eone, a tree, the wood whereof is so hard that neither fi^r
nor water can consume it. Poets say that Argos his ship was made of it. it
resembles the oak. Epa, the belly, panch or womb of any creature. Epact, the
Epact in the Almanacke, an addition unto. Epagogia, a figure, when like things
or arguments are compared together. Epanadilosi, a figure, when a sentence
begins and ends in one word. Epanado, when two things rehearsed together
are afterward severally spoken of. Epanafora, a figure, when diverse clauses
begin with one word. Epanalessi, a repetition after a long parenthesis.
Eparchia, a province. Eparco, a president of a province. Epatica, the herb
liuerwort. Also of or pertaining to the liver. Epatico, a kind of aloes so
called. Epatico morbo, a disease in the liver. Epausesi, an increase, or
augmentation. Epenthesi, the putting in of a letter or syllable in the midst of
a word. Ephebia, striplings age, about fourteen years of age. Ephebo, a
stripling, about the age of fourteen. Ephemera febbre, an ague during but one
day. Ephemere, windeflyes, or dayflyes which live but one days space.
Ephemeri, day books, or registers of single several days. Ephemeride, as
Ephemeri. Ephemero, a beast which lives but one day. Also a kind of strong
purge, or the herb liriconfancie, or may lillies, the flower whereof drunk in
wine, makes one very drunk. Ephestij, the gods that be called Penati, or
Lares. Ephestite, a stone that reflecteth the image like glass. Ephestio, a
familiar, of the same house or family. Ephialta, a disease called the
nightmare. Ephoro, was among the Lacedaemonians as a Tribune among the Romans.
Epiale febbre, a fever rising of cold fleame, that is sour and like glass,
wherein at one time hot and cold is felt in every part of the body. Epibade,
a kind of barge, or ferrie-boate. Epicauma, a foul sore in the eyes.
Epicedio, a funeral song, sung before the corpse be buried. Epicherema, an
argument made in reasoning. Epiciclo, a lesser circle, whose center is in the
circumference of a greater, whereby the irregular motion of some planet is
salued. Epiceno, of both kinds, male and female. Epicitharisma, the last part
of the interlude, wherein after the auditors had bin wearied, musicians stepped
forth and plaide. Epicoma, the difference of sores which rises in the eyes.
Epico, which makes or is made in heroical, hexametre, stately and lofty
verses. Epicureo, voluptuous, epicureall, given to nothing but pleasure.
Epicurizzare, to live an epicureall voluptuous life. Epicuro, an epicure, a
gourmand, a voluptuous liver. Epidemetici, herbingers for a princes train.
Epidemia, an universal sickness, a pestilence. Epiderme, the outward thin
skin of the body, which being of it self insensible, does as it were spring
out of the true and natural skin. Epididime, one of the four thin skins
that cover the testicles, thicker then the rest, and outmost of all.
Epidittico, demonstratiue, that pertains to praising and dispraising.
Epifania, the epiphanie or twelftide. Also an apparition or manifestation.
Epifora, a rheumatike watring or dropping of sore eyes. Epigamia, affinity by
marriage. Epigastrio, all the outward part of the belly that covers the
entrails from the bulk down to the privy member, called also Abdomen.
Epiglotti, the cover or wesill of the throat, the flap or little tongue that
closes the amplitude of the larynx and way of the rough artery, least any
meat or drink should slip into the inner capacity thereof, and so fall into
the lungs. Epigliotta, a crick or wrinch in the neck or back. Epigonea, a kind
of musical instrument or music plaide at marriages. Epigonio, one gotten in a
second marriage. Epigramma, an epigram or superscription. Epigrammizzare, to
write epigrams. Epigrifo, one that has a crooked nose. Epijcia, indifferent
interpretation or tempring of the rigor of the law according to reason and
equity. Epijcizzare, to mitigate the rigor of the law according to reason and
equity. Epilentico, sick of the falling sickness or foul evil. Epilessia,
the falling sickness or foul evil. which takes hold both of sense and mind
together. Epilettico, one that is sick of the Epilessia. Epilogare, to conclude
or make an epilogue. Epilogatione, as Epilogo. Epilogo, a conclusion or final
end, a knitting up of a matter. Epimachi, a kind of impostume in a man's
breast. Epimedio, a medlar tree, the fruit whereof has three stones. Epimela,
a white precious stone having a blackish color over it. Epimenio, a mean
small gift, a soldiers months pay. Epimittide, the spot, mark, or skarre of
any sore or tetter. Also a wheale, pimple, or push rising upon the skin by
night. Also a disease in the eyes which in Florence is called la porcellana.
Epimithio, the moral sense of a fable. Epinicie, verses or songs of triumph
after some victory. Epinitte, as Epimittide. Epipattide, wild white Ellebor
or neesewort. Epiphania, as Epifania. Epiphonema, a pleasant ending or shutting
up of a matter, a witty sentence in the end of a thing declared or discussed.
Epiphora, the watering or dropping of the eyes by means of a rheum issuing
thereat. Epiphisi, called of the anatomists an addition or coagmentation of
some bone, obtaining a peculiar circumscription, yet not being a true portion
of that bone whereto it is committed and annexed, an appendance. Epiploceo,
bursting, that is when the entrails or thin skin or sewet compassing the
entrails falls into the cods. Epipomfalo, a disease, when the caul or sewet
wherein the guts are lapped falls out of the nauill. Episcopato, a
bishopric. Episcopio, a bishops house, a bishops sea. Episcopo, a bishop, an
epsy, an ouerseer, a coadiutor or fellow helper in ecclesiastical matters.
Episusi, episeusi, a figure, doubling a word in one sense, and having no other
word between. Epismo, a watrish disease in the eyes. Episodio della tragedia.
Epistalma, a princes commission having the charge subscribed. Epistato, an
ouerseer, a stuard, a baylife. Epistatorio, a place or court where matters are
heard and debated. Epistebe, a kind of weed or herb. Epistola, an epistle or
letter sent from friend to friend. Epistolare, to write epistles. Epistomio, a
stop in a pair of organes whereby the sound is made high or low. Epistrite, a
kind of precious stone. Epistropheo, the foremost joint in the neck, wherein it
is turned about. Epitalamio, a song sung at a wedding. Epitaphio, Epitasio, an
epitaph or writing set upon a grave or tomb. Also a funeral song used or sung
at a tomb. Epitasi, the most busy part of a comedy. Epithema, a kind of
moist medicine laid on linen to bathe any place of the body to cool the
liver. Epithesi, a counterfaited description to deceive a man. Epitetto, as
Epitheto. Epitheto, an addition to a noune for some quality, an epithete.
Epithimia, lust or concupiscence of the flesh. Epitimbro, Epithimbro, dodder
growing upon the herb Tithymale, it bears a flower like Time, and is used to
purge melancholy. Epitimia, good name and report, not distained with any spot
of infamy. Epitimalo, as Epitimbro. Epithimo, as Epitimbro. Epitome, an
epitomie, an abridgement, or breuiarie. Epitomizzare, to epitomize, or abridge.
Epitragij, worms that devour vines. Epitrito, a foot consisting of four
sillables, whereof one does always differ from the other three. Also a
proportion containing some number, and the third part thereof. Epitrocasmo, a
figure, whereby we do speedily run over many differing things, and so we
maze and trouble our adversaries. Epitrope, a figure, when as we seem to
permit one to do what he will, and yet think nothing less: it is also used
for a procuration or wardeship. Epoca, a withholding of ones assent. Epodo, a
kind of verses, having the first verse longer then the second. Epopeia, a
verse or song containing things both of god and man. Epule, flesh growing about
the gummes of the teeth. Epulea, the name of an herb. Epulone, a glutton, a
gormand, a smellfeast, a tall trencher-man, a banquettor. Epulie, meat, food,
or whatsoever else is to be eaten. Equabilita, gentleness, meekenes, mildnes.
Equalare, to equal, to even, to match, to compare, to counteruaile. Equale,
equal, even, matched, compared. Equalita, equality. Equatore, a circle in
heaven, to the which the sun coming, makes the day and night of one length.
Equestre, a knight or a horseman, or belonging to them. Equidistante,
equidistant. Equilatero, having even sides. Equile, a stable for horses.
Equinottiale, Equinottio, the equinoctial, when days and nights are even.
Equiparare, Equiperare, as Equalare. Equiparatione, comparison, or equaling.
Equiperantia, a comparison, or equaling. Equisono, an equal or tunable
sounding. Equita, equity, justice, vprightnes. Equiualente, equivalent, worth
as much. Equiualenza, a like valuation. Equiualere, vaglio, valsi, valuto, to
value, or be worth alike. Equiuocale, equivocal, of diverse significations.
Equiuocare, to equivocate or reduce words to diverse significations.
Equiuocatione, an equivocation, or doubtful signification. Equiuoco,
equivocal, of a doubtful signification. Equiuolentia, an equal will or
consent. Era, I, he, she, or it was. Eradicare, to vnroote, to pull up by the
root. Erario, as Errario. Eremita, a hermit or solitary man. Eremitaggio, a
hermitage or solitarines. Eremo, a hermitage or solitarines. Ereolo, a weight
of two grains. Also a coin among the Athenians, worth a about a penie
sterling. Eretria, a kind of ceruse. Ergere, ergo, ersi, erto, to erect, to set
up, to advance, to raise or stand up. Erice, heath, hather or linge to make
brushes of. Ericetto, a place or heath, full of heath or linge. Eripile, a kind
of faulkon. Erifilla, avarice, covetousness, greedines, strife bringing,
litigious. Eringio, Erigne, Erige, the weed seaholme, sea-hollie or
sea-huluer. Also Eringos roots. Erinni, the furies of hell. Erino, the fruit
of the wild fig tree which never comes to ripenes. Also a medicine used to
stop bleeding, to provoke sneesing, to cause childbirth, and to purge the
brain. Eripere, to take away, pluck out or snatch from by force. Erisimo, wild
mustard seed. Erisipila, an inflammation or inflamed ulcer, aswelling full of
heat and rednes. Some call it S. Anthonies fire. Eritaco, a bird so solitary
that there is never two seen together. Some take it for the Robin-redbreast.
Eritino or Erithrino, a sea fish called a rotchet. Erithrotaone, a kind of
bird. Also the herb woodrooffe or madder. Eritride, one of the four thin
skins that cover the testicles, next to the innermost. Ermo, a hermitage or a
solitarines. Also uncouth, vnhanted or solitary. Erniauentosa, a disease in a
hanks gorge. Erpete, a kind of S. Anthonies fire, which some call the shingles,
the running worm or wild fire. Erpicare, to grub or harrow the ground. Erpice,
a harrow to break clods of earth, a weeding hook or a grubbing iron. It is
also taken for a man's privy member. Also a kind of weed or herb. Errabondo,
wandering, straying, gadding, roauing, vagabond. Errante, errand, wandering,
roauing, gadding, erring up and down. Erranza, as Errore. Errare, to err, to
miss, to fail, to trangresse, to trespaas, to mistake, to roaue, to wander,
to gad or straie up and down. Errario, a princes exchequer or treasury, a
common treasury of a city. Also a clearke of the exchequer or keeper of
books of accounts, an auditor or teller of the exchequer. Erratico, as
Errabondo or Errante. Erro, has been used for Ferro. and also for Errore.
Erroneo, as Erronico. Erronia, as Ironia, a mocking or scoffing, a figure in
speaking meaning contrary to the word. Erronico, erroneous, false, erring,
mistaking, in another sense. Errompere, rompo, ruppi, rotto, to break or burst
forth with violence. Errore, an error, a fault, an oversight, a trespass, a
mistaking, a miss. Errutare, to cast or throw forth with violence.
Erruttione, an eruption, a violent out breaking, a bursting forth. Erta,
steepie, upright, high, craggie. Look Stare al'erta, a hillocke, a steepie,
craggie place, an ascent, a watch tower. Also subtle, watchful, sly, wily,
crafty. Ertezza, steepnes, craggines, ruggednes, height of hills. Erto,
erected, set up, stood up, advanced, raised, heaued up. Also as Erta.
Erubescentia, blushing shame. Eruche, stalks or stems of coleworts or
cabbages. Also the worm called a canker or palmer. Also the herb rocket.
Erudire, disco, dito, to teach, to instruct, to inform, to bring up, to
nurture. Eruditione, erudition, teaching, instruction, nurture, education,
bringing up. Erudito, taught, instructed, informed, nurtured, brought up.
Erusca, bran: also any thing made of bran, bread of bran. Es, Esse, the letter
S. Esacolito, Esacontalito, a kind of stone that has a circle in it, wherein
may distinctly be perceived threescore several colors, and has so many
virtues as colors. Esacordo, an instrument of six strings. Esagonale, six
cornered, having six angles. Esalare, to exhale or euaporate, to vent out.
Esalatione, an exhalation or euaporation. Esalatoio, a vent or exhaling place,
a breathing hole. Esaltare, to exalt, to advance, to raise, to prefer.
Esaltatione, exaltation, advancement, preferment, raising. Esaltatore, an
exalter, an aduancer, a raiser. Esancimata, the name of a disease in the head.
Esangue, bloodlesse, wan, pale, dead, liuelesse. Esanimare, to let out ones
soul, to deprive a man of life. Esarcato, a dignity or magistrate heretofore
used in Rauenna. Esarco, a supreme magistrate or judge instituted by another.
Esasperare, Essasperare, to exasperat, to exagerate, to aggrauate. Esatto,
Essatto, exact, perfect, complete, Also exacted or drawn out, extracted.
Esausto, exhaust, drawn dry, soaked dry. Esbrefone, a fish called in latin
Phoxinus. Some take it for the men^w fish. Esca, a bait, a food, a fuel.
Also tinder to light fire with. Also of the verb vscire, let him go out.
Escandescenza, a sudden rage or anger or pepper in the nose. Escane che voglia,
come of it what will, prove how it list. Escara, a baiting place, a place
where meat is kept, a lardrie. Escara, Escaro, a core or lump of mortified
flesh corroded and fetched out of any sore or fistula. Escare, to bait, to
allure, to inueagle, to angle for fish. Escaro, a fish which is said to chaw
his meat. Escauare, to dig, to grub, to open, to discover, to disclose.
Eschinomene, an herb which if one approach his hand unto it will draw as it
were for shame her leaves in and close them up. Eschio, as Esculo. Escire,
Escita, as Vscire. Escludere, cludo, clusi, cluso, to exclude, to except, to
shut out, to exempt. Esclusione, an exclusion, an exception, a shutting out
Escluso, excluded, excepted, shut out, exempted. Escomunicare, to
excommunicate. Escomunicatione, an excommunication. Escrementale, excrementall,
of or pertaining to excrements. Escrementare, to void or put forth
excrements. Escremento, an excrement. Escubie, Escubre, a sentinel or watch in
time of war. Escuccione, a skutcheon in armorie. Esculo, a tree like an oak,
bearing maste and leaves bigger than any oak. Escusa, Escusatione, an excuse.
Escusare, to excuse. Esdia, Esdra, a confection against poison or diseases of
the brain. Ese non che, and but that, were it not. Esente, as Essente.
Eseredare, to disinherit. Eseredatione, a disinheriting, a disherison.
Eserstite, a kind of whitish stone. Eshilare, as Allegrare. Eshilerare, as
Allegrare. Esicio, Esitio, death, ruin, consummation, havoc, destruction,
spoil. Esimio, as Essimio. Esipo, a kind of beast bearing wool. Esistimare,
as stimare. Esitiale, deadly, ruinous, fatal. Esitio, death, consummation,
destruction, havoc, ruin, spoil. Esito, the end, issue or event of any
thing. Esoceto, a sea fish, round like a gudgeon, yellow in color, lives in
the water, but sleeps on the shore. Esole, banished, exiled. Also a banished
man. Esorbitante, as Disorbitante. Esorbitantia, as Disorbitantia. Esorcista,
as Essorcista. Esordio, an exordium, entrance or beginning of a discourse.
Esornatione, a decking, a trimming, a garnishing, an elegancie. Esortare, to
exhort, to persuade, to admonish, to encourage. Esortatione, an exhortation, a
persuasion, an admonition. Esortatore, an exhorter, a perswader, an admonisher.
Esostra, a vice or gin of wood wherewith things done within with turning of a
wheel are showed to those that are without. Esparagnare, as Sparagnare.
Esparagno, as Sparagno. Espargere, as Spargere. Espediente, expedient,
necessary, needful. Also an attempt, an exploite. Espedire, spedisco, spedito,
as Spacciare or Spedire. Espeditione, as Speditione. Espedito, as Spedito.
Esperienza, as Sperientia. Esperimentare, as Sperimentare. Esperimento, as
Sperimento. Esperto, expert, perfect, tried. Espianare, as Spianare. Espiare, to
expiat, to blot out, to make amends or satisfaction, to cancel, to purge, to
satisfy. Espiatione, expiation, satisfaction, purgation, cancelling. Espilare,
to rob, to poll, to take by extorsion or deceit, to spoil, to proule from.
Espilatione, pillage, extorsion, robbing, prouling. Espinetta, virginals or
claricords. Espirare, as Spirare. Espiratione, an expiration, ending or
breathing. Esplanare, as Spianare. Esplicita, an unfolding, an exposition.
Esplorare, to bewail with exclamation, to epsy, to grope or feel, to
explore. Esponibile, that may be expounded or explained. Esporre, Esponere,
pongo, posi, posto, as Sponere. Espositione, as Spositione. Espositore, as
Spositore. Esposto, as Sposto. Espressamente, expreslie, for the nonce,
purposely, of purpose. Espressione, an expression, an expounding, a
pronuntiation, a manifesting. Espressiuo, expressing, expressiue. Espresso,
express, of purpose, for the nonce. Also expressed, expounded, wroong forth,
crushed out. Also pronounced. Esprimere, primo, primei, presso, to express, to
expound, to pronounce. Also to wring forth. Esprobare, Esprobrare, as
Rimprouerare. Espugnare, to overcome, to vanquish, to expugne, to raze, to
conquer. Espugnatore, an ouercommer, victor or vanquisher. Espugnatione, a
conquest, a vanquishing, a victory. Espulsione, expulsion or driving out.
Espulsiua, expulsive or expelling. Espurgare, as Spurgare. Espurgatiua lettera,
a letter of purgation or clearing of a fault. Esquisitezza, exquisitnes.
Esquisito, exquisite. Essa, she, the same, the said. Essagerare, to exasperat,
to provoke, to irritate, to agrauat, to exaggerat, to amplify, to extol.
Essageratione, exasperation, provocation, an irritation, an agrauating, an
increasing, an amplifiyng, an extolling. Essaltamento, exaltation, advancement,
a raising, a magnifying. Essaltare, to exalt, advance, raise, heave or lift up,
or to magnify. Essaltatione, exaltation, advancement, greatness, magnificence.
Essame, Essamine, a trial, examining or inquiry. Essametro, an exameter, a
kind of verse. Essamina, Essaminatione, an examination, an inquiry.
Essaminare, to examine, to enquire, to consider. Essaminatore, an examiner, an
enquirer. Essaminato, an examinate, a party examined. Essanimare, as
Esanimare. Essarcato, as Esarcato. Essarco, as Esarco. Essare, to exact, to
extort. Essasperare, to exasperat, to provoke, to irritat, to egg on, to
aggrauat. Essasperatione, exasperation, provocation, aggrauation. Essattamente,
exactly, completely. Essattatione, an exactnes. Essattione, exaction,
extorsion, exactnes, a constrayning to, a pilling of the people. Essatto,
exacted, extorted or wrested out. Also exact. Essato, as Esatto. Essattore, an
exactor, an extortor. Also a receiver of rents or subsidies. Essaudeuole,
gentle, mild of hearing. Essaudire, disco, dito, to hear, to listen.
Essauditore, a hearer, a harkner, a listner. Essausto, drawn dry, exhaust,
soken dry. Esse, the letter S. Also they or those, of the feminine gender.
Essecrabile, execrable, abominable, detestable, blasphemous, cursing.
Essecrare, to execrate, to detest, to blaspheme, to curse. Essecratione,
execration, blasphemy, cursing, banning. Essecutare, to execute, to perform.
Essecutione, execution, performance. Essecutiuo mandato, a warrant of
execution. Essecutore, an executor, a performer. Esseguire, guisco, guito, to
execute, to obtain, to accomplish, to atchieue. Esseguito, executed, obtained,
attained, achieved, accomplished. Essei, certain religious Jews that
abstain from flesh, wine, and women, feeding only on dates. Essempiare, to
copy, to exemplify, to take a pattern. Essempio, Essemplo, an example, a
pattern, a copy. Essemplare, notable, worthy to be imitated, imitable, as a
noune, but being a verb, it signifies as much as Essempiare. Essemplarita,
exemplification, example. Essemplificare, to exemplify. Essemplificatione,
exemplification. Essemplificatore, an exemplifier. Essentare, to exempt, to
excuse, to free, to quit, to se^uile. Essente, exempted, excused, freed, quit.
Essentia, Essenza, essence, being, realitie. Essentiale, essential, real.
Essentione, an exempting, a freeing, or quitting. Essequie, obsequies,
funerals, burials, Essequiale, funeral, mourning. Essequire, as Esseguire.
Essequiscere, as Esseguire. Esser^enti, has bin used for sergeants, or such
like officers. Essercitare, to exercise, to practice, to trade, to train.
Essercitio, exercise, art, trade, occupation, or study. Essercitatione, an
exercising, trading, or studying. Essercito, an army, a camp, an host of men.
Essere, sono, fui, fora, stato, suto, to be. Also a state, essence, or being.
Esser' a ferri, to be a grapling, to be together by the ears, or a busting.
Esser' in conclaue, to be in secret counsel, to be a consulting. Esser' in
pagliuola, to lie in childbed. Esser' a mal partito, to be in an ill taking.
Esser' auiso, to think, to imagine, to seem, to be aware. Esser' per, to be
about, to be ready for. Esser' a l'oglio santo, to be ready to dye. Esser' di
poca leuata, to be of small worth. Esser' in frega, to be proud or salt as a
bitch or a catterwalling as cats. Essere scruito, to be pleased, or served.
Essi, they, or those of the masculine gender. Essibire, to exhibit, to offer,
to present, to set abroad for all men to behold. Essibitione, an exibition, a
representation, a deliverance, or giving. Essibitore, an exhibitor, an officer,
a setter abroad of things. Essicare, to exiccate or dry. Essicatione, a
drying, or exiccation. Essigere, to expel, to extract, to draw out, to
express. Essigliare, to exile or to banish. Essiglio, exile, banishment.
Essiguo, little, slender, scant, small, slight. Essile, as Esule. Also fine and
thin. Essiliare, to exile, to bannish. Essilio, exile, banishment. Essimio,
high, singular, notable, excellent of choice. Essitiale, unhappy, dangerous,
deadly, ruinous. Essitio, ruin, destruction, overthrow, utter undoing,
danger. Essitioso, as Essitiale. Esso, he, that, the same. Essorbitante, as
Disorbitante. Essorbitantia, as Disorbitantia. Essorcismare, to exorcisme, to
conjure, to adjure. Essorcismi, exorcismes, incantations, coniurations, spells.
Essorcista, a coniurer, an exorcist. Essordio, as Esordio. Essornare, to deck,
to trim, to garnish, to dress. Essornatione, a decking, a trimming, a
garnishing. Essortare, to exhort, to persuade. Essortatione, an exhortation.
Essortatiuo, exhorting, exhortable, perswasiue. Essortatore, an exhorter, a
perswader. Essortatoria lettera, a letter of exhortation. Essoso, vexfull,
cruel, exacting, intolerable, hateful, detestable. Esta, summer season.
Esta, has bin used for Questa, this. Estade, Estate, the summer season.
Estasi, an ecstasy, an amazement, an astonishment, a trance, a quandarie. Also
a figure when the short syllable is made long. Estasire, sisco, sito, to be in
an ecstasy, to be amassed, to astonish, or be in a trance. Estendere, as
Stendere. Estenduto, as Stenduto. Estensione, an extension, or extending.
Estensiuo, extending, or far stretching. Estenuare, as Stenuare.
Estenuatione, as Stenuatione. Estenuatiuo, that does extenuate, or diminish.
Esterefare, to affright, to terrifye, to undo, to overthrow. Esterefatto,
affrighted, terrifyed, undone, overthrown. Esteriore, the exterior or outward.
Esterminare, to destroy, to deface, to desolate, to waste, to spoil, to ruin.
Esterminio, destruction, desolation, waste, spoil, ruin. Esternale,
external, outward. Esternare, to alienate, to estrange, to foreign. Esterno,
external, outward. Also of yesterday. Estesi, as Estasi. Estima, estimation,
or esteem. Estimabile, estimable, valuable. Estimare, as Stimare. Estimatiuo,
valuable, estimable, esteeming. Estimatore, an esteemer, a regarder, a deemer.
Estimeuole, estimable, valuable. Estimo, an esteem or valuation. Estinguere,
stinguo, stinsi, stinto, to extinguish, to quench, to put out, to kill, to
slay, to quell. Estintione, an extinguishing. Estinto, extinguished, extinct,
quenched, killed, dead, slain, put out. Estiomenate, certain ulcers, which
corroding and fretting rot and putrify a man's members. Estirpare, as Stirpare.
Estirpatiuo, as Stirpeuole. Estirpatione, Estirpamento, an extirpation, a
rooting out, a grubbing. Estiuare, to summer in some cool place. Estiuo,
Estio, pertaining to summer. Esto, has bin used for Questo, this. Estollere,
tollo, tolsi, tolto, to extol, to advance, to raise up, to eleuate, to
prefer. Estorcere, as Storcere. Estorquere, to take away, to wrest from by
force and violence, to extort, or wring from, to put out of joint. Estorsione,
extorsion, or wresting from by violence. Estorto, extorted, taken away,
wrested, or wrong from by violence, put or wrinched out of joint. Estracorrere,
as Stracorrere. Estracorso, as Stracorso. Estraggere, as Estrarre. Estranio, as
Stranio. Estranome, without or out of name. Estrarre, traggo, trassi, tratto,
to extract, to draw forth, to wrest out. Estrattione, an extraction. Estratto,
an abstract, an extract. Also extracted, drawn forth, wrested out.
Estrauagante, as Strauagante. Estrauagantia, as Strauaganza. Estremare, as
Stremare. Estremita, as Stremita, Estremo, as Stremo. Estretto, as Stretto.
Estri, a kind of gnats or horseflyes. Estrinsico, external, outward,
extrinsecall. Estro, a hornet, a horseflye. Also a sting. Esulare, to exile, to
banish. Esulatione, an exiling, a banishing: Also exile, banishment. Esule, an
exile or banished man. Esultare, to rejoice, to leap, to triumph, to skip for
joy. Esultatione, a reioicing, a leaping, and skipping for joy. Esurie, hunger,
or greedines. Esuriendo, used by Dante for thirsting, longing, greedy,
covetous or hungry. Et, a conjunction, and, moreover, besides. Eta, Etade,
Etate, age. Etere, Etereo, as Ethera. Eternale, eternal, everlasting,
aie-during, perpetual. Eternare, Eternizzare, to eternize, to perpetuate, to
make eternal. Eternita, eternity. Eterno, eternal, everlasting, euerduring.
Etesie, winds blowing out of the east, orderly about the canicular or dog
days. Ethera, the heaven, the sky, the firmament, the air, the fire.
Ethereo, ethereall, heavenly, airie, fiery, bright. Etheroclito, Eteroclito
ceruello, fantastical, unruly, unreasonable conceit or wit. Also properly
declined otherwise then the other nounes. Ethica, Etica, a sickness called the
consumption or dropsy. Also moral philosophy, or a book entreating of
moral philosophy, called the ethics. Ethice, a kind of precious stone.
Ethico, Etico, sick of a consumption or dropsy. Also moral, belonging to
manners and behavior, or that represents or sets them forth. Ethimo,
Ethimologia, as Etimologia. Ethimologo, as Etimologo. Ethmo, the middle bridge
or gristle of the nose. Ethmoide, the holes or issues of the nose or nosthrils.
Ethnarchia, principality. Ethnarco, a ruler or prince of people. Ethnico, a
gentile, an ethnik, a pagan, an infidel. Ethologia, the feate of
counterfeiting men's manners. Ethologo, one that with voice or gesture
expresses men's manners. Etianche, howbeit, although. Etiandio, also, moreover,
besides, yea, yea further, and, eftsoons. Etiandioche, howbeit, although,
that. Etimologia, true saying, true exposition, or reason of words. Etimologo,
he that searches out the true interpretation of words. Etindro, a kind of
whitish stone. Etiologica, causale medicina. Etiopide, an herb which cast into
the water, it will dry it up, and if horses tread upon it, it will make them
cast their shoes. Etite, a stone found in an eagles nest, of great virtue to
make a woman be delivered of child without pain or labor. Etologia, Etologo,
as Ethologia. Etra, whatsoever is above the element of fire. Also the element
of fire, the firmament, the sky, the welkin, light or brightness. Ettagonale,
seven cornered, having seven angles. Ettalche, a kind of tree so called. Also
and so that. Ettasi, a figure when a short syllable is made long. Etti, it is
to thee, is it to thee? Euacuare, to euacuate, to empty. Euacuatione,
euacuation, emptying. Euadere, vado, vasi, vaso, to escape, to euade, to shun.
Euangelico, evangelical, or of the gospel, gospellike. Euangelio, the gospel.
Euangelista, an evangelist, a gospeller. Euangelizzare, to euangelize, to
preach the gospel. Euaporare, to euaporate or steame out. Euaporatione, an
euaporating, or steaming out. Euasione, an evasion, an escape, a shunning.
Euaso, escaped, euaded, shunned. Also one that has escaped. Eucharista, the
sacrament of the Lords supper. Also thanksgiving or good grace. Euenire,
vengo, venni, venuto, to happen, to chance, to come to pass. Euentilare, to
wave in the wind. Also to blow or breath, to winnowe, or try in the wind.
Euentilatione, a winnowing in the wind Euento, an event, a success, an issue,
a hap a chance. Euersione, an euersion, an overthrowing, a ruin. Eufonia, a
good sound, a pleasant noise or utterance of words. Euforbio, Euphorbiu^, or
gummie thistle. Eufragia, the herb Eiebright. Euganeo, a kind of excellent
cheese. Eugenia, noblenes of blood or birth. Eugenico, noble in blood and
birth. Euidente, evident, clear, manifest, apparent. Euidenza, evidence,
appearance, an evidence, a testimony. Euincere, vinco, vinsi, vinto, to
convince, or euict by law. Euitabile, euitable, that may be avoided. Euitare,
to shun, to avoid, to escape. Euitatione, an avoiding, a shunning, a flying
from. Euittione, a conuicting by law. Eulogia, a praise, an honest and
profitable reason, a thing well spoken. Eumenide, the furies of hell. Eumetre,
a kind of green precious stone like flint, which being put upon ones head
causes him to dream of strange sights. Eunucare, to geld, to eunuch, to
splaie, to libbe. Eunuco, one that is gelded, an eunuch, a gelding, splaid or
libd. Euocatione, an invocation or calling upon, a calling forth. Euo, time
everlasting, euerduring time. Euphonia as, Eufonia. Eupatoria, the herb
Agrimonie, or Liuerwoort. Some take it for Maudelin, or Balsamint. Eupelato, a
precious stone of four colors, fiery, blew, green, and vermillion.
Eupilide, a swelling of the flesh in the gums by the cheek teeth. Eupotria, an
herb good against agues. Euripo, an arm of the sea often ebbing and flowing.
Also a water pipe. Eurithmia, a beauty where every thing or part answers his
just or due proportion. Euro, the easterly wind, the east wind. Euro austro,
a northeast wind. Euronato, a southeast wind. Eusebia, piety, religion,
godliness. Eutimia, security, quietness, hartes-ease. Eutrapelia, good
behavior, gentleness or garb. Euuene, there is of it, or else is there any
thereof? Euui, there is, is there?
F
FA, a note in music. Also he does. Also do thou. Fabraria, the art of
Smithes. Also a smithes forge or workehouse. Fabrica, a frame, a building.
Fabricare, to build, to frame, to forge. Fabricatione, a building, a framing,
a forging. Fabricatore, a builder, a framer, forger. Fabricense, a suruayer, or
master of works and buildings. Fabrile, pertaining to a smith. Also that may
be wrought. Fabro, Fabbro, a smith, a workman, a forger. Also a kind of fish.
Fabuloria, the herb Henbane. Fabulosita, fabulousnes, invention of fables and
lies. Faccette, the name of some part of a horses bit. Facchinante, base,
playing the porter. Facchinare, to play the porter, or the base companion.
Facchinarie, base, filthy, rascally, porterlike-trickes. Facchino, a porter, a
bearer of burdens. Also a soul base knave. Faccia, a face, a visage, a sight
or countenance. Also the sembla^ce, figure, form, fashion, proportion or
likeness of a thing. Also let him do, make, or cause, or that he may do, or
make. Faccia, Facciata, a side of a chamber or of a house, or of a leaf of a
book, a page of a book. Also a sores^^nt. Faccia a faccia, face to face.
Facciolo, Facciuolo, Faccioletto, as Fazzoletto. Face, Faccola, a torch, a
link or any great light, a firebrand, a cresset light. Facella, Facellina, a
little torch or link, or any burning light, a little brande. Facendare, to
busy, to deal, to be doing. Facende, business, affairs, negotiations,
doings, dealings. Also a man's or woman's priuities. Facendiere, Facendaro, a
dealer in business, affairs, a negociator, an agent, a dealer, a factor, or
dooer. Facetie, pleasantnes, mirth, witty conceits. Facetioso, as Faceto.
Faceto, pleasant, conceited, witty. Facile, easy, tractable, pliable, facile,
ethe, light, gentle, tractable, prone. Facilita, easines, readiness, courtesy.
Facilitare, to make easy. Facillimo, most easy. Facinio, a mischief, an ill
deed, a wicked act. Facino, bread made of a kind of pulse or grain called
Ciue. Facinoroso, wicked, ungracious, lewd, full of mischief. Facitore, a
dooer, a maker. Facitrice delle fusa storte, a woman that spinnes crooked
spindles, id est, makes her husband a cuckolde. Facitura, a doing, a making,
a workmanship, or labor. Facolta, Facoltoso, as Faculta. Facondia, eloquence,
pleasant speech, grace in speaking. Facondo, eloquent, well spoken. Faculta,
riches, wealth, goods, faculty, power, ability. Facultoso, rich, wealthy,
well to live. Faganello, the bird called a linnet. Also a kind of fish.
Fagiana, a phesant hen. Fagiano, Faggiano, a phesant. Fagianella, a phesant
poute. Fagianotto, Faggianotto, a phesant poute. Faggio, a beech tree.
Faggiola, a kind of gall or acorne, or maste that the Beech tree bears.
Faggiolata, Fagiolata, a flim-flam tale, as women tell when they shale peason,
which has neither head nor foot, nor rhyme nor reason: a flap with a
foxetaile: court-holie water, a tittle tattle, or such. Fagioli, Fagiuoli, a
kind of pease like unto a bean, called faseoles, french peason, welsh beans,
or kidney beans. Fagioli pinti, french beans, or beans of Rome. Fagiolo, a
colts tooth, whereby a horses age is known. Fagnone, an idle loytring g^ll, a
ninnie. Fagotto, a faggot, a bundell, a bauin, a fardell, a trusse, a pack.
Also a kind of musical instrument. Faguccia, the name of a goldsmiths tool.
Faina, a mincing, coie, nice, puling, squeamish woman, an idle huswife, a
flurt, a gigxi. Also as Foina. Fainare, to mince it, to pule, to be squeamish,
to play the idle huswife. Falangagio, an herb that cures the biting of the
spider Phalangio. Falange, a military order that Alexander the great used, a
great squadron, consisting of eight thousand footmen. Falangiale, pertaining
to that military order. Falangio, a kind of venomous spider. Also an herb
that cures the biting of that spider. Falangose, a kind of disease in a man's
eielids. Falaride, a kind of herb called grass corn. Falbo, a baie color
of a horse. Also a kind of fish. Falcare, to wreath, to wrest, to bend, to
make crooked. Also to abate, to defeat. Also to arm with crampers. Falcati,
hooked, armed with crampers, as the Romans were wont to arm their carts.
Falce, a sieth, a sickle, a hook, a bill, a crampern. Also a fish called in
Latin Taenia. Falce fenaia, a sieth to mow haie. Falchi, are stays when a
horse does rest upon his hinder parts. Falciare, to mow corn or haie.
Falciatore, a mower. Falcidia, a word taken from Falcidius the Roman, who made
a law that the Senate should have the fourth part of the lands that were
gotten. The Italians use it for the abatement of the fourth part of any thing,
but spoken in mockery. Falcifero, a mower, or one that bears a sieth.
Falcinella, a sickle. Also as Auosetta. Falcione, a bending forest bill, or
welsh hook. Falcone, a faulcon. Also a kind of bumbard so called. Also gold
according to Alchimists phrases. Falcon trauescio, a kind of faulcon.
Falconzafiro, a kind of faulcon with yellow legs and feet. Falconeggiare, to
hawk or to faulcon. Falconello, a kind of lanaret hawk. Falconetto, a
faulconet, a kind of shot or bumbard. Falconiera, a faulkners bag, a hauking
pouch. Falconiere, a faulkner, a hauker. Falcon randione, a kind of faulcon
that is king of al birds, for that no bird dares fly near it, no not the
eagle. Falda, a fold, a plate, a wrinkle, a gathering, the skirts of the cote.
It is also the side or foot of a hill. Also the armor called taces or
cuishards. Also a flake. Faldare, to fold, to pleite, to entresse, to wrinkle,
to cockle, to gather, to curle, to entraile. Also to flake. Faldarello, a
little pretty dog, a playing dog, a puppie sitting upon a woman's cotes.
Faldea, a kind of open or loose garment which the noble women of Venice were
wont to were. Falde, swathes, roulers or bandles to swath children with. Also
flakes of snow: also those pieces of armory, that are called cuishards or
taces. Also plaitings, wrinckles, folds, gatherings, curlings, plaites. Also
locks or handfuls of wool or flax. Also a folding, an inwinding or a
plaiting of a garment. Faldelare, as Faldare. Faldigliare, as Faldare.
Faldiglie, as Falde. Also a frocke or gathered garment. Faldigie, idem.
Faldoni, as Falde. Falecio, a kind of verse or poem. Falegname, a carpenter or
timber maker or worker, a cutter down of wood, a woodman. Fall in bello, a
goodly gallant spruise finicall fellow* in the worst sense, a fresh water
soldier, a milk sop. Falace, false, deceivable, deceitful, fraudulent,
guilefull. Fallacia, fallacy, falsehood, deceit, illusion, fraud, guile.
Fallacioso, fallacious, deceitful. Fallaci loquentia, deceitful speech.
Fallante, falling, missing. Fallare, to fail, to miss, to err, to deceive, to
trespass, to fraud. Fallenza, Fallore, Fallanza, as Fallo. Falletto, is a
little ring in the mouth of the bit set at one end of the root. Falli, faults,
as Annelletti. Fallimento, as Fallo, a breaking, a bankrout. Fallire, Fallisco,
Fallito, as Fallare. Also to become bankrout, to crack his credit. Fallito, a
bankrout, one that has cracked his credit. Also broken, bankrout, cracked in
credit, mist, erred. Fallo, Fallore, a fault, an error, a miss, a sin, a
transgression, an oversight, a trespass, couen, fraud or guile. Also a fault
in tenise. Also do it. Falope, a kind of shell fish. Falsare, to falsify,
counterfeit or forge. Falsario, Falsatore, a falsifier, a counterfeiter, a
forger, a false corner. Falseggiare, as Falsare. Falsetto, a false treble or
counter-tenor in music. Falsidico, a lier, a leaser, one that tells no truth.
Falsificare, as Falsare. Falsifico, Falsificatore, as Falsario. Falsita,
falsehood, falsenes, deceit. Falso, false, counterfeit, deceitful. Falsoni,
hawks or faullons. Falsonetti, little young hawks. Falso quarto, a cleft in
the hoof of a horse by the talent nail, commonly called a false quarter.
Faluo, a bay color. Fama, fame, report, brute, renown, reputation, credit.
Fama vt, or Fame vt, in jest used for Fama vt, a note in music, but taken for
hungerly or greedily. Fame, hunger, famine. Also greedines and desire, an
appetite, a good stomach or lust to eat. Fame canina, a hungry dogged
stomach. Also a disease so called. Fame contadina, clounish hunger, ravenous
hunger. Famelico, hungry, greedy, ravenous. Famfaluche, as Fanfaluche.
Famiglia, a family, a household. Famigliaccio, a filthy groom, hind or
swain, a scullion. Famigliare, to set up household, to become familiar, to
tame. Also familiar, tame, gentle, acquainted, conversant, a household guest.
Famigliarita, familiarity, acquaintance. Famiglio, a groom, a servant, a
hind, a swain, a manseruant. Famigliola, Famigliuola, a little family, or
household. Familiare, as Famigliare. Familiarita, as Famigliarita. Fammelo, do
it me, do it to me. Fammi, make me, do me. Famoso, famous, renowned, glorious,
excellent. Famulente, hungry, or hunger starved. Fanale, a lantern of a ship
or gally. Fanatico, used for a pagan priest, properly fanatike, inspired,
ravished, or mad. Fanciulla, a wench, a less, a girl, a child, a maiden.
Fanciullesco, childish, toyish, indiscreete, puerile, brattish. Fanciullezza,
childhood, youth, puerilitie. Fanciullo, a boy, a child, a lad, a page, a
stripling, a brat, a barn. Fando, used in verse for facendo, doing. Fanello, a
little bird, we call it a Linet, some take it for a Lapwing. Fanfaluche,
Fanfalughe, flim flam tales, old wives fables, a ribble rabble discourse, idle
words, speeches of no worth. Fanfaluco, a simple, sottish, prating fellow.
Fanfalucole, as Fanfaluche. Fangare, to bemire, to bemud, to bedash with dirt,
to bedabble. Fangarolla, a kind of bird, always dabling in the mud or mire.
Fango, dirt, mud, mire. Fangoso, durtie, murie, bedasht, muddie, bedabled.
Fangro, a fish called in latin Pagrus. Fan, do us, make us, make of it.
Fano, the lantern of a ship or galley. Fantaccino, a silly soldier, a mean
footeman. Fantaguzzo, a nickname for a fresh water soldier, a milkesop.
Fantaria, infanterie, footmen. Fantasia, a fancy, a conceit, fantasy, humor,
imagination or intent. Fantasma, a ghost, a hag, a robin good fellow, a
holigoblin, a sprite, a jade, the riding hagge, or mare. Fantasticare, to rave
or be fantastical, foolishly conceited, or humorous. Fantasticarie,
fantastical toys, vain humors, idle imaginations. Fantastico, fantastical,
conceited, humorous, rauing, skittish. Fante, a man or woman servant, a groom,
a footeman, a soldier serving on foot, the knave or varlet at cards, a pawn
at chesse. Fantella, a girl, a less, a young maid. Fantesca, a kitchen maid,
a househould servant, a drudge servant. Fanticella, a young maiden servant, a
young wench, a little girl. Fantino, a young lad or boy, a prentice, a child.
Fantocchio, a foolish serving creature. Fantoccia, an elderlie unmarried maid.
Fantolino, a young child, lad or boy, a babie. Farassa, a great round fish that
is an enemy to the Whale. Farciglione, a kind of cormorant or such water
ravenous foul. Farcina, a disease in a horse called a Farcin, or fashions, or
farcies, a creeping ulcer. Farcinoso, a horse that has the farcins, full of
the farcins. Fare, Faccio, or Fo, Feci, Fatto, to do, to make, to cause, to
compose, to act. Fare a guisa della coda del porco, che tutto il giorno se la
dimena and poi la sera non ha fatto nulla, do and undo the day is long enough,
mutch ado and never the nearer, to do as the hog does that all day wags his
tail and at night has done nothing. Fare aguati, to lay ambushes, to seek to
entrap. Fare ala, the name of a certain march sounded upon drum and trumpet in
time of war. Fare alto, as Fare ala. Fare all coltellate, to fight with
weapons that cut. Fare alla grappa piu, to play at musse, to shuffle, or
skamble for. Fare acqua, to water, or take in fresh water in a ship. Also to
piss. Fare a gara, to strive, or to contend for the victory. Fare a
chetichegli, to go closely and secretly about ones business, to play the slye or
subtle companion, the lurking and close fox, to sneake or mich about
lurkingly, to play least in sight. Fare all braccia, to wrestle, to struggle.
Fare a gucchia, to knit as silk hosen be with needles. Fare a cozzi, to shock,
to but as Rams do. Fare accoglienza, to entertain, to give entertainment.
Fare brindisi, to drink a health, to pledge a health to one, to carrouse it.
Fare broglio, to canuas, to trudge about, or shift for, to rob Peeter and pay
Paul, to take up commodities. Fare beffe, to mock, to floute, to scoff. Fare
buon partito, to make a good offer, to give good entertainment. Fare baco baco,
to play boe peep. Fare bell tempo, to be fair weather. Fare a rigatta, to
strive or play at musse for any thing. Fare capitale, to make especial account
of, to account as his own, to gather a stock. Fare chiomazzuoli, a horse to
defend the bit with his nether lip: Some conster it to be when a horse does
cover or defend his gum with his lip. Fare colatione, to break ones fast.
Fare cattiuo tempo, to be foul weather. Fare cornamusa, as Gonfiare alcuno.
Fare di meno, to choose whether one will do a thing or no. Fare di beretta, to
put off ones cap or hat for reverence sake. Fare d'occhio, to wink upon one,
to give a sign with the eyes, to give an inkling. Fare fare, to cause or force
to do. Fare frit frit, to play cricket a wicket. Fare festa, to keep holyday.
Also to cherish, to make much of, to entertain lovingly. Fare giornata, to
fight a battle. Fare forfici, when a horse does wry both his chaps like a
pair of sheares. Fare il rosso, to jest, to dally, to play the wanton. Fare
il solecchio, to make a shadow, to shadow, to shade. Fare il sole, the sun to
shine. Fare il ballordo, to play the noddie or fool. Fare il call, Fare la
piega, to make a habit, to enure. Fare il pane, to dye, to kick up ones heels,
never to have more need of bread. Fare il santo, to play the hypocrite, to
dissemble. Fare il buon pro, to do one good. Fare il sen^e, to come to
perfection, to come to a full groth. Fare la credenza, to take the essay for a
Prince, to be sewer to a prince. Fare la quarantana, to keep lent or fast
forty days, properly in time of plague or sickness, to keep forty days from
company, namely if one come from infected places, as they use in Italy. Fare le
bozze, to graft horns on ones head. Fare le fusa sort, to spin crooked
spindles, a woman to make her husband a cuckold. Fare le carte, to deal the
cards. Fare la sposa, to play the bride, to bride it, to mince it. Fare le
none, to prevent one for borrowing, as if I fear that one comes to borrowe
money of me: as soon as I see him I begin to complain that I am poor and
have no money, and know not where to get any: of such a one they say, Lui fa le
none, that is there is nothing to be hoped for of such a dissembler. Fare la
quaresima, to keep lent. Fare le forche, to know a thing and to dissemble the
knowledge thereof. Also to blame one when one should praise him, used in both
these senses. Fare la busca, to play at musse. Fare le luster, as Fare le
forche. Fare le fica, to bid a fig, a flurt or a turde for one. Fare la honesta
da campi, to counterfeit honesty. Farla in tree paci, to have but three casts
for it, not to stay long upon the matter. Also to make a conclusiue peace
between man and woman putting two in one. Fare la minuta, to make a draught of
any writing or work. Fare montar in collera, to make one be angry or take
pepper in the nose. Fare merenda, to make a drinking after dinner. Fare la
luna, the moon to shine. Fare peduccio, to sooth one up with good words, to
currie favor one, to allow and make good whatsoever one says. Fare tauola, to
make a stale at the play of chess^, to be idle, neither win nor lose. Fare
ribuffi, to chide or give a check. Fare scommessa, to lay a wager, to bet.
Fare tempone, to feast and make good cheer, to pass away the time merrily.
Fare vna finta, to make an offer or show to do any thing. Fare stare, to
coosen, conicatch, to ouerreach or fetch one over. Fare scala, to land or set
footing on any land. Fate vezzi, to wantonize withal. Fare stocchi, to take up
commodities, to rob Peter and pay Paul. Fare le posate, to make a horse
advance, when at a stop he rises twice or thrice with his forefeet.
Fardellare, to fardle, to pack, to trusse, to bundle up. Fardello, a fardell, a
pack, a trusse, a bundle, a burden. Faretra, a quiver for arrows. Faretrare,
to quiver or adorn a man with a quiver. Farfa, the dandrafe that comes from
the head or lies on the head. Farfalla, a gnat, a mote, a fly that houering
about a candle burns it self called a bishop. Farfallone, the filthy snot of
ones nose or gubbon of fleame. Also a kind of great fly, or humble Be. Also
a filthy, snottie, slouenly, slauering, driueling fellow. Also a shameless
lying fellow. One that will lie for the whetstone. Farfanicchio, a foolish
milkesop or fresh water soldier. Farfante, as Furfante. Farfara, Farfarella,
as Farfa. Also the herb folefoote, coltes foot or horsefoote. Farfaro, the
white poplar tree. Farfaroso, one that has dandrafe on his head. Farfoso,
Farfuso, as Farfaroso. Farina, flower or meal. Farinaccio, Farinato, made of
flower, flowred or mealed. Farinaio, Farinaro, a mealeman, a hutch or bin to
keep meal in. Farinaiuolo, a mealeman. Also a malte man. Farinare, to
beflowre or bemeale. Fario, a kind of troute. Farlacchio, a gull, a noddie, a
sot. Farneticare, to rave, to be frantic, or frenzy. Also to ruminat, to
muse. Farnetico, rauing, frantic or frenzy, musing, ruminating, mad.
Farnice, a kind of tree bearing a hard fruit. Faro, I will do, I shall make.
Farole, the lantern of a gallie or ship. Also a beacon. Farona, a stubble
goose. Farraina, a kind of mash given to horses made of diverse sorts of grain
together. Farro, a kind of wheat which they make pottage or formentie of in
Italy like our oatmeale. Also spelt corn. Farsa, Farza, a pleasant discourse
or interlude, a merry tale, a play. Farsetto, Farseto, a trusse or thin doublet
for summer, a little iacket. Fartagna, a kind of Lark with a bush on his
head. Fasanello, a feasant pout. Fasano, a feasant. Fasce, bundles, swathes,
withs, fardels, gardings, borders, laces, roules, or bindings about a garment.
Also sesses in armorie. Fascello, a Bee-hiue. Fascetto, a little bundle, a
sheafe of any thing. Fascia, the singular of Fasce. Fasciano, a feasant, or
feasant pout. Fasciare, to swathe, to swaddle, to bandle, or bind about, to
sheafe up, to roll or tie up. Also to fesse in armorie. Also to bind, to
guard or lace, or border a garment about. Fasciatoio, a bandle, a swathe or
rouler. Fascicolo, a little bundle, a sheafe. Fascina, a country cottage, a
shepherds bullie, a cabin, a shelter, a shroude, a thatcht house. Also a
saggot or a bauin. Fascinare, to bewitch, to forspeake, to charm with words or
looks. Fascinatione, a bewitching, a forespeaking or charming with looks, an
eyebiting proceeding of the wry looks of envious persons and of wolfes.
Fascinatore, a bewitcher, a charmer with the eyes. Fascinelle, little fagots,
little bauins, little fesses. Fascino, as Fascinatione. Fascio, a bundle, a
sheafe, a fardle, a trusse. Fasciola, a little bandle, a little swaddling clout,
a swathe, a binder, a rowler. Fasciuole ondose, a word in armorie,
barrie-wauie. Fascitelli, sheafes, or handfuls of corn. Fastello, a fardell, a
bundell, a sheafe, a burden, as of wood or straw. Fastidiare, to trouble, to
vex, to molest, to be tedious or loathsome, t^o importune, to accloye.
Fastidio, trouble, vexation, molestation, wearines, tediousnes, lothsomnes.
Also care, grief, anguish, or importunity, a loathing of the stomach, an
accloying. Fastidiosita, as Fastidio. Fastidire, disco, dito, as Fastidiare.
Fastidio^o, troublesome, importune, tedious, loathsome, wearisome, irksome.
Fastigiare, to raise, or work up to the top or height. Fastigio, the top or
height of any thing, namely of a tree. Also the deapth of any thing. Fasto,
pride, hautines, loftines, disdain, surquedry. Fastoso, proud, hautie, lofty
minded, disdainful. Fasuoli, as Fagioli. Fata, a fairie, a witch, an
enchantres, an elfe. Fatale, fatal, destined. Fatappi, doltes, fools,
noddies, guls, noddie poopes. Also a kind of night bird. Fatare, to enchant,
to bewitch, to satuate by fayries. Fatatura, a bewitching by fayries. Fateui in
cola, go a little farther, as we say away. Fatezze, Fattezze, features,
beauties, shape, handsomnes, making. Also disposition, propernes, good making,
form. Fatica, labor, pain, travel, toil, endeavor, industry, swinke.
Faticare, to labor, to travel, to endeavor. Faticoso, laboursome, laborious,
painful, toilsome, industrious. Faticosita, as Fatica. Fatidico, Faticido, a
soothsayer, a diuiner, a prophet, a secretary of the gods. Fatione, the
fashion or making. Fato, destiny, chance, lot, fortune, fate. Fatta, as
Fratta. Also a fashion or making. Sifatta, such, so made, like. Fattamente,
perfectly, in such sort, in such manner but joined with Si. Fatti, facts,
gestes, acts, doings, deeds, feats, or actions. Also done, made, caused,
composed, acted, accomplished, or performed. Fattibile, that may be done or
wrought, or made. Also to be done or made. Fattionato, fashioned. Fattione, a
faction or sect. Also any action or service. Fattioso, factious, turbulent,
troublesome, sectious. Fattitio, any thing to be done or acted. Also
artificial, counterfeit or fained. Fattiuo, as Fattibile. Fatto, an estate, a
business, a man's wealth. Also the singular of Fatti. Fatto a gucchia, knit with
knitting needles as silk hosen be. Fatto d' arm, a conflict, a battle, a
warlike piece of service. Fatto stare, conie-catcht, crosse-bitten,
ouer-reacht, fetched over, cozened. Fattocchiare, to bewitch, to forespeake, to
enchant, to charm, to besot. Fattocchiera, a she witch, or enchant^es.
Fattocchiero, a he witch or enchanter. Fattocchierie, base charms,
enchantments, bewitchings or forespeakings. Fattoio, a jar, a pot, a fat or
bottle, to put oil in. Fattorare, to play the factor or merchant for another.
Fattore, a factour, an agent, a dealer, a solicitour, a founder, a maker or
dooer. Fattoria, a storehouse or a custom house, or merchants warehouse. Also
a place of traffike. Fattorino, a factour, a petti-fogger, a soliciter.
Fattosene, having made to himself of it. Fattucchiare, Fatucchiare, as
Fattocchiare. Fattucchiera, Fatucchiera, as Fattocchiera. Fattucchiero,
Fatucchiero, as Fattocchiero. Fattucchiarie, Fattucchiaie, as Fattocchierie.
Fattura, a making, a fashion or workmanship of any thing, a doing or handy
work. Fatturare, as Fattocchiare. Fatture, charms, incantations,
forespeakings. Fatturera, as Fattocchiera. Fatuare, to make or play the fool,
fond or idiot, to besot. Fatuita, foolishnes, blockishnes. Fatuo, foolish,
fond, simple, idiot, natural, a sot, a blockish fellow. Faua, a bean. Also
a kind of pottage of beans. Also used for the prepuse or top of a man's yard.
Fauagello, vnguento di fauagello. Fauale, made of beans. Faua lupina, the
herb H^nbane. Faua menata, a kind of bean pottage. Faua porcina, an herb
called in Latin Alterum. Fauaro, one that sels beans. Also a field of
beans. Fauata, a meat made of beans. a flap made with a foxetaile, as
Fagiolata. Fauce, the throat, gorge, or gullet pipe. Faue, certain running
ulcers from which comes a matter like honey. Also certain kernels that come
between the flesh and the skin to men and beasts. Fauella, a speech, a
language, a tongue. Fauellare, to speak, to discourse. Fauellatore, a speaker,
a discourser. Fauelleni, a poison maker. Fauerotti, earth nuts, kipper nuts, or
earth chestnuts. Fauetta, a little bean. Fauilla, a spark, a sparkle, a
twinkling. Fauillare, to sparkle, to spark, or twinckle. Fauillante,
Fauilloso, sparkling, twinkling. Fauilluccia, Fauilluzza, a little sparkle, or
twinkling. Fauine, Look Vlcere fauine. Faule, chafe or stubble of corn.
Fauni, Faunes, certain Siluane gods, half men half goats, as Satires.
Faunico, wild, siluane, rude. Fauo, a honey comb. Also a kind of scaule in
the head running matter like honey. Also a Bee-hiue. Fauola, a fable, a tale, a
leasing, a lie. Fauolare, to fable, to tell tales. Fauoleggiare, as Fauolare.
Fauoletta, a little fable, a short tale. Fauolone, a pleasant conceited
fellow, a teller of tales or fables. Fauoloso, fabulous, false, untrue,
profane. Fauolosita, falsehood, a tale, lie, or leasing. Fauonio, a west
wind. Fauorabile, favorable. Fauore, favor, grace, a boon, a grant, a gift,
a good turn. Fauoreggiare, to favor, to be friend. Fauoreuole, Fauoreggiante,
favorable, friendly. Fauorire, risco, rito, to favor or grace one Fauorito,
favored. Also a minion, a favorite* a lover, a friend. Fauoscello, the herb
Celandine, figwort, or pilewoort. Fauotti, a kind of ducke, mallarde, or
wigeon. Fauro, a smith. Faustita, good fortune, good luck. Fausto, hap,
fortune, propiciousnes, luck. Faustoso, happy, fortunate, propicious, luckie.
Fautore, a fauorer, a protector, a furtherer or maintainer. Fautrice, she that
favors, furthereth, or maintains. Fazende, as Facende. Fazzatoia,
Fazzatora, a maunde to put bread in. Fazzo, a fashion, a manner, a guise, a
custom. Fazzoletto, a handkerchiffe, a mucketer, a towell, a barbers cloth, a
wiper. Fazzuolo, Fazzuoletto, as Fazzoletto. Fe, he did. Also as Feed. Feace,
voluptuous, given to all pleasures. Febbre, a fever, an ague. Febbre continua,
a continual ague. Febbre cotidiana, a quotidian ague. Febbre quartana, a
quartane ague. Febbre terzana, a tertian ague. Febbricella, a little, slow,
faint, gentle or easy ague. Febbreggiante, as Febricitante. Febbreggiare, as
Febricitare. Febbricitante, troubled with an ague. Febbricitare, to have or be
sick of an ague. Febbriccioso, Febbriggioso, idem. Febbrone, a violent or
great ague, a mighty fever. Febraio, Febraro, the month of February.
Fecatelle, as Fegatelle. Fecato, as Fegato. Fecatoso, as Fegatoso. Feccia,
dregs, l^es, or filth of wine or any thing else, dross, ordure, rif-raffe.
Feccioso, dreggie, slimie, filthy, drossie. Feciale, a herald, an ambassador,
or officer of war to denounce war or peace. Fecondare, to fructify, or make
fruitful. Fecondia, fruitfulnes, fertility, plenty. Fecondita, Fecondezza, as
Fecondia. Fecondo, fruitful, fertile, plentiful. Feed, or Fe, faith, trust,
truth, troth, religion, honesty, credit. Also a ring made with hand in hand:
also a pasport, a testimony, a warrant, an assurance. Fedele, faithful,
trusty, true, honest, of credit, loyal, upright. Fedelta, faith, faithfulness,
trust, credit, troth, loyalty, fidelity. Federe, fedo, fedei, feduto, to hurt,
to wound, to strike, to smite. Fedire, as Federe. Fedita, a wound, a hurt, a
sore, a cut, a gash with a weapon. Fedito, hurt, wounded, stricken. Fedo,
filthy, foul, abominable, lothsom, stinking. Feduto, hurt, wounded,
strooken. Fegato, a fish called in latin Glaucus. Fegato, the liver of any
creature. Also a fish like a breame called in latin Hepar. Fegatelle, certain
meats made of liver, liuerings. Fegatello, a little liver. Fegatoso, one that
has a great liver. Feggiare, as Federe. Felce, the herb fern, blake or
brake. Feel, Fell, the gall of ones body. Feleggiare, to make or be as bitter
as gall. Felice, happy, fortunate, blessed, luckie, prosperous, blissful.
Also the herb fern or blake. Felicita, felicity, bliss, happiness,
prosperity, good luck. Felicitare, to prosper, to bless, to make happy.
Felizzette, a kind of dainty bird. Fellare, to commit fellonie. Felleo, of
gall, as bitter as gall. Fellifluo, choler or flowing of the gall, rising
commonly of rawnes. Fellio, a kind of musical instrument. Fello, fell, cruel,
severe, inexorable, moodie, wrath. Also fellonius, murderous, cruel, wicked,
treacherous, perverse, froward. Fellone, a fellon, a fellonious, wicked, cruel,
treacherous man. Fellonia, fellonie, villannie, treachery, cruelty, rebellion.
Felluca, a kind of boat, barge or ship. Feltraro, a felt-maker. Feltro, a
felt, whereof hats are made or riding clokes and bases. Also a hat it self or
cloak made of felt. Also a kind of limbeck or stillatorie. Felzata, a kind of
course woollen stuff so called likefelt. Felze, the place of a barge or boat
covered where passengers sit, namely in gondolas. Feme, the upper and inner
part of the thigh, the privy parts of a woman. Also the parts about the
pastell or nether joint of a beasts leg. Femina, a woman, a wife, sometime
taken for a bad light woman. Femina del mondo, a bad light woman. Femina di
partito, a common queen. Feminable, weak, faint, of a woman's nature.
Feminaccia, a filthy loathsome woman. Feminacciolo, a whore-monger, a
frequenter of women. Feminare, to effeminat, to womanize. Feminella, a silly
little woman. Feminelle, the little claspes and hooks that women use to tie
their peticots with. Femineo, of the feminine kind or gender. womanish,
feminine. Feminetta, a very little woman and pretty. Feminiere, a
whore-monger, a frequenter of women, a mutton monger* Also belonging or
pertaining to women. Feminina, a very little and pretty woman. Also of the
feminine gender. Feminile, feminine or womanish. Feminuccia, a poor silly
wretched woman. Femora, the privy parts of a woman; but specially the thigh or
foreparte thereof. Fenaia, of or pertaining to haie or to cutting of haie.
Fenaiuolo, Fenaruolo, an host^er, one that makes haie-bottles or locks of hai,
a hay man or maker. Fendere, fendo, fendei, fenduto, to cleave, to burst
asunder, to riue, to chap, to splint, to shiuer, to spall. Fendente, cleaving,
a down right cleaving blow. Fendeuole, that may be cleft, shiuered or broken.
Fendita, Fenditura, a cleaving, a chinke, a cranish, a flaw, asplint, a cleft,
a chop. Fenditore, a cleauer, a wood cleauer, a river, a splin^^r. Fenestra, a
window. Also a casement, a hole through any thing. Fenestrare, to make windows
or holes through any thing. Fenestraro, a glasier or window maker. Fenestrata,
windowed, holed through. Also a row of windows. Fenestrella, Fenestretta, a
little window, a loope hole, a spike hole, a button hole. Fenestreuole,
Fenestroso, full of windows or holes. Fengere, as Fingere. Fenice, the bird
Phoenix. Also a kind of herb. Fenico, a kind of musical instrument with
strings. Fenile, a hay-ricke, a stacke of hay, a house for hay, also made of
hay. Also a rack where hay is put. Feno, haie. Fenocchio, as Finocchio.
Fenogreco, the herb fenegreeke. Fenoso, full of hay. Fenta, as Finta. Fera, a
fierce monster, a wild beast. Ferace, fertile, fruitful, plentiful, bringing
forth much fruit, full of. Feracita, fruitfulnes. Feraiuolo, Feraruolo, a
riding cloak. Ferale, a taper, a torche, a quarier or a link. Also deadly,
dangerous, lamentable, mourning. Feralia, a day dedicated to the gods, to
pacify them toward dead souls, all souls day. Ferbotto, a robin-red-breast.
Feretro, a tomb, a hearce, a beer, a cofin for the dead. Feretta, a ferret to
catch conies with. Ferge, fetters for horses, or any other cattle. Fergolastro,
a kind of weed or herb. Feria, a holy festival day, a wake day, a vacation,
a holy days life. Feriale, festival, holy, vacant from labor. Also common.
Feriare, to make holy day, to be idle, to keep holy day. Ferigno, cruel,
fierce, of the color or nature of iron, rustie, canckred. Ferina carne,
venison, meat of wild beasts. Ferino, cruel, monstrous, beastly, inhumane,
savage, wild, as a beast. Ferire, risco, rito, to hit, to strike, to hurt, to
wound. Feristo, the middle or chief post of a tent, or any thing else. Ferita,
a hit, a hurt, a wound, or stroke. Ferita, fiercenes, cruelty, pride, hautines,
disdain, beastlines, wildenes. Ferito, hit, stricken, hurt, wounded. Feritore,
a wounder, a striker. Ferla, a hawks perch, or a little stake. Ferle,
crutchets for lame men to go with. Fermagliare, to adorn with jewels, ouches
or brooches, or pendants. Fermaglio, an ouch, or jewel, a pendant, namely a
brooch. Fermamento, the firmament, or sky. Fermare, to confirm, to settle, to
establish, to ratify, to conclude, to assure. Also to affirm, to warrant, to
stay, to order, to refrain, to determine or remain. Also to make fast, to
pound, to empale, to close, to shut, to lock, to seal. Fermatiuo,
affirmative. Fermentare, to leaven, to mix with, as leaven with dowe.
Fermento, leaven for bread. Fermezza, firmenes, constancy. Fermo, firm,
steadie, established, settled, assured, certain, ratified, concluded, fixed.
Also sure, confirmed, warranted, fastened, ordered, stayed, arrested. Also fast,
empaled, closed, shut, locked, sealed. Fernanbucco, brasill wood to dye withal
because it comes from such a place in Brasile. Ferneticare, as Farneticare.
Ferneticamento, a rauing. Fernetichezza, rauingnes, franticknes. Fernetico,
frantic, rauing, humorous, toyish, mad. Fero, Feroce, fierce, cruel, severe,
stern, hasty, headlong, hard-harted, eager. Fero, Fecero, Ferono, they did,
they made, they caused. Ferocia, as Ferocita. Ferocita, fiercenes, cruelty,
severity, eagernes, hastines, arrogancy. Ferolagine, as Ferola. Ferola,
Ferula, a cloven cane or reed. Also a kind of mantle that shepherds wear.
Also a reed or sedge, or bent growing by the water side. Also a kind of
shrub. Also an herb like big fennel, called herb Sagapene, or fenell giant.
Ferragina, a kind of weed or herb. Ferraine, all manner of iron works. Also
green barlie cut for horses. Ferrame, all manner of iron, or iron works.
Ferramenti, iron works, or pieces of iron, all manner of iron tools. Ferrante,
an iron or dark color of a horse, an iron gray. Ferrare, to shoe a horse, or
any such beast, to trim, or dress with iron, to tagge points. Ferrar la mula,
a proverb, to steal, to filch from ones master, to deceive him in his
expenses. Ferraio, Ferraro, a lock-smith, a horsesmith, a f^rrier. Ferraria
art, the art of smiths working in iron. Ferraria, an iron mine.
Ferrastringhe, a tagger of points. Ferrata, as Ferriata. Ferrata mazza, an iron
club. Ferrato, covered, plated, or wrought with iron. Also shod with iron as a
horse, or any other beast. Ferratura, any iron work. Ferra vecchio, a crier of
old iron, or that sells all manner of old iron works. Ferrazza, a forkefish, it
is like a raye. Ferrea, of or pertaining to iron. Ferretti, little irons. Also
tags for points. Ferri, horseshoes, all manner of irons. Also iron tools. Also
fetters or shackles of iron. Ferriata, a grate of iron for a window or such
like, or before a prison door, a perculleise. Ferriere, a harbinger, one that
takes up lodgings for others, a forerunner. Ferrigno, cruel, hardharted, of
the nature or color of iron, rustie. Ferro, iron. Also a horseshooe, the
metal iron, any iron tool. Ferro a ghiaccino, a horseshooe to go in the
frost with. Ferroliche, toys, vanities, bables, jests, nifles, fooleries,
fopperies. Ferroso, full of iron, or of iron. Ferrugineo, of an iron color.
Also bearing iron, or of the nature of iron. Also rustie. Ferrugine, rust of
iron. Ferruzzi, all manner of iron tools. Ferruginoso, tasting of iron, full
of iron, rustie. Fersa, a sickness proceeding of extreme heat. Also a violent
heat, or a burning ague. Fersora, a frying pan. Fersura, a frying pan. Also
meat fried. Fersuto, fried in a pan, scorched. Fertile, fertile, fruitful,
abundant, plentious store bringing. Fertilire, lisco, lito, to wax, or become,
or make fruitful, plentiful, or fertile. Fertilita, fertility,
fruitefulnes, plenty. Feruente, fervent, fierce, hot, violent, earnest,
burning, ardent, raging, boiling, parching. Feruenza, feruencie, violence,
raging heat, ardencie. Feruere, feruo, feruei, feruuto, to burn, to scalde,
to be hot, to rage, to boil, to parch. Feruido, as Feruente. Ferula, as
Ferola. Feruleo, like unto Ferola. Also full of reeds or canes. Feruore,
feruor, heat, earnestnes, valiantnes, ardencie, feruencie. Feruoso, as
Feruente. Feruto, a disease in a horse called the swaying of the neck. Feruuto,
burned, scalded, hot, raged, boiled, parched. Ferza, a whip, a scourge, a
flaile. Ferzare, to whip, to scourge. Ferzatore, a whippe^, a scourger.
Fesceia, a great maund, a dosser, a basket, a panier. Fescenio, baudie,
filthy, dishonest. Fessa, Fessura, cloven, cleft, burst. Also a cleft, a
chinke, a creuis, a hole, a slit, a chop. Fessile, fendible, that may be cleft,
or splinted. Fesso piede, clouen-footed. Fessurare, to cleave, to open, to
burst. Festa, a feast, a holyday, a banquet, joy, pleasure, solace, a show.
Also a kind of simnell, cracknell, or gingerbread. Festante, as Festoso.
Festare, to feast it or make holyday, to rejoice, to glad, to solace, to
banquet. Festatore, a feaster, a banqueter. Festeggiante, feasting, merry,
banqueting, pleasant, of good entertainment. Festeggiare, to feast it, to
banquet, to make holie-day, to cherishe, or make much of. Festeggieuole,
Festeggioso, as Festoso. Festeuole, as Festeggieuole. Festichina seta, a kind
of raw sleaue silk. Festinare, to hasten, to dispatch. Festinita, haste,
speed, quicknes. Festino, Festinamente, quickly, nimbly, hastily, coming
before time, speedily. Festiuale, as Festoso. Festiuamente, by way of sport or
holiedaie festiualie. Festiuita, a festing, a festiuitie, a festival, a mirth,
ioyfulnes or iolitie, a pleasant grace. Festiuo, as Festeuole. Festoccia, as
Mottozzo. Festone, a garland, a wreath, a chaplet, a crown of flowers.
Festoncello, a little garland or wreath, or chapiet, or coronet of flowers.
Festoso, feasting, merry, pleasant, jolly, joyful, blithe, bonnie, iocond,
conceited, solacing, buxsome, idle, reioicing, playing, gamesome, festival.
Festuca, Festuga, a shrub, a stake, a single quarter, a staff, a pole. Also
chafe, or straw, or stubble. Also a feskue. Festucco, a little stick, a
fease-strawe, a tooth-picke, a moth, a little beam. Fetente, stinking, ill
sauouring. Fetida, Fetido, stinking, ill sauouring. Fetidare, to smell, to
stink, to savor ill. Fetidezza, as Fetore. Fetore, a stink, an ill smell or
savor. Feto, all things brought forth by generation of man, beast or fish, a
brood or birth. Fetta, a slice, a collop of any thing, a cut of any meat,
Fetta di pane, a shiuer of bread. Fetta di stame, has been used for a girdle.
Fettone, a disease in a horse, called the running frushe. Fettore, as Fetore.
Fettuccia, a little collop, slice, or cutting. Fettuccia di presciutto, a slice
of bacon. Fettuccie, iags, iaggings, cuttings or snips in garments. Feudatare,
to let or take in fee farm, or feude. Feudatario, a feudation or tributary
person. Feudo, a fee, a feud, or tribute. Feudoso, that paieth tribute, feude
or fee. Fia, shall be, of the verb Essere. Fia, times, as tree fia tree, three
times three. Fiabbe, as Fanfaluche. Fiacca collo, a breake-necke, a
haltersacke, a wagge. Also tumbling down headlong. Fiaccare, to break, to
bruise, to batter, squease, crush, spoil, mar, or craze. Also to tire, faint,
weary, consume, weaken, wither, or droope. Fiac cato, tired, made fainte,
wearied, consumed, weakened, withered, faded, drooped. Also broken, bruised,
battered, squeased, crushed, spoiled, mard, crazed. Fiacche, Fiappe, as
Fanfaluche. Fiacchezza, wearines, weakening, withering, faintnes. Fiacco, as
Fiaccato. Fiaccola, a firebrand, a torch, a link, a cresset light, a quarier.
Fiaccolare, to burn, to blase, to light as torches or brands do, to flash.
Fiadone, a honie-combe. Also taken for a Be hiue, or hith. Also a kind of
flawne, egge-pie, doucet or custard. Fiadonello, idem. Fiala, a wine glass.
Also a certain measure for wine. Fialone, a great glass for wine or oil.
Also as Fiadone. Fiamma, a flame, a light, a twinkling, a blase. Fiamma di
volto, a blush, or maidens blush color. Fiammare, to flame, to blase, to
burn, to light, to twinkle, to sparkle, to flash or to blush red. Also to
stream in the air as streamers. Fiamme, the streamers or baneroles of a
ship. Fiammeggiare, as Fiammare. Fiammeggiante, flaming, blazing, sparkling,
etc. Fiammella, Fiammetta, a little flame, a sparkle, a twinkling, a blaze.
Fiammeo, a flame color. Fiancare, to flank. Also to fortify. Fiancata, a
blow or thrust given upon the side or flank. Fiancheggiare, as Fiancare.
Fiancheggiante, flanking. Fianco, a side, a flank, a hip. Also a side of any
squadron of men. Fiappare, to wither, to fade, to droope, to faint, to make
hollow, to foist. Fiapparie, witherings, droopings, foistings, vanities.
Fiappe, as Fanfaluche. Fiappo, withred, faded, drooped, faintie, hollow,
foisting, spungie, wrimpled. Fiasca, a flagon, a bottle. Also a whore, a
harlot, an ouer-ridden whore. Also a gunners flaske. Fiascheggiare, to plie
the bottle, to tipple square, to haunt the tavern, to quasse with bottles.
Fiasco, a flagon, a bottle, a flaske. Fiascone, a great flagon or great bottle,
a flaske. Fiata, a time, one time, a turn, vna fiata, once, a fit. Fiatare, to
breath, to draw breath, to blow. Fiate, times, turns, Piu fiate, many times.
Fiato, breath, wind, air, spirit, a blast, a gale. Fiatoso, sauouring ill,
stinking, breathing. Fibbia, any kind of buckle, a latch, a claspe or haspe, or
latchet. Fibbiare, to buckle, to lace, to tie, to join or fasten together.
Fibbiatura, a buckling, a lacing. Fibella, has been used for the moon.
Fibra, a vein so called. Also the tip of ones liver, or the hem or skirt of
garments. Also the beast called a Brocke or Badger, a Beuer. Also entrails or
guts of beasts. Also the small strings hanging upon roots of trees or herbs.
Also the border or brim of a river. Fibula, Fibola, as Fibbia, in building it
is a brace to fasten beams, a crampiron or hook to hold square stones
together, the pin of a truckle, the cleuer or axe. Also a surgeons instrument
wherewith a wound is stitched and drawn together. Also the lesser bone of the
leg. Also the nut of a crosse-bowe. Also a haspe or little hook of brass.
Fibulare, as Fibbiare. Fica, a fig. Also a woman's conie or quaint. Also a
flurt with ones fingers given in disgrace, fare le fica, to bid a fig for
one. Ficaia, Ficaide, a shade or arbor of fig leaves, a bower of fig
leaves. Also a discourse made of figs, or rather of women's quaints. Ficaldi, a
kind of figs so called. Ficarda, one that loves figs. Also a lecherous woman.
Ficarelli, a kind of little figs. Ficaretto, a place set with fig trees.
Ficato, the liver of any creature. Ficatoso, pursie, short breathed, troubled
with the cough of the lungs. Ficatelli, a kind of meat made of liver,
liuerings. Ficcare, to thrust in, to drive in, to fasten in, to peg in, to
fix. Ficcare la pasta, to knead the paste. Ficcatoio, a mallet or beetle, or
any thing to thrust in withal. Ficcatura, a thrusting, a driving in, a
fastening, fixing or pegging in. Ficedula, a bird called a stare or a starling;
but properly a gnat snapper. Fice, a fish that with sea weed makes his nest by
the shore to lay in his young ones. Fichi Secchi, dry figs. Fico, a fig tree.
Also a fig, a disease in a horse foot called the fig. Also a fish like a
breame called in latin Hepar. Also a whiting mop. Also a kind of scab growing
about a man where hair is, namely in the head or fundament. Ficod'egitto, a
sicomore tree. Some take it for the mulbery tree. Ficolini, little or green
figs. Ficone, a glutton or greedy of figs. Ficoso, full of scabs, sores or
figs. Ficulino, made of fig tree. Also a little fig tree. Ficulo, a little fig
tree, a little fig. Fida, a surety, a warrantise. Fidanza, faith, trust,
affiance, confidence, assurance, feoffment, credit. Fidare, to trust, credit,
affie, assure, enfeoffe or believe. Fidato, trusted, credited, affied, etc.
Also trusty, secret, sure and confident. Fide, as Feed. Fidecomesso, put in
trust, committed to his charge, enfeoffed, a feoffement of trust.
Fidecomessore, a feoffer of trust, one put in trust, to dispose and order a
thing. Fidele, trusty, true, faithful, confident. Fidentemente, trustily,
truly, confidently, faithfully. Fiditio, a kind of parcimonious feasting among
the Lacedaemonians. Fido, trusty, faithful, loyal, true, assured. Fiducia,
trust, faith, confidence, affiance. Fie, shall be, of the verb Essere.
Fiedere, fiedo, fiedei, fieduto, to hurt, to wound, to strike, to smite.
Fieduto, hurt, wounded, strooken, smitten. Fiedita, a wound, a sore, a hurt.
Fiena, as Hienna. Fienaro, a hay mower, a hay seller, a haiestacke, a haie man.
Fieno, all manner of hay or fodder for cattle. Fienogreco, the herb
fenugreeke. Fienoso, full of hay, hayish. Fiera, fierce, cruel, beastly,
savage. Also a fair or a fairing or a public mart or a market. Also any
manner of fierce wild beast. Fierezza, fiercenes, cruelty, arrogancy. Fiero,
arrogant, fierce, crew, beastly, wild. Fieto, a smell, sent, savor, stink or
air. Fieuolare, as Indebolire. Fieuole, as Debole. Fieuolezza, as Debolezza.
Fieuolire, as Indebolire. Fieura, as Febbre. Fifaro, as Pifaro. Figadello,
Figadetto, as Fegatello. Also a purse of money in gibbrish or rogues language.
Figaruola, a woman's priuities or quaint. Figgere, figgo, fissi, fisso, or
fitto, to fix, to drive in, to thrust in, to fasten. Figlia, a daughter, a
wenche, a girl, a less. Figliare, to increase, to bring issue, to fructisie,
as well to women as to beasts, properly to filly. Figliastra, a daughter in
law. Figliastro, a son in law. Figlio, a son, a child, a brat, a barn, a
fillie. Figliola, Figliuola, a daughter, a child, a wench. Figliolanza, as
Figliuolanza. Figliolare, Figliuolare, as Figliare. Figliolo, Figliuolo, a son,
a boy, a child. Figliale, Filiale, Amor Figliale, filial love. Figliozza,
Figlioccia, a god-daughter. Figliozzo, Figlioccio, a god-son, a foster child.
Figliuolanza, procreation, issue, or bearing of children. Figmenti, fictions,
devises, inventions, conceits, forged tales or lies. Fignolo, as Fistola, or
Fistolo. Figo, as Fico. Figora, figs. Figula, any thing wrought or formed or
shaped in clay or earth. Figulare, to work or shape in clay or earth.
Figulino, Figularo, a potter, a worker in clay. Figulo, idem. Figura, a figure,
a picture, a shape, a statue, an image, fashion, favor, likeness, or making.
Figurale, bearing a figure. Figurantia, an expressing or figuring. Figurare, to
figure, to picture, to shape, to image, to form, to fashion, to conceive in
mind. Figuratione, a fashioning or forming. Figuratiuo, figurative,
expressiue. Figurato veluto, figured velvet, wrought or branch't velvet.
Figuressa, a she figure. Figuretta, Figurina, a little figure, a little picture
or image. Fila, files, ranks, orders, rows, or lines of such soldiers as do
stand or march consequently one after another in ordinance or array of
battle, extending from the front unto the train of the battle. Filaccio,
course thread, or yarne to be wouen. Also course raw silk. Filagine,
cottonweede, or bloudieflixe woort. Filagna, the cranes to lure a hawk with.
Filandre, a disease in a hawk called the Fillander. Filarco, one that loves
to bear rule. Filare, Filatare, to spinne. Also to set an edge on any weapon,
to twist or draw into threads. Also a streake or line drawn by any
mathematician. Filatamente, threadmeale, thread by thread. Filaterie, trifles,
toys, or vanities spoken by spinners to keep them from waking. Filato, spunne
or twisted. Also with an edge, sharp, keen, cutting. Also any kind of yarne
that is spunne, or spinning, made in manner of a thread. Filatoio, a silk
mill. Also a spinning wheel. Filatoia, Filatrice, a spinner, a woman spinner.
Filatore, a spinner. Filari, the uttermost ranges of vines, or the walls that
compass them, an empalling. Filastrocca, as Filastroccola. Filastroccola,
slimflam tales, old wives tales as they tell when they spinne, a tale without
rhyme or reason, or head or foot. Filatera, a web, a woofe, a devise, a
complot. Fill di terra, the herb centorie. Filaterio, a precious stone which
worn about one comfort the spirits, and drives all melancholy away.
Filello, a little yarne string or thread. Also the string of the tongue. Fileolo
della lingua, the string of the tongue, which makes some toong-tide. Filera, a
woman spinner. Also as Filagna or Filiera. Filetti, are little water chains
extending from one side of the port to the cheek. Filetto, a little thread, or
line, a wire or twist. Fileul, a tree in India with a very broad leaf, and so
sharp at the point, that the Indians make their needles of them, and through
the leaf goes certain threads, that serves them in stead of thread, so one
leaf finds them needle and thread. Filfilo, even, just, level, as it were
close to it, by line and measure. Filibustacchina, the burden of a country
song, as we say hay down a down douna. Filicare, to notch about the edges as
fern is, or indenter wise. Filiera, a tool to draw wine with being full of
round holes. Also a spinner. Filigine, Filigne, the blacknes proceeding of
smoke, blacking of smoke. Also blacking for shoes. Filipendola, the herb
dropwort or red saxifrage. Filisello, a kind of course silk which we call,
filosetta or flouret silk. Filo, a thread, a line, a strike, a twist, a fillet
or yarne. Also the edge of any knife or weapon. Also as Fetta. Also a style or
manner. Also the string in the mouth wherewith children are toong-tied. Filo
del'acqua, the brim of the water. Filo di ferro, an iron wi^r. Filomena,
Filomela, a nighting all. Filone, a vain of metal. Also a medicine to make
one sleep or to forget pain. Filosello, as Filisello. Filosofare, to play the
philosopher, to philosophise. Filosofastro, a foolish philosopher, as we say,
a foolesopher. Filosofia, philosophy, knowledge, virtue. Filosofico,
philosophical. Filosofo, a philosopher, a lover of knowledge. Filostoccola, as
Filastroccola. Filtro, an amorous potion or medicine to make one love. Also the
hollownes upon the upper lip under the nostrels. Also a comely proportion and
sweet behavior of man's body, able to move love. Filza, a file, a thread full
of pearls, of beads or of snailes, a chain of pearls. Filzare, to enthread
or put upon a thread, as beads, bugle or pearl. Fima, as Fimate. Fimate, a
kind of swelling or sirie inflaming disease about a man, namely in his
priuities. Fimbria, the hem or skirt, a fringe, a welt, a guard, a border or an
edge of any garment. Also a friars girdle. Some have taken it for the meridian
line or the horizon. Fimo, dung or ordure of cattle or man. Fimoso, a disease
when the nut of a man's yard will not be covered, or being covered will not be
opened. Also silthie, full of dung or ordure. Fin, Fino, fine, subtle,
crafty. Also even, whilst. Also so far. Also until. Fin' alhora, even then,
until then. Fin' a quando, until when, how long? Fin' a tanto, so long as,
until that, whilst that, whilst. Finale, final, concluding, lag, last. Also
that which pertains or serves for bounds or limits. Finalmente, finally, to
conclude, lastly. Finare, to cease, give over or make an end, to r^fine or make
fine. Fin che, until, until that, whilst that, so far as, so long as. Fin
hoggi, until this day, till to day. Fine, a fine, an end, until, even,
whilst, the success or end of a thing. Finemente, finely. Finentro, even
within, so far as in, very in. Finestra, as Fenestra. Finestrare, as
Fenestrare. Finestraro, as Fenestraro. Finestrata, as Fenestrata. Finestrella,
as Fenestrella. Finestreuole, as Fenestreuole. Finestroso, as Fenestroso.
Finezza, finenes. Also craftines. Fingardaggine, as Infingardaggine.
Fingardare, as Infingardire. Fingardigia, as Infingardaggine. Fingardo, as
Infingardo. Fingere, fingo, finsi, finto, to feign, to dissemble, to
counterfeit, to forge. Fingimento, a faining, dissembling, counterfaiting or
forging. Fingitore, a fainer, a dissembler, a counterfaiter, a forger. Finire,
nisco, finito, to end, to finish, to accomplish, to make an end. Finimento, an
ending, a finishing, a conclusion. Finita, an end, a fine, a finishing. Finito,
finished, ended, accomplished. Finito il vespro delle voci, talk being ended.
Fin la, thitherto, so far as that. Fin qui, hitherto, even to this place. Fino,
fine, subtle, crafty. Also until, whilst, even, so far as. Finocchiare, to
enfennell. Also to flatter to cog, to foist, to claw, as we say. Finocchio, the
herb fennel. Look Dare finocchio. Finocchio marino, sampier growing upon
rocks. Finta, a faining, an offer, a profer to do any thing. Finto, fained,
dissembled, counterfaited, forged. Fio, a fee, a penalty, a rent, a tribute, a
forfet, a fine, an amercement. In Lumbard Italian for Figlio, a son, a child.
Fioccaggio, Fioccatura, tasslings, bushes, tuffes or locks of hair or wool
or silk. Fioccare, to flake, to snow, to betassell, to hang with tassels or
buttons or tuffes. Fiocco, a tassel, a button, a lock or bush of hair, a
flake, a flock or tuffe of wool. Also hoarse or saint. Fioccone, a great
tassell, bush, lock, flake or tuffe of any thing. Fiocare, to burst out or
break out in languishing or weeping. Also to be hoarse. Also to betassell.
Fiocino, a young cluster of grapes beginning to grow. Fioco, faint, weary,
hoarse, weak. Fiolca, a kind of sea crab called a frill. Fiomba, a slinge.
Fiombino, a slinger. Fionda, a slinge to hurl withal. Fiondare, to slinge or
cast with a slinge. Fiondaro, a maker of slings. Fiondatore, a slinger.
Fioramuzzi, flourishing or budding loves, effeminat wantons. Fioraranci, Orange
flowers. Fiorata, flowrie, a thing to die blew withal. Fior belle piantate,
grass flower-deluce. Fiore, a flower, a prime, a beginning, a blossom, used
as Boccata, a flowret. Fior campese, blew-bottle, corne-flower or hurt-sickle.
Fior del sole, a marie gold or sunneflower. Fior di latte, cream, the cream
of milk. Fior di notte, blew bind-weed. Fior di primauera, the daizie flower.
Fior d'ognimese, a mariegold or rud. Fior di ligi, flower-de-lis,
flower-deluce. Fior sole, a sun-flower or mariegold. Fior velluto, the flower
gentle. Fiorrancio, a robin-red-breast. Also orange flowers. Some take it for a
wren. Fioreggiante, flowring, flourishing. Fioreggiare, to flower, to flourish,
to blossom, to flourish or set a fair show upon any thing. Fiorente,
flourishing, flowrie. Fioretti, little flowers, flowrets. Also flourishings or
quauering^ upon any musical instruments or running upon them. Also a kind of
course silk called foret or ferret silk. Also foiles to play at rapier and
dagger with. Fiori, flowers or flowrets. Also clubs at cards. Fiorifero,
flourishing, bearing flowers. Fiorina, the chiefest railer or scoulde in a
parish. Fiorino, a gilder, a florin or kind of money so called. Fiorio, a till
in a chest. Fiorire, fiorisco, fiorito, to flourish, to flower, to blossom, to
bloome. Fiorita, cream of milk. Also Florie for diers. Fiorito, flowred,
blossomed, bloomed, flourished. Fioroni, garlands or chaplets made of flowers.
Also great branches in damask. Fiottate, to flote, hull or wave upon the sea.
Fiotto, Fiotta, the floting or foam of the sea, the eddie or furious stirring
or turning of the sea. Firia, a kind of disease in a man's ears. Firmaglio, as
Fermaglio. Firmamento, the firmament. Firmare, as Fermare. Firmezza, firmenes,
steddines. Firugelli, silk worms. Fisame^te, fixedly, earnestly, attentively.
Fiscale, fiscall, an officer as the Princes attorney general. Also penal.
Fiscare, to confiscate, to condemn, to fine, to a^erce. Fiscellare, to plate,
to work baskets, frailes or cades of bulrushes, straw, or osiers. Fiscelle,
little baskets of wicker plated and made of bulrushes, straw or osiers, wherein
country folks press their cheeses: and also carry things in them to the
market: and also make straw hats of them: also frailes or wickers as they put
figs in. Fiscello, a plating of straw to make hats withal: or a frail or
wicker as they put cherries in. Also a Be hiue. Fischietto, Fischetto, as
Fiaschetto. Also a little whistle. Fischiare, to whistle, to hiss as serpents.
Fischiata, a whistling, a hissing. Fischio, a whistle, a whistling, a hissing,
a houting, a shouting, a noise. Fiscina, a kind of pipe made of a reed.
Fisco, the princes treasury or exchequer, where all penalties and amercements
are paid. Fisculo, a basket or frail, or wicker for fruit. Fisetro, a kind
of sea fish. Fisica, physic. Also the Art or science of natural things, or
natural philosophy. Fisicare, to be snappish, captious, or carping, to take
pepper in the nose for every straw, to seek a knot in a rush. Also to
practice physic, or take medicines. Fisicale, physical, medicinable. Also
according to natural philosophy. Fisicoso, a snappish, carping, captious
fellow, that for a wagging of a straw will pick a quarrel, one that will
rather loose his friend then his jest. Fisico, a physician, phisical. Also a
natural philosopher. Fisiologica, natural medicina. Fisionomia, the art or
rule to know a man's natural affection by his visage, physiognomie.
Fisionomista, one that professes physiognomie. Fiso, fixed, fast, earnest,
driven in. Fisolara, Fisolera, as Fisoliera. Fisoliera, a pinnace, a little
fliebote, a scouting bote, a light barge. Fison, gold according to Alchimistes
phrases. Fisonomia, as Fisionomia. Fisonomista, as Fisionomista. Fissare, to
fix, to drive in, to fasten unto, to join unto, to scout. Fisso, fixed,
driven, earnest, fast, shut, joined unto. Fissura, Fessura, a chinke, a cleft,
a creuise, a hole. Fistera, a kind of great fish. Fistiare, to whistle, to
hiss. Fistio, a whistle, a hiss. Fistola, a spigot, a tap or cock for a
conduit. Also an impostumation or running sore called a fistula, because it
grows in length like a pipe. Look Cassia fistola. Also a pipe. Fistolare, to
grow to a fistula, to infistulate Fistolatione, an infistulation. Fistolo, a
hobgoblin, a hag, a sprite, a robin-goodfellow, a hodge-pocher. Fistula, as
Fistola. Fistulare as Fistolare. Fistulatione, as Fistolatione. Fistulo, as
Fistolo. Fiteuma, a kind of herb. Fitta, a thrust, a foine, a push, a punch.
Also hard wouen. Fittagione, a letting, a farming. Also a lease for any land,
or indenture of letting, a demising. Fitta^uoli, Fittaruoli, tenants, farmers,
or such as take land to rent. Fittare, to let, to rent, to farm, to hire, to
demise. Fittatore, a renter, a farmer, a landlorde, a hirer, a demiser or
letter of land. Fittile, earthen, or made of earth. Fittione, a fiction, a
dissembling, faining or invention. Fittitio, fained, dissembled, counterfaite,
false, made by art, not natural. Fitto, fixed, driven in, pedg in, fast,
close, shut. Also obstinate, earnest, wilful, stubborn, steadfast. Also the
rent, fine, or tribute a man pays for a house or land. Also fained, or
supposed. Fitto merigio, highnoone, midday. Fittonessa, a witch, an
enchantresse. Fittonico, bewitched, charmed. Also as Fittitio. Fiumara,
Fiumana, a river, a fludde, a stream. Fiume, a river, a flud. Fiumenale,
fluuiall, waterie, fennie, marishe. Fiumarella, Fiumaretta, as Fiumetto.
Fiumetto, Fiumicello, a little river, a brook. Fiutare, to smell, to sent.
Fiutarino, a blood-hound, a senter, a senting dog. Fiutino, a little flute.
Fiuto, a sent, a smell. Also a flute. Flaccido, weak, faint, effeminate,
drooping. Flagellare, to scourge, to punish, to whip, to plague. Flagellante,
scourging, whipping, punishing, plaguing. Flagellatione, a whipping or
scourging, a punishing or plaguing. Flagello, a rod, a whip, punishment, a
plague, a flaile, a scourge. Flagitio, mischief, villainy, ungraciousness, a
detestable act. Flagitioso, ungracious, wicked, lewd, or full of mischief.
Flagrare, to burn, to flame, to scourge. Flammeo, a flame color. Flammola,
the herb trinity, or harts-ease Flauio, Flauo, a bright shining straw yellow.
Flautare, to play upon a flute. Flauto, a flute, a player upon a flute.
Flebotomia, fleabotomie, or letting of blood. Flegonite, a stone which being
put in water seems to burn with a great flame. Flemma, phlegm, fleame.
Flemmatico, Flegmatico, flegmaticke, rewmatick. Flemmone, a winde-gall, a great
byle or swelling, an inflammation in the body, a great fleame, an hot red
inflammation of blood. Flessibile, flexible, pliable, gentle, tractable,
tunable, mutable, unconstant. Flesso, wept, wailed, whined. Also crooked
winding in and out. Flessuoso, crooked, winding in and out. Fletere, fleto,
flessi, flesso, to weep, to wail, to whine. Fleuma, as Flemma. Fleto,
weeping, wailing, whining. Florido, flourishing, flouring. Floscio, faint,
weak, lanke, idle, lazy, drooping. Flotta, a fleet, a navy of ships.
Flottare, as Fluttuare. Flottante, as Fluttuante. Fluente, as Fluido. Fluere,
to flow, to abound, to come flowing in. Fluenza, fluence, flowing, affluence.
Fluida, a kind of herb. Fluido, running as clear water does, flowing,
running, floting, moving, fluent, thin, feeble, weak. Fluire, fluisco,
flusso or fluito, to flow as the sea does. Flussata, a play at cards called
Flush. Flussibile, that may be molten or made to run, fluxible. Flusso, a
fl^xe. Also a flush in play at cards. Also a laske. Also a flowing, or flow of
the water, the current of the sea. Also fading, or passing away. Flutto, a
flood, a storm, a raging sourge or billow, a troublous stir, pang, or
passion. Fluttuare, to wave, to floate, to hull upon the sea, to fleet, to
rise in waves or sourges, to be boistrous as the sea does. Fluttuante,
Fluttante, floting, wauing, hulling, flowing, fleeting, sourging, passionate,
unquiet. Fluttuoso, floating, wauing, hulling, that which is fleeting or
flowing, as Fluttuante. Fluuiale, fluuiall, waterish, fennie, marrish, that
which is of the river, or pertaining to the river. Fluuio, a flood, a river, a
stream. Fo, or Faccio, of the verb Fare, I do or make. Foca, a fish, called a
sea calfe. Focaccia, any kind of cake. Focaia, fiery, that has fire in it.
Focale, a harth, or chimnie. Focare, to burn, to fire, to sear, to cauterize,
to neale metals. Focarello, a harth or chimnie. Focarone, a great fire, a
bonfire. Foce, the mouth of a river, the closing of valleys, a hole, a ditch,
and also the gullet of ones throat, an out let into the sea. Foci, used for
Fauce. Focile, a steel to strike fire, a tinderboxe. Also the name of a
certain bone in the arms. Focina, a forge, a smithes forge, a workemans shop.
Foco, fire, the element fire. Focolare, Foccolare, a harth, a chimney Focone, a
great fire. Also a furnace of earth to keep fire, and to be removed, a barbers
fire pan. Focoso, hot, burning, ardent, fiery, glowing hot, red hot. Also
testie. Fodera, a lining, a scabberd, a sheath. Foderare, to line a garment.
Foderaro, a scaberd, a sheath-maker. Foderetta, a pillowbeere. Fodero, a
scaberd or sheath. Fodra, as Fodera. Fodrare, as Foderare. Fodraro, as
Foderaro. Fodretta, a pillowbeere. Fodrighetta, a pillowbeere. Fodro, as
Fodero. Foga, for fuga, a flight, or running away. Fogaccia, a cake, a
cheese-cake. Fogacciera, a cake-maker. Fogamento, a drowning, a smothering,
stifeling or choking. Fogare, to drown, choke, smother or stifle, to put to
flight. Foggia, a fashion, a manner, a guise, a sort, a kind, an use, custom.
Foggiare, to fashion, shape, use, custom, or to follow a fashion. Foggiatore,
a fashioner, a shaper, a follower of a fashion. Foglia, a leaf, a sheet, a
foil to set under precious stones, a blade of grass. Also a flaw in any iron
work. Also a purce in gibrish or pedlars french. Also a foil under a looking
glass. Fogliami, all manner of leaves. Also foillage, or branched work.
Fogliare, to leaf, to bud. Also to lay a foil under a precious stone.
Fogliaruole, a kind of broadleafed coleworts. Fogliata, a kind of thin light
puffed paste meat made in Italy. Foglietta, a certain measure, cruse or pot of
wine used in Florence. Fogliette, little tender young leaves. Foglio, a leaf or
sheet of paper, a folio. Foglioso, leafie, full of leaves, green. Also flawie
or full of flawes. Fogna, an interiection of contempt, as we say fogh. Also
carrion, or baggage stuff, filth, a common shore, iakes or sink. Fohonello, a
bird called a Linnet. Foi, deceitful, false, fraudulent, wily. Foia,
lustful, bitchie, salt, filthy, beastly lechery. Foiare, to lust for
beastly leacherie, to be salt as a bitch. Foietta, a kind of wine measure.
Foina, a polecat. Some take it for a Ferret. Foiosa, beastly, leacherous, or
salt like a bitch. Fola, a fable, a vain tale, a vanity, a trifle, a toy, a
flim flam, a leasing. Folare, to tell tales, to jest, to fable, to trifle, as
Follare. Folcire, cisco, cito, to sustain, to uphold, to strengthen, to
underprop, to set up. Folcito, sustained, held up, strengthened, set up.
Folcitore, a susteiner, an vpholder, a strengthner, a setter up. Folega, the
bird called a Coote. Also a Mooreben or Fenducke, a ducke or mallard.
Folgente, shining, fulgent, bright, flaring. Folgere, folgo, folsi, folgi^^o,
to shine, to glister, to brighten, to flare, to blaze, to twinkle. Folgola, the
name of a guilders tool. Folgiuto, shined, flared, glistred. Folgorare, to
lighten, to shine, to blaze, to flake, to blasten. Folgorante, lightning,
shining, blazing, flashing, blasting. Folgore, a lightning, a shining, a blaze,
a flashing, a blasting. Folgoreggiare, as Folgorare. Folice, as Folega. Folio,
a folio, a leaf or blade. Also a kind of herb. Folla, a press, a throng, a
crowd, a company of people. Follare, to full, as clothes in a press, to press
wines. Follata, a seaduck, or moore-hen. Follate, fooleries, foolish tricks.
Follatore, a fuller, a presser. Also a presser of wines, a tucker. Folle, a
pair of bellows. Also vain, fond, or foolish. Also a fool, an idiot, a
sotte, a gull, a coxcombe. Folleggiare, to play the fool. Folletto, a little
fool, a little vain, sottish, foolish fellow. Also a spirit, a hag, a
hobgoblin, a robin-goodfellowe, a hodgepoker, an elfe. Folli, the names of
certain guts in any body. Also taken for the lungs. Follia, folly, fondnes,
foolishnes, oversight, sottishnes. Follica, Folica, as Folega. Follicoli,
hollow things in some trees like a little bag. Also the green husks or hose
of wheat, the hull, peele or skin enclosing the seed, or husks of grapes
being pressed. Folligine, Foligine, the soote or s^^^t of a chimney, a dark
mist, a fog. Follo, a pair of bellows, a fulling mill, or a fulling fat. Also
an ^ar^wig, or ^arecreeper, a forketaile vermin. Folminare, to flash, to
lighten as it does before thunder. Also to strike with a thunderbolt.
Folminante, flashing, lightning. Folmisse, a flashing, a lightning. Also a
thunder bolte. Folo, as Follo. Folore, Folone d' acqua, a bird called a
blacke-macke, or water ^^zell. Folo del molino, a mill clapper. Folpo, a fish
called a cuttle fish, or porecuttle. Folta, Folto, bushie, thick, spisse,
dark, obsucre, soggie, mistie, duskie, gloomie, also a press, a throng, or
crowd of people. Foltamente, bushie, thickly, darkly, foggily, mistily etc.
Also throngingly, pressingly, gloomingly. Foltare, to thicken, to bemist, to
befogge, to darken, to croude, to press. Foltezza, thicknes, foggines.
Fomentare, to nourish, to comfort, to feed, to foster, to harten with any
application, to abette. Fomentatione, a fomentation, a comforting, a feeding
with any plasters applied to the stomach, a strengthening with any cordials.
Also a nourishment laid to the body to comfort and warm it. Fomentatore, a
comforter, a strengthner, a fosterer, a maintainer, an abettor. Fomento, as
Fomentatione. Fondaco, a s^ore-house, a merchants shop, or warehouse.
Fondaghi^ro, a shop or warehouse keeper, a merchants factour. Fondamentale,
fundamental, that has or is a ground or foundation. Fundamento, a ground, a
foundation, a building. Fondare, to found, to ground, to settle, to lay a
foundation, to build. Fondatore, a founder or layer of any foundation, a
builder. Fondello, little circles made of brass or osiers to lay under dishes,
as they use in Germany to save the cloth from fouling. Fondere, fondo, fondei,
fonduto, to melt, to cast, to confound, to sound metals, to undo, to thawe.
Fondico, as Fondaco. Fondigli, tappings of wine, lees or dregs, or grounds in
the bottom of pots or glasses. Fondime, the dregs, lees, or grounds of wine.
Fonditore, a founder, a melter, a casier. Fonditura, Fondura, a melting, a
casting, a founding, a thawing. Fondo, a bottom, a ground, a foundation, a
depth, a deep or dungeon. Also a man's wealth, stock or s^ate. Fondola, a fish
called a Loche. Fonduto, melted, cast, confounded, founded as metals be,
thawed, undone. Fonghini, little mushrums, or srothes growing in the fields.
Fongo, a mushrum, a todestoole. Also a sea fish so called. Also a kind of
windegall in a horse. Fongoso, full of mushrums, or todestoles. Also spungie.
Fontana, a fountain, a well, a spring. Fontanaccio, a bogge, a quag-mire, a
continual slow of water. Fontanella, Fontanetta, a little fountain. Also the
roweling of a horse. Font, a source, a spring, a fountain, a well, a ground,
a beginning, a fount. Fontego, as Fondaco. Fora, forth, out, excepted, abroad.
Also an anger, a borer, a piercer, or wimble. Also when it comes of the verb
Essere, for Sarebbe* he should be; and is rather used in verse then in prose.
Forabosco, a bird called a Wood-pecker. Also a sneaking prying busy sellowe.
Foracchiare, to bore, to pierce. Foragna, a fish called a Loche. Forame, a
h^le. Also taken for the arse. Foramello, a nice, c^ie, squeamish fellow, that
will find fault with every man, and never be pleased with any thing, but
still be prating and have an ^are in others men's matters. Forare, to bore, to
pierce. Forasiepe, a little bird called a Wren. Foratoio, an anger, a borer, a
piercer. Foratore, a borer, a piercer. Forbici, cizers, sheares, tailers
sheares. Look Fare forbici. Look Zoccoli zoccoli. Forbiciaro, a maker of
cizers or sheares. Forbicini, Forbicette, little pretty cizers or sheares.
Forbire, bisco, bito, to furbish, to rub, to make clear, to cleanse, to wipe.
Forbito, furbished, rubd, spruse, fine, neat, crafty. Forbitoio, a wiper, a
rubber, a furbishing iron. Forbitore, a wiper, a rubber, etc. a srubber of
blades. Forbottare, to spoil, to waste, to havoc, to raze. Forca, a gibbet,
a gallows. Also a wagge or haltersacke. Also a haie-sorke. Forcabile, fit for
the gallows, or to be hanged up. Forcare, to hang on the gallows, or to make
like a forke, to underprop. Forcarie, knauish, gallows tricks, rascalities.
Forcata, the mouth of the stomach. Forcaro, a gallows or sorkemaker, an
vnderpropper. Forche, the gallows. as Fare le forche. Forchebene, a knave fit
for the gallows. Forcheggiare, to hang dangling, to play the hang man.
Forchetta, a little gibbet, a hempe-wrester. Also a little gallows. Forchette,
little forkes, or underprops, or musket rests. Also the bars, trailes, or
vizarde of a helmet or caske. Force, a pair of tongs or mullets, or pincers.
Forcella, a little forck: also a muskets rest. Forcella della vite, an
underprop to hold up vines. Forcellare, to underprop with forkes. Forciare, to
make like a forke. Also to enforce, to compel, to constrain. Forciere, as
Forziere. Forchetta, a disease in a horse called the running frush. Also as
Forcella. Forcola, the place where the oars stay when the watermen row. Also
a musketeers rest. Forcone, a great forke, a great gallows, a roguing
fellow. Forcuto, forked, or the mouth of the stomach. Fore, forth, out,
abroad, without. Forense, foreign. Also pertaining to the common place, used
in pleading. Foresana, Foretozza, as Foresosa. Forese, Foresano, a forreiner, a
stranger, an alien, a country swain, a clown. Foresennato, mad, out of his
wits, or senseless. Foresosa, Foresetta, a country wench, a country less.
Foresta, a forest. Forestaro, a forrester, a woodman. Forestiere, a stranger,
an alien, or forrainer, a seen. Foretta, a pillow-beare for a pillow.
Forfecchie, a kind of biting flies. Forfici, sheares, cizers, tailers sheares.
Look Fare forfici. Forficette, little cizers or sheares. Forficini, little
cizers or sheares. Look Fare forfici. Forfante, as Furfante. Forfantare, as
Furfantare. Forfantarie, as Furfanterie. Forfecchie, a kind of earth worm.
Forfora del capo, the dandraffe or scurf that comes on the head. Also a kind
of weight. Forgia, a forge, it is also used for Foggia. Forgiare, to forge, to
frame, as Foggiare. Forgiatore, a forger, a framer. Forica, a common draught,
sink or iakes. Foricario, a iakes or goong sar mer. Forichetta, as Forchetta.
Foriere, a harbinger for a camp or prince. Forma, a form, a manner, a fashion,
an order, a method, a custom, an use. Also a model, a draught, a pattern, an
introduction. Also a cheese press, a piece or whole cheese. Also the last of a
shoe. Also a mould or frame of any thing. Forma d'huomo, gold, according to
alchimists phrases. Formaggio, cheese. Also a whole cheese. Formaggiare, as
Informaggiare. Formaggiaro, a cheesemonger. Formaggiata, a matter or discourse
of cheese. Formaggiera, a cheese maker. also a place to keep cheese in. also a
cheese press. Formaglio, a shoomakers last. Formale, formal, orderly.
Formalita, formality, ceremoniousnes. Formare, to form, to fashion, to order,
to accustom, to use, to institute, to shapen. Formatione, a forming, a
formation, a shaping. Formatore, a former, fashioner, etc. Form, as Formella.
Also a swelling about the pasterns joint. Formella, a swelling at the corner of
the horses hoof being overmuch traveled when the horse was young.
Formentaccio, a kind of tart made of wheat. Formentada, household, common,
cheat or wheaten bread. Also a kind of potage which we call formentie.
Formentaro, a meal or wheatman. Formento, wheat: also any kind of corn.
Formentone, a kind of formentie potage or a kind of wheat. Formica, an emmet or
an ant, a pissemire. Also a raging evil, the shingles or running worm.
Formicare, to swarm or creep as thick as emmets or ants or pissemires.
Formicaro, Formicaio, a neast of emments, ants or pissemires. Fomicatione, a
pricking of warts or ring-wormes in ones body, an itching, a crawling.
Formichino passo, a slow pace as a pissemire makes. Formicola, a bird called a
wrinecke. Some take it for a hickway. Formicolatione, as Formicatione.
Formicone, a great ant or emmet. Also a traftie sneaking companion. Formicoso,
full of emmets or ants or pissemires. Formidabile, dreadful, to be feared,
terrible, undaunted. Formidare, to dread, to fear, to daunt, to fright.
Formiga, as Formica. Formigare, as Formicare. Formigaio, as Formicaro.
Formigone, as Formicone. Formigoso, as Formicoso. Formolo, a mould, a form, a
model to cast any thing in. Formosita, fairnes, beauty, comelines. Formoso,
fair, beautiful, comely. Formularo, Formulario, a practitioner in the law, a
writer of processes or writes, a drawer of presidents. Furnace, a furnace, a
kill, a lime kill, a glass house. Fornaciaio, Fornagiaio, a furnace man, a
lime man, a kill man, a glass maker. Fornagiotto, a lime kill or such furnace.
Fornaia, Fornara, a she baker. Fornaio, Fornaro, a baker of bread. Fornasaro,
a glass maker, a furnacer, a lime man, a kill man. Fornase, as Furnace.
Fornata, an oven full or a batche of bread, a baking. Fornello, a little oven or
little furnace, a kind of rack or torture or little ease. Fornetto, as
Fornello. Fornicare, to commit fornication. Fornicatione, fornication.
Fornicatore, Fornicario, a fornicator. Fornicatrice, a whore, a woman that
commits fornication. Fornire, fornisco, fornito, to furnish, to adorn, to be
autifie, to deck, to dight, to store, to perfect, to supply. Also to garnish,
to trap. Also to accomplish, to provide. Also to end, to finish, to make an
end, to dispatch. Fornimenti, furnishings, ornaments, beautifyings, deckings,
dightings, supplies, st^rings, garnishments, trappings, accomplishments,
provisions, furnitures, embellishings, caparisons. Forniscila, dispatch it.
Fornito, furnished, adorned, beautified, decked, stored, supplied, perfited,
garnished, dight, trapped, accomplished, provided. also ended, don, finished,
dispatched. Fornitore, a furnisher, adorner, supplier, storer, garnisher,
acco^plisher or prouider Forno, an oven or a furnace. Foro, a market place.
Also a court or judgment seat. Also a hole or the bore of a canon or musket.
Foroncolo, a kind of swelling or bile or pimple in the body. Forore, fury,
rage, outrage, madness. Forosetta, as Foresosa. Forsanello, a kind of bird.
Forse, perhaps, by chance, by hap, peradventure. Forsennaria, madness, privation
of wit. Forsennato, mad, out of his wits or rightsences. Forte, strong,
fortified, aloud, high, fast, much, greatly, sour, hard, stout, sturdy, tough.
Fortezza, a fortress, a fort, a tower, a keep, a castle, a skonce, a
citadell. Also a bulwark, a strength, a blockhouse, a hold. Also fortitude,
power, strength, force, valor. Forticello, somewhat strong. Fortificare, to
fortify, to strengthen. Fortificatione, fortification. Fortificatore, a
fortifier, an enginer. Fortitudine, fortitude, strength, force, valor Fortino,
rammishnes, sowrenes, rancknes in taste or smell. Fortore, a damp, a smell, a
stenche; namely of the stomach when one belcheth. Fortuito, casual, by chance
or hap. Fortuna, a storm, a tempest, ill weather at sea. Also fortune, chance,
hap, lot, good or bad hazard or adventure. Fortunale, a storm or tempest. Also
casual or accident all. Fortunato, fortunate, happy. Fortunesimo,
fortunatnes, happy luck or chance. Fortuneuole, fortunate, luckie, happy.
Fortunio, a chance, a casualty. Fortunoso, fortunat, happy, luckie. Foruiare,
to stray or wa^der out of the way. Forza, force, power, strength, might,
ability, means, authority, constraint, compulsion. Forsanelle, a kind of
foul or bird. Forzare, to force, to ravish, to rape, to urge, to constrain,
to compel. Forzatamente, 'forciblie, perforce. Forzeuole, forcible, strongly.
Forzina, a little forke. Forziere, a chest, a forcet, a coffin, a casket, a
cabinet. Forzierino, a little chest, a little coffine. Forzoso, strong, hardy,
daring, sturdie, tough, forcible, of force. Forzuto, as Forzoso. Fosca, Fosco,
duskie, gloomie, dark, thick, mistie, lowering, foggie, of a dun, or swart
color, dim. Foscare, to darke^, to thicken, to be miste, to fog. Foscina, as
Focina. Foscio, as Fosca, or Fosco. Fossa, a ditch, a dike, a grave, a pit, a
trench Fossame, all kind of ditches or trenches. Fossamenti, dikes,
trenchings, diggings, graves, pits. Fossare, to dig or make ditches, or
trenches, to mote about. Fossatello, Fossolo, a little ditch, grave or pit, a
mote about a house. Fossato, dug or made in a trench, ditch or dike, a pit,
a ditch, a dyke, a grave. Also moted about, or a mote. Fossetta, Fossicella, a
little ditch, a little grave or little pit. Fossettine, little dimples or holes
in fine women's cheeks or chins. Fossina, as Fossetta. Also a long pole to bob
fore eles. Fosso, a ditch, a dike, a pit, a trench, a cave. a grave, a dell.
Fossolare, as Fossare. Fossole, a kind of disease in a man's eyes Also as
Fossetta. Fottarie, iapings, sardings, swiuings, fuckings. Fottente, occupying.
Also an occupier. Fottere, fotto, fottei, fottuto, to iape, to sard, to fucke,
to swiue, to occupy. Fotterigia, a crampe fish. Fottisterij, baudie or vauting
houses. Also occupyers or baudie fellows. Fottitrice, a woman fucker, swiuer,
sarder, or iaper. Fottitore, a iaper, a sarder, a swiuer, a fucker, an
occupier. Fottitura, a iaping, a swiuing, a fucking, a sarding, an occupying.
Fottiuenti, windefuckers, stamels. Fottura, as Fottitura. Fottuto, iaped,
occupied, sarded, swiued, sucked. Fra, between, betwixt, among, amongst. Also a
friar. Fra me, with, or between my self. Fra quanto? in what space? Fra qui,
here away, between here. Fra tanto, in the mean while, whilst. Fraccare, to
bruise, to batter, to crush, to make flat. Fraccuradi, a kind of game or play
in Italy. Also toys, jests, fooleries, trifles, fopperies. Fracassare, to
tear, to rent in pieces, to bruze, to break, to batter, to destroy, to
hauock. Fracasso, a tearing, renting, broozing or breaking to pieces: also a
destruction, a hauock, a hurlibury, a breaking, a wrack. Fracidire, fracidisco,
fracidito, to rot, to corrupt, to putrify. Fracido, rotten, corrupted,
putrifide, wearied, cloyed. Fracidume, rottennes, corruption, putrefaction.
Also importunity, trouble, vexation of or with words. Fradiciare, to tire, to
weary. Also look Fracidire. Fradiccio, weary, tired: also as Fracido.
Fradicciume, as Fracidume. Also wearines. Fraga, a strawberrie. Fragara, a
strawberrie woman. Fragaria, the herb bearing strawberies, or strawberie
bush. Fragata, a strawberie plot. Fragile, frail, corruptible, weak, brittle.
Fragilita, frailty, corruption, bricklenes, weakness. Fragitide, the twelve
great veins appearing on each side of the neck. Fragmento, a fragment or
sharde. Fragnere, as Frangere. Frago, a fish called in latin Pagrus. Fragola,
a strawberie. Fragolara, a strawberie woman. Fragolata, a strawberie plot. Also
as Fagiolata. Fragolino, a fish so called in Rome, in latin Erithinus, some
think it to be the gurnet and rotchet. Fragore, a noise, a crack causing
terror or fright, a crashing, a cracking, a clattering, as of things broken in
sunder. Fragranza, a fragrancy or sweet smelling. Fragrare, to crack violently
causing terror. Also to cast a sweet smell. Fraintendere, tendo, tesi, teso,
to have intelligence one between another, to hear and understand very well,
used also to misunderstand. Frainteligenza, intelligence between one another,
enterintelligence. Also misunderstanding. Fraintenditore, one that has
intelligence between others. Also a misundersta^der. Frainteso, understanding
or having intelligence, or that had intelligence with another. Also
misunderstoode. Frale, Fralo, as Fragile. Fralla, as Frulla. Framettere, metto,
misi, messo, to interpose, to intermit. Framesso, intermitted, interposed.
Framettitore, an intermitter, an interposer. Frammenti, Fragmenti, fragments,
scraps, pieces. Framponato, a kind of high horse shoe, such as the bruers
horses use in London. Franare, to break, to sunder, to spoil. Francare, to
free, to enbolden, to enfranchise, to exempt, to endenize. Francatione, an
enfranchisement. Francatrippa, a gross greasy, s^ullionlike loggerheaded
lubberlie foolish fellow. Francese, french, malfrancese, the french pocks.
Francesare, to frenchifie. Also to insect with the french disease. Francescani,
friars of the order of Saint Francis. Francheggiare, as Francare. Franchezza,
freedom, boldness. Also a sanctuary, a place of safety, a liberty, a place
of refuge, a frankenes. Franchigia, Franchitia, franchise, freedom, boldness, a
place of refuge or safety, a sanctuary, a liberty, a privilege, an
immunitie. Franchigiare, as Francare. Franciosare, as Francesare. Francioso, as
Francese. Franco, frank, free, bold, vnrespectiue, liberal, exempt,
endenized. Francolina, a dainty bird called a goodwit. Some also take it for a
moore hen, others for a seasant pout. Frangenti, fragments, ruptures,
hurlyburlies, squarings. Frangere, frango, fransi, franto, to break, to
broose, to shiuer, to batter, to riue, to crush, to splint. Frangia, Franza, a
fringe. Frangiare, Franzare, to fringe. Frangibile, that will or may be broken,
brittle. Frangitore, a breaker, a bruzer. Fragna, may break, brooze, craze or
batter. Frangolino, as Fragolino. Franguello, as Frenguello. Also as
Francolina. Frantendere, as Fraintendere. Franto, broken, broozed, shiuered,
battered, braide, or stamped. Fraolino, as Fragolino. Frappa, a brag, a
boast, a crake, a vaunt, a conycatching trick. Frappare, to brag, to boast,
to crake, to vaunt, to deceive, to conicatch. Also to iagge, to snip, to cut as
garments be. Also to tear, to hale, to tug, to drag along the ground.
Frappatore, a bragger, a boaster, a craker, a vau^ter, a conycatcher, a
bragart. Frappatura, a brag, a boast, a crake, a vaunt, a conycatching trick.
Frappe, fringes, embroderings, gardings, lacings. Also cuttings or iagges, or
snips of garments. Fra quanto? in what space? Fra questo mezzo, in the mean
while. Frasca, a twigge, a bough, a sprig of any green leaves. Also a wag, a
knave, a knauish wag. Also a vintners or alehouse bush or srash. Frascare, to
make a booth, bower, or shade of boughs, to branche, to trifle. Frascarie,
Frascherie, knaueries, youthly waggish tricks, branches, foolish things.
Frascata, a bower, booth, or shading place, an arbor of boughs, branches, or
frash. Frasche, knaueries, waggish or knauish tricks, branches, toys,
vanities. Also shrubs, srashes, bowres, shades made of leaves, boughs, or
bushes. Also tattlings, chattings, or idle words. Frascheggiare, as Frascare,
and also to play the knave, to trifle, to rave, to chat. Fraschetta, a little
wagge, a little knave. Also little bough, a branchlet. Also the name of a tool
that printers use. Fraschetto, a seamans whistle. Fraschiere, a wagge, a knave,
a varlet, a toyish foolish fellow. Frascone, a great bough. Also a great
filthy knave, a trifler. Frassinella, the herb Polipodie, or okeferne. But
some Herbals take it for Salomons Seal or Whitewoort. Some take it for a kind
of bastard Dittanie. Frassinelli, young ash trees. Frassino, the tree called
ash. Frastagliare, to entercut, to enterfer. Also to falter, to havoc, to
swagger. Frastagliatamente, faultringly, swashingly, helter-shelter,
swaggringly. Frastagli, cuts, iags, snips. Frastornare, to turn back, to
divert. Also to intermit or leave off. Frastuono, huge roaring thunder.
Fratacchiare, to play the filthy greasy friar. Fratacchione, a filthy, fat,
greasy, idle friar. Frataccio, as Fratacchione. Frataia, a friars leman, a
friars wench. Fratarsi, to become a friar. Frataria, the crew or order of
friars, frierhood. Also a frierie. Fratarie, frierish tricks. Frate, a friar, a
brother. Fratellanza, a brotherhood. Fratello, a brother. Fratello cugino, a
cosengermane. Fratelleuole, brotherlike. Fratelmo, my brother. Fraterna, a
frierie, a brotherhood. Fraternale, brotherly, pertaining to, or of a brother.
Fraternita, fraternity, brotherhood. Frateria, a frierie, a brotherhood, a
fraternity. Fratesco, frierish, frierlike. Also a gray or ash color.
Fraterno, brotherly, or belonging to a brother, fraternall. Fraticello, a
little young friar. Fraticida, a murderer of his brother. Fratino, a little
young friar, Fratta, a brake, a firbush, a bush, a bramble bush, a brier bush,
a hedge or quick-set hedge. Frattione, a fraction, a fracture, a breaking, a
breach. Fratto, broken, bruzed, crazed, shiuered, battered. Frattura, a
rupture, a breaking, a breach, a gall. Fraudare, to defraude, to beguile, to
deceive. Fraud, couine, guile, deceit, fraud. Fraudeuole, fraudulent,
guilefull. Fraudolente, Fraudoso, fraudulent, deceitful. Frauicinanza, an
entre-neighborhood. Frauicinare, to border near among neighbors. Frauicino,
an entre-neighbour. Frauolino, a fish so called in Rome, it is our Rochet or
Gurnet. Also a robin redbrest. Frauto, as Flauto. Freccia, an arrow, a shaft, a
dart. Frecciare, to shoot arrows. It is also taken for to cosen, or to
affront a man. Frecciaro, a fletcher, a cosener, a cheater, a conicatcher, a
shooter, a darter. Frecciata, a blow or shot with an arrow, an affront, a
conicatching trick. Frecciatore, as Frecciaro. Freddaccio, a filthy great
cold. Freddare, to cool, to take cold, to chill. Fredetto, a little easy
cold, chillish. Freddezza, a cold, a chilnes, a coldness. Freddiglioso,
subject to cold, coldish, frozen, chillie. Freddiccio, coldish, chillie.
Freddire, freddisco, freddito, to cool, to take cold, to chill. Freddito,
cooled, or taken cold, chilled. Freddo, cold, chill, breme. Also faint, slow
or cold. Also a cold. Freddoloso, full of cold, coldish, frozen, chillie.
Freddore, a cold, a coldness, a chilnes. Freddoso, full or subject to cold,
coldish, chillie. Freddorifico, that brings or makes cold. Freddura, a
cold, a chilnes, a coldness. Frega, a catterwalling, or to be proud as cats
and bitches be. Look Andar in frega. Fregagione, rubbing, friging or
frication. Fregare, to rub, to frigle, to frigge, to claw, to fret. Also to
chafe with one. Also to cogge and foist, or fasten a jest or gull upon one.
Fregatore, a rubber or clawer. Fregadenti, a rubber for teeth, a toothpicker.
Frega piatti, a scullion or rubber of dishes Fregaruolo, a fish called a
menowe. Fregata, a kind of ship called a frigate, a pinace, a barge, a
fliebote, a brigandine or spiall ship. Fregatino, Freghetra, as Fregata.
Fregatura, as Fregagione. Fregiaccio, a filthy scarre, a great blemish or cut
in the face. Fregiare, to fringe, to guard, to lace, to adorn or garnish any
thing, to border. Also to cut, hacke, wound, hurt, scarre, or gashe any body in
the face. Fregiato, fringed, bordred, guarded, laced, adorned. also cut, hackt,
wounded, scarred or gasht in the face. Fregiatame^te, finely, adornedly, as
with lace; fringes, or other gardings for ornaments. Also like unto marks,
scars, gashes, cuts or other mangling in the face. Fregio, a fringe, a guard, a
lace, a border, a welt, embroderie, ornament or garnishment about any garment.
Also a cut, a hurt, a cicatrice, a mark, a gash, a wound, a scarre, or such a
slash over ones face. Fregna, a woman's or beasts privy parts. Also the smell
of a salt bitch, a quaint as Chaucer calls it. Fregola, a crum or little piece,
a mammocke. Also lust or catterwalling. Fregolare, to crum, to crumble, to
mammocke, to moulder. Also to go a catterwalling. Fregolatura, a cruming, a
crumbling, a mouldring. Fregole, crumbs. Also toyish or foolish humors imitated
of others. Frego torto, an error in any writing or reckoning. Fregona, a
whelping bitch. Freguente, as Frequente. Fremere, fremo, fremei, fremuto, to
rore, to bray, to ruffle, to rage, to rumble, to shoute, to royne as a lion, to
gnash the teeth. Fremitare, as Fremere. Fremito, fremore, a roaring, a raging, a
rumbling, a braying, a shouting or ruffling noise as the sea makes, the
roaring or royning of a lion. Fremente, roaring, braying, raging, rufling,
royning, rumbling. Fremuto, rored, braied, royned as a lion, rumbled, shouted.
Frenare, to refrain, to restrain, to bridle, to curb, to snaffle. Frendire,
disco, dito, to grunt as a hog, to grumble. Frendito, grunted, grumbled, as a
wild bore. Also a grunting, a grumbling. Frenello, a curb for a bridle. Also
little crispes of hair for women's heads, or headbands. Also a little bridle or
a little bit, or a little snaffle. Frenesia, frenzy, or rauing, or madness.
Freneticare, to rave or be frenzy. Frenetico, mad, frantic, rauing.
Frenguellare, to chat, to prate, to tattle. Frenguello, a goldfinch, a
lobfinch, a chaffinch, a spinke or shaldepile. Also as Francolina. Frenguello
montano, a bird called a brambing. Frenire, nisco, nito, to grunt, to grumble.
Frenito, grunted, grumbled. Freno, a bridle, a curb, a restraint, a bit.
Frequentare, to frequent, to haunt, to people, to won. Frequentatione,
frequencie, hanting, conversation. Frequente, frequent, populous, hanting,
oftentimes. Frequentia, as Frequentatione. Freri, harbingers for a camp or for
princes courts. Freschezza, freshnes, newnes, sweetness, greennes, coldness,
coolnes. Fresco, fresh, new, vnsalt, cool, cold, green, sweet, newlaid, sound,
lusty. Frescoline, little, young, fresh, new. Frescolino, a fine pleasant
coolenes. Fresone, course frize rug or home spuncloth. Fressora, a frying pan.
Fressorare, to fry. Fretia, the name of a color that painters use. Freto, a
narrow sea or a streit between two lands. Fretta, haste, speed. Frettare, to
hasten, to make speed, to dispatch, to speed. Frettoloso, hasty, quick,
speedy, nimble. Frezza, as Freccia. Frezzare, as Frecciare. Frezzaro, as
Frecciaro. Frezzata, as Frecciata. Frezzoloso, as Frettoloso. Fricassea, a
kind of fried minced meat used in France. Fricciare, to prick forward, to
frig, to wriggle, to tickle. Friccioso, frigging, wrigling, pricking, tickling.
Friere, a harbinger for a camp or a prince. Also an host or inholder. It is
used by Bocace for a friar or a brother. Frigere, to urge or molest with words.
Friggere, friggo, frissi, fritto, to fry in a pan. Frigidita, coldness, cold,
coolenes. Frigido, cold, cool. Frigio, a kind of soft moldring stone. Also a
melody or tune wherein seemed to be a divine fury. Frignoccola, a filip or
flurt with ones fingers. Frignoccolare, to filip or flurt with the fingers.
Frigulare, to cry as a cuckoe does. Frilingotti, a kind of dainty chewet or
minced pie. Fringuellare, as Frenguellare. Fringuello, as Frenguello. Frimfri,
Frinfri, sudden foolish, fond, headlong humors, violent toys or fancies.
Frinire, nisco, nito, to creake or cry as grasshoppers do. Frinzone, Frinsone, a
green finch. Fripparo, a fripper, as our brokers be, that sell old clothes.
Fripperia, the place where old clothes sellers dwell, a fripperie. Frisa, the
stuff called frize. Frisaccia, filthy course frize or rug. Frisada, a kind of
stuff called, frizado. Frisare, to frize, to cotton, to set a nap. Also as
Fregiare. Frisaro, a frize-maker, a rug-maker. Frisetta, Frisella, very fine
frize or nappie cloth which we call peni-stone or cotton. Also a kind of
frizado. Frisigna, a sow pig, a hoglouse, a wherle for a spindle. Friso, as
Fregio. Frisoggia, a frying pan. Frisone, a Frizeland horse. Also a rough
hairie garment. Also a Frizeland man. Also course thick frize. Also the stuff
we call rug. Also as Frusone. Friscolo, a mill hopper. Also a frail for figs
or such other things. Fritone, a fish called in latin Lacerta. Fritelaca, as
Menta greca. Fritta, a kind of composition to make Venice glasses with.
Frittata, a tansie fride, a pancake, a fraise. Frittare, to fry in a pan.
Frittellare, to make fritters or pancakes or tansies. Frittelle, Frittole,
fritters, pancakes. Fritt fritt, as we say cricket a wicket. Look Fare fritt
fritt. Fritto, fried in a frying pan. Frittura, a frying. Friuolare, to make
void, vain or frivolous. Friuolo, frivolous, vain, void. Frizza, as
Freccia. Frizzante, shrill, quauering, frisking, sharp, tarte or smacking in
taste, as a brisk cup of wine. Frizzare, to fry, to quauer upon any
instrument, to friske. Also to break, to bruise, to crush, to squash, to spurt
as wine does being powered into a glass. Froda, frode, frodo, fraud, deceit,
guile. Frodare, to defraud, to deceive, to beguile. Frodatore, a defrauder, a
deceiuer, a beguiler. Frodolente, fraudulent, deceitful, guilefull.
Frodolentia, fraud, deceit, guile. Froghe, Froge, the nosthrils. Froire,
froisco, froito, as Fruire. Froitione, as Fruitione. Frole, tender, mortified,
short, as they make flesh with hanging it in the air. Frollare, to mortify
meat, to make it tender and short. Frollatura, a mortifying, or making meat
tender or short. Frollire, lisco, lito, as Frollare. Frollo, mortified, short,
tender with hanging in the air. Fromba, Frombola, a slinge. Frombare, to hurl
in a slinge. Frombata, a cast or blow, or throw with a slinge. Frombatore, a
slinger. Frombolare, to hurl in a slinge. Frombolata, as Frombata.
Frombolatore, a slinger, a thrower in a sling. Fromentaria, pertaining to
corn. Fromento, wheat. Also any kind of corn. Fromentata, as Formentata.
Fronda, a sling or green bough or branch. Frondare, to sling, to bud leaves, to
branche. Frondata, a blow with a sling, a throw with a sling. Also a branching.
Frondatore, one that casts in a sling. Fronde, green leaves or boughs, or
branches, or bloomes, or blossoms. Frondeggiante, budding forth leaves,
branching, blooming, blossoming. Frondeggiare, to bud forth leaves, to branch,
to bloome, to blossom. Frondifero, bearing green leaves, leafie, branchie,
blossomie, bloomie. Frondola, a sling, a little branche or bough. Frondolare,
to cast in a sling. Frondolata, a cast, blow, or throw with a sling.
Frondolatore, one that casts in a sling, a slinger. Frondoloso, Frondoso,
full of green leaves, leafie, branchie, blossoming, blooming. Frontaccia, a
filthy front or broad forhead. Frontale, a forhead piece, or headband, a
frontstall or a bridle, a square as women wear on their heads, a frontlet.
Frontamento, a fronting a confronting. Frontare, to front, to confront, to
meet face to face. Frontatore, a fronter, a confronter. Front, a front, a
forhead, a brow, the space or forefront of a squadron or battle. Also the
forepart of a wall or bulwark. Fronteggiare, to frontire, to border near, to
front, to confront. Frontespicio, the forefront of the house. Frontiera, a
frontier or bounding place. Also a defense, a ditch, a trench. Also a hedge, an
empaling, a skonce, a forte, a bastion. Frontino, a little pretty forhead.
Frontino, was the name of Rugiero his horse named by Ariosto; but now we take
it for a saucie, malapert, impudent, shameless companion, whose brow will not
blush. Frontoso, one that has a broad and high forhead. Fronza, the stalks of
colewoorts. Fronzale, a kind of frounzing or ornament about a woman's head or
hair. Fronzare, to stalk or bud, or sprig forth with leaves or boughs. Also
to frounze. Fronzuto, stalkie, buddie, spriggie, leafie, full of boughs,
frounzed. Frotta, a troop, a company, a shole, a multitude. Frottare, to
flock in troops, to gather together in companies and multitude. Also to rub
or claw or frig. Frottola, a country gigge, or round, or country song, or
wanton verse. Frottolare, to sing gigges, rounds, country songs, or wanton
verses. Fruanza, a wearing out or consuming of any thing. Fruare, to wear out,
or consume with wearing. Frucare, as Frugare. Frucatore, an iron furbishing
tool, a rubber, a polisher. Also a tool that founders use. Frugacciare, to
rush up and down. Also to grope or fumble. Frugale, frugall, near, sparing,
thriftie. Frugalita, frugalitie, nearenes, sparingnes, thriftines. Frugare, to
sift, to purge, to spare, to save, to prickon, to burnish, to rub, to fumble,
to grope, to mingle together. Frugatoio, a burnishing tool, a sife, a rubbing
cloth. Frugatore, a sifter, a sauer, a sparer, a frugall fellow, a burnisher, a
fumbler, a groper, a thriftie fellow. Frugelli, silkewormes, or spinning
worms. Frugo, sparing, near, frugall, thriftie. Frugone, as Frugo. Also a
downeright blow. Fruire, fruisco, fruito, to enjoy or have fruition of, to
gain, to frolic. Fruitione, fruition or enjoying. Fruito, enjoyed, or had
fruition of. Frulla, a flurt or lirp with ones fingers, a toy, a jest, a matter
of nothing. Frullare, to flurt or lirp with ones fingers, to rave about matters
of nothing. Frullo, as Frulla. Also bones of calves feet which children play
withal. Also a small coin. Frumentata, as Formentata. Frumento, wheat. Also
all kind of corn. Frusone, a bull finch or howpe. Some take it for a
clothird, a smatch, an arling, or a staine-cheeke. Frusta, a whip, a scourge.
Also worn out. Frustabordel, a brothel haunter, or common filthy whore.
Frustare, to whip, to scourge, to ierke, to wear out. Frustata, a blow with a
whip or scourge, a ierke. Frustatore, a whipper, a scourger, a ierker. Frutta,
Frutte, Frutti, all manner of fruits. Fruttare, to fructify, to bear
fruits. Also to thrive. Fruttaiuolo, a fruterer, a costardmonger. Fruttaro, a
place yielding fruits. Fruttata, as Frittata. Frutteggiare, to fructify, to
bear fruits. Fruttice, or Frutice, a shrub or that which grows up of a young
shoot, and rises not to the just bigness of a tree. Also an herb with a
great stem or stalk. Fruttifero, Fruttoso, fruitful. Frutto, fruit, profit,
commodity. Fruttuale, one that enjoys the fruits or profits. Also fructuall.
Fruttuare, to fructify or bear fruit. Fruttuario, as Fruttuale. Fruttuoso,
fruitful, profitable. Ftisi, a disease in the lungs with a consumption of the
whole body. Also pionie. Fu, Fue, of the verb Essere, he was or she was.
Fucatione, a coloring or disguising. Fucato, colored, disguised, painted.
Fucile, a steel to strike fire. Also a tinder box. Fucina, a forge or smithes
shop. Fucinare, to forge or work in a forge. Fuco, a kind of Be fly or
drone. Also deceit, dissimulation, couey, guile, colorable deceit. Fuga, a
flight, overthrow, defeature, running away or escape. Fugaccia, Fugazza, a
cake, a tarte, a cheese cake. Fugacciera, Fugacciara, a woman cake-maker.
Fugace, flying, escaping, slippery, fugitive, fleeting, flickring. Fugare, to
put to flight, to defeat. Fugatore, a defeator or one that puts others to
flight. Fuggeuole, that is ready or apt to fly, fugitive or slipperie,
running away. Fuggire, fuggo, fuggito, to fly, to run away, to escape, to
slip away. Fuggita, a flight, an escape, or running away, a slipping away.
Fuggitiuo, a fugitive. Also slipping away. Fuggito, fled, escaped, run away.
Fugo, a gull, a sot, a patch, a ninnie, as Fuco. Fugolo, a whirlewinde, a
whirlepoole. Fugone, part of a gallie. Fuio, a pilfrer, a hooker, a filcher, a
subtle crafty thief. Fulgente, fulgent, shining, glistring, bright, flaring,
blazing, flashing. Fulgenza, fulgencie, a glistring, a shining. Fulgere, fulgo,
fulsi, fulgito, to shine, to glister, to brighten, to blaze. Fulgido, as
Fulgente. Fulgito, shined, glistred, brightned. Fulgore, a shining, glistring,
blazing, or flashing. Fulgolo, a whirlewinde, a whirlepoole. Fulgurare, as
Folgorare. Fulica, a moorehen, or a fen ducke. Some take it for a water crow.
Fuligine, Fuligne, the sut or smut of a chimney, a fog or dark miste, blacking
for shoes, smouldring. Fuliginare, to sut, to smut, to be foggie or mistie, to
besmoulder. Fulima, a cobweb, or spiders web. Fulisello, a silk cod, the cod
of a silk worm. Fulminante, flashing, lightning, striking with thunder.
Fulminare, to flash, to lighten before thunder. Also to strike with thunder.
Fulmine, a flashing, a lightning, a thunderbolt. Fulminoso, flashing,
lightning, or striking with thunder. Fuluido, bright, shining, glistring,
flashing, flaming, blazing. Fuluo, of the color of gold, or bright yellow.
Also a weazell color. Fumana, as Fiume, or Fiumara. Fumante, smoking, reeking,
vaporating, breathing, fuming. Fumare, to smoke, to reeke. Also to dry in the
smoke, to besmoke, to fume. Fumati, fishes dried in the smoke, fumed, bloated.
Fumicare, to besmoke or dry in the smoke, to fume, to bloate. Fumicoso, smokie,
suttie, fuming. Fumicotremola, as Sgramfo. Fumiero, a dunghill, a muckhill,
dung, or mucke. Fumigare, as Fumicare. Fumigoso, as Fumicoso. Fumo, smoke,
reeke, vapor, exhalation, a fume, a steame. Fumosita, fume, smoke, or strength
in wine Fumoso, smokie, suttie, fuming. Fumostore, as Fumoterra. Fumoterra, the
herb Fumitorie. Funale, a torch or wax candie. Also the week or cotton of a
torch or candle. Fundaco, a shop or merchants warehouse. Fundico, as Fundaco.
Fune, Funi, a cable, rope, cord, halter, cables, ropes, cords, halters.
Funebre, mornefull, funeral, deadly. Funerale, Funereo, mornefull, funeral,
deadly. Funerare, to morn, to celebrate funerals. Funere, mourning. Also the
funerals them selves. Funestare, as Funerare. Funesto, mournful, funeral,
deadly. Fungo, a todestoole, a mushrome. Also a kind of winde-gall in a horse.
Fungoso, spungie, airie, light, as a mushrome. Funicella, a little cable, a
little rope, a little cord or line. Funiculo, as Funicella. Also a little
handful. Also a Persian measure containing 60. furlongs. Funne, there was
thereof or to us. Funtione, a function, the executing of a charge or office.
Fuoco, a fire, the element fire. Sometimes used for a whole house or family.
Fuoco a cencio, to pity one by giving him a little fire upon a ragge, for want
of a shouell. Fuocarello, Fuochetto, a little fire. Fuocolare, a harth, or a
place for fire. Fuocone, a cole-basket, but more properly a great fire shouell.
Fuocare, as Infuocare. Fuogo, as Fuoco. Fuogo a cencio, as Fuoco a cencio.
Fuogarello, as Fuocarello. Fuogone, as Fuocone. Fuogolare, as Fuocolare. Fuor,
fuora, fuori, fuore, out, forth, without, abroad, except, saving. Fuorche,
except, saving, only, excepted. Fuor di casa, out of the house, abroad, from
home. Fuor di se, out of his wits, besides himself. Furacciare, to pilfer, to
steal, to purloin, to filch, to proule, to shift for by hook or crook.
Furace, theeuish, subject or given to steal or filch, filching, stealing.
Furare, to steal, to rob, to filch, to pilfer. Furatore, a stealer, a filcher,
a pilfrer, a thief, a robber. Furattola, a tippling house, a tap-house.
Furattolare, to frequent common tippling houses or tap houses. Furattoliere, a
freque^ter of tippling houses. Furbare, to play the cosener or cheater, or
coni-catcher, to crossebite. Furbarie, cosenings, cheatings, conicatching
tricks, knaueries. Furbeggiare, as Furbare. Furbesco, full of conicatching,
cosening, or cheating tricks. Furbo, a cheater, a coni-catcher, a stealer, a
setter, a crosse-biter. Furchetta, Furcina, a little forke or rest. Furente,
mad, outrageous, raging, terrible, furious, blustering. Furetto, a ferret to
hunt conies with. Furfantaggine, as Furfanterie. Furfantare, to play the rogue,
rascal, vagabond, knave, to rogue up and down. Furfante, a rogue, a varlet, a
knave, a vagabond, a rascal, a loute, a thief, a conicatcher, a setter, an
upright man, a rakehell. Furfanterie, knaueries, rogueries, villainies,
rascalities. Furfanteuole, Furfantesco, roguish, knauish, rascalike,
vagabondlike. Furfantone, a great rogue, rascal, or knave, or varlet, a rogue
or upright man. Furia, a fury, rage, madness, furiousnes. Furiare, to grow
furious, to rage, to enrage, or be mad, to hasten. Furibondo, furious, ragie,
frantike, mad, bedlam. Fury, furies, the furies of hell. Furigare, to fumble
or be clumsie, to grope. Also to sweep an oven. Furigone, an oven sweeper, or
maulkin. Furioso, furious, raging, mad, frantike, bedlam, outrageous. Furlano,
a pratler, a chatter, a mountebanke. Furmaggio, as Formaggio. Furno, as Forno.
Also they were. Furo, Furon, Furono, they were of the verb Essere. Furo, a
thief, a filcher, a hooker, a pilfrer, a cosener. Furo, he stole, or she did
steal. Furon furone, by stealth, stealingly, secretly, sneakingly. Furore,
Furrore, fury, rage, madness, outrage, bedlam madness. Furtarello, a petty
filching or theeuish trick. Furtiuo, by stealth, stealing. Furto, a theeuery,
a larcine, a burglarie, a pilfring, a filching. Fusaiuolo, a spindle maker, or
a wreather, a turner. Also a swiuell for a spindle. Fusano, Pricke-woode,
Pricke-timber, or Spindle tree. Fusare, to spindle: but taken to flatter or go
about the bush with one. Fusaruolo, Fusardo, as Fusaiuolo, Gambe fusaruole,
spindle shankes. Fusare, to twirle a spindle. Also to spin. Also to wind a man
about as women do their spindles, id est, to flatter or fetch one over.
Fusarie, trifles, vanities, nifles, baggage things. Fusaro, a spindle maker.
Fuscellare, to sprigge, to stalk, to stubbe to prick. Fuscellino,
Fuscelletto, a little sprig, a little stick, a prick or flalke, or straw.
Fuscello, a stub, a sprig, a stalk, a little stick, a short straw, a prick.
Also spindle shankes, little stalking or small legs. Fusciellare, as
Fuscellare. Fuscielle, as Fuscello. Fusciellino, as Fuscellino. Fusellare, to
twirle spindles, to spinne, to make or cast squibs. Fuselli, little spindles,
little pegs. Also flying squibs. Fuseragnolo, a spindler. Fusetto, a kind of
small sharp poynado or dagger used in Italy, as Stilletto. Fusibile, any thing
that will melt. Fusile, any thing that will melt or may be melted. Fusione, a
melting, a casting, a founding, a thawing. Fuso, a spindle to spin with. Also
melted, thawed, founded or cast. Fusore, a founder, a melter, a caster.
Fusolare, to twirle a spindle, Fusoria, the art of founding or melting. Fusse,
fussi, fussero, I, he, or they should be, or were. Fusta, a kind of small
bark called a foist, a pinace or Fliebote. Fustagno, the stuff we call
Fustian. Fustagnaro, a fustian maker. Fustagnoso, made like fustian.
Fustagnetto, a kind of fine thin fustian. Fustibalo, as Balista. Fusto, a
stock, a truncke, a stump, a log, a block, a body without a head. Also a
stalk. Also a stock, or a breech for any artillery. Also a tree of a saddle.
Fustoso, like a log, a truncke, a stock or block or stump. Futta, Futa, a
confutation, a confounding. Futtare, Futare, to confute, to confound. Futuro,
future, aftercomming, to come herafter.
G
GAbano, Gabbano, a fishermans or a shepherds cloak or gabbardine. Gabanare,
Gabbanare, to cover with a course cloak or gabbardine. Gabbanello, a gabbardine
or sheapheards coat, or cloak. Gabbare, to cosen, to cheat, to conicatch, to
mock, to flout, to cog withal, to deceive or fetch one over. Gabbatore, a
cosener, a cheater, a conicatcher, a mocker, a flouter, a cogger. Gabba
christo, an hyppocrite, a dissembler. Gabba done, a cosener or deceiuer of
women. Gabba santi, a precise dissembling puritan, an hypocrite. Gabbatella, a
fool or vice in a play or painted upon cards. Gabbatelle, as Bagatelle. Also
a kind of dog to play withal. Also foolish and apish tricks. Gabbatelliere,
as Bagattelliere. Gabbeuole, cosening, cheating, conicatching, mocking,
flouting, deceiving. Gabbo, a cosening, a cheat, a conicatching trick, a
mock, a flout, a deceit, a mockery. Gabella, toll, tallage, custom or
imposition. Gabellare, to toll, to tallage, to custom as merchandise are.
Gabelliere, Gabellotto, a receiver of toles, tallages or customs. Gabbia, a
cage, a coope, a pen. Also the top of the maste of a ship where the shrouds
are fastened. Also a woman's privy parts. Gabbia della naue, the top or cage of
a ship. Gabbiare, to encage, to cage, to coope or pen up. Gabbione, a gabbion,
a great cage or coope. Also those baskets full of earth that are set by the
ordinance in the camp, to hide the canoniers. Gabbionare, to strengthen or
compass with gabbions, to barricados. Gabbionaro, a gabbion or barricado
maker. Gabbietta, a little cage. Gabiano, a fish called in latin Agonus.
Gabrina, an old filthy ouerridden whore or witch, a stallion ramp. Also a
woman's name in Ariosto. Gaffare, to filtch or snatch away, to proule, to miche
or shift for. Gaffo, a snatching or taking hold of, a prowling or shifting.
Gagalare, to chucke or laugh extremely. Gagate, as Gagatronica. Gagatronica, a
stone called ieat or agath stone, that being burned smells of brimstone. Gaggia,
as Gabbia. Gaggia di naue, the cage of a ship. Gaggia di sorgij, a mouse trap.
Gaggiandra, a kind of great snaile. Gaggiare, to wage, to lay a wager, to
engage, to coope, to encage. Gaggio, a gage, a wager, a pledge. Gagite, a stone
found in an eagles neast, which being shaken sounds hollow. Gagliarda, a dance
called a galliard. Gagliardetti, streamers, banerols or ensigns in ships.
Gagliardia, Gagliardezza, lustines, bravery, gallantnes, strength, valiancie,
force. Gagliardo, strong, lusty, brave, gallant, valiant, disposed, stout,
frolike, blithe. Gagglioffa, a pocket, a pouch, a budget. Also a baggage or
filthy queen. Gaglioffare, to cosen, to coni^atch. Also to pocket up.
Gaglioffarie, cosening, conichatching or cheating tricks, knauish pranckes.
Gaglioffo, a crafty knave, a cosening companion. Gaglioffone, a filthy great
cosener or crafty varlet. Gagnolare, to mutter, to grumble, to falter or
speak between the teeth. Gaiandra, a tortoise or shelerah. Gaiezza, gaita,
io^e, mirth, glee, blithnes, iolitie, buckesomnes, gayness. Gaietto, a
pleasant conceited man. Gaino, a wild perverse hawk. Gaio, joyful, glee,
merry, pleasant, blithe, gay, tollie, buckesome. Gaiola, a cage for birds.
Gaiolare, as Gabbiare. Gaiolaro, a cage maker. Gala, glee or mirth, idleness or
lazines. Also an oak apple or galnut, which serves to make ink with. Also
gallantnes, iocondnes, light somnes or ornament. Also a kind of fantastical
diverse colored clothing or apparel. Gala, Andar a gala, to run a drift or
to flote up and down the water as corck or a gall does. Galana, a kind of
snaile. Also a bird flying low, and even to the ground. Also a kind of fish.
Galanga, the herb or spice Galangall. Galanga the weed called cats tail or
flags or Galangall. Galangola, a kind of poppingaie green bird, about the
bigness of a fieldfare; whereof there is store in Italy. Galante, gallant,
brave, disposed, handsome, decent, gracious. Galant'huomo, an honest proper
true man. Galanteria, gallantnes, brauenes, handsomnes, decency, a good grace.
Galantino, pretty, quaint, fine, neat, spruce, decent, handsome. Also a
favorite, a m^nion or darling. Galare, to float light upon the water. Also to
adorn, to beautify, to be meery, to rejoice, to triumph. Also to be idle and
lazy. Also to sleep in gals. Galaricide, a whitish stone full of red veins.
Galateista, one professing good manners or civil courtesy, as Gala^^to did
write off. Galatina, a kind of Galantine or sauce. Galatite, a precious stone
of a white milky color good to make a woman that gives suck to have store of
milk. The stone put in ones mouth does seem to taste of milk. Galaurone, a
beetle or horse fly, an humble Be. Galbano, a kind of gum or liquor issuing
out of a kind of scrula. Galbedro, as Galgolo. Galbula, as Galgolo. Gale,
fashions, liueries, suits or devises in clothes. Also the plural of Gala.
Galea, a kind of ship called a galley. Also a sea lamprey or cele pout.
Galeazza, a galleasse. Galearo, a gall^ie-maker or ship wright. Galedore, a sea
cob or sea gull. Galeffa^e, to mock, to scoff, to flout one in scorning
manner. Galeffone, a mocker, a flouter, a scoffer. Galega, Italian fitch or
goats rue. Galeo, a fish much like a Lamprey, or a Lamprey it self. Galeone,
a great gallie or gallion. Galeotta, a kind of galley. Galeotto, a gallyman or
shipman, a seaman, a mariner, a skipper. Galero, a dormouse. Also a dogfish,
and some take it for a sea calfe. Galette delle gambe dietro del cauallo, the
joint of the hinder legs of a horse, called the hought or the spliterne of a
horse. Galette, silk cods, the cods of silk that silkewormes spinne. Galgolo,
a bird called a witwall, a hickwall, or woodwall. Also a bird, whom if a man
that has the yellow iaundise behold, he is presently cured, and the bird
dies. Galio, our ladies bedstraw, maidenhaire, or cheeserenning herb. Galla,
as Gala, a disease called a windegall. Gallana, a land tortoise, or shell crab.
Gallare, as Galare. Galle, a disease in a horse called the windgalles.
Galleggiare, to flote lightly upon the water, to run adrift. Also to cocker,
to pamper, to make wanton, to play the cock. Also to be troubled with the
winde-galles. Galleria, a gallerie, or long walk. Gallette, as Galette.
Galletto, a cock, a spout in a conduit, a tap or spiggot of a barrel. Also a
stop of any instrument, wherewith the strings are wreathed higher or lower.
Also a little cock. Galletto di maggio, a bird called a howpe. Galliare, to
sail or go in a galley. Also to cockre or crow as a cock. Gallicinio,
cockcrowing time. Gallina, a hen. Gallina d' India, a Turkey hen, a fish which
some take for the colefish. Gallina bagnata, a wet hen, id est, a milkesop, or
freshwater soldier, or one that looks like a drowned rat. Gallinaccia, a
filthy old hen. Gallinaio, the hens rooste. Gallinaro, a poultrer or seller of
hens. Gallina rusticella, a Woodcocke, or Snite. Gallinelle, the seven stars
that are always near Taurus. Also woodhens or suites. It has also bin taken
for moorchens. Gallo, a cock. Also gold, according to alchimists phrases.
Gallo alpestre, a feasant poute. Gallo cresta, the herb we call Clarie. Gallo
d'India, a turkiecocke. Gallo di paradiso, a bird called a howpe. Gallone, a
man's thigh, hip or hanche. Galloppare, to gallop. Galloppo, a galloping pace, a
gallop. Galloria, cockishnes, iollity, mirth, taken from the crowing of the
cock. Also pride, or disdain. Also a gallerie, or long covered walk.
Gallosa, Galosa, blithe, bonnie, merry, iocond. Gallozza, Galozza, a kind of
wooden patins, startops, gallages, or stilts. Also a gall, a bladder, a
blister, or a bubble on the water. Also a windegall. Gallozzole, blisters,
galls, puffes, windgalles. Galluta, a cockish wanton or riggish wench, a
cockring wench, a ramp. Gallutia, wantonness, cockring. Galluzzare, to cocker,
to wantonize. Galluzze, galls or oakeapples, also hollow beads of gold or
silver for bracelets. Galta, or Guancia, a cheek, a iawe, a chap. Galuppo, a
lackey, a foote-boy, a horseboy. Galogna, a kind of venomous herb. Gamanto,
the name of a surgions tool. Gamarro, a lobster or sea-crab. Gamaut, a note in
music, the name of a barbers tool. Gamba, a leg, a shanke: used also for
Boccata, but used in mockery. Gambaccia, a disease in a man's legs so called, a
filthy leg. Gamba torta, a crooked leg or shanke. Gambale, the greues or
armor for the legs. Gambaro, a crabfish. Also a lobster. Gambarelli,
creuishes, praunes, shrimps, or little crabs. Gambe, legs, or shankes.
Gambetta, a little small spindleshanke or leg. Gambettare, to shake the legs
sitting. Gambieri, greues or armor for the legs. Gambiglia, the foot of any
vessel. Gambo, a stalk, stem, or stub of any flower. Also the foot of any
vessel or cup. Gambone, a hanche, or gammon of bacon, a great leg. Gambrieri,
as Gambieri. Gambuto, having legs, legd. Gambuzzi, legs, hanches, or gammons of
bakon, pestles of porke. Also cabiches. Gamelione, Gamalione, the month
January dedicated to Juno because of marriages. Gamma, a pipe or reed. Also a
note in music. Gamorra, a woman's garment or gown. Gamurra, as Gamorra.
Ganascia, Ganassa, a iawe or the iaw bone, or a chap of ones mouth. Ganascione,
Ganassone, a blow or box given on the iawe or chaps. Ganga, a moath. Also a
cheek, a iawe. Also a pullie. Gangale, as Ganascia. Also a checktooth.
Gangheggiare, is properly when a horse does wry with his upper jaws.
Gangherare, to stretch on tenterhookes, or set upon hinges. Gangheri,
tenterhookes, also hinges, whereon a door hangs or moves. Ganghero,
Ganghiero, a tenterhooke, a claspe, or any hook, or hinge of a door.
Ganghitella, a whirret blow or box on the ear. Gangolare, a dewlap of an
ox, or kernels in ones throat. Gangolaro, one troubled with kernels or wartles
in his throat. Gangole, kernels or wartles in the throat. Gangrena, a disease
called the gangrene, or mortifying of a man's flesh. Ganguto, one that has
kernels or wartles in the throat. Gannare, as Ingannare. Gannatore, as
Ingannatore. Gannire, Gannisco, Gannito, Ganire, to snarle, to grinne, to houle
as a dog, to hall or bark as a fox. Gannito, Ganito, snarled, grinned or
houled as a dog, the balling or barking of a fox. Ganzeghe, fooleries,
fondnes, fopperies, goose tricks. Gara, a strife, a contention, a iarring, a
brawling, a debate, a contending for the victory. Garabattulo, a cloak, a
frocke, a gabbardin, or upper homely garment. Garabullare, as Anfanare.
Garafelli, a kind of pears in Italy so named. Garafono, a gilliflower, or
the spice called a cloue. Garagnoni, good, handsome, strong nags or hackneis.
Some have used them for stallions. Garamatica, a precious stone like an
emerauld, but has a white line athwart it. Garamella, the wrist of ones arm.
Garamuffola, a word immockerie for Gramatica, as we say for Philosophy,
foolelosophie. Garancia, the herb that dyers use called madder. Garatide, a
kind of precious stone. Garbare, as Garbeggiare. Garbatezza, as Garbezza.
Garbato, fine, neat, handsome, proper, spruce, with a good grace, gracious,
decent, dapper, deaf, feate. Garbatura, as Garbezza. Garbeggiare, to spruce
it, to be comely, to be handsome, neat or proper, to grace, to adorn, to set
forth, to fadge, to sutewell, to decore, to beseem or square with, to give or
add a grace unto. Also to be or taste sowrish. Garbetto, somewhat sow^r or
tarte. Also a merry, witty, close quip or scoff. Garbezza, sowrenes, tartnes,
sharpenes. Also grace, comelines, neatenes, handsomnes, ordecorum, featnes,
prettines. Garbella, a Witwall. Some take it for another bird. Garbino, the
southwest wind. Garbo, grace, handsomnes, finenes, neatenes. Also a garb, a
propernes, a comelines. Also sower, tarte or sharp, as vinegar is.
Garbugliare, to garboile, to hurli-burlie, to turmoile, to disorder, to
entangle, to be in a pecke of troubles. Garbuglio, a garboile, a hurli-burlie,
a tumult, a confusion, a disorder, an entangling, a pecke of troubles.
Gardello, Gardolino, a Gold-finche or Thistle-finche. Some take it for a
Linnet. Gareggiare, to strive, to contend, to braule to scoulde, to chat, to
square, to debate. Also to chirpe as birds do. Gareggiatore, a striuer,
contender, brauler, scoulder, or chatter. Gareggioso, contentious, given to
brauling, striving, chatting or scoulding. Garesolo, a bird called a Howpe.
Garetto, the bone in the knee, the kneepan. Also the ham of a horse. Gargancio,
as Garganello. Garganello, a kind of small ducke called a Teale or Wigeon.
Some take it for a diuer or diue-dapper. Gargareggiare, to gargarize, to wash
the throat, to rattle in the throat. Gargarismo, a gargarisme, a water to wash
ones throat. Gargarizzare, as Gargareggiare. Gargaro, a chief leader of a
flock. Gargatile, a throat or ousell pipe. Gargatoglio, idem. Gargatone, a
throat or ousell pipe. Also a worm that deuoureth corn, called a mite or
weeuell. Gargea, Garzetto, Garietto, a Hearon. Gargiolo, a word about a weauers
trade or loome. Gargogliare, as Gargareggiare. Gargozzo, as Gargatile.
Garietto, as Garzetta. Gariglio, the kernel of any fruit or nuts. Garire, as
Garrire. Garletto, as Garetto. Garo, a kind of medicament. Garof, a stone that
stancheth blood, therefore it is called a boodstone. Garofanare, to spice or
make sweet with cloves or gilloflowers. Garofano, Garofolo, a gilloflower.
Also a cloue. Also a pinke flower. Garofilo, as Garofano. Garoni, pinkes or
gilloflowers. Garra, a braule, a brabble, a strife, a quarrel, a squaring, a
iarring, a falling out. Garreggiare, as Gareggiare. Garresi, the withers of a
horse. Sometimes taken for the galling of the withers. Garretti, the hams of a
horse. Garrire, Garrisco, Garrito, to chide, to braule, to scoulde, to rail,
to strive, to prattle. Also to chirpe, to chante, to sing as birds do, to
chat, or to chaunt. Garrito, chirpped, chanted or chatted as birds. Also a
chiding, a brauling, a chirping, a chatting. Also chidde^, brauled, scoulded,
railed, striued, pratled, chanted. Garro, a chiding, a check, a braule. Also a
chirping. Garugli, a kind of nut so called. Garulare, to chat, to iangle, to
prattle, to babble. Garulita, a chatting, a prattling, a brabling. Garulo,
tatling, babbling, prattling, iangling, a babbler, a prater, a tatler. Garza, a
magot a pie, or piot. Some have taken it for a Hearon. Garzabianca, a white
Hearon, or a cryell dwarf Hearon. Garzara, a kind of Hearon. Garze, a disease
in a horses mouth. Garzetta, a magot a pie, or piot. Also a dwarf Hearon, or
mire dramble. Garzicolo, a woman distaffe to spinne with. Garzo, a thorn, a
thistle, but properly the teazell to dress clothes with. Garzolo, as Garzuolo.
Garzonastro, a young lusty stout lad or boie. Garzone, a boie, a lad, a youth,
a yongman, a page, a lackie. Garzoneggiare, to play the boy, the lad, the
lackie, the wagge or page. Also to follow boys. Garzonetto, Garzoncello, a
little boy, a young lad or page. Garzonissimo, very young or childish, boyish.
Garzuolo, a bale of flax, a handful of flax, a lock of wool. Gasiare, to
work in purle, work or stitch work. Gasio, a kind of purle or stitch work.
Gasidane, a precious stone which is said every three months to bring forth
young ones as other living creatures do. Gastaldia, the bailiship over lands or
country affairs. Gastaldo, a baily of a man's farms or lands. Gastigamento,
as Castigo. Gastigare, as Castigare. Gastigatore, as Castigatore. Gastigo,
Gastigatura, as Castigo. Gastronomante, a deuiner, or soothsaier, by glasses.
Gastronomantia, divination by glasses. Gatromeo, a kind of precious stone.
Gatta, a she cat. It is taken for a brabble, braule, a quarrel, as we say he
has an ill crow to pull, so they say lui ha vna mala gatta a pelare.
Gattacieca, as Gatta orba. Gattafura, a kind of sops or pottage in in Italy.
Also a kind of tarte. Gattaiuola, as Grattaiuola. Gatta orba, a kind of
Christmas game called blind is the cat. Gattaria, the herb Cat-mint or Nep.
Gattarigolare, to tickle. Gattarigole, ticklings. Gatticciole, little kitlings,
young cats. Gattillare, to mewe or cry as a cat. Also to kitten as a cat.
Gattillatura, the meweing or crying of a cat. Also a kitling of a cat.
Gatticino, a young cat or kitlin. Gattino, of a cat kind, cattish. Also a
little cat or kitlin. Gatto, a he cat. Gatto gatto, groping, creeping, fumbling
in the dark, sneakingly as a cat. Gatto maimone, a great ^^^kie. Gattonare, to
grope or creep, to sneake or fumble in the dark. Gattone, a great cat. Gatton
gattone, as Gatto gatto. Gattone della noce, the kernel of a nut. Gattoncini,
young cats, kitlin^* Gattorbole, a kind of country sport or game used in
Italy, as we say blind is the cat. Gattorigole, ticklings, ticklishnes.
Gattuccia, a young little cat or pusse. Gattucciare, to kitten as a cat, to
have young cats. Gattuccini, as Gattoncini. Gauagna, a great basket or
hand-basket. Gauagnare, to get, to gain, to profit. Gauagno, gain, profit,
getting. Gauanello, a young pig or porckling. Also a kestrell. Gauanetti, mad
young lusty lads. Gauardina, a frocke, a gabbardine, a shepherds garment.
Gauazza, a dance, a leap, a skip or hop. Gauazzare, to hop, to skip, to dance,
to leap, to friske, to skud, to iump, to tumble, to play gambols. Also to
encircle or swell round as a bile. Gauazzatore, a skipper, a hopper, a dancer,
a frisker, a tumbler, a iumper. Gauazzi, hoppings, leapings, skippings,
dancings, friskings, iumpings. Gaudio, joy, mirth, gladness, reioicing, glee.
Gaudioso, ioifull, merry, blithe, buckesome. Gaudire, gaudisco, gaudito, to
rejoice, to be glad, to be merry. Gauetta, a tray, a trug, a wooden bowl or
little trough. Also a skeane of yearne. Gauettone, a hogs trough, a draffe
tub. Gauia, a bird in Naples which is a great enemy to grasshoppers and
locusies. Gauignare, to clinch, gripe or clasp fast. Gauillare, to cavil, to
wrangle, to contend. Gauillatione, a cauilling, a wrangling, a contention.
Gauillatore, a cauiller, a wrangler, a contender. Gauilloso, cauillous,
wrangling, contentious. Gauinello, a kestrell or kind of hawke. Gauio, a part
of a cart wheel. Also a sea-cob or sea-gull. Gauio marino, a sea-cob or
sea-gull. Gauitella, a little bowl, vessel, goblet or standing cup. Gaulno, a
bird whom if any look upon that has the yellow iaundise; the patient is
presently cured, and the bird dies. Gaulo, as Dardani. Gauocciare, to come or
swell to a botch, to a blane, to a bile or plague sore. Gauoccio, Gauocciolo, a
botch, a bile, a blane, a plague sore. Gauocciolare, as Gauocciare. Gauotta, a
French dance or round so called. Gaulino, the bird wit-wall or wood-wall or
hickwall. Gausto, an herb the juice whereof will make ones skin very black.
Gauzo, bleere-eied, pinck-eied, squinte^ed, goggle-eied, whal-eied. Gazza, the
bird we call a pie or a pyot. Gazza sparuiera, a kind of lanaret hawk called a
skreeke or nine murtber. Gazzana, an ambrie or hole or cubbord in a wall to set
things in. Gazzetta, a young pie or piot. Gazzettare, to write or report daily
occurences one to another, to tell flying tales. Gazzette, the daily news or
intelligence written from Italy, tales, running news. Gazzettiere, an
intelligencer or such as have daily occurences. Gazzetto, squint or goggled
eye. Gazzinio, a pie-colour. Gazino, Look Molin gazino. Gazzo, Gazo, a
whal-eied horse, a squint or goggle-eie. Also a pie colored horse. Gazzera,
Gazzuolo, the bird we call a pie, a iay or piot. Gazzolare, to chat as a pie,
to babble, to tattle, to skould. Gazzoloni, great pies. Also great praters.
Gazzotto, a maggot-a-pie. Gazzouiglia, Gazzouigliare, as Gozzouiglia.
Gazzuolare, to chat as a pie, to prattle or tattle vainly. Gazzuolina, a young
little pie. Ge, the letter G. Gebo, a kind of meat so called in Italy.
Geietta, a kind of precious stone. Geladia, Geladina, the meat we call
gellie. Gelamento, a frost or congealing. Gelare, to freese or congeale, to
stiffen or benum with cold. Gelata, Gelatina, a froste or the meat gellie.
Gelatide, a kind of precious stone, as Garatide. Gelatione di denti, teeth set
on edge. Gelettia, as Gelata. Gelidezza, coldness, chillness, freesing, frost.
Gelido, cold, chill, freesing, congealing. Gellamina, a kind of stone or
mineral. Gelo, frost or ise. Gelosia, jealousy, suspect, suspicion, mistrust,
a letteise window or drawing window. Also a kind of white stone. Gelosire,
sisco, sito, to be or become jealous or suspicious. Geloso, iealious,
suspicious, mistrustfull. Gelsa, the fruit called a mulberrie. Also the fruit
called raspis. Gelso, a mulberrie or raspis tree. Gelsomino, a little white
flower called gelsomine orgesmine. Gemare, to divide, to sever, to sunder. Also
to wind clues of thread or yarne. Gemelli, twins, borne together. Gemere,
gemo, gemei, gemuto, to sob to groan, to blubber, to bewail, to lament. Also
to whoor as doves do. Gemiti, sobs, gronings, wailings, mournings, pitious
groans, sighs or sobs. Also blubbrings, bewailings. Also whorrings as turtles
use. Geminare, to double, to join, to couple, to pair, to twin, to increase.
Gemini, twins or paires. Also one of the twelve signs in the Zodiac, called
Castor and Pollux. Gemire, misco, mico, as Gemere. Also to whore or cry as
turtle doves. Gemitio, a wailing, a blubbring, a whoorring of turtles. Gemuto,
sobbed, groned, blubbred, sighed, whorred Gemma, a gemme, a jewel, or precious
stone. Gemma di venere, as Pederetti. Gemmare, to engemme or deck with precious
stones. Gemmaro, a ieweller, or lapidarie. Gemmoso, full of gemmes, jewels, or
precious stones. Gemo di silo, a clew or bottom of third. Genaio, Genaro, the
month January. Gene, jaws, cheeks, or chaps. Genealogia, a genealogy,
pedigree, or description of a kindred. Genebro, a juniper tree, or wood.
Generabile that may breed or engender. Generalato, the office of a general or
chief leader. Generale, general, universal, common. Also a general or
chief leader. Generalissimo, chief or sovereign, or most general.
Generalita, generality, universality. Generare, to engender, to beget as the
male, to conceive, bear, or bring forth as the female, to spring as herbs do,
to make, to create, to breed, to invent. Generatione, a generation, or
begetting, an engendring, a kind. Generatiuo, that may engender or beget.
Generatore, an engendrer, or begetter, a father, a creator. Genere, a kind,
manner or sort of any thing. Genero, a son in law, one that mary's another
man's daughter. Also a lineage, a stock, or kindred. Generoso, generous, noble,
of good race, excellent, of a gentleman-like disposition. Generosita, gentry,
noblenes, excellency, gentilitie, generositie. Genesi, generation, nativity.
Also the planet under which one is borne. Genestra, the shrub which we call
broom. Genestra spinosa, furze, furzen bushes, whins, gorse, or thorn broom.
Genestrata, a kind of meat or potage used in Italy. Gengebro, Gengero, the
spice ginger. Gengidio, the herb called cheruill. Gengiua matre, as Dura
matre. Gengiue, Gengie, the gummes wherein the teeth stand. Gengiuo, Gengiouo,
the spice ginger. Geniale, whatsoever pertaines unto a man's genio. Also
pleasant, blithe, bucksome, merry, given to pleasure and recreation. Also
pertaining to marriage, ho^should, and procreation. Geniana, a kind of precious
stone. Geniare, to follow the good or evil natural genium of a man. Genio,
the good or evil angel of man, the spirit or instinct of man given him by
nature. Genitale, the herb glade, or sword grass. Also the priuities of man
or woman, serving for to engender or to breed. Genitali, the instruments of
generation, a man's or woman's priuities. Genitare, to engender, to beget.
Genitiuo, the genitive case. Also natural, that has power to engender.
Genito, begotten, engendered, borne, bred. Genitore, a father, a Sire, an
engendrer, a creator, a maker. Genitrice, a mother, a dam, she that engenders.
Genitura, a generation. Also a thing begotten, an engendring. Geno, as Genio.
Genocchiare, to kneel down. Genocchio, a knee of any creature. Genocchione,
kneeling upon ones knees. Gensola, a fruit called of the apothecaries Iuiuba.
Gensolo, the tree bearing the fruit Gensola. Gentaglia, Gentaccia, common base
people, riff raff, skum of the earth. Gentale, borne of such a kindred.
Gentarella, as Genterella. Gente, men, people, folks, nations. Gente a piedi,
footmen, soldiers serving on foot. Gente d'arme, horsemen, soldiers serving
on horse, men at arms. Genterella, poor, silly, mean people. Gentiana, the
herb fellwort, bitterwort, or gentian. Gentile, courteous, gentle, kind,
affable, loving, mild, noble, fine, gracious, pretty, quaint, soft,
tractable, smooth, supple, dapper, deaf. Also a kind of pear so called in
Italy. Gentilezza, gentleness, kindness, courtesy, mildnes, quaintnes,
affability. Also a toy, a pretty devise, a favor, a boon, a grace, a knacke.
Gentilire, lisco, lito, to become or make gentle, kind, loving, or mild.
Gentilesco, gentleman-like, loving, kind. Gentildonna, a gentlewoman.
Gentilhuomo, a gentleman. Gentilita, as Gentilezza. Also heathenisme, or
paganism. Gentilmente, gently, lovingly, softly, affablie, courteously,
kindly, deafelie, dapperlie. Gentilotto, a mean gentleman. Genuamente,
voluntarily, of a man's proper instinct, without constraint. Genuflesso, with
bended knee, humbly. Genuini denti, the innermost cheek or iaw teeth, which
are bred and dye with a man. Genuino, proper, peculiar, natural. Genuro, the
tree and wood juniper. Geo, the herb auens, or herb bennet, or herb
blessed. Geografia, the description of the earth. Geografo, a geographer, or
describer of the earth. Geomante, a sorcerer that works by circles or pricks
in the earth. Geomantia, Geomantina, the art of enchanting by circles or
pricks on the earth. Geometra, a geometrician, a surueyor or measurer of lands.
Geometria, the art geometry, or of measuring of lands. Geometrico,
geometrical, according to the art of geometry. Geometriggiare, to practice
geometry. Geometro, a geometrician or measurer of lands. Georgia, culture and
tillage of the earth. Georgiche, books entreating of tillage. Gerachide, a
kind of blackish stone. Gerade, a kind of reddish flaming precious stone.
Geranio, a greek measure of liquid things. Also the herb Geranion or storks
bill, whereof there be diverse kinds, as pinkneedle, or herb robert, or cranes
bill, or bloodroote, or gratiadei, or bassinet geranion, or crowfoote geranion.
Gerarchia, a holy governance or principality, a hierarchy of Angels. Gerda,
as Gierda. Gergare, to speak fustian pedlers french, or rogues language, or
gibbrish. Gergo, pedlers french, fustian or roguish language, gibbrish.
Gerliero, a kind of porter or burden carrier that carries in baskets. Gerlo,
a kind of basket which they use in Italy to carry on men's backs like a
dosser. Germana, a right lawful sister. Germanino, a wyerdrawers tool. Also a
kind of gould smiths work. Germano, a brother of one self father and mother.
Also the waterfowle which we call a teale. Also a weed or herb called
germander. Germe, a branche, a sprig, or twig, or imp of a tree or herb, a
tendrell. Germinare, to spring, to sprout, to bud, to branch, to bloome, to
blossom. Germinatione, a springing, spreuting, sprigging, braunching,
blooming, or blossoming. Germini, springs, sprouts, twigs, sprigs, buds,
branches, bloomes, blossoms, or tendrels. Also a kind of playing-cards which
we call terrestrial triumphs. Germinoso, springing, sprouting, budding,
braunching, blooming, blossoming, shooting up. Germogliare, Germolare, as
Germinare. Germogli, Germoli, as Germini. Germoglioso, as Germinoso.
Geroglifico, a gieroglife, mystical or enigmaticall letters or cyfers used
among the Egyptians, who under characters used to comprehend whole sentences.
Gerondio, the gerond of a verb. Gerone, a wagtaile. Gerso, soothsaying. Also
as Gergo. Gersomino, as Gelsomino. Gesmino, Gesmano, as Gelsomino. Gessaiuolo,
a chalke-man. Also a iakesfarmer. Gessare, to mark or score with chalk.
Gesso, white chalk. Also whiting, or white plastering. Gessomino, as
Gelsomino. Gessoso, chalkie, full of chalk. Gesta, a part, a faction, a party,
a name, a blood, a consort. Gesteggiare, to act, or jest with hands, to make
much gesture or sign of mirth. Gesti, acts, deeds, feats, doings, actions,
jests, gestures, proceeding, behauiours. Also the iesses of a hawk.
Gesticcolare, as Gesteggiare. Gestire, gesto, gestito, as Gesteggiare. Geti,
hawks iesses. Also the trains of a hawk. Getia, a kind of nigromancie.
Gettare, to throw, to hurl, to fling, to cast away. Also to cast or found or
melt, as melters and founders do. Gettar in occhio, to hit or twit in the
teeth. Gettaruolo, a hawks cranes. Also a lure. Gettatore, a caster, a
thrower, a hurler, a flinger. Also a caster, a founder or melter. Gettata,
Gettatura, a throwing, a hurling, a casting, a flinging. Also a casting,
founding, or melting of metals. Getti, hawks iesses, voi ne beccarette
igetti, you may go shake your ears: also brambles, briers, thorns, bushes,
sprigs, or buds. Also fetters, gives, or shackles. Getto, the casting of a
hawk. Also a path between beds in a garden. Also usury. Also any thing or
work that is cast of metal. Also the Art of casting or founding of
metals. Gettoni, counters to cast accounts with. Gezo, a lizard or a newte.
Ghembare, to bow, to bend or make crooked. Ghembo, bowed, bent, crooked,
winding, crook-backt. Ghemo, a bottom or clue of thread or yarne. Ghengheria,
wantonness, foolish toying, in jesting manner. Ghennone, a munkie, or marmoset.
Gheppio, a certain bird that only flies in the night. Some take it for a
kind of hawk. Ghere, as Ghiere. Gherminella, subtletie, malice, deceit,
trumpery, trash, foolish toys, iugling tricks, or legier de maine.
Gherminellare, to iuggle, to play fast and loose. Gherminettiere, a iugler, a
toyish fellow. Ghermire, misco, mito, to embrace, to cleave or slicke too, to
take hold of, to to cling hard. Also to snatch or gripe for a pray as a hawk
does. Gheroni, the skirts or quarters of a coat, or ierkin, the gores or
gussets of a smock or shirt, the side pieces of a cloak. Ghetta, a kind of
ore of metals, but properly the first founding of them. Ghetto, a place
appointed for the Jews to dwell-in in Venice, and other cities of Italy.
Ghezzo, foolish, simple, grosse-headed, a dull sconse, a shallowe pate. Also
ripe or withered. Ghiabaldano, a trifle, a nifle, a matter of nothing, a flap
with a foxetaile. Ghiacciare, to freese, to congeale. Ghiacciatura, a frost or
freezing, a coniealing. Ghiaccino, Look Ferro a Ghiaccino. Ghiaccio, frost or
ise, a congelation. Ghiacciuoli, Ise-sickles, dropping ises. Also a kind of
pear so called in Italy. Ghiadare, to freese, to benum or stiffen the blood,
to pain. Ghiadatura, a frost or benumming of the vital blood, pain. Ghiado,
as Ghiadatura. Ghiaia, gravel or course sand. Ghiaiare, to gravel, or sand.
Ghianda, an acorne, or oke-apple. Also maste. Ghiandaia, Ghiandara, the bird
called a Pie, or pyot. Also a Iaie. Ghiandare, to feed with acornes, to fatten
with maste. Ghiandole, wartles or kernels that come in the throat, the glanders
in a horse. Ghiandoso, Ghiandifero, bearing or having akornes or maste. Also
measely porke, or full of the glanders. Ghiandule, as Ghiandole. Ghianduloso,
measely porke. Also troubled with the glanders. Ghiandussa, Ghianduscia, the
sickness which we call the murrein or the plague. Ghiara, Ghiarra, as Ghiaia.
Ghiarare, Ghiarrare, as Ghiaiare. Ghiaretta, Ghiarella, small gravel or sand.
Ghiaroso, Ghiarroso, gravely, full of sand, sandy. Ghiaradadda, a compass or
circuit of ground. also the name of a town in Italy. Ghiarone, old gold laid
up by mizers, pinche-pennies, or pennie-fathers. Also a coin. Ghiartura, as
Iattura. Ghiaue, the stock whereon a ship is built. Ghibbo, as Ghembo.
Ghierde, swellings about the pasterns joint of a horse. Also taken for the
disease we call the wet spauen. Ghiere, the furniture or pendants about a
funeral sword, hung over tombs. Ghignate, to smile, to simper. Also to grin.
Ghigno, a smile, a simpring, or simper, or a grinning. Ghignoso, similing,
simpring, grinning. Ghiga, a crowd, a fidle, a violin. Ghigaro, a crouder or
fiddler, a minstrell. Ghignacese, a gull, a ioult-head, a sot, a leering fool.
Ghiminelle, toies, fooleries, bables. Ghimphe, ruff bands as men and women
wear. Ghindare le vele. Ghinocchietti, as Ginocchietti. Ghioccia, a drop of
any thing. Ghiocciare, to drop or trill, to baste rostmeate. Ghiocciola, a
little drop. Ghiocciolare, to drop or trill, to baste roste-meate.
Ghioccioloso, dropping, trilling. Ghiosa, a gloss, an exposition, a scholion.
Ghiosare, to gloss, to expound. Ghiosatore, a gloser or expounder. Ghiosatura,
a gloss or expounding. Ghiotta, a dripping pan. Ghiotto, a crafty, knauish,
sly, subtle, malicious man. Also a saucie jack, a malapert or saucie
companion. Also a glutton, a gourmand or gullie gut. Ghiottola, a dripping pan.
Ghiottonare, to gluttonize, to play the glutton, to become saucie or knauish.
Ghiottonarie, knaueries, saucie prankes, gormandizing tricks, gluttonise.
Ghiottonia, gluttony, gourmandizing. Ghiottone, as Ghiotto. Ghiottoncello,
Ghiottocino, a little young glutton or knauish wag. Ghiottornie, as
Ghiottonarie. Ghiozza, a drop of any thing. Ghiozzare, to drop or trill or
trickle. Ghiozzi, a kind of meat so called in Lombardie. Ghiozzo, a fish called
a gudgeon, but rather according to some the fish called a gullhead, a millers
thombe, a cur or bulhead. Ghirandolare, as Girandolare. Ghirandole, as
Girandole. Ghirandolo, joined, intermedled, interlaced or set together.
Ghiribizzare, to devise humorous, fantastical conceits, as Fantasticare.
Ghiribizzi, sudden, humorous, fantastical, toyish conceits. Ghiribizzoso,
fantastical, humorous, toyishly conceited. Ghirlanda, a garland, a chaplet, a
circlet, a coronet of flowers or of any thing else, a coronall, a wreath, a
border. Ghirlandare, to engarlande, to encircle with chaplets, to border about.
Ghirlandella, Ghirlandetta, a little garland, wreath, chaplet, coronall or
circlet. Ghiro, a dormouse or reremouse. Some take it for a bat. Ghisa, part of
a horses neck. Ghisello, a gull, a ninnie, a shallow-headed fool. Ghitandola,
a blane, a plague sore, a botch, bile or swelling, a kernel in the flesh. Gi,
he went or did go. Gia, whilome, erst, of yore, heretofore, sometime. Also
now, already, so soon, right now. Gia, he went, he did go. Gia longo tempo, a
long time since. Gia molto, long since. Gia molto te^po, long time since, of
yore. Gio tempo fu, the time has been, long time since. Giaccare, to arm
with a iacket. Giacchera, as Baia, as Fagiolata. Giacchetta, a little iacket.
Giacchio, a fish net. Also a fowling net, a hay for conies, Also as Giaccio.
Giacente, iacent, a word of armorie. Giacere, giaccio, giacqui, giacciuto, to
lie down. Giacchere, foolish tricks, mad prancks, humorous toies. Giacco, a
jack of maile made like a corslet, a iacket or shirt of maile. Giacinthine,
certain nights feasts among the Lacedaemonians. Giacinto, a precious stone
called a iacint. Also a flower called Hyacint. Giacitura, Giacimento, a down
lying. Giaciuto, Giacciuto, lain down. Giallare, to die or make yellow.
Giallastro, Gialliccio, yellowish, somewhat yellow. Giallo, the color yellow.
Giamai, ever, at any time. Also never, at no time. Giambare, to gibe, to flout,
to mock, to dally or solace with. Giambo, as Gambo. Also sport, glee,
dalliance, solace. Also a mock, a gibe, a flout. Gianda, as Ghianda. Giandaia,
as Ghiandaia. Giandosa, full of blaines, pimples, or kernels. Also full of
akornes, or glanders. Giandussa, Gianduscia, the disease we call the murren or
a pestilence. Gianetto, a Spanish horse, a gennet. Gianfrusaglia, a huddle, a
hotchpotch of absurdities, or a sort of rascally people. Giannolino, a kind of
blew color that painters use. Also little John. Giara, Giarra, gravel or
sand. Also a brazen vessel to put wine pots in at a cupboord. Also a certain
measure of liquid things, which we call a jar. Giarda, a mock, a floute, a
scoff, a jest, as Cilecca. Giarde, as Ghierde. Giardinaio, a gardner.
Giardinare, to gardine. Giardineggiare, to gardine, to make or frequent
gardins. Also to talk foolishly or loiter up and down idly. Giardinetto, a
little gardine or orchard. Giardiniere, a gardener. Giardino, a gardin or
orchard. Giardoni, as Ghierde. Giarelle, pibble stones, such as they give
hawks. Also grauelly stones. Giarioli, Giraldelli, moore-hens. Giaroncelli, as
Giarelle. Giaroso, Giarroso, grauellie, sandy or grittie. Giattire de' cani,
the questing of dogs. Giattantia, Iattantia. Giattare, as Iattare. Giattura, as
Iattura. Giauetta, a bottom or clue of packthread. Also a mullet fish. I find
it also for a tool that roapers use. Gibar, a kind of fish. Gibba, a bunch
upon ones back. Gibboso, bunch-backt, crooke-backt. Also hilly or full of
knobs or mole-hils. Gibellino, a beast called a Sable. Gielare, as Gelare.
Gielata, as Gelata. Gielatina, as Gelatina. Gielatura, as Gelatura. Giele, a
game at cards so called. Gielo, as Gelo. Gielsa, Gielso, as Gelsa. Gielso, as
Gelso. Gielsomino, as Gelsomino. Gienca, Gienco, a heifer, a steer, a yearling,
a runt. Giergo, as Gergo. Gierlo, as Gerlo. Gierliere, as Gerliere. Gierda,
Gierdone, as Ghierdo. Giesu, our Savior Jesus Christ. Giesuato, Giesuista, a
Jesuit. Giettare, as Gettare. Giettatore, as Gettatore. Giettatura, as
Gettatura. Gietti, Gieti, as Getti. Gietto, a thawing or melting, a rotting.
Also as Getto. Giffa, a beast like unto a camel, as Giraffa. Giga, a fiddle, a
crowd, a kit, a violin. Gigalo, a kind of herb. Gigante, a giant. Gigantesco,
Giganteo, giant-like. Gigaro, a fiddler, a crowder. Also the herb cuckoe-pintle
or wake-robin. Gigis, a precious stone which as some write makes those that
wear it invisible. Gigliato, a kind of coin in Florence stamped with the
flower-de-luce. Also lilied. Giglio, the flower we call lilly or
flower-de-luce. Giglio azzurro, a blew flower-de-luce. Gigliolino, a little
lilly. Also light bay colored or little color. Gigotto, a leg of mutton or
veale or a pestle of porcke. Gimbo, a bunch on men's backs. Also such a one as
camels have. Gimboruto, Gimmo, crook-backt or bunch-backt. Gimnasiarca, as
Ginnasiarca. Gimnasio, as Ginnasio. Gimnasta, as Ginnasta. Gimnicigiuochi, a
kind of wrestling game among the Grecians. Gimnosophista, a gymnosophist,
certain philosophers or wise men or naked men among the Indians. Ginaldo, a dog
or a curre in rogues language or gibbrish. Ginebraio, as Ginepraio. Ginebro,
Ginepro, the wood Juniper. Also the tree. Ginepraio, a thicket or brake of
Juniper. Also taken for a maze or laberinth. Ginesta, as Genestra. Ginestrata,
as Genestrata. Ginetta, a spanish horse called a iennet. Also a kind of little
beast like a weazel. Also a kind of iaueling or dart used in war. Ginettarij,
horsemen that ride spanish iennets. Also such as fight with a kind of iaueling
so called. Ginettone, a great huge iennet. Gingerbro, the spice called ginger.
Also dittanie. Gingidio, the herb toothpicke or cheruill. Gingiue, Gingie,
the gummes of ones mouth. Ginnasio, a school of learning or exercise either of
body or mind, a college or studying place. Ginnasiarca, a rector, a ruler, a
principal of a college or school. Ginnasta, a master or one that teaches
exercise of body and mind in a school. Ginocchiare, to kneel down.
Ginocchiato, a kneeling, a thump or push with ones knee. Also kneeled.
Ginocchietti, greues or knee pieces. Also knee cushions that carpenters use or
knee pieces of harneis. Ginocchio, the knee of any creature. Ginocchioni,
kneeling upon ones knees. Gio, he or she went or did go. Giobbia, the day
called thursday. Giobbia grassa, the thursday before shrouesunday.
Giocacchiare, to play foolishly or idle for sport. Also to dally.
Giocacchiamenti, filthy beastly sports. Giocare, to game, to play, to sport,
to solace, to dally, to jest. Giocar' a leua culo, to play at level coile or
itch buttockes. Giocar' alla mora, a kind of play casting of the fingers and
numbering together. Giocar' al damiere, or Tauoliere, to play at tables. Giocar'
a gli ossoli, a sbrigli or a zoni, to play at nine pins or at keeles. Giocar' a
che egli e dentro? to play at fast or loose. Giocar' all piastrelle, to play
at quoites. Giocar delle mani, to play with ones hands, to be foolish in
hitting or striking others, to be ouerbusie with ones hands, which is taken as
a discurtesie in Italy, and therefore they say Gioco di mano e gioco di
villano. Giocar a Scacchi, all carte, a dadi, alla palla, al ballone, all
borelle, to play at chesse, at cards, at dyce, at tennis, at ballone, at
bowls. Giocarello, a pretty game, play or sport, a meriment in a play.
Giocatello, as Giocarello. Giocatore, a player, a gamester, a sporter, a
iester. Giocatoria professione, the art or trade of playing, or of gaming.
Gioco, a game, a play, a sport, a solace, a jest, a delight. Gioco di palla, a
tennis court. Gioco di mano, hand play. Gioco marzo, a maiden set or lurch at
any game. Giochi, Giuochi, games, plays, sports, solaces, jests, delights.
Giochi di veglie, christmas games. Giocciola, a drop, a trill. Giocciolare, to
drop, to trill. Giocogliere, a iugler, iester, or mountibanke, or tumbler.
Giocolare, to iuggle, to jest or play the mountibanke, to play with puppets.
Also as Giocogliere. Giocolatore, as Giocogliere. Also a puppet player.
Giocheuolmente, in sport, in play, in jest, merrily. Giocondare, to rejoice, to
make merry, or be iocond. Giocondezza, as Giocondita. Giocondita, iocondnes,
iolitie, mirth, blythnes, glee. Giocondo, iocond, pleasant, merry, blithe.
Giocoso, sportfull, merry, blithe, gamesome. Gioga, a kind of long measure of
land, as much as a Giugero. Giogare, to make hilly, steepie, or to yoke
together. Gioggiolino, a kind of color which we call flesh-colors, or
brickcolour. Gioglio, the cockle or darnell that grows among corn, the corn
rose. Giogna, the dew lap of an ox. Giogo, a hill, a steep. Also a yoke.
Gioia, a gemme, a jewel, or any precious thing. Also joy, pleasure, delight,
comfort, harts-ease, iouissance. Gioiare, to joy, to delight. Also to set with
gemmes or jewels. Gioiellare, to set forth or adorn with jewels, to bespangle.
Gioielleria, the art of iewellers, or lapidaries. Also a jewel house.
Gioielliere, a ieweller, a lapidarie, one that sells jewels. Gioiella,
Gioietta, a little pretty jewel. Gioioso, joyous, iocond, pleasant, blithe
buckesome. Gioire, gioisco, gioito, to rejoice, to joy, to blithe it.
Gioliuita, iollines, blythnes. Gioliuo, iollie, pleasant, joyous, blithe,
bonnie, buckesome. Gioncare, as Giuncare. Gioncata, as Giuncata. Gioncastri, as
Giuncastri. Gionchi, as Giunchi. Gioncho, as Giuncho. Also the herb galingale.
Gionconi, as Giunconi. Gionica, one of the four greek tongues that were
commonly spoken. Giongere, giongo, gionsi, gionto, to come, to arrive. Also to
attain, or reach unto. Also to overtake, to ad, to join, to conioyne, to
ouerreach. Gionta, an arriving, a coming to a place, a reach, a joining. Also
an overplus, an addition to boot, an advantage or to boot given in buying any
thing. Also a coosening, cheating, or conycatching trick. Giontamente, jointly
together, linked in one, coupled, yoaked. Giontamento, a coosening, cheating,
or conycatching trick. Giontare, to coosen, to beguile, to conycatch, to
ouerreach one, to cheat. Giontarie, coosening, cheating, conycatching tricks.
Giontatore, a coosener, a cheater, a conycatcher. Gionto, Look Giongere.
Giontura, as Giuntura. Giornalaccio, an idle, loytring, lazy body. Giornale,
daily, eueryday. Also a daybooke, or iornall. Giornaliere, an obseruer of
days, a daybooke keeper, one that cares but for to day and lets to morrow care
for it self. Giornata, a fight, a battle, a days journey or travel. Also a
days work or labor. Giorne, part d' un edificio. Giornea, a certain
garment made long like a gown or horsemans coat. Giorneare, to go, to
wander, to iet up and down idly. Giorneone, an idle loytering ietter up and
down. Giorno, a day. Goirno di festa, a holyday. Giorno di lauoro, a workiday.
Giorno grasso, a flesh day. Giorno magro, a fish day. Giostra, a iusting, or
tilting, a tourney. Giostrare, to just or tilt, to tourney. Giostramenti,
iustings, tiltings, or tourneis. Giostranti, tilters, iusters, or tournears.
Giostratore, a iuster, a tilter, or tourneant. Giota, a jot, a whit, a mite, a
crum. Giotto, as Ghiotto. Also a kind of pot or pitcher. Giottola, a dripping
pan. Giottonare, as Ghiottonare. Giottonarie, as Ghiottonarie. Giottone, as
Ghiottone. Giottonia, as Ghiottonia. Giottoncello, Giottoncino, as
Ghiottoncello. Gioua, something about a saddle or part thereof. Giouane, young,
lusty, gallant, youthlie, youthful, tender. Also a young lad, a youth, a young
man, a young less, wench, or girl. Giouanastri, young, sturdie, stout lads.
Giouanesco, youthly, youthful. Giouanetta, a handsome young woman, a pretty
less. Giouanetto, a pretty young boy, or very young and tender. Giouanezza,
youth, greennes, tenderness. Giouani, young men or women. Giouamento, auailing,
help, succor, profit or furtherance. Giouare, to avail, to help, to
succor, to do good, to profit, to further, to besteade. Giouatore, an auayler,
a helper, a succorer, a good dooer. Gioue, the metal tin according to
Alchimists phrases. Also Jupiter. Giouedi, thursday. Giouedi santo, maundie
thursday. Giouenca, a heyfer or yearling calfe, a weanling, a runt.
Giouencella, a young less, a pretty wench. Giouenco, a steer, a runt, a
bullock, a yeereling, a weanling. Giouene, as Giouane. Giouenile, youthly,
youthful, childish. Giouentu, Giouentudine, youth, young, or tender age or
youthfulnes. Gioueuole, helpefull, auailefull, profitable. Giouiale, one borne
under the planet Jove, iouiall. Giozza, as Gocciola. Giozzare, as Gocciolare.
Gipsiera, a faulkners or hauking bag. Gippatura, as Giubba. Also a kind of
work that tailers use upon doublets. Giraffa, a beast greater then a leopard,
resembling a panther with a long neck. Also a kind of glass that they use to
drink wine in, in Italy. Girac chiare, as Girare. Girafalco, a ier-faulcon.
Giranda, a garlande or chapplet of flowers. Girandola, a train of powder. Also
a flying squib. Also as Fagiolata. Girandolare, to roue, gad, scud, trudge, or
wander about, to go about the hedge. Also as Fantasticare, to lay a train.
Girandole, long flim-flam discourses, foolish babbling tales, humorous fancies,
as Fagiolata. Girandolina, a wauerer, a gadder, a wanderer about. Girardina, a
fine kind of bird. Girare, to g^re, to turn, to wind, to compass: to
twirle about, to wander, to roue, to gad up and down, to crankle in and out,
to wheel about, to circumuent, or lead about, to go about the bush with one.
Giramenti, girings, turnings, windings, compassings or twirlings about,
wheelings about, circumuentings, goings about the bush. Girasole, an herb
called in latin Ricinus, or Croton. Also as Helitropia. Also changeable
taffeties. Some take it for fiue-leafed grass. Girassa, as Giraffa. Girata, a
turning about, a crankling in and out. Also a reach along a river side, a
twirling of any thing. Girauento, a weathercock, or fane on the top of a
house. Also a winde-mill of paper for children to play with. Girauolta, a
walking turn, as we say a bout. Gire, to go: an imperfect verb wanting many
tenses and persons. Girella, a fane on the top of a house. Also a twirle, a
weathercocke. Also a pullie of a well or ship. Also a sudden humorous to ye or
fancy. Also a weauers tool. Girellaio, a light headed, unconstant, wavering
man. Girellare, to twirle or gire about. Girello, a fish called in latin Iulis.
Also some ornament about a horse. Gireuole, turning, winding, or twirling
about. Giribbizzi, as Ghiribizzi. Girifalco, Girfalco, a ier-faulcon. Girino, a
tadpole, or young frogge. Girioli, a kind of dainty bird. Girlo, as
Molinello, or Ciurlo. Also as Pirlo. Gironda, Look Agironda. Girondare, as
Girandolare. Giro, a gire, a turn, a turning about, a circle, a compass, a
fane, a circlet, a revolution, a crankling, a winding about, a twirle. Giro,
Giroli, a fish called a menowe. Girone, the name of some implement of wood in a
ship. Giroella, Giroetta, as Girella. Gita, a going or departing away.
Giterella, a little going. Gittare, as Gettare. Gittar tempo dietro a tempo, to
bestow time idly. Gittata, Gittatura, as Gettata. Gittatore, as Gettatore.
Gitti, as Getti. Gitto, as Getto. Gittone, the herb coriander of Rome, Nard or
pepperwoort. Giu, Giuso, down, off, below, from-of. Giua, he went, or did go.
Giuara, a kind of bird. Giubba, Giuba, an upper cassock, a mandilion, a
soldiers or horsemans coat, or iacket. Giubbarello, Giubarello, a little
horsemans coat, a mandilion, a trusse, a sleeueles doublet. Giubbone, Giubone,
a doublet. Giubebba, a drug called iubebes. Giubetta, a gibbet. Giubetto, the
perfume called ziuet. Giubilare, to rejoice, to joy, to blithe, to make merry,
to shoute for joy. Giubeleo, the year of Iubilee or gladness and remission of
sins. Giubiloso, joyful, joyous, blithe, iocond, merric, shouting for joy.
Giubilo, a rejoicing, a shouting for joy, with signs and voice expressing the
same. Giucare, to play, to game, to dally. Giucolare, as Giocolare.
Giucolatore, as Giocolatore. Giudeo, an incredulous or unbelieving man. Also a
Jew. Giudicamento, a judging, a judgment. Giudicare, to judge, to doom, to
deem, to censure, to condemn, to decree, to discern, to suppose, to think,
to determine, to sentence. Giudicato, judged, doomed. Also the office of a
judge. Giudicatura, a case of judgment, a sessions holden, a determination.
Giudicatore, a iudger, a determiner, a decider. Giudice, a judge, a
commissarie, a righter of causes. Giudiciale, judicial, of or pertaining to
judgment, determinable. Giudiciario, pertaining to judgment, determinable,
judicial. Giudicio, judgment, examination, suit, sentence, opinion, advise, a
decree, respect, understanding, consideration, learning, wit, discretion,
skill, wisdom. Also a place or seat of justice, a doom. Giudicioso,
judicious, learned, wise, discreet. Give, used for Giu, down, low, below.
Giuero, Giuerone, a bird called a diuer, a didapper, or arsefoote. Giugale, of
or pertaining to a yoke. Giugale osso, the iugall bone, which is a portion of
the bones of the head and of the upper iawe. Giugare, to yoke or couple
together. Giugero, an acre of ground, as much ground as one yoke of oxen can
ear in a day. Giuggiare, as Giudicare. Giuggiola, a fruit of the Apothecaries
called Iuiuba. Also I judge it, used by Dante. Giuggiolo, the tree bearing that
fruit. Giugiuba, as Giuggiola. Giuliuo, as Gioliuo. Giugnere, giungo, giunsi,
gionto, as Giongere. Giugno, the month June. Giugnole, a kind of pear in
Italy coming in June. Giugulare, to behead, or cut ones throat. Giula, the
herb Maudleine. Giuleppe, Giulebbe, a i^lep, a kind of potion. Giulio, the
month Iulie. Also a kind of coin current in Italy, made by Julius the pope.
Giulillita, iolines, blithenes. Giuliuo, as Gioliuo. Giullare, to mock, to
frumpe, to jest, to scoff or dally with. Also to iuggle or play the fool,
to play the vice. Giullaro, a iugler, a iester, a pleasant vice. Giumenta, a
mare or breeding beast. Also any beast of carriage. Giumentario, one that has
the charge to ouerlooke the breeding mares of a horse race. Giuncare, to strewe
with rushes or flowers. Giuncata, a kind of fresh cheese and cream, so called
because it is brought to market upon rushes. Also a iunket. Also a pretty
work made of bents or rushes. Giuncaro, one that sells rushes. Giuncastri,
pretty baskets made of rushes, or frailes for figs. Giunchi, rushes,
bull-rushes. Giunco, a rush, or bull-rush. Giunconi, great bull-rushes.
Giuncoso, full of rushes. Giungere, giungo, giunsi, gionto, as Giongere.
Giungo, as Gionco. Giunta, as Gionta. Giuntare, as Giontare. Giuntarie, as
Giontarie. Giuntatore, as Giontatore. Giuntamento, as Giontamento. Giunte, as
Gionture, ioints. Giunto, as Gionto. Giuntura, as Giontura. Giuocare, as
Giocare. Giuocatore, as Giocatore. Giuochi, as Giochi. Giuocolare, as
Giocolare. Giuocogliere, as Giocogliere. Giuocacchiare, as Giocacchiare.
Giuoco, as Gioco. Giuppa, as Giubba. Giuppone, Giupone, as Giubbone.
Giupponaro, Giuponaro, or Giubbonaro, a doublet maker. Giuracchiamenti,
swearings, bannings, cursings, oaths. Giuracchiare, to swear, to ban, to
curse. Giuradios, taken in mockery for a Spaniard, or a braggart. Giuramenti,
oaths, swearings, depositions. Giurare, to swear, to protest, to depose, Also
a kind of water foul called in latin Colymbus. Giuri, oaths, swearings,
depositions. Giuridico, of or pertaining to the law. Giuriconsulto,
Giureconsulto, a lawyer, an expounder of the law. Giuridicente, a lawyer or
counselor at law. Giuridicamente, according to due course of law, iudicially.
Giuridittione, Giurisdittione, jurisdiction, power or authority. Giurista,
Giurisconsulto, as Giuriconsulto. Giuso, down, below, low, of, from of.
Giuspatronato, a patronage by law. Giusquiamo, the herb henbane. Giustamente,
justly, even, leuelly, equally, uprightly, righteously. Giustare, to make just
or level or even, to take level or aim. Giustezza, iust^es, euennes.
Giustitia, justice, vprightnes, rightnes, equity, indifferency. Also a place
of execution. Giusticiaro, a justice of peace, a iusticer. Also a headsman or
hangman or executioner. Giustitiare, to behead or put to death or execute
justice on malefactors. Giustitiato, beheaded, put to death, executed justice
on malefactors. Giustitiere, as Giusticiaro. Giustificare, to justify, to
clear, to purge. Giustificatione, a justification, a clearing or purging.
Giustificabile, that which may be justified. Giustificatore, a iustifier, one
that justifies. Giusto, just, iump, right, straight, level, upright,
righteous, lawful, indifferent, vncorrupt, even, impartial, virtuous,
perfect. Glaciale mare, the frozen sea, that will freese. Glacitare, to bray as
an ass Gladolo, an herb called great Galangall or swordgrasse. Some write it
Gladiolo. Gladiatoria art, the art of fencing. Gladiatore, a fencer or
flourisher with his weapon. Glandire, disco, dito, to cry as an eagle does.
Glagopo, a kind of herb. Glandule, as Ghiandole. Glanduloso, as Ghiandoso.
Glangire, gisco, gito, as Glandire. Glangolo, as Ghitandola. Glasto, a stuff
to die blew with, called woad. Glaucare, to stretch on the tenter hooks.
Glauchiera, a pair of tenters. Glaucia, the herb celandine the great or the
juice thereof. Glauco, a tenter hook. Also a kind of bird so called. Also a
kind of grayish color. Some say it is the color of a lions eyes. It has
been used for a bay color of a horse. Also the herb milk woort or sea
trifoly. Also a kind of fish. Glaucoma, a disease in the eyes or fiery rednes
in them. Some take it for a whale eye. Gleba, a clod or turffe or lump of clay
or earth, a gleebe. Glebare, to gleebe, to break clods or turfs of earth.
Glencino, a kind of oil so called. Gleotophilida, an herb which druncke with
wine will procure laughter. Gli, a masculine article of the plural number,
they, them, those. Also to him or to them. Also from him or from them.
Gliandra, kernels or wartles growing between the flesh and skin or meazels that
comes to hogs. Gliceritia, licorice wood. Gliel, to him it, joined with verbes.
Gliela, it to him, joined with verbs. Glielo, it to him, but with a verb.
Gliene, to him of, to him thereof. Some of it to him. Gliero, a dormouse.
Gliomaro, a clue or bottom of thread. Gliombaro, the licorice wood. Gliotto, as
Ghiotto. Gliottonare, as Ghiottonare. Gliottonarie, as Ghiottonarie. Gliottone,
as Ghiottone. Gliottonia, as Ghiottonia. Gliribizzare, as Ghiribizzare.
Gliribizzi, as Ghiribizzi. Glirio, foolish, sottish. Gliro, a dormouse, a
rearmouse. Globo, a globe. Also a type of the whole world. Glocitare, to bray
as a wild ass. Also to clucke like a hen. Glocitatione, the braying of a wild
ass or clucking of a hen. Glomerare, to wind thread upon a bottom. Glomero, a
clue or bottom of thread. Glomo, a bottom of yarne or clue of thread. Gloria,
glory, renown or good name. Gloriare, to glory, to boast, to brag, to vaunt.
Glorificare, to glorify, to magnify. Glorioso, glorious, full of glory.
Glosa, Glosare, as Ghiosa. Gloso, a precious stone in form like a man's tongue
which falls from heaven when the moon is in the wane. Glotorare, to cry as a
storke does. Glutinatiuo, that is clammie or sticking unto. Gnaccara, a
musical instrument, a cymball or a rattle or a bag pipe. Gnaf^lio, the herb
cudwort, chafweed, peticotton or small bumbase. Gnaffe, an interiection of
admiring and refusal, and swearing, as we say gogs, gods, by the mass, no
bir-ladie. Gnaffe si, yea in goodsooth, yea forsooth, yea by our lady. Gnaffe
no, no by our Lady, no in goodsooth, no forsooth. Gnarita, skilfulnes,
knowledge. Gnaro, skillful, knowing, expert. Gnatone, a parasite, a
smell-feast, a flatterer, a gnatho, a trencher friend. Gnauita, actiuitie,
lustines or quicknes to do any business. Gnauo, quick, lusty, active to any
thing. Gnene, for Gliene. Gneo, a mark in the body whereby a man may be
known. Gnoco, a fool, a grosse-pate, an idiot, a gull. Gnocchi, a kind of
paste meat used in Italy. Gnoccone, a great gull, a doult, a patch. Gnomo, a
mathematical instrument to measure land. Gnomone, the know-man or gnow-man of
a dial; the shadow whereof points out the hours. Also the tooth whereby a
horses age is known, a coults tooth: in mathematical it is one diagonall with
two complements of any parallelogram. Also a square, a squire or rule to know
any thing by. Gnomonica architettura, a kind of architecture so called,
according to geometry or the true art and science to know the situation,
lying or measure of any place or country. Also according to the rule of
dialing. Gnuno, no one, not any, any one, any. Go, goi, a fish called a quap,
which is poison to man and man to him. Gobba, a bunch, a knob or crook back,
a croope. Gobbare, to bunch, to knob, to make a crook back. Gobbazza, a great
bunch or knob. Gobbe, a kind of shell fish. Gobbio, Gobbione, as Ghiozzo. Also
as Gozzo. Gobbo, crook-backt. Also a kind of faulkon. Gobbuto, that has a
crook-back. Goccia, a drop, a drizzle, a jot, a whit. Gocciare, to drop, to
drizzle, to trill, to distill, to drip. Goccio de gli vccelli, the crop, craw
or gorge of any bird, the panell or maw of a hawk. Gocciola, a little drop or
drizling, dripling or trilling. Also an Apoplexy. Also a palsy.
Gocciolamento, a dripping, drizling or trilling. Gocciolare, to drop, to
drizzle, to trill, to distill, to drip, to dangle down. Gocciolatoio, a gutter
or drainer in a house. Gocciolone, one that goes a dingle-dangle, that has a
good tool. Also a filthy nodie peake, a sneaker, one dropped down by chance.
Gocciuto, having a great gorge. Also gorged. Godano, the bird called a witwal
or wood wall. Godere, godo, godei, goduto, to enjoy, possess, hold or owe:
also to rejoice, to be glad, to joy, to delight. Godezzo, a kind of strange
birds in India. Godimento, an enjoying or possessing, a delight, a iouissance.
Godino, as Godano. Goduta, an enjoying, possessing, ioying, holding, owing.
Goduto, rejoiced, gladded, ioyed, delighted, enioied or possessed. Goffaggine,
as Melensagine. Goffarie, gross, foolish, fond, bungling tricks. Goffita,
Goffezza, as Melensagine. Goffo, foolish, doultish, grossewitted, a bungler.
Goffone, a great fool, a dolt, a gross lubberly wit. Gogna, a kind of
torture or rack, a cage or stocks for vagabonds. Also some part of a piece of
ordinance. Also the pumpe of a ship or such stinking place. Gogolare, as
Gongolare. Gogusciada, a kind of bird. Goi, as Go. Gola, the throat or gullet
of any creature. Also gluttony. Golano, the bird, on which if one sick of the
yellow iaundise look, he becomes whole and is cured, but the bird dies
suddenly, the bird is of a yellow color. Golarina, the dewlap of cow or ox
hanging down his throat. Goletta, a gorget or piece of armor for the neck.
Golfare, to engulfe. Golfo, a gulf, a pit, a downfall. Golfo di setalia, the
rugged or brislie gulf, a woman's priuities. Golino, as Godano. Golomastico, a
principal glutton, a gulliegut, or gutling. Golosino, gluttonous, greedy, a
gulliegut, a gutling. Golosita, gluttony, gourmandize, greedines. Goloso, a
glutton, a gourmand, a greedy deuourer. Golpe, has bin used for Volpe, a
fox. Golpeggiare, to play the fox. Golpone, as Sopiattone. Goluppare, to
fould, wind, wrap, roll, huddle up, to wind or roll up as yarne. Also to
faulter in speeches. Goluppato, foulded, wound, wrapped, rolled, hudled up as
they do any bundle. Goluppo, a bundle, a fardle, a clue, a roll, a huddle, a
winding up, a faultering in speech. Gombine, the thongs or straps of leather
that tie a flaile, or bells, they are commonly made of synewes or strong white
leather. Gombitare, to hit, thrust, or iustle with the elbow, to push. Gombito,
an elbow. Also a cubit, the measure between the hand and the elbowe.
Gombitoso, crooked, or bending as an elbow does. Gomedo, an elbow, as Gomito,
or Gombito. Gomedra, a brave, goodly, great Lady taken in mockery. Also a
kind of bird. Gomena, a great anchor cable. Gomenare, to store a ship with
cables, to cable an anchor. Gomenaro, a cable maker. Gomitare, as Gombitare.
Gomitello, part of a horse under the shoulder or joints thereof. Gomito, as
Gombito. Gomitolare, to roll, to wind, to huddle, or wrap up. Gomitolo, a
bottom or clue of thread. Also a bundle, fardle, heap, or pack of any thing.
Gomma, gum. Gomma Arabica, a kind of gum so called. Gomma bianca,
quicksilver, according to Alchimists phrases. Gomma dragante, a kind of gum
so called. Gommare, to gum, to glue, to size. Gommena, as Gomena. Gomoreo, a
Gomorrhean, a Sodomite. Gommoso, gummie, gluish. Gonagra, the gout in the
knees. Gondola, a kind of small boats like our wherries used in Venice.
Gondolare, to go or sail in a gandole. Gondolaro, a gondole maker. Gondoliere,
a rower in such gondoles. Gonfalone, a chief standard. Gonfaloniere, a chief
standard bearer. Gonfiamento, a swelling or puffing. Gonfiare, to swell, to
puff up, to blather. Gonfiare alcuno, to make one believe any thing, to
persuade one that the moon is made of green cheese, to set one a gogge, to
bring one with fair words into a fools paradise, to ouercom one with fair
words, to sooth up and flatter one. Gonfiasone, a swelling or puffing.
Gonfiatoio, any thing that will cause a swelling: properly a squirt of brass
that Balloniers use to blow their ballones full of wind. Gonfiatura, a
swelling, a puffing, a pride. Gonfietto, as Gonfiatoio. Gonfieuole, any thing
that may be swollen or puffed. Gonfiezza, a swelling, a puffing. Gonfio,
swollen, puffed. Also proud or hautie: a swelling, a puffing. Gonfiotto, as
Sughero, as Gonfione. Gonfione, a man swollen or puffed up with pride, as
Sughero. Gonfo, a bundle of wood or stones, or such things. Gongola, the shell
fish which we call scallop. Gongolacchiare, as Gongolare. Gongolamenti,
chuckings. Gongolare, to laugh at the heart till it be sore, or shoulders ache,
to chuck. Gongolatione, a hearty laughing or chucking. Gonna, a woman's upper
gown, robe, or mantle. Gonnella, a little gown, a sauegarde, a petticote, a
straight gown. Gonnellaro, a woman's robe-maker. Gonnellino, a little gown,
robe, sauegard, or petticote, a iacket, a cassocke, a gabardine. Gonorea, the
running of the raines or shedding of seed. Gonzi, wide sleeves, or
trunke-sleeues. Also idle lubbars, gross clownish fellows. Gora, a gutter to
convey water, a mill trough. Gora morta, a standing poole of water. Gorga,
Gorgia, the throat, gullet, or weason pipe, the gorge or pannell of a hawk.
Also a roaring noise. Gorgazzule, a disease called the quinzey. Gorgheggiare,
to gargarize, to rattle, or gurgle. Also to speak in the throat. Gorghiera, as
Gorgiera. Gorghetta, as Gorgiera. Also the purling spring of water.
Gorghierino, as Gorgierino. Gorgiera, a gorget, a partlet, a neckercher, a
rail about ones neck, a collor of harneis. Gorierino, Gorgiarino, a gorget or
piece of armor for the neck. Gorgietta, a little gorget. Also a partlet.
Gorgo, a spoute of water, a gutter to convey water, a gullet, the eddie of the
waters, a gulf, a whirlepoole, a stream of water, a swallow of water, a
gurgle. Gorgogliare, to gurgle as water does running, or to rattle in the
throat. Gorgogliestro, a weed of some called yellowe watercresses. Of some
water perslie, of others belders, or bell-rags. Gorgogliccia, the yellow root
which we call licorice. Gorgolio, a gurgle, or gurgling noise. Gorgolare, to
gurgle as water does running. Gorgolita, the sweet root licorice.
Gorgolestro, the weed we call watercresses. Gorgonia, a kind of precious
stone. Gorgorizzare, to gargarize in the throat. Gorgorismo, a gargarizme.
Gorgozzare, as Gorgogliare. Gorgozzulo, a man's throat, gullet or weazon pipe.
Gorgozzuolo, as Gorga, or Gorgo. Goro, a kind of wine or the color thereof.
Gorzarino, a gorget armor for the neck. Gosso, as Gozzo. Gota, a cheek, a
iaw. Also a drop or trill. Gotata, as Guanciata. Gotta, a drop, or a drizle.
Also the disease called the gout. Gottacciuola, a little drop. Also a squinancy
in the throat. Also a botch, a bile, a blane, a plague sore: but properly
little knobs or bunches, wartles or kernels growing in a man's mouth.
Gottanciuola, the gout. Also as Gottacciuola. Got, a disease in a horse
called the weakness in the back. Also the gout. Gottimbrillo. Gottomano, a
digger or workman about mines or minerals. Gottonare, to cotton or set a nap
on, to frize. Gottonato, a kind of cotton, frizado, penestone, or buffin
sarge. Gottone, cotton, bays, frize, penestone. Gotto, a pot or jar for
oil, a drinking glass. Also a drop of any thing. Gottoso, goutie, troubled
with the gout. Gottuccia, a creeping gout that is not yet settled. Also a
little drop. Gouernamento, a government or charge Gouernare, to govern, to
rule, to swaie. Gouernatore, a governor, a ruler. Gouernatrice, a gouernesse,
a woman ruler. Gouerno, a governance, a rule, a swaie. Gousa^ghina, a gudgeon
fish, or a mop. Gozza, as Goccia, as Gotta. Gozzauiglia, pleasure, blithenes,
glee, pastime in good company, especially making^ good cheer together. Also
good cheer, cates, all manner of viandes together, and belly cheer.
Gozzauigliare, to go and gad abroad only to make good cheer, to gossop, and
take only delight in gluttony and riot, to fare daintilie. Gozzo, a bunch or
knob in the throat, called the throat bole. Gracchia, the bird we call a
chough, or a dawe. Also a blab, a pratler, a tatler. Gracchiare, to chat, to
cackle as a chough: to rail, to prate, to tattle. Gracchione, Gracchiatore, a
chatter, a cackler, a railer, a prater, a tatler. Gracculo, Graculo, a dawe, a
choughe, or cornish chough. Gracidare, to croake as a toade or frogge. Also to
hiss as a goose. Gracillare, to cackle as a hen. Gracitare, as Gracidare.
Graciughe, a kind of pincers, tongs, or mullets that goldsmiths use. Grada, a
grate or lettice window. Also a net. Also a gridiron. Gradare, to give a degree
unto. Gradeggiare, as Gradare. Gradella, a gridiron. Also a window grate.
Gradeuole, acceptable, grateful, thankful, pleasing. Gradire, disco, dito,
to accept, to take in good worth, to prize, to esteem, to acknowledge
gratefully, to be pleased with. Graditamente, gratefully, thankefullie,
dearly, acceptablie. Gradi, Gradora, steps or stairs, degrees, ways,
means, ladders, greeses. Gradito, accepted, taken in good part, prized,
esteemed, dearly accoumpted. Grado, a degree, a d^gnitie, a state, an office,
a step. Also content, or thanks. Also a greece, a staire or step in ladders.
Also a mean, an entry, a way to any thing, a will, a desire, a mind, an
intent, a size or proportion. Also a pace or step, that is two foot and a
half. Graduare, to graduate, or take degree in schools. Graduato, graduated,
a graduate, one that has taken degrees of learning. Graffi, scratches or
rakings. Also hook or crook. Graffiare, to scratch, to claw, to scrape.
Graffiatura, a scratching, a clawing, a scraping. Graffiere, a register, a
remembrancer, or writer, or clerk of records. Graffignare, to scratch, to
claw, to scrape, to gripe. Graffigne, gripes, claws, pounces of a hawk,
nails or talents. Graffigno, a scratch. Also a dragging hook, a griping.
Graffio, a scratch, a claw, a scrape, a flesh hook or other hook. Graffione,
a great dragging hook. Graffiuolo, the name of a carpenters tool. Gragniuola,
small hail, or drizeling rain. Gragniuolare, to hail, to drizle or miste.
Grallo, a woodpecker, or eate-bill, or witwall. Gramaglia, any mourning
garment. Also a robe of state. Gramagliare, to clad in mourning attire.
Gramaia, as Gramaglia. Gramare, to make wailefull, sad, or in miserable plight.
Gramegna, all kind of grass, but chiefly dogs tooth. Gramenare, to knead any
thing, or dow as bakers do. Also to hazzell or break flax. Gramerce, as
Grammerce. Gramezza, sorrow, misery, wretchedness, sillines. Gramfo, as Granfo.
Gramigna, the herb or grass called dogs tooth. Also all manner of grass.
Gramignoso, full of grass. Gramineo, made of grass. Gramma, as Gromma.
Grammamente, greatly. Grammatia, a kind of precious stone. Grammatica, a
grammar, the art of grammar, that is to teach to speak well, and write
correctedlie. Grammaticale, grammatical, according to grammar rules.
Grammatico, a grammarian, one that teaches to speak and write well.
Grammerce, god amercie, I thank you, gramercie. Gramo, sad, woeful, wretched,
miserable, heavy, in poor plight, a poor silly wretch. Gramola, a iawe, a
cheek, a chap, but namely, a kneading tub. Also a hassell to break flax
with. Also a bin that receives the meal being ground. Gramolare, as Gramenare.
Gramolato, ranged bread. Gramone, a kneader of dowe for bread. Also a kneading
tub. Gramoso, as Gramo. Also bedawbed or laid on. Grampella, a kind of
sea-crab. Gramuffa, a kind of staring, stately, staulking, puffing look. Also
in derision used for grammar. Grana, the grain wherewith they dye scarlet.
Granaio, Granaro, a garner, a barn, a maund. Granare, to kerne as corn does,
to grain. Granata, a broom, a beesome. Also a pomegranet. Also a kind of red
precious stone. Granatare, to sweep, or brush. Granatella, a brush, or little
broom. Granato, a pomegranet tree. Also kerned as corn does, grained.
Grancelli, Grancetti, as Granceoli. Granceoli, creuisses, praunes, or shrimps.
Granchiare, to clinch, to gripe, to take hold of, to pinch. Granchio, a crab or
creuisse. Also a dragging hook, also the cramp, a foolish fellow, a noddie, a
gull. Also a disease or crampe in a horse. Granchiolini, Granchiuellini, as
Granceoli. Granchiporo, Grancipo^o, a crab or creuisse. Also a kind of shrub
so called. Gran, great, big, mighty, huge, always before a consonant. Grande,
great, huge, mighty, big, before a vowell. Grandeggiare, to become great,
huge, or big, to brave, to swear, to swagger. Grandezza, greatness, bigness,
hugenes. Grandicello, indifferent great. Grandinare, to hail. Grandine, hail.
Grandinella, small hail. Grandiloqui, such as speak with a high and lofty
style. Grandire, disco, dito, to greaten, to advance, to prefer, to raise.
Grandito, greatned, advanced, preferred, raised. Grando, great hail. Grandone,
huge, big, very great, a big lubber, a loggerhead. Grandura, as Grandezza.
Granelli, certain little grains which the Apothecaries sell, all manner of
kernels or grains. Granello, a little grain, the kernel of any fruit, or
nut. Granellosa, an herb that is always green called sengreene, or
houseleeke, some think it to be the prickmadame. Granelloso, full of grains,
full of kernels. Granfare, to cramp one. Granfatto, hardly, with much ado.
Granfo, the crampe, or shrinking of the synewes. Also a kind of waspe or
h^rnet with horns. Also as Sgramso. Grangia, a grange, a country farm.
Grangio, Granzo, as Granchio. Granito, a kind of speckled or many colored
stone. Grano, any kind of grain or corn. Also a grain, or weight of a
grain. Graphie, a kind of engine of war so called. Also delineations or
drawings out of any work. Grappa, a dragging hook, a clinch, a gripe, a
snatching, or playing at musse, a scambling. Grappare, to drag, to hook, to
clinch, to gripe, to seize as a hawk does on his pray, to skamble, to snatch,
to grapple. Grappe, a kind of skab in a horse called the pains. Grappello,
Grapello, a dragging, or grapling hook. Grappo, as Grapello. Also a bunch or
cluster of grapes. Also a snatch. Also as Grappe. Grappola, a bunch, a cluster,
as of grapes. Grapposo, full of bunches as vines and trees are, full of
clusters. Graspare, to graspe or grapple. Graspia, Graspea, a kind of common
household wine, the last wine that is made. Graspie, the grapes when the wine is
pressed out of them. Graspo d'uua, a bunch or cluster of grapes. Graspolo, a
cluster, or a bunch. Graspugliare, to scrape as a hen does. Grascia, fat,
grease. Also white meats, as cheese and butter. Also all manner of flesh
meats. Also sport, play, delight, pastime, good fellowship, ease. Grasciare,
to fatten, to grease, to noynt, to tallow, to make good cheer. Grasciero, a
puruaier, or ouerseer of all sorts of flesh victuals. Grasciume, fatnes, fat,
grease, plenty, cheese and butter, oil, tallow, sewet. Graselle, Look Botta.
Grassa, as Grascia, Grassare, as Grasciare. Grassella, incense or frankincense.
Grassetto, somewhat fat or greasy. Grassezza, fatnes, greasines. Grasso, fat,
rich, fertile, as grasso terreno. Also any kind of fat, fatnes, grease, tallow,
sewet, ointment, oil or butter. Grassola, part of a horse about the shoulder.
Grassone, very fat or greasy. Grassume, as Grasciume. Grasta, an earthen pot
to plant sweet flowers or gilliflowers in to keep them in houses, we call
them flowerpots, or lillypots. Grata, a grate of iron, a gridiron, a grater, a
hurdle. Gratamente, gratefully, thankefullie, kindly, in good worth. Gratare,
to grate. Grate, grates of iron, gridirons, hurdles. Gratella, a grate, a
grater, a grediron. Gratellare, to grate, to broyle upon a gridiron. Gratia, a
grace, a pardon, a boon or gift, grace, comelins, feature, welfauorednes,
favor, ornament. Gratia dei, the herb blew cranes bill or blew crowfoot.
Gratiano, a gull, a fool or clownish fellow in a play or comedy. Gratiare,
to grace, to favor, to countenance, to pardon. Also to decore or adorn.
Gratiato, graced, favored, countenanced, pardoned. Also gracious, favorable,
loving, kind, mild, gentle, comely, welfauoured. Graticolato, a grate before a
door. Gratiosa, the sun flower or rud or marigold. Gratioso, gracious,
favorable, loving, mild, gentle, comely, welfauoured. Graticola, as
Graticula. Graticolare, as Graticulare. Graticcij, grates or gridirons: but
most properly hurdles of rods. Graticciare, to grate or broile upon a gridiron,
to hurdle. Graticcione, a great grater, a gridiron* a great hurdle. Graticula,
a grater, a grate, a gridiron. Also a hurdle. Also a kind of torment or
torture. Graticulare, to grate, to broile upon a gridiron. Gratie, the three
graces, Agalia, Thalia, Euphrosina. Gratificare, to gratify. Gratificatione, a
gratification. Gratisicoso, gratfull, acceptable. Gratigliare, to be merry or
pleasant, to tickle, to blithe. Gratiglioso, merry, blithe, pleasant, iocond,
jolly. Gratis, gratis, for god a mercy. Gratitudine, gratitude, thankefulnes.
Grato, gratfull, acceptable, thankful, in good worth. Gratta cascio, Gratta
cacio, a grater to grate cheese or any thing with. Grattaculo, the hip of a
rose. Grattaiuola, a grater to grate spices with. Grattalice, a scratching, a
clawing, a scraping. Grattamento, a scratch, a clawing, a scraping.
Grattapugia, a wire brush that goldsmiths use. Grattare, to scratch, to claw,
to scrape. Grattatore, a scratcher, a clawer, a scraper. Grattatura, as
Grattamento. Grattera, a mouse trap, a grater. Gratuccia, as Gratuggia.
Gratucciare, as Gratuggiare. Gratuggia, a shauing iron. Also a grater.
Gratuggiare, to shave as curriers do leather, to grate. Gratuire, tuisco,
tuito, to gratify. Gratuito, gratified. Gratuita, gra^tuitie. Gratulare, to
gratulate, to rejoice with, to give thanks. Gratulatione, a gratulation, a
thanksgiving. Gratulatoria lettera, a letter of congratulation or
thanksgiving. Graua, a pit, a trench, a breach in the earth, a deep, a
dungeon. Grauaccione, a heavy, dull, lumpish, slow, leaden witted man or
beast. Grauagni, a kind of bird abiding in cold countries, supposed of some to
breed of shrubs or sprigs of trees. Grauame, idem. Grauamento, a greeuance, an
aggravating, a burden, a charging, a trouble. Grauare, to aggrauat, to grieve,
to molest, to burden, to charge, to oppress, to annoy or trouble. Grauato,
aggrauated, grieved, molested, burdened, charged, oppressed, annoied,
troubled. Grauatore, an aggrauator, a grieuer, a molester, a burthener, a
charger, an oppresser, an annoier, a troubler. Grave, heavy, burthenous,
troublesome, dolorous, sorrowful, grievous, noisome. Also grave, solemn,
maiesticall, important. Grauella, gravel or sand. Also the grauel or stone in
the bladder. Grauezza, grieuance, oppression, gravity, heaviness. Grauezza di
petto, a disease in a horse called grief in the breast. Grauiare, to aggrauat,
to wrong, to oppress. Grauicembalo, a musical instrument like our claricoes.
Grauida, Grauido, great, big, with child. Grauidanza, Grauidezza, a being great
with child. Grauidare, to beget with child. Grauio, grieuance, wrong,
oppression, injury, heaviness, grief. Also a burden or heaviness. Grauita,
gravity, solemnity. Graulo, Graulano, as Golano. Grauore, as Grauio, as
Grauezza. Grauoso, grievous, troublesome, full of oppression, intolerable,
heavy, dull, leaden. Grebbeno, a crag, a rock, a cliffe. Grecheggiare, to
sail according to the north east wind. Also to play the greek. Greco, the
north east wind. Also greek wine. Also a greek. Greco leuante, a north east
wind. Greco tramontana, east and by north. Gregali, as Guaidignoni. Also
vulgar or common. Gregge, a flock of sheep. Greggia, flocks of sheep.
Greggiaro, a sheapherd or keeper of flocks. Greggioso, rich in flocks of
cattle. Gregnappola, as Grignappola. Gregne, sheafes or handfuls of corn, a
wad of straw, a bottle of hay. Grembiale, Grembiule, an apron, a sauegard, a
half kirtle. Grembo, a lap or a bosom. Gremiale, Gremiolo, as Grembiale.
Gremire, misco, mito, to hide or pull up close. Gremmiale, as Grembiale.
Gremmo, as Grembo. Gremola, bran or course meal. Greppo, a crag, a cliffe, a
rock, a hillocke, a molehill, a heap, a round, a turfe, a clod. Greppola,
dross, dregs, or lees of any thing. Greppolare, to grow to dross, dregs or
lees, as wine does. Also to make craggie, rockie, hilly, or in heaps.
Grespia, Raspise wine. Gretta, lean, spinie, narrow, straight, bare, meager,
gaunt, lanke. Grettitudine, finicalnes, nicenes, thinnes, leanness, lanknesse.
Gretto, flat, squeased, squatted, shotten as a shotten hering, crushed.
Grettole, narrow cliffes or crags, or creekes. Also chinkes or little holes.
Grieve, heavy, weighty, grievous, pondrous. Grezza, of the color of hemp or
course canuas vnwhited. Gricciare, to lust, to desire, to long, to have a toie
or conceit in the head. Griccio, a lust, a desire, a longing, a sudden toie,
humor or conceit. Gricciolare, to be toyish, humorous, fantastical, or full
of strange conceits. Gricciolo, a toie, a conceit or sudden motion in the head,
a fantastical humor. Griccioloso, humerous, toyish, fantastical, wavering,
skittish. Griccione, a kind of water foul. Griccioso, lustful, longing, full
of toys and humors. Grida, a proclamation, cries, cryings, whinings,
callings, contentions, brawlings, chidings, outcries. Gridare, to proclaim,
publish, to chide, braule, strive, or contend, to cry, whine, weep, call, or
call out. Gridatore, a crier, a proclaimer, a chider. Grido, fame, report,
brute, relation. Also a cry, a weeping, a noise, a call, a clamor. Gridore, a
cry, a call, a noise, a shoute, a clamor. Grieve, as Grieve. Grifagno,
Grifano, any bird that is ravenous, or that has claws or gripes. Also a
haggard hawk. Naso Grifagno, a hawks nose. Grifare, Griffare, to gripe, to
seize as a hawk does. Also to feed as a hog. Grifo, Griffo, a griffon, a
gripe, a clawe, a pounce, a hogs snoute. Also a bill, a grinning, or yawning,
or scornful opening, or moving of the mouth. Also a kind of shepherds
garment or weed. Grifone, Griffone, a griffon who has a beak like an eagle,
and has four feet, and is hairie. Grigietto, a fine graie or sheep russet.
Grigio, graie* sheep russet, dark, brown, black, hoarie, white. Also a
shepherds weed, or home spun sheep russet cloth. Grigione, a course graie, a
homespunne cloth. Also as Frusone. Grignappola, a man's or woman's geere or
priuities. Also a kind of slow flying bird. Grillaie, cricket-holes,
cricketings. Grillante, reioicing, glad, blithe, bucksome, brisk, skipping for
joy, cricketing. Grillare, to creake as a cricket, to leap for joy, to be
blithe. Grilli, crickets. Also toys, as we say his head is full of
Bees-nests. Grillo, a cricket, a fantastical toie or conceit. Also a kind of
creuise or praune. Grillo^o, toyish, one whose head is full of proclamations.
Grima, Grimma, withered, wrimpled, wrinkled, faded, old, wretched, silly. Also
a beggars scrip, bag, lap, or satchell. Also a mam, a dam, or mother.
Grimaldellare, to pick locks, to hook out of windows. Grimaldelli, picklock
irons, or hooks to pick any lock with. Also a kind of darting weapon.
Grimaldelliere, pick-locke tricks, coniecatching or prowling tricks, picklocks.
Grimare, to wither, to wrinkle, to fade. Grimo, as Grima, a sire, a dad, a
father. Grincia, Grinza, a withering, a wrimple, a fading, a wrinkle.
Grinciare, Grinzare, to wither, to wrinkle, to fade. Grincioso, Grinzoso, full
of wrinkles or wrimples. Grinzo, as Grincia, a red kind of fish called a
gournet, a rotchet or a red fish. Gripho, as Grifo. Grippia, a case or box
wherein a mason does put his chisels or tools. Also a handful, a wispe or
wadde of straw, a bottle of haie, or any such thing. Grippo, a little skiffe
or cock bote. Also as Grepppo. Grippola, the dregs or lees that the wine
leaves sticking to the vessel. Grippone, a good big skiffe or cockbote.
Grisare, to grow graie, white or hoarie. Griscella, a fish called a loch.
Grisetto, as Grigietto. Griso, as Grigio. Grisone, as Grigione. Grisomele, the
fruit called Apricocks. Grisopazzo, a kind of green stone with veins of
gold in it. Gritta, a kind of sea crab. Grizzolo, as Gricciolo. Grobio, a kind
of precious stone like coral. Grocchi, as Gnocchi. Grofolare, to root or
grubbe up as hogs do* also to filtch, to embezie, to purloine, to pilfer.
Grogna, haulme, stubble of corn. Also thatch. Grognano, a kind of stuff
called grogram or mockadowe. Grola, Grolla, a chough, a dawe, or a rooke.
Groma, Gromare, Gromoso, as Gromma, etc. Gromma, moss, also gum or glue. Also
the earth, mortar, or daubing that is laid on walls. Also the crust or lees of
wine that it leaves sticking to the vessel. Also any kind of scurffe or dirt
sticking to any thing. Grommare, to become mossie, hard, rugged, durtie,
crustie, scuruie, grettie, gummie, gluish, scabbie. Grommoso, mossie, gummie,
gluish. Also daubed or laid on with mortar, rugged, knottie, scuruie, scabbed.
Gronda, a gutter upon the roof of houses, the eaues of a house. Also the ridge
of the hair about the eie-lids, the eie-browes. Also a top or height.
Grondaia, Grondara, the ridge or uppermost part of a house, the top of any
thing, a penthouse, a gutter between two houses. Also the pipes of lead to
convey water from the tops of houses. Grondalla, as Grondaia. Grondare, to
trill, trickle, or drop down as water does of from a house. Grongo, a cunger
fish. Groppa, a buttocke or crupper of a horse, a rumpe, used also for Feccia.
Groppamenti, knottings, tyings, entanglings. Groppare, to knot, to tie in
knots, to grow to nodes or knobs. Groppeggiare, is when a horse does knit
himself together carrying himself upon his hinder parts and drawing them up as
though he would yarke. Groppi, knots, nodes, knobs, bunches. Groppiera, a
crupper for a horse. Groppo, a knot, an entangling, a node, a knob, a bunch.
Also a flawe or berrie of wind, a whirle wind. Groppone, a great crupper or
buttocks. Also a rumpe or buttocke piece of meat. Gropposo, Groppoloso,
knottie, full of knots. Grossa, gross, big, fat, round, with child, course.
Also a kind of measure for wet things. Grossaggine, lowtishnes, grossenes,
clownishnes, foolishnes, coursenes. Grossamente, grossly, bungerly, slovenly,
^oursely. Grossare, to make gross, big, round or with child, to make course.
Grossetta, Grossettina, somewhat big, or course. Grossezza, bigness, greatness,
coursenes, grossenes. Grosso, gross, big, round, loggerheaded, lubbarlie,
clownish, great, course. Also a coin that we call a grote. Grossograno, a
stuff which we call groguran. Grossolaneria, clownishnes, baseness,
slouenlines, grosnes, bungerlines. Grossolano, Grossolone, a lubber, a
loggerhead, a clown, a boore, a rude fellow. Also bungerly, grossly,
clownishly, homely, coursly. Grotta, a cave, a den, a cauerne, a grot. Also a
disease in a hawk. Grottesca, a kind of rugged unpolished painters work,
anticke work. Grotto, Grottomarino, as Grottomolinaro. Grottola, a little den,
cave, or cauerne. Grottolare, to enden, to encaue or engrot. Grottomolinaro, a
bird like a swan that brayeth like an ass. Grottoso, full of grots, caves or
dens. Grottoso osso, the name of a bone in a man's head. Gru, Grue, the bird we
call a crane. Also a kind of long fish. Gruario, a nest of cranes. Gruccia, a
hawks perch. Also a stake to tie an owl unto when they go a birding with
them. It is also taken for the crutches of lame men. Grufolare, to root or
grub as hogs do, to filch, to embezle, to pilfer, to purloine, to shift for,
to scrape or hoord up toigther. Gruga, a bird called a crane. Grugnare, to
grunt as a hog, to grumble. Grugnire, gnisco, gnito, as Grugnare. Grugno, the
snout of a hog. Also the herb cicorie. Also as Grifo. Grugno di porco, the
herb cicorie. Also a hogs snout. Grugnolo, the snout of a hog. Grugnoloso,
grunting, grumbling. Grugnone, a great snout. Gruire, gruisco, grui^o, to cry
or crankle as the crane does. Grullo, a gull, a sot, a fool, a patch. Also as
Brullo. Gruma, the eye of a needle. Grummoso, as Grommoso. Grumo, a lump, a
^^ddle or mass of any thing, a cob. Grunello, a kind of wild beast. Grunire,
nisco, ni^o, to grunt as a hog, to grumble. Grunito, grunted, grumbled. Also
the grunting of a hog. Gruno, as Grifo. Gruogo, saffron. Gruppo, Gruppare,
Grupposo, as Groppo. Gruzzare, as Ruspare. Gruzzolare, as Ruspare. Gruzzolo, as
Gozzo. Also a scraping or hoording up together. Gua, a kind of fishing net.
Guaccetto, as Guazzetto. Guacchi a kind of birds. Guaco, as Guaiaco.
Guadagnare, to win, to gain, to get, to profit, to save. Guadagnatore, a
winner, a gainer, a getter, a profiter. Guadagneria, as Guadagno. Guadagno,
gain, profit, commings in, getting, cheuissante. Guadagnoso, gainefull,
profitable. Guadare, to wade, to ferrie or to foard over a river. Also to wod
with blew. Guado, a stuff to die blew withal called woad. Also a ferrie or
passage of a river, a shallow, a ford or a wading place. Also the bottom of a
water or river. Guadoso, that may be ferried or waded over. Also ground that
bears woad, full of woad. Guagina, a sheath or a scabbard. Guaginare, to
sheath or put up in a scabbard. Guaginaro, a scabbard or sheath-maker.
Guagnastra, a common whore, strumpet or harlot in rogues language or gibbrish.
Guagnelo, a Lombard word for Vangelo, the Gospel. Guagnelle, a country man's
oath, as much to say as, by the Gospel, by the mass. Guai, woes, troubles,
vexations, sorrows, crosses, stowers. Guai a voi, woe to you. Guaiaco, the
wood called Guacum, good to cure the pox, pockwood or wood of life.
Guaimembro, a kind of fine bird in India that only feeds upon deaw. Guaina,
as Guagina. Guainare, as Guaginare. Guainaro, as Guaginaro. Guaioso, full of
woes or troubles or sorrows. Guaire, isco, guaito, to be full of woes,
troubles or sorrows, to whine or wail, to yell or cry out. Also to quest
about for a prai^ as a dog. Gualano, a ploughman, a husbandman. Gualare, to
wail, to lament, to moan. Gualca, a calender or press for cloth, a mill to
full cloths in. Gualcare, to calender or press cloth, to full clothes.
Gualcatore, a calender or presseman, a cloth fuller. Gualchiera, Gualchera, as
Gualca. Gualcherare, as Gualcare. Gualda, an excursion, an outroad against
enemies, a bootehaling, a freebooting. Gualdana, the fury of soldiers when
they spoil or pray upon their enemies. Gualdo, a weed to die yellow with
called woald. Guallare, a bursting or opening of a man as when the guts fall
into the cods. Gualloroso, burst, open bellied. Gualloppare, as Galloppare.
Gualloppante, as Galloppante. Gualloppatore, as Galloppatore. Gualloppo, as
Galloppo. Guancetta, a little cheek. Guancetto, a little claspe or kirble
hook about a horses bit. Guancia, a man's cheek. Guanciale, a pillow.
Guancialetto, a little pillow. Guanciata, a blow, a cuffe, a box or a whirret
on the cheek. Guanciatore, a striker, a cuffer. Also a iugler, a cosener, a
pilferer, a flicker. Guancietta, a little cheek. Guancietto, a kind of kirble
hook that horse-riders use. Guangiare, to knead dow, to clap with the hands.
Also to rub. Guantaio, Guantaro, Guantiero, a glouer, a gloue-maker. Guantare,
to glove or put on mittins. Guanti, a kind of paste meat so called in Italy.
Guanto, a glove, a mittin, a gauntlet. Guantone, a gauntlet, a great glove.
Guarallo, a kind of noisome beast living in Africa. Guardacuote, a stomacher, a
mariners or fishers habit with a flap over the belly. Guardacenere, a brazen
vessel to cover the ashes when the fire is raked up. Guarda donna, a woman's
keeper when she lies in childbed, a midwife. Guarda festa, an idle lazy
fellow, a keeper of holidaies. Guarda nappa, nappo, a cubboord, a court
cubboord. Guardanaso, a defense or case for ones nose. Guarda porci, a
swineheard, a hog-keeper. Guarda robba, a wardrop, a buttrie, a lardrie, a
pantrie. Guarda robbiero, a wardrop keeper. Guardarobbo, a sparing miser, a
niggardly chuffe. Guardante, gardant, viewing, a word in armorie, looking,
beholding. Guardare, to see, to look, to behold, to view, to guard, to beware.
Also to note, to consider, to advise, to regard, to respect, to keep, to
heed, to ouersee. Also to holud, to retain, to defend, to govern, to
protect, to shield. Guardati, take heed, look to thy self. Guardatore, a
guardian, a warden, a keeper, a master, a looker, a tutor, an ouerseer, a
protector. Guardatura, a looking, a viewing, an aspect, a countenance, a
semblance. Guardia, a guard, a watch, a tuition, a custody, a government, a
protection, a defense, a keeping. heed, oversight. Look la guardia, a ward
of a lock, or a keye. Also a part of a bit for a horse. Guardiano, a guardian, a
warden, a keeper, a master, a looker, a tutor, an ouerseer, a protector.
Guardie, sentinels, watches. Also a ward of a lock or key. Guardigno, nice,
coye, scrupulous, precise, heedie, watchful, considerate, diligent, careful,
respective. Guardignoni, stalions that live abroad with mares. Guardingo,
Guardiuo, as Guardigno. Guardo, a look, a regard, a glaunce, a show, a
semblance, a beholding, a viewing, a countenance, an aspect. Guardoli, the
randes of a pair of shoes. Guarentare, to warrant, or assure. Guarentire, to
warrant, to assure. Guarenza, a cure, a recovery, or healing. Guari, an aduerb
of quantity, much, or long since, or too much, mickle. Guarigione, as
Guarenza. Guarimente, has been used for Guari. Guarire, guarisco, guarito, to
cure, to heal, to recover. Guarito, cured, healed, recovered. Guarna, as
Guarnaccia. Guarnaccia, Guarnacca, a kind of upper garment for women. Also a
kind of wine like malmesie. Guarnaletto, a frocke, petticote, sauegard, or such
like garment. Guarnello, fustian, or that stuff we call bustian or carell.
Also an upper long veil that women wear in Italy. Guarnigione, a garrison of
soldiers. Also furniture. Also any kind of lace, guard, or fringe for
garments. Also a garnishing. Guarnimento, a garnishment, a furnishing, a
munition, an adornement, a decking, a trimming. Guarnire, nisco, nito, to
garnish, to furnish, to store, to puruay. Also to deck, to adorn, to
bewtifie, to set forth, to trim, to munite. Guarnito, garnished, furnished,
stored, puruayed, decked, adorned, beawtified, set forth, trimmed, munited.
Guasca, a kind of measure for dry things. Guastada, a glass to bring wine in
to the board. Guastadella, a little glass or violl. Guastadetta, Guastaretta,
as Guastadella. Guastadori, Guastatori, pioners in a camp, destroyers,
spoilers. Guastamento, a spoil, a marring, a wasting, a corruption, a
defacing, an undoing. Guastare, to waste, to mar, to spoil, to corrupt, to
rot, to consume, to undo, to overthrow, to spoil, to besot or entangle in
love, used also to execute or put to death. Guastato, wasted, marred, spoiled,
corrupted, rotten, consumed, undone, overthrown, defaced, destroyed, spoiled,
besotted, or entangled in love. Also executed or put to death. Guastatore, a
marrer, a spoiler, a destroyer, a pioner, a waster. Also a hangman or
executioner. Guastatura, as Guastamento. Guasto, a waste, a spoil, a
destruction, a defacing. Also as Guastato. Guatare, to prye, to peep, to spy,
to look narrowly, to peer, to watch, to lurk, to toote. Guatatore, a prier,
a peeper, a spy, a peerer, a watcher, a tooter. Guataro, as Guatatore.
Guatatura, a prying, a peeping, a spying, a peering, a watching, a tooting.
Guataro di puttane, a bawd or applesquire. Guati, snares, entanglings,
ambushes, ambuscadoes, or waitings for. Guatta, a kind of dogfish. Guattaro,
Guattero, a scullion in a kitchen, a drudge in a kitchen. Guatto, flat,
squatted, bruised, close, whoosht, close lurking. Guauliare, to whine as
children do. Guazza, the morning deaw. Also a plash, moore, slow, or standing
water. Guazzabugliare, to mingle mangle, or confound together, to mesh.
Guazzabuglio, a hotchpotch, mingle-mangle, a gallymauphrey, a mesh. Guazzare,
to dash, to wade or trample in the water, to lavish or riot in good cheer.
Guazzarone, a top-saile of a ship. Also an upper course smock, such as women
use to wear over their clothes when they spinne. Also as Gherone. Guazzerone,
as Guazzarone. Guazzetare, to make fine or dainty sauces. Also as Guazzare.
Guazzettino, as Guazzetto. Also minced meat. Guazzetto, a kind of fine saucie
meat, or galliemaufrey, or pottage. Guazzo, a foord, a ferrie, a plash of
water, a wading place, a wash poole. Also lauishnes, riot, wasting in good
cheer. Also a water or washed color. Guazzolare, to babble, to tattle, to
chat. Guazzoso, plashie, waterish, fennie, moorish, boggie, that may be waded.
Also lavish, or riotous in gluttony Guccio, a gull, a sot, a ninnie, a
m^^cock. Guercio, squint eyed, bleare eyed. Guercietto, a little squint eyed.
Guere, as Ghiere. Guerminella, deceit, guile, trumperie, a knauish trick.
Guernimento, as Guarnimento. Guernire, nisco, nito, as Guarnire. Guernito, as
Guarnito. Guerra, war, or warfare. Guerreggiante, warring, warfaring.
Guerreggiare, to war, to warfare. Guerreggieuole, warlike. Guerreggioso,
warlike. Guerriera, a she warrior. Guerriere, Guerriero, a warrior. Guetto, as
Ghetto. Gucchia, a needle. Also a knitting needle. Gucchiare, to thread a
needle. Gucchiaro, Gucchiaiuolo, a needle maker. Gucchiata, a needlefull, a
prick with a needle. Guffo, Gufo, a kind of owl called a horn cout, with
feathers on each side of his head like ears, used also for a gull, a ninnie,
or fool. Guffone, Gufone, a great owl, a foul noddie, gull, patch, or
coxecomb. Gugelle, a kind of wild beast in India. Guglia, a needle. Also a
spire, or sharp pointed thing, a knitting needle. Gugliare, to thread a needle,
to make sharp pointed. Gugliato, a needle maker. Gugliata, a needle-full. Guia,
as Gucchia. Guiardo, a kind of herb or weed that sheep love to feed upon.
Guiare, as Gucchiare. Guiata, as Gucchiata. Guida, a guide, a direction, a
leader, a chief. Guida leschi, gore blood, clottred blood, the gall of a horse
back. Also rogues, vagabonds, raskals. Also the bare and lean ribs of a
horse. Guidamento, a guiding, a direction. Guidardonare, as Guiderdonare.
Guidardone, as Guiderdone. Guidardonatore, as Guiderdonatore. Guidare, to
guide, to direct, to lead. Guidareschi, as Guidaleschi. Guidatore, a guider, a
director. Guidatura, a guiding, a direction. Guidatico, a pasport, a
safeconduit, a conuoy, a guiding. Guidegi, the names of certain veins in the
throat. Guiderdonare, to guerdon, to reward, to recompense. Guiderdonatore, a
guerdoner, a rewarder, a recompencer. Guiderdone, a guerdon, a reward, a
recompense. Guidereschi, as Guidaleschi. Guido, a dog or a cur in gibrish or
rogues language. Guidone, a guidon or a banner for horsemen that be shot. Also
a rogue, a crosbiter, an upright man, or vagabond. Guiggia, a whip wherewith
friars whip themselves. Guiggiare, to whip, or scourge. Guigi, a stuff called
satin of Briges. Guindalo, as Guindolo. Guindolare, to reele, or wind yarne,
or silk. Guindolatore, a reeler or winder of yarne. Guindolo, a reele or rice
to wind yarne or silk upon. Guinedra, a barbarous word taken for the Tartars
Queen or Empress. Guinzaglio, the rings that are upon dogs slips or couples.
Also a slip or couple for dogs. Also among riders a long rain of leather
called a quinzell. Guinzare, to couple up dogs. Also to wrimple, or to wither.
Guinzo, withered, outworne, or wrimpled through age. Guisa, fashion, manner,
guise, custom, form. Guisare, to fashion, to guise, to custom, to form.
Guistrico, the herb that we call priuet print, or prime print. Guizzare, to
tumble, to skip, to leap, to flourish a sword in the air. Also to slide, or
glide, or slip, or glibe away suddenly as an eele does out of ones hand. Also
to wither, or sade away. Guizzo, a sliding, a gliding, a slipping, a glibbing
away suddenly. Also a tumbling, a skipping, a leaping, or flourishing. Also
withered, faded, slipperie as an eele, wrimpled. Gulone, a beast like a beauer,
or a badger very insatiable and greedy. Also a sea-gull, or a sea cob. Also a
gullygut, a gulling, or a bellygod. Guluppo, as Goluppo. Gumedra, as Gomedra.
Gumma, as Gomma. Gummare, as Gommare. Gummoso, as Gommoso. Gurghiera, Gurgiera,
as Gorgiera. Gurgiarino, as Gorgiarino. Gurgetta, as Gorgiera. Guscella,
Gusella, a pin. Guscelletta, Guseletta, a little pin. Guscia, as Guscio.
Gusciare, to shell, to husk, to pare. Guscio, a shell, a husk, a paring, a
cod. Gusciolare, as Gusciare. Gusciolo, a little shell or husk, or cod.
Gustare, to assaie, to taste. Gustatore, a taster, a sewer, or assaier.
Gusteuole, smacking, tarte, tastesome, tasting well, delight some to the taste.
Gustia, Gustio, a bark, a rind, a shale, a shell, a husk, a paring or cod.
Gustiare, to pare off the rind, or bark, to shale or vnhuske. Gusto, a taste
or assaie. Also the sense of tasting. Gustoso, tasting, sauorie, hungry,
tasting well. Guttarosa, as Glupea. Gutture, a throat. Guuo, as Guffo. Guzzo,
Look Gorzo, it is also a little whelpe.
H
HA, he has, also a word of chi^ing, as we say to dogs, hagh? what? Habbo,
Haggio, Ho, I have. Habile, able, sit, apt, proper, handsome, convenient.
Habilitare, to make able, to enable, to make fit, apt, proper, or convenient.
Habilita, ability, fitnes, aptnes, power, puissance, ablenes. Habitabile,
Habiteuole, inhabitable, that may be dwelt in, lodgeable. Habitante, dwelling,
inhabitant, lodging. Habitanza, Habitacolo, an abode, a dwelling or abiding
place. Habitare, to dwell, to abide, to inhabit, to woone, to lodge.
Habitatione, a dwelling, an habitation, an abiding place, a lodging.
Habitatiuo, dwelling, a dweller, inhabiting. Habitatore, a dweller, an
inhabiter, a lodger. Habito, a form, an habit, a fashion, a manner, a
custom, a quality. Also a disposition, an attire, or suit of apparel.
Habituare, to habituate, to accustom, to use, to fashion. Habituatione, an
habituation, a custom, a use, a fashion, a condition. Habitudine, the state,
plight, liking, or disposition of the body. Habituri, dwellings, mansions,
frequented places. Hacca, the letter H. Haffe, in good says, by my faith,
truly. Hai, as Haime. Also an herb which will black ones teeth. Haime, aie
me, woe is me, alas, welladaie. Halare, to reeke, to fume, to smoke, to
euaporate, to exhale, to vent. Halce, a herring or pilchard. Halcione,
Halcionei, as Alcione. Haleci, herrings. Also pilchards. Halcacabo, the herb
dogs grass. Halieto, a kind of kite or buzarde that keeps the seas, an
Ospraie which lives on fish. Halitare, to breath, to pant. Halito, a breath, a
breathing, a panting. Haloni, a circle about the stars, and namely about the
moon. Hamadriadi, nymphs of the wood. Hamare, to catch with a hook. Hameth,
a kind of medicinable thing. Hamo, a fishers hook. Hamone, a kind of
precious stone of the color of gold. Hanelare, to pant for breath, to draw
breath, to breath. Hannire, nisco, nito, to hem or clear the voice with
hemming. Hargolottiere, a soldier serving on horseback unarmed using a caliuer
with a snaphance. Haringo, as Aringo. Harmonia, harmony, music, melody.
Harmonioso, harmonious, musical, swee^elie sounding, melodious. Harmonizzante,
as Harmonioso. Also melodiouslie. Harmonizzare, to harmonize, to make music.
Harpa, a harp. Harpia, a harpie, a monster so called. Hasta, a lance, a
spear, a staff serving for any weapon. Hastare, to arm or dight with a
lance, staff or spear. Hastaro, a lance or speare-maker. Hastatore, a
launcier, a soldier bearing a lance, staff or spear. Hastetta, H^stacciuola,
a little lance, staff, or spear. Hauere, Ho, or Haggio, Hebbi, Hauuto, to
have, to hold, a verb. Also ability, wealth, rid^es, goods, chattle, a noun^
substantive. Also among old authors for Essere, non v^ha, there is not. Hauer
voglia, to long for, or have a longing. Hauer fame, to hunger. Hauer sete, to
thirst. Hauer sonno, to be sleepie. Hauer paura, to fear, to be fearful.
Hauer caldo, to be warm or hot. Hauer freddo, to be a cold. Hauer a ca^o, to
be glad of, to esteem, to account, to hold dear. Hauer a grado, to take in
good worth, or in good part, to prise much. Hauer di gratia, to be glad to do
any thing. Hauer mestieri, to have need, to need. Hauer d^uopo, to have need,
to need. Hauer' agio, to have leisure or conueniencie. Hauer' ardire, to dare,
or be so bold. Hauer' animo, to dare, to be so bold, to have a heart. Hauer' a
fastidio, to loath, to despise, to contemn. Hauer del asino, to be of the asses
condition. Hauer' a schiuo, to loath, to abhor, to contemn, to scorn. Hauer' a
male, to take in ill part. Hauer martello, to be jealous, to be appasionate, to
be in love. Hauer diecio venti anni, to be ten or twenty years old. Hauuto,
had, possessed, enjoyed. Haustorio, a wheel of a well to draw water, a bucket
to draw water, a skoope to wet sails with. Also a kind of pot, judge, cup, or
cruse. He, an interiection, oh, alas, I pray you, for Gods sake, ah. Hebano,
Hebeno, the black wood called Hebanie. Also Sable or sad color. Hebbe,
Hebbero, of the verb Hauere, he had, they had. Hebere, heb^sco, hebei, Hebuto,
to make blunt, dull or weak. Hebetatione, a dulling, a qua^ling, a
diminishing, an vnsatiablenes, a bluntness. Hebetudine, as Hebetatione.
Hebuto, made blunt, dull, or weak. Hecatompo, a fish having a hundredth feet.
Hecatonchito, one having a hundredth hands. Hechinometri, a kind of sea
hedgehog. Hedera, the herb Iuie Hedera spinosa, a kind of Iuie or bindeweede.
Hederoso, full of Iuie. Hediosmo, the herb minte. Hedisaro, an herb which
some take to be the mint. Hefestite, a precious stone of a fiery color, which
as a looking glass reflecteth any thing. Hegira Hecira, a mother in law.
Helebria, a kind of black Hellebore, bearefoote, or setwoort. Helenio, the
herb elicampane. Heliaco, as Eliaco. Helice, the sign called Vrsa mayor, or
Charles waine. Also a kind of iuie bearing no berries. Heli, Heloi, Helois, an
Hebrew word signifying God. Helicrisio, yellowe cammomill, or golden flower,
some take it for the marigolde. Heliocriso, as Helicrisio. Heliopoli, a kind
of warlike engine to batter cities. Helioscopio, a kind of spurge with a
leaf like purslaine: or a little tree like a fig tree. Helio^ropio, as
Helitropia, as Helitropio. Helitropia, the herb Turnesole, Ruddes, Wartwoort,
or Sun-flower, which turns with the sun, both at rising and at going down.
Some take it for the Marigold. Helitropio, a precious stone, which as a burning
glass receives the sun. Helleboro, an herb whereof there be two kinds, as
Helleboro bianco, which is called in English Lingwoort, the root whereof
makes neesing powder. The other Helleboro negro, and in English Beares-foote,
Terwoort, or Setwoort It is used to purge melancholy. Hellera, the herb Iuie.
Heluatione, gluttoning, greedy eating, gormandizing. Heluo, a deuourer, a
destroyer. Hemarite, a bloud-stone, good to stanch blood. Hemerobio, a worm
living but one day, of one days life. Hemeroso, that dureth but one day.
Hemiciclo, a half circle, a demie-circle, a half round. Hemicranea, a sickness
called the migram, or an ache on the one side of the head coming by fits.
Hemicrani^o, subject to the migram. Hemina, a greek measure about three
quarters of a pint, or nine ounces. Hemiolio, an arithmeticall proportion
called Sesquialter or S^squiplex, which is so much, and half so much again.
Hem^onio, the herb Harts-^oo^g. Hemionite, the herb Harts-toong. Hemiplessi^,
the pa^sie in the half of the body. Hemispero, Emisfero, half the compass
of the visible heaven. Also a kind of musical instrument. Also a kind of
sundyall. Hemistico, an half verse. Hemitritea febb^e, a semitertian fever.
Hemoroid^li, or Hemoroide vene, the veins whereby the blood passes backward.
Hemoreo, a kind of serpent. Hemoroide, a disease in the arse called the piles
or hemorrhoides. Hendecasilabo, a verse of eleven sy^ables. Hepatario, that
pertains to the liver. Also a disease or grief of the liver. Hepate, the
liver. Also a fish very dainty in taste like a breame. Hepatica, noble
agrimonie, three leaf Liuer-woort, herb Trinity, white Crowe-foote, or water
Crowefoote. Hepatica vena, the liver vein. Hepatico, of the liver, diseased in
the liver, liver grown. Hepatite, a precious stone of the figure of a liver.
Also the master liver vain. Hepatizone, a temperature of the air,
representing the color of the liver. Hephestite, as Hefestite. Hepistite, as
Hefestite. Hepta, the number seven in greek. Heptameron, a work of seven
days, or seven parts. Heracleone, the loadstone or magnet. Heraclio, a
touchstone to try gold and silver. Also taken for one that has a singular
fine ready wit. Heradione, as Dispiron. Herba, an herb, grass, woort, weed,
leaf, or blade, all manner of simples. Herba beneditta, Spearewoort, Setwall,
or Sidewall. Herbacceo, of grass or herbs: springing like herbs. Herba
casta, the herb Pionie. Herbaccia, any fi^thie weed. Herba del vento,
winde-flower. Herba da buoi, the herb calves grass: but many times used for a
princock boy, a fr^sh man, a milk sop, a nouice, or fresh water soldier.
Herba di muro, pellitorie of the wall. Herba di san pietro, the weed sampier.
Also the Cowslip. Herba di sant Antonio, the herb leadwoort. Herba di san
Giouanni, the herb Clarie. Herba gatta, the herb catmint or nep. Herba impia,
an herb so called because no beast does eat of it but feels some hurt, we
call it chaffeweede or cudweede. Herba latace, the name of an herb which is a
token of great plenty of all things, and who so first finds it shall want
nothing. Some take it for the herb thrift. Herba latte, an herb called in
latin Herba lactis. Herba lupa, as Orobanche. Herbaggij, herbage, all manner of
herbs. Herba murale, pellitorie of the wall. Herbaggio, all manner of herbage
or grass. Also a kind of stuff like water chamlet. Herbale, of or pertaining
to herbs, an herball. Herba lista, an herbalist, a simpler. Herbaio,
Herbaiuolo, an herb man, a simpler, an herbarist. Also an herball. Herbaro,
Herbario, as Herbaio. Herba nesa, goats rue, or Italian fitch. Herba torpa, as
Orobanche. Herba rossa, the herb arsesmart, or culerage. Herba turca, the
herb burstwoort. Herbeggiare, to spring as grass, to bring forth weeds, to
strew with herbs. Herbei, a kind of mountain partridge. Herbeo, green like
grass, grassie, a grass green. Herbescente, growing to an herb. Herbella, a
kind of broad leased grass. Herbena, the herb Verucin. Herbetta, small,
young, tender, budding grass or herbs. Herbiccine, al manner of tender pot
herbs. Also a kind of potage made of herbs. Herbido, full of herbs, weeds or
grass. Also green or grass color, or grassie. Herbi grada, a kind of
snaile going still in the grass. Herbile, of or belonging to herbs, or that
feeds on herbs and grass. Herbolaio, as Herbaio. Herbolata, a kind of tarte
made of young herbs: green sauce. Also a kind of potage made of herbs.
Herboso, grassie, leafie, weedie, full of grass or herbs. Herbuccie, filthy
weeds, wild weeds, silly, little, young weeds. Herede, an heir, a
succeeder in a man's goods or lands, an inheritour. Hereditare, to inherit.
Heredita, Hereditaggio, an inheritance, an heritage, a patrimony. Hereditario,
hereditarie, by inheritance. Herediteuole, hereditable, that may be inherited.
Heremita, an Hermit, a solitary person. Heremitaggio, an hermitage or
solitary place. Heremitano, an hermit, or hermit-like. Heremo, as
Heremetaggio. Heresia, an heresy. Heresiarca, a chief heretic. Heretico, an
heretic. Herisipilla, as Erisipilla. Heritaggio, heritage or inheritance.
Hermafrodito, an hermafrodite, both man and woman. Hermino, the herb clarie.
Hermita, as Heremita. Hermitaggio, an hermitage. Hermisino, syndall or taffatie
sarcenet. Hermo, an hermitage or solitary place. Also solitary, alone.
Hermodatile, an herb called Mercuries fingers, dogs stones or wild saffron.
Hermofrodito, as Hermafrodita. Hermoso, solitary. Also taken from the spanish
for beautiful, fair or comely. Hernie, a kind of swelling or inflammatition
in a man's cods or stones, but properly the bursting or rupture of a man when
the bowels fall into the cods. Herodio, a kind of eagle or faulkon. Hero, a
hero, a noble worthy, a famous man, in whom there is more virtue and
excellency then in ordinary men. Heroico, heroical, noble, magnanimous.
Herpete, as Erpete, a kind of Saint Anthonies fire. Some call it the shingles.
Some the wild fire, and some the running worm. Herpicare la terra, to harrow
or grubbe land. Herpicone, a grubbing iron. Hesonicon, as Dispiron. Hespera, an
herb smelling more in the night then in the day. Hespero, the eeuening star.
Also twilight in the eeuening. Heteroclito, declined otherwise then the common
nounes be. Hetero^ranea, a disease in the head, aching and swelling with little
round pushes rising up. Heterogenio, of another kind, not of the common kind.
Heteroscij, those which have their shadows cast but one way, as those which
dwell in either of the temperat zones, we that dwell in the worth temperate have
at noone the sun always south; and therefore our shadows north. They that
dwell in the south temperate have the sun at noone in the north; and
therefore their shadows always south. Hiacintho, a precious stone called a
hyacint. Also a flower called crowtoes. Also a purple color. Hiade, the five
stars in the head of taurus. Hialino, a glassie green color, glassie.
Hialoida, the third humor of the eyes, for that it is like molten glass.
Hiastio, a kind of music among the Grecians. Hiato, an opening or bursting of
a man, a wide opening or yawing of the mouth, an open unpleasant sound with
ones mouth. Hibbo, a kind of fish. Also a kite or buzzard. Hibre, a mungrell,
one borne of parents differing in countries. Hictiofagi, seeders upon fish,
eaters of fish. Hidra, a serpent having seven heads. Hidria, a kind of pot or
pitcher. Hidro, a kind of serpent breeding in Nilus that feeds on frogs.
Hidromante, a deuiner or soothsayer by waters. Hidromantia, divination by
calling spirits in the waters. Hidromele, a kind of drink as Metheglin.
Hidiopepe, the herb arsemart or culerage. ^^^^pico, a man that has the
drops^e. Hidropisia, the disease called the dropsy. Hiecora, now, at this
instant, even now. Hiemale, winter, of the winter. Hiena, a beast of all other
the most subtle, about the bigness of a wolf. It counterfeits man's voice; it
has a maine like a horse: the doung it yields is called ciuet. Also a kind of
precious stone taken out of the Hienas head. Hier, Hieri, yeasterday. Hieracio,
the herb hauk-weede or sowthistle. Hiera^ite, a kind of precious stone.
Hierapicra, a bitter confection to purge choler. Hierarchia, an holy
governance or principality. Hierde, as Ghierde. Hieria, a kind of precious
stone good against the falling sickness. Hiermatina, yeasterday morning.
Hierobotamo, the herb verueine. Hiersera, yeasternight, yeasterday ceu^ning.
Hiernotte, yeasterday at night, the last night. Hierofante, an expounder of
mysteries or holy scriptures. Hieroglisico, mystical or enigmaticall letters
or ciphers, signifying whole sentences used by the Egyptians. Hierone, the bird
called a hearon. Hile, a kind of salt or mixture that alchimists use. Hillare,
cheerful, glad, blithe, joyous, pleasant. Hillaria, the eight day of the
kalends of April, when the day begins first to increase, and be longer then
the night. Used also for shrouing time or other times of mirth. Hillarita,
gladness, cheerfulnes, glee, rejoicing, mirth, iocondnes, pleasantnes. Hillo,
the little gut. Hilo, the northwind. Himeccere, an interiection of admiration;
as we say good Lord, who would have thought it. Himenei, the weddings or
marriages. Himeneo, the god of marriage. Himmon, a kind of adamant stone, that
on the one side draws iron to it; and with the other drives it away from it.
Hinchinchiare, as Fottere. Hinnire, nisco, nito, to niegh as a horse. Hinnito,
the neighing of a horse, neighed as a horse. Hinno, a hymn, a praising song.
Hinnulare, a kind of kite or buzzard. Hiosquiano, the weed henbane. Hipangi,
the planets so called when they are hidden with the light of the sun.
Hiperbasi, a figure when words are transposed from the grammatical order.
Hiperbaton, an herb that will cure hurts of poisoned arrows. Hiperberico, the
month October. Hiperbole, an hyperboll or excess in advancing or depressing.
Also a certain crooked line coming of the cutting of a cone or cylinder.
Hiperbolico, hyperbolical, beyond all credit or estimation or liklyhood of
truth. Hiperbolizzare, to hiperbolize, to advance or depresse any thing beyond
likelihood and truth. Hiperborei, they which dwell above the blowing of the
northwinde, who commonly live above a 100. years. Hiperdulio, above or
ouerseeing the service of slaves and bondmen. Hiperico, the herb saint John's
woort. Hipericon, an herb called in latin Colion. Hiperzeugma, maniera di
costruttione. Hipice, an herb which chewed in ones mouth takes away hunger.
Hipocausto, a stew or hot house. Hipochisi, a disease in the eyes called
Suffusio. Hipocondria, the forepart of the belly and sides, under which lies
the liver and spleen. Hipocrisia, simulation, hypocrisy, fained holiness.
Hipocrita, Hipocrito, an hypocrite, a dissembler of another man's person.
Hipocritico, hypocritical, full of dissimulation. Hipodorio, a kind of grave
accent in music. Hipofrigio, as Hipodorio. Hipogaustrio, that part of the
belly which reaches from the navel to the hairs of the privy parts.
Hipolidio, a kind of accent or note in music. Hipopij, the bones that be
under the eyes. Hipostasi, a substance. Also residence in urine flitting toward
the bottom. Hipotetica, a word of the civil law importing pledge, bail or
maine price. Hipothesia, an argument or matter whereupon one should dispute and
argue. Hipozeugma, a figure when every clause has his proper verb.
Hippagreto, such a one as is captain over armed men. It is used in Xenophon.
Hippicone, a greek measure of 500. paces, or half an Italian mile. Hippo, as
Hipuro. Also the greek word for a horse. Hippodamo, a breaker, tamer or rider
of horses. Hippodromo, a place where horses are excercised in games, races,
running or coursing. Hippofae, Hippofesto, a kind of herb. Hippofrigio,
Hippolidio, Hippodonio, certain kinds of music or accent in music.
Hippoglosso, the herb horse tongue or double tongue. Hippolapato, the herb
patience. Hippopotamo, as Hippotamo. Hippotamo, a beast living in the river
Nilus, having feet like an ox, back and maine like a horse, tucked like a
bore, and a long winding tail. Hipuro, a kind of lobster or sea-crab. Also the
herb cats tail or horse tail. Hirco, a wild bucke or he goat. Hirondinaria,
as Celidonia. Hirondine, the bird called a swallow. Hirsuto, hairie, brizlie,
shaggie, rough, haired, prickie, horride, sharp, sluttish. Hirto, as Hirsuto.
Hisopo, the herb hysop. Hispido, brizled, hairie, rough, pricked, sharp
haired. Hispidoso, as Hispido. Historia, an history, a story, a declaration
of true things in order set down, a true tale. Historiagrafare, as Historiare.
Historiale, historical. Historiare, to historize, to write or tell histories.
Historico, an historian or historical. Historiographo, an history writer.
Histrice, a porcupine. Histrione, a stage player, an interlude player.
Histrionia, the feate or science of stage plaiers. Hittiofagi, fish eaters or
feeders upon fish. Ho, of the verb Hauere, I have. Hobo, a tree, the root
whereof if a man hold but a piece of it in his mouth it yields so much water
as he shall feel no thirst. Hodierno, modern, of this day, a late man or
thing. Hoggi, this day, to day. Hoggidi, now adays, at these times. Hoggimai,
now at last, now adays, at length, at last. Hola, hoe? who is there? what hoe.
Holestio, a kind of herb. Holiostrophio, an herb, the touch whereof kills
Scorpions. Holla, Holle, I have her, I have them. Hollo, Holli, I have him or
it, or them. Holocausto, a sacrifice killed and laid whole on the Altar.
Homaccione, a great evil favored man, a lubbarly man, a loggarhead. Homai,
now, at last. Homaggio, homage, fealty, liegenes, fidelity. Homeri, the
shoulders. Hometto, a little man. Homicida, a manslayer, a killer of men.
Homicidiale, guilty of man's blood. Homicidio, manslaughter, murder.
Homicidioso, killing of men. Homicranca, a dizzines, or giddines in the head.
Homilia, a sermon, or homily. Homo, Huomo, a man. Homoemere, likeness of
parts, all the parts in a body that have affinity with the brain, liver,
and heart. Homogeneo, of one kind. Homographia, like writing or painting.
Homologia, a confession, a consent, an agreement. Homone, Homoncione, as
Homaccione. Homoncino, a little man. Homonea, concord, agreement. Homonimia,
when diverse things are signified by one word. Homori, humors, conceits.
Honesta, Honestade, honesty, truth, dignity, worship, honor. Honesta da
campi, a dissembling woman. Honestamente, honestly, indifferently. Honestare,
to make honest, to excuse, to color a fault. Honesto, honest, civil,
virtuous, upright. Also honesty it self. Honoranza, as Honor. Honorare, to
honor, to worship. Honorato, honored, worshipped. Honorando, worshipful,
worthy of honor. Honor, honor, worship, reputation, honesty, credit,
estimation, the reward of virtue. Honoreuole, honorable, worshipful.
Honoreuolezza, honor, worship, reputation. Honorificenza, honor, worship.
Honorifico, honorable, worshipful. Hor, now, at this instant, sometimes. Hora,
as Hor. Also an hour. Hora may, Hor may, now, at last, at length, in the end.
Horanza, as Honor. Horario, hourly, the space of an hour. Hora si, yea
marry now, now indeed. Horbene, well go too, it is well. Hor hora, by and by,
even now, presently. Horetta, a small short hour. Horfanita, orphanisme.
Horfano, an orphan, or fatherless child. Horgiata, a kind of meat or drink
made of barlie, barlie-water. Horgio, the grain we call barlie. Horiolo,
Horiuolo, an horologe, a dial, a clock, an hower-glasse, a watch. Horioletto,
Horiuoletto, as Horologio. Horiuolaro, an howreglasse maker. Horologiaro, a
clock-maker or keeper, a dyall maker. Horologiere, idem. Horologio, as Horiolo.
Horologio dal sole, a sun dial. Horoloio Horlogio, as Horologio. Horoscopo,
the ascendent of ones nativity, that part of the firmament that rises every
hour from the cast. Also any thing wherein hours be marked, as in dyall. Also
a diligent marking of the time of the birth of a child. Horizonte, the
horizon, a circle dividing the upper part of the sphere from the lower.
Hormisino, taffetie sarcenet. Hormino, the herb called Clarie, or sage of
Rome. Horranza, as Honor. Horrendo, horrible, frightfull, grizlie, gastfull,
ugly, hideous, dreadful, strange, to be eschued. Horreuole, honorable,
worshipful. Horreuolezza, as Honor. Horribile, as Horrendo. Horribilita,
horriblenes, horror, hideousnes, grizlines, fright, trembling for fear.
Horrido, horride, hideous, terrible, gastlie, grizlie, evil favored,
dreadful, frightfull, lothesome to behold. Horrifico, terrible, horrible, that
makes one quake for fear or cold. Horrisuono, roaring, or having a terrible
sound or voice. Horrore, a horror, a shiuering for fear or cold, a fright, a
terror, or shaking fit. Also a dreadful sound, a reverent fear, a frowning or
iowring co^^tenance. Also a loathing, as when one cannot away with a thing.
Hortata, Hortaglie, all manner of fruits or profits that gardens give.
Hortami, idem. Hortare, to exhort, cheer up, encourage, to move, to emboulden,
to counsel. Hortatione, an exhortation, a cheering, an encouraging. Hortense,
pertaining to a garden, or growing in a garden. Horticello, a little garden.
Horti di venere, the woman's secret parts. Horto, a garden. Also an orchard.
Hortolano, a gardener. Also a dainty bird so called. Horsu, Horsuso, as
Horuia. Horuia, an aduerb of encouraging, go too, now, away, on, forward, to
it. Horzada, as Horgiada. Horzo, as Horgio. Hospedale, an hospital or spittle.
Hospitabile, keeping hospitality. Hospitale, as Hospedale. Also pertaining to
hospitality. Hospitalie^o, a keeper of an hospital, one keeping hospitality.
Hospitalita, hospitality, entertaing of friends and guests. Hospite, an host.
Also a guest. Also a friend that entertaineth strangers. Hospitoso, a man
keeping hospitality, full of hospitality. Hospitio, an inn or house of
lodging, ready to receive friends and guests. Hostaggio, Hostale, an hostage
or pledge, a surety or pawn. Hostaria, an inn or hosterie, a victualing
house, an alehouse, a tavern; but properly a house where meat and drink and
lodging for men and horse is to be had. Host, an host, a guest, being of the
masculine ginder. Host, an host, a camp or an army of men and soldiers,
being of the feminine gender. Hostelleria, as Hostaria. Hostelliere, as
Hosteriero. Hostello, an hostell, a house or place of receite, an habitation.
Host^ria, as Hostaria. Hosteriero, an host, an hoster, an inholder.
Hosterietta, a little inn, a little hosterie, a victualing house, an
alehouse. Hostiere, Hostiero, an host, an inholder. Hostessa, an hostess.
Hostia, an host or sacrifice. Hostile, hostile, of or belonging to an enemy.
Hostilita, hostility, enmity, feude. Hostolano, an inne-keeper, an host.
Hotta, now, at this time, presently. Also an hour. Hotta a hotta, still,
every foot, oftentimes, now and then. Hotta catotta, now now, even now, by
and by. Hui, an interiection of sighing, alas, oh Lord, aie me. Humanere, to
become humane or take upon him humanity. Humanita, humanity, gentleness,
courtesy, civility, pleasantnes in manners. Humanista, a humanist or professor
of humanity. Humano, human, gentle, courteous, civil, pleasant, mild,
affable. Humaro, a kind of great shell fish, which is said to take men as they
swim. Humeggiare, to moisten, to steep, to wet, ta danke, to run as a sore
does. Humeri, the shoulders of any creature. Humettare, as Humeggiare.
Humettatione, a moistning, wetting, steeping, dankishnes. Humidare, as
Humeggiare. Humidire, disco, dito, idem. Humidita, Humidezza, humiditie,
moistnes, danknes. Humido, moist, wet, dankish, humid, liquid, waterish.
Humidore, as humidita. Humigare, as Humeggiare. Humiggiare, as Humeggiare.
Humile, humble, base, low, lowly, simple, poor, abject, vile, meek, faint,
feeble, creeping, crouching. Humiliare, to humble, to make low or lowly, to
tame. Humiliatione, an humbling, humility, lowlines, meekenes. Humilimmo, most
humble. Humilta, Humilita, humility, lowlines, meekenes, gentleness. Humorale,
an ague proceeding of humors. Also as Humoroso. Humore, humor, moisture,
liquor, juice or sap. Also a toy, a humor, a fancy, a conceit. Also sap in a
root or tree. Humorista, humorous, fantastical, toyish, passionate in his
humors. Humoroso, full of humors, of moisture, of juice, of sap, of liquor.
Also humorous, toyish, conceited, fond, unconstant, newfangled. Huoi, to day,
this day. Huomo, Huomini, a man, men. Huomo di bardella, a young rider that can
scarce sit in the saddle. Huomo di poca leuatura, a man scarce worthy the
taking up. Huomo da been, an honest man. Huomo di grossa pasta, a gross
logger-headed man. Huomo da nulla, da poco, a man of no worth. Huomo di mezza
sella, a man proceeded but to the middle degree in the art of riding. Huomo
materiale, a foolish gross conceited man. Huomini cappati, chosen trained men.
Huomo di tutto sella, a horseman in every point of horseman-shippe complete.
Huominesco, manlike, manly, mannish. Huomicino, Huomicello, a little man.
Huopo, need, occasion, want. Huouo, an egg. Hurlare, to howl as a woulfe.
Hurlatore, a howler. Hurli, howlings. Hurloso, howling as a woulfe.
I
I, For Io, namely in verse; I, me self. Also a masculine article of the
plural number; they or the. Iacente, iacent, lying flat, flat. Iacolo, a dart,
and whatsoever else may be thrown, or cast with the hand. Also a kind of very
swift serpent. Iacono, a deacon, a degree among the clergy. Iaculatore, a
shooter, a darter, a dart, slinger. Iada, a kind of precious stone like an
emerauld. Iaia, grauellie sand, gravel. Iambi, certain verses called
Iambickes. Ianchetto, a fish called a pilchard or sparling. Ianizzeri, the
Turks guard, Ianizers. Iantino, as Hiacinto. Iapiga, the western wind; yet some
take it for the northcast wind. Iaspe, a precious stone called a iasper-stone.
Iatraleptica, curing by ointments and frications. Iattantia, bragging,
boasting, vaunting. Iattare, to brag, boast or vaunt. Iattatore, a bragger,
boaster or vaunter. Iattura, loss, damage, hurt, decay or casting away.
Iberide, the herb wild cresses. Some take it for another herb. Ibi, a kind
of bird in Egypt which has stiff legs and a long bill, wherewith when he is
sick he glistreth himself with salt water. And some write that Hippocrates
first learnd of this bird to give glisters. Icnografia, a plot, model or
frame of a house drawn in paper, describing every room of it. Ichneumone, a
rat of India which creeps into the crocodils mouth when he gapeth, and cating
his bowels kills him. I Would, the ides of every month, that is the eight day
after the nones, called so for dividing the month. Iddea, a goddess. Iddio,
God almighty. Idea, the idea, figure or form of anything conceived in
imagination. Ideale, ideally, figuratively, formely, imaginatiuely. Identia, an
imaginary figure of any thing. Idiachigiorni, the fatal, ill or unlucky
days that be in the year. Idioma, a proper perfect tongue, speech or language.
Idiomista, a man professing a proper language. Idiota, an ignorant, a sot, an
idiot, a natural, a fool. Idolatrare, to commit idolatry. Idolatria,
idolatry. Idolatro, an idolator. Idolo, an idol. Idoneo, convenient, fit,
apt, sufficient. Idromante, a soothsayer or deuiner by the air. Idromantia,
dinination by the air. Idropesia, the sickness which we call the dropsy.
Idropico, one troubled with the dropsy. Iella, the root of Elecampane or as
Enola. Iemo, a bottom or clue of thread. Ierda, as Ghierde. Ieri, yeasterday.
Ieuolo, a bird called a woodpecker or eatbill. Ifid^ino, a precious stone good
against the stone in the bladder. Ifsilonne, the letter y, so called in
Italian. Igiena, conseruatiua medicina. Ignauia, cowardnes, baseness of mind,
lithernes, dullnes, sluggishnes. Ignauo, a coward, a dastard, base of courage,
lither, dull, sluggish. Igneo, fiery, of the nature of fire. Ignite, a precious
stone of the color of glass. Ignobile, ignoble, infamous, unrespected, base,
dishonored. Ignobilita, ignobilitie, baseness. Ignocco, a fool, a sot, a patch,
a noddie, a gull, or a ninnie. Ignominia, ignominy, reproach, dishonor.
Ignominioso, ignominious, reproachful, dishonorable. Ignorante, ignorant,
unwitting, not knowing, dull, foolish. Ignorantesco, foolish, or
ignoraunt-like. Ignorantia, ignorance. Ignorare, to ignore, not to know, to be
ignorant of. Ignoto, unknown. Ignudo, naked, bare, void. Also a fish called a
dace or a merlune. Iguale, equal, alike, match. Igualare, to equal, to match,
to make even. Igualita, equality, likeness, euennes. Il, an article masc.
singular, the, namely with nounes. Also a pronoune primitive of the dative and
accusative cases, him the same, it, with verbs. Ileo, the third gut from the
ventricle. Iliaco dolor, an obstruction or stopping of the small guts, causing
a great pain in the belly. Ilio, Ilione, Illione, as Ileo. Ilio osso, that
bone which is committed or joined to the transaers processes of osso sacro,
albeit in old bodies this seem^th to be but one bone, yet because in children
it is by a cartilage intersected with three lines, therefore the anatomists
divide it into three parts, calling the first (which is the supreme part
thereof, being the broadest of the rest and joined to osso sacro) by the name
of the whole Ilio osso, the second osso pube, the third osso cossendico.
Illecito, Illicito, unlawful. Illeiare, to enter into her. Illeso, unhurt,
vnoffended. Illetamare, to vndoong, to cleanse, to farm. Illiberale, not
liberal, miserable, a snudge, a miser. Illiberalita, couetize, misery,
avarice. Illicito, as Illecito. Ilice, the tree called an oak. Illudere, ludo,
lusi, luso, to mock, to flout, to frump, to delude, to dazzle, to illude.
Illuiare, to turn or enter into another then himself. Illuminare, to
illuminat, to clear, to lighten, to brighten, to enlumine. Illuminatione, an
illumi^ation, a light or opening of the eyes. Illuminatore, an illuminator or
lightgiuer. Illusione, an illusion, a deluding, a mocking, dazzling. Illustrare,
to illustrate, to glorify, to brighten, to dignifie. Iullustratore, an
illustrator, a glorifier, a giver of honors. Illustre, clear, famous,
excellent, honorable, worthy, bright. Illustrezza, brightness, excellency,
woorthines, honor. Illustrissimo, most excellent, most worthy, most renowned.
Il perch, wherefore, the reason why. Ima, low, deep. Imaginabile, as
Imagineuole. Imaginare, to imagine, to think, to surmise, to devise, to
conceive. Imaginario, imaginary. Imaginatione, Imaginamento, an imagination or
surmising. Imaginatore, an imaginer, a thinker, a surmiser. Imaginatiua,
imaginatiue. Imagine, Imago, an image or likeness in form, a similitude, a
counterfeit, a vision, a sancie, an imagination, a figure, a pretense or color
for any matter. Imagineuole, imaginable, that may be imagined. Imbabolare, to
blubber with ones eyes. Imbacuccato, masked, muffled, hooded, hood winkt about
the head. Imballadore, as Imballatore. Imballare, to pack up in packes, as
they do merchandise. Imballamenti, packes of wares, packings. Imballatore, a
packer, such as pack up merchandise in packes. Also a wooll-winder.
Imbaligiare, to put in a male or cloke-bag. Also to suppress. Imballordire,
disco, dito, to be or make dizzie or giddie. Imballordito, been or made dizzie
or giddie. Imballordimento, a dizzines or giddines. Imbalsamare, to embalme or
preserve with Balsamum. Imbambagiare, to stuff, fill, or quilt with bumbaste,
to bumbaste. Imbambinare, to dote or become a child again. Imbambire, bisco,
bito, as Imbambinare. Imbambolare, to blind, dazie, or bleare the sight.
Imbancadura, the forms, benches or seats in a gallie. Imbandigione, any kind
of naperie or linen serving for the board. also swathings, sewings, or dishing
and dr^ssing up of meats. Imbandire, disco, dito, to swath or bandle about.
Also to cry or proclaim by proclamation: but properly to spread or lay the
boorde or cupboords, to play the sewer, to dish or dress up meat ready to be
carried up. Imbanditore, a gentleman sewer, a disher or dresser up of meats, a
laier of the tables. Imbarazzare, to disorder, to put to confusion, ruin,
spoil, or havoc, to trouble, to busy. Imbarazzo, trouble, confusion,
disorder, luggage, trumperie stuff, or an entangling. Imbarbare, as
Abbarbicare. Imbarbigliare, as Imbardare. Imbarberescare, to teach any creature
to do anything, as to teach a horse to run a race, to hunt a match, to come to
the staff, to enter a dog or a hawk, to enseame, the word is taken from
those that teach Barberie horses. Imbarbuglio, a garboile, a trouble, an
entangling. Imbarcare, to imbarke, to ship or take shipping. Also to cosen, to
setch over, to bring one into a fools paradise. Imbarcamento, a shipping or
imbarking. Imbardare, to bard or trap a horse. Also to love foolishly.
Imbardigliare, as Imbardare. Imbarilare, to barrel up, to imbarell.
Imbasciadore, Imbasciatore, an Ambassador. Imbasciata, an Embassage.
Imbascieria, idem. Imbastaggiare, to put a pack saddle, a pad or carriers
saddle on, to harnish a carriers horse. Imbastare, as Imbastaggiare.
Imbastardare, to bastardize or corrupt, to adulterate. Imbastardire, disco,
dito, as Imbastardare. Imbastinare, as Imbastaggiare. Imbastire, tisco, tito,
to put a pack saddle on. Also to stuff or quilt. Also to furnish, to store or
to be set. Imbasto, a pack saddle, a pad, a carriers saddle. Imbastonare, to
put any ensign upon a staff. Imbattagliare, to embattle. Imbattere, batto,
battei, battuto, to meet or light upon by chance. Also to fight or beat in.
Imbattimento, a meeting or lighting upon by chance. Imbattuto, met or light
upon by chance. Also foughten or beaten in. Imbauagliare, to enbib, to put a
bib before one. Imbaucare, to mask as women be when they go abroad.
Inbeccare, to embill or feed birds, to bill, to smouch. Imbeccata,
Imbeccatura, an embilling, a billing or feeding, a kissing, a smouching.
Imbeccatore, one that embilleth or feeds birds. Imbecherare, to put into ones
fancy or head, to teach, to instruct one to do or say any thing. Also to
deceive or bear false witness, to suborne. Imbecille, weak, feeble, faint.
Imbecilita, weakness, faintness, imbecilitie. Imbelle, weak, bare, unarmed,
naked, unapt to war, cowardous, timorous. Imbellettare, to paint as women do
their faces. Imbellettamenti, slauerings and paintings that women use upon
their faces. Imbellire, lisco, lito, to adorn, to beautify, to deck, to
embellish. Imbendare, to enskarffe, to hoodwinck, to blindfold. Imberbe,
beardles, without a beard. Imberciatore, a shooter in a hand-gun or fouling
piece. Imbertescato, made rampire wise or full of skaffolds. Imbertonato,
besotted, adulterously in love. Imbertestato, aloft or surmounting others.
Imbestialare, as Imbestiare. Imbestialire, as Imbestiare. Imbestiare, to become
a beast, wild or beastly. Imbeuere, to drink or suck in, to swallow or gulpe
up. Imbiaccare, to paint with ceruse or white lead. Imbiaccamento, a whitning,
a blanching or a washing white. Inbiancare, to whiten, to blanch, to wash
white, to become pale or wan. Imbiancheggiare, as Imbiancare. Imbianchire,
chisco, chito, as Imbiancare. Imbianchito, whitened or become pale or wan.
Imbiondire, disco, dito, to make yellow or of a golden color. Imbizzarire,
risco, rito, to become fond, mad or fantastical. Imboccamento, an mowthing or
an entrance. Imboccare, to feed or cram. Also to snatch with the mouth. Also
to stop the mouth of a cannon: also to run into some creek of the land as the
sea does in some places. Imboccata, a feeding or cramming. Also a mouthfull, a
mouthing. Imboccatura, the mouth of a horses bit. Also a mouthing. Imbolare, to
filch, to steal, to purloine, to lurche, to pilfer, to prowle. Imbolio, a
stealing, a filching, a larcenie, a theeuing. Imbollare, to mark with a
branding iron. Also to beplaster or be patch. Imbonire, nisco, nito, to make
good, to endeare. Imborbare, to bemire with dirt. Imborcare, to cloth with
cloth of gold. Imborgare, to enter in a town or borrough. Imborsare, to
emburse or put in a purse. Imboscare, to enter a wood, to lay in ambush, to
take shelter as a dear does, to grow wild, wooddie or desert. Imboscata, an
ambush, an ambushcado. Imboschire, chisco, chito, as Imboscare. Imbosimare, to
stiffen linen cloth after it is wouen as weauers use to do. Imbossare, to
work embost work. Imbossolare, to dight or deck any room or chamber with
all necessary furniture. Also to put into a box. Imbossolata, furnished,
dight or decked very bravely. Also put into a box. Imbottare, to barrel up,
to put into barrels or pipes, to tun up wines. Also to swell as a toad.
Imbottatoio, a tunnell. Also a devise or pipe of leather used in Italy to
transport wine from one vessel to another. Imbottire, tisco, tito, to stuff,
to quilt, to bumbase or counterpoint, to stiffen. Imbottitura, a stuffing, a
quilting, a bumbasing, a counterpoint. Imbottonare, to butten together. Also to
quilt and stuff. Imbottonatura, a buttoning. Imbozzare, to hew out roughly, to
draw the first rough draught of any work. Imbozzamento, a rough or first rough
draught of any work. Imbozzatore, a drawer or framer of any first draught.
Imbozzatura, as Imbozzamento. Imbozzimare, as Imbosimare. Imbracare, to
embreech or put any artillery upon a stock, to put into breeches. Imbraccato,
become a brach or meddled with braches. Imbracciamenti, embracings, claspings,
collings, huggings. Imbracciare, to embrace, to coll, to hug. Imbraciatura, an
embracing: also a shield or target. Imbragare, as Imbracare. Imbrattare, to
foul, to sully, to defile, to pollute, to durtie, to besmeare, to filth.
Imbrattamento, a fouling, a polluting, a defiling, a besmearing, a sulling.
Imbrattaria, as Imbrattamento. Imbrattatura, idem. Imbratti, foulings,
pollutings, defilings, filthe, trash, rags, clouts, sluttishnes. Imbreda, a
breakefast. Imbrenare, to bridle, to snaffle, to refrain. Imbreuiare, to
abreuiat, to shorten, to abridge. Imbreuiatura, an abreuiation, a shortning, an
abridgment. Imbriacare, to be drunken, to make drunk to tipple, to quaffe.
Imbriacaggine, drunknes, tippling, quaffing, tipsines. Imbriacamento, as
Imbriacaggine. Imbriachezza, as Imbriacaggine. Imbriaco, drunk, tipl^d, a
drunkard, a quaffer, a suck spig^^. Imbriacone, a filthy drunkard, a tipler, a
quaffer. Imbricare, to cover, or roof with tyles, to make like a rooft.
Imbriccato, become or made, as Sbricco, or Bricco. Imbrici, the ridge, top, or
uppermost tyles of a house. Also the caves of a house, gutter, or roof tyles.
Imbrigantato, become a rascal, a piras, a thief, or a varlet. Imbrigliare, to
bridle, to snaffle, to curb. Imbrigliamento, a bridling, a snaffting, a
curbing. Imbrigliatura, as Imbrigliamento. Imbroccare, to hit right, to faster
with studs, to stud, to seazeon, to power in, to clothe, or put into cloth of
gold, to give a thrust at fence over the dagger. Imbroccato, hit right,
studded, seized on, clothed with cloth of gold. Also cloth of gold. Also a
thrust given at fence over the dagger. Imbroccata, a thrust at fence, or a
venie given over the dagger. Imbrodolare, to foul with brothe or dish wash, to
fill with swill. Imbrogliare, to entangle, to enwrap, to intricate, to
encomber, to confound together. Imbroglio, an entangling, an enwrapping, a
garboile, a coil, an intricatenes, a mish-mesh. Imbroglione, a sad, busy,
frowning, garboiling fellow, a swash buckler. Imbrucare, to trouble, to wast,
to spoil, to deface, to devour as it were with caterpillars. Imbrunire,
nisco, nito, to burnish. Also to darken, to obscure or make broune.
Imbrunitore, a burnisher. Imbucare, to lay or wash in a buck, to put or creep
into a hole. Imbucatare, as Imbucare. Imburchiare, as Imbarcare, as
Imbecherare. Imbussare, as Imbossare. Imbuire, isco, ito, to teach, to
instruct, to train up, to endue. Also to sink into. Also to infect, to
distaine, to moist or wet, to embrue. Imbuito, taught, trained up, instructed,
endued. Also sonken into. Also infected, distained, imbrued. Imbumento, an
infecting or staining, an imbruing. Imburiassare, as Imbecherare. Also to
stuff or fillfull. Also to beat, to bang, to bumbaste, to swaddle.
Imbutirare, to butter, or dress with butter. Imbutire, tisco, tito, as
Imbottire. Imbuto, as Imbuito. Imiagolare, to meaw or cry as a cat. Imitabile,
imitable, that may be imitated. Imitando, to be followed or imitated. Imitare,
to imitate, or follow or do the like. Imitatione, an imitation. Imitatore, an
imitator, a follower. Immacchiare, to enter or grow to bushes, brambles,
brakes, briers or thorns. Immacerare, as Immollare. Immaculato, Immacolato,
unspotted, clean, vnsoyled. Immagrare, to become or make lean, m^agre, gant,
or lanke. Immagrire, grisco, grito, as Immagrare. Immane, cruel, fell, fierce,
moodie, outrageous, wild, bloudieminded, brutish. Immanita, cruelty,
fiercenes, brutishmes, blood-thirstines, outragiousnes. Immanicare, to put a
handle, haft, or hilt upon any thing. Also to sleeue a garment. Immansueto,
untamed, wild, cruel, fierce, savage, vnmilde, ungentle. Immansuetudine,
wildnes, cruelty, vntamednes, fiercenes, ungentleness. Immantare, to enrobe, to
enmantle, to inuest, to deck, to dight, to cloak. Immantellare, as Immantare.
Immantinente, incontinently, presently, by and by. Immarchesata, having the
flowers or monethlie flowers as women have monthly. Also become a marquis.
Immarcire, cisco, cito, to rot, to adle, to putrify. Immarginare, as
Marginare. Immargine, as Margin. Immariuolare, to become a cutpurse, a
conycatcher, or crafty villain. Immarzapanato, become or made fine, brave,
sweet, or dainty, or smug, or trickesie, and trim as a marchpane.
Immascarare, to mask, to enmaske, to hide, or cover ones face. Immascherare,
as Immascarare. Immaschire, chisco, chito, to become of the masculine gender.
Immastellare, to lay or put into tubs or such vessels, to lay clothes in a
bucking tub. Immateriale, immateriall, without matter. Immattire, tisco, tito,
to become mad, foolish or sottish, to go one of ones wits, to assot.
Immaturamente, untimely, vn^ipely, before season or time. Immaturita,
vnripenes, too much haste in doing. Immaturo, untimely, unripe, out of season,
green, raw. Immediatamente, immediately, next after. Immediate, immediate,
next. Immedicabile, incurable, that can not be cured. Immeditatamente, without
premeditation, extempore, suddenly. Immeditato, vnpremeditated, extempore, on a
sudden. Immegliare, to better, to mend, to make better. Immembrare, to carue,
unlace, cut up, or dismember any piece of meat. Immemorabile, vnmemorable, not
worth the remembrance, forgetful. Immemoria, forgetfulness. Immenso, Immense,
unmeasurable, passing all measure, that can not be filled. Immensita, exceeding
greatness, boundless largenes. Immensurabile, unmeasurable. Immentecatto, as
Mentecatto. Immerdare, to beshit, to beshite, to beray. Immergare, to drown,
to plunge, to duck, to drench, to diue in the water. Immerger^, mergo, merger,
merso, as Immergare. Immeritamente, undeservedly, wrongfully, without just
cause. Immeriteuole, undeserving, unworthy, not meriting. Immerito,
unworthiness, undeserving, without desert. Immerso, drowned, plunged, diued,
duckt, or drencht in the water. Immeschiare, as Mescolare. Immescolare, as
Mescolare. Immetriare, to mytre, or crown with a mytre as bishops be. Immiare,
to enter into me self, to become or make me self. Immigratione, an entering or
changing into a place. Immillare, to multiply by thousands. Imminente,
imminent, aloft, on high, apparent, hanging over ones head, at hand approaching,
ready to fall. Imminenza, imminencie, nearenes, appearance, height, an hanging
above as it were ready to fall. Immiserabile, vnpittie^^, vnmiserable.
Immisericordia, unmercifulness. Immisericordioso, unmerciful, merciless.
Immisto, unmixed, pure, simple. Immitriare, as Immetriare. Immo, but rather,
yea rather, yea but, nay rather. Immobile, immovable, steadfast. Immobilita,
immobilitie, stedfastnes. Immoderatione, immoderatenes, vnsacietie,
vntemperance. Immoderato, immoderate, intemperate, insatiable. Immodestia,
immodestie, intemperancie, vnciuilitie. Immodesto, immodest, intemperate,
saucie, unchaste, unclean, unseemly. Immodico, unmeasurable, excessive, too
much, exceeding. Immolare, to offer sacrifice. Also to baste rostmeate.
Immolatione, an offering or a sacrifice. Immolire, lisco, lito, to built, or
erect. Immollare, to mollify, to soften, to appease, to faint, to weaken. Also
to wet, to bathe, to wash or steep in water, to lay in water. Also to become
wanton or effeminate. Immollire, lisco, lito, as Immollare. Immollito,
mollifide, softened, appeased, wet, moistened, steeped or laid in water, become
wanton or effeminate. Immondezza, as Immonditia. Immonditia, vnclenlines,
filthiness, pollution, sluttishnes. Immondo, unclean, filthy, polluted,
sluttish, beraide. Immorigerato, unnurtured, untaught. Immortalare, to
immortalize, to make immortal. Immortale, immortal, neuerdying, everlasting.
Immortalita, immortality, euerlastingnesse. Immoto, steadfast, immooueable,
fast, firm, vnmoouing, constant, resol^te, fixed. Immouere, to make some
innovation, uproar or commotion. Immuggire, gisco, gito, as Muggire. Immune,
exempt, free, quit, discharged of any office, law, or paiments. Immunire,
nisco, nito, to vnfence, to unfurnish, to vnmunite, to vnwall, to to unfurnish
of garrison, or other munition. Immunita, immunitie, franchise, liberty,
privilege, exempting. Immurare, to wall in, to immure, to enclose within a
wall. Immuschiare, to perfume or dress with musk. Immutabile, immutable,
constant, unchangeable. Immutabilita, immutabilitie, constantnes, firmenes.
Immutanza, as Immutabilita. Immutare, to change or transform into. Immutire,
to make or become dumb or mute. Immutito, made or become dumb or mute.
Immutolire, as Immutire. Imo, low, deep, the lowest, the bottom, the
deepest. Impacciare, to empeach, to meddle with, to care for, to trouble, to
hinder to disturb. Impacciato, empeched, meddled with, cared for, troubled,
hindered, disturbed. Impaccio, trouble, care, hindrance, let, disturbance,
vexation. Impaciente, as Impatiente. Impacienza, as Impatienza. Impacciuccare,
to squatter, to blot, to blur, to bedaube. Impadellare, to put into a frying
pan. Impadronire, nisco, nito, as Insignorire. Impagare, to pay one home for
any thing. Impagliare, to lie in childe-bed as a woman: to betroth in marriage,
to plight faith. Also to fill with straw, to litter or lie in straw.
Impagliuolare, to lie in childbed. Impagliuola, laid in childbed: a woman
lying in childbed. Impagliuolata, as Impagliuola. Impalare, to empale, to
underset with poles as they do hop^ and vines, to put bread into an oven with a
beale, to put to death with a stake as the Turks do the Christians, putting a
stake or sharp pole in at the fundament, and out as the mouth. Also to
fortify or set about, or rail in with stakes, railes or pales, to stake.
Impalato, empaled, underset with poles, put bread into an oven with a beale:
put to death as Christians are by the Turks, fortified, or set about with
railes, stakes, or pales, staked. Impalamento, an empaling, an vndersetting
with poles, a staking. Impalidire, disco, dito, to wax or become pale, wan or
colourles. Impalizzare, as Impalare. Impalizzata, a palizada or setting about
with stakes. Impalmare, to affiance, to betroth man and wife in marriage, to
plight faith and truth, to fasten ^and (...). Impalmato, (...) faith and truth,
the man that is s^re or betroth^^. Impalmata, a woman that is sure or ^^anced
to (...) husband. Impalpabile, impalpable, that (...) not be felt, without a
body. Impaludare, to make or grow (...), ^arrish, waterish, to ^^marish.
Impanare, to make or red^^ (...), as sugar or bread is. Impanatione, a real
turning of another substance into bread. Impancare, to bench, to set upon a
for^^ or bench. Impaniare, to entangle or catch with birdli^e, to beslime, to
make (...), slimie or g^^ish. Impannarazzare, to hang or dight with tapistrie
or hangings. Impannarazzata, hanged, light, or furnished with tapestrie.
Impannare, to close, to shut up with drawing or paper windows. Also as
Apannare. Impannate, certain drawing windows of boardes or paper used in
Italy. Impantanare, to be^yre, to be^^d, to befog, or fill with ^^d.
Imparadisare, to emparadize, to bring to paradize. Imparare, to learn or
conceive any thing in mind. Imparare a mente, to learn by rote or heart.
Imparentarsi, to allie, to become kinsemen together. Impari, ods, unequal,
vn^euen. Imparita, odnes, inequality. Imparnasare, to bring, to l^^^e, or
enter into parnassus. Impartite, tisco, tito, to impart, to divide.
Impartimento, an imparting, or deu^dence. Impascinto, unfed. Impassabile, that
cannot be passed, impassable. Impassibile, impassible, that is not moved with
any pert^rbation, that cannot suffer. Impassionare, to appassionate, to become
passionate. Impassire, sisco, sito, to fade as flowers in the sun, to dry as
raisins and (...), to grow flappy, withered, or ^^^pled. Impastare, as lay or
put into paste, or dow as venis^^ is, to would, to knead, to reduce into dow or
paste as bread is, to cram with (...) as they do capons, to be paste, to lay
le^e^ for bread. Impastata, any kind of paste or pasting. Impasteggiare, to
lay in paste for pasties, to knead, to mould. Impasticciare, to lay in paste
for pasties, to knead, to bedaube, to beplaister. Impasticciato, laid in paste
for pasties, kneaded. Impastoiato, besotted, taken, caught with some shackels
or fetters. Also fettred, shackled. Impastricciare, to bedaube, to beplaister,
to squatter, to be-dabble, to besmeare. Impasturare, Impastorare, to shackle,
to fetter. Also to pasture. Impatibile, insufferable, intolerable, that can not
be suffered. Impatiente, impatient, that cannot abide or refrain. Impatienza,
impaciencie. Impatronire, as Insignorire. Impattare, to bargain, to condition,
to covenant. Also to challenge a man with contempt, to bid a fig for one.
Impauidezza, boldness, stoutnes, courage, vndantnes. Impauido, bold, feareles,
undaunted, sansfeare. Impaurire, risco, rito, to fear, to dread, to put in
fear, to terrify. Impaurito, feared, dreaded, possessed with fear, terrified.
Impazzare, to become mad, foolish, or frantike, to assot. Impazzire, zisco,
zito, as Impazzare. Impazzo, as Impaccio. Impeccabile, that cannot sin,
trespass, or do amiss, vnsinfull. Impeccabilita, vnsinfulnes, purity.
Impeciare, to bepitch or soul with tar, to mark or stop with pitch.
Impeciatura, a bepitching or stopping with pitch. Impecorarsi, to become
sheepish. Impedalate, to take root, to fix fast, to take good footing.
Impedicinare, to set, fasten, or join to the foot or root of any thing.
Impedimenti, cariages, luggage, bag and baggage of an army. Impedimento, an
impediment, a hindrance, a let, a trouble, an encombrance. Impedire, disco,
dito, to hinder, to let, to encombe^, to busy. Impedito, hindered, let, busy,
busied, encombred. Impeditore, a hinder, a letter. Impegnare, to paune, to
engage. Impegno, in paune or engage. Also a gage or a paune, or a pledge.
Impegolare, as Impeciare. Impegolatura, a pitching or tarring of anything.
Impegrire, grisco, grito, as Impigrire. Impelagarsi, to engulfe himself into
the maine, to go into the deep sea. Impelare, to begin to have hairs, or bud
out hairs. Impelire, lisco, lito, as Impelare. Impellicciare, to cloth or put
into a surd garment. Impellizzare, as Impellicciare. Impendere, pendo, pendei,
peso, to hang up, to hang over ones head. Impendente, hanging, pendent.
Impendola, fast, steadie, firm. Also down hanging, or down dangling.
Impenetrabile, impenetrable, that cannot be pierced. Impennacchiare, to deck,
to dight, or adorn with plumes or feathers. Impennare, to fledge or begin to
have feathers as young birds, to deck or adorn with feathers, to fill a
featherbed. Also as Impannare. Impennarsi, is to bound or plunge iadishlie as
some horses do. Impennata d'inchiostro, a pen full of ink. Impennato, fledged
as a young bird, feathered, full of feathers. Impennate, as Impannate.
Impensabile, not to be thought or imagined. Impensato, not thought on,
unregarded, unawares, unaware, without thinking on it, extempore. Impensibile,
without consideration. Impensierato, fraughted with thought. Impepato, dressed
with pepper, pepperd. Imperadore, Imperatore, an emperor, a general of an
army, a chief ruler. Imperadrice, Imperatrice, an emperesse Also an herb so
called. Imperante, reigning, commanding, ruling, swaying. Imperare, to command,
to swaie, to rule, to govern. Imperatiuo, imperative, or commanding.
Imperatoria, a certain herb whereof there be two sorts. Imperatorio,
belonging to an emperor. Impercio, therefore, because, forasmuch. Impercioche,
because that, forasmuch as that. Impercolla, a precious sione. Impercosso,
vnstroken, vnbit. Imperfetto, imperfect, unfinished. Imperiale, imperial,
royal, maiesticall. Imperiato, as Imperio. Imperio, an empire, an empirie, a
monarchy, a dominion, a majesty, a rule, a solemn charge, a supreme
pre-eminence, a royal power, a government, a chief command, an authority
royal, a princely jurisdiction, an imperious swaie. Imperioso, imperious,
maiesticall, royal, stately. Imperiosita, imperiousnes, statelines. Imperitia,
unskillfulness, vnexpertnes, ignorance. Imperito, unskillful, inexpert, ignorant.
Imperlare, to empearle or deck with pearls, to set with pearl. Impermesso,
vnpermitted, unlawful. Impermutabile, as Immutabile. Impero, as Imperio.
Impero, as Impercio. Imperoche, as Impercioche. Impersonale, impersonall, that
has no person. Impersuaso, vnperswaded. Imperturbabile, that can not be
disturbed, vnuexable. Imperturbato, quiet, untroubled, not disturbed, clear,
calm. Imperuersare, to grow perverse, peevish, or froward, or worse and
worse. Imperuersamento, a peeuishmes, a peruersenes, a frowardnes. Impeso,
hanged up. Impetigine, a totter, a scurfe, a mangie, itch, or a ringworme.
Impetenare, to white-wash a wall or house. Impeto, a violence or fury, a
vehemency, a shocke, an assault, a brunt, a force, a sudden motion, a rage, a
pange, a passion, a headstrong toie, fit, fancy or passion. Impetrabile, that
may be obtained or gotten by prayer or entreatie. Impetrare, to obtain or get
by entreatie. Also to grow hard or turn to a stone. Impetratione, an obtaining
by entreatie. Impettolare, to bedash, to bedaube, to beblur, to foul. Also to
entangle. Impetuosita, as Impeto. Impetuoso, impetuous, violent, rash, sudden,
raging. Impia, vide Herba. Impiagare, to wound, cut, gash, or hurt one.
Impiagatura, a wounding, a hurt, a gash, or cut. Impiantare, as Piantare.
Impiastracciare, as Impiastrare. Impiastracci, plaistrings, saluings or
bedaubings. Impiastracciamenti, as Impiastrame^ti. Impiastrare, to beplaister,
to plaster, to salve, to bedaube. Impiastramenti, plaistrings, daubings,
saluings. Impiastratore, a plaistrer, a dauber, a saluer. Impiastri, plasters,
salues, daubings. Impiastro, any kind of plaster or salve. Impiccare, to hang
up. Impiccatello, a wag, a cracke-rope, a halter-sacke. Impiccatoio, a hook to
hang any thing at, a halter sack, a hanging thing. Impiccatore, a hangman, a
headsman. Impicciare, to kindle, to set on fire. Impicciolire, lisco, lito, to
grow or make small or little, to lessen. Impicciolito, made or grown little or
small, lessened. Impiegabile, that will not or cannot bend, inflexible.
Impiegare, to employ, to enfold, to wrap up, to bestow, spend or lay out ones
money. Impiego, an employment. Impieta, impiety, ungodliness, wickedness,
unrighteousness, ungraciousness. Impietrare, to grow hard to a stone, to become
stony. Impigliare, to fill, to replenish, to take hold on, to sease upon.
Impignoccato, candied or preserved with confets of pine apples. Impigrire,
grisco, grito, to make or become dull, lazy, sluggish, slow or idle. Impimento,
a fulfilling, a filling, a replenishing. Impinguare, to fatten, to make fat, to
grow fat. Impingue, fat, gross, greasy. Impinguere, as Impinguare.
Impinguire, guisco, guito, as Impinguare. Impinzare, to fill, to glut, to
gorge, to cloy. Also to tie fast. Also to kindle the fire. Impio, impious,
ungodly, wicked, ungracious, unrighteous, cruel, hating god and man,
blasphemous. Impiombare, to enlead or fasten or cover with lead, to lead.
Impiombatura, an enleading or fastening with lead. Impire, Impio, Impito, to
fill, to accomplish. Impirio, as Empireo. Impiso, hanged up. Impito, filled,
filled up, accomplished. Impisciare, to bepisse on, to piss upon one, not to
care for a man. Impiumare, to sether, to fledge. Impizzare, as Impicciare.
Impizzicare, to raise up to the top. Implacabile, inexorable, obstinate,
implacable, that cannot be appeased. Implicare, to imply, to fold up, to
inwrap. Also to busy or trouble one. Implicatione, an implying, an enfolding,
an inwrapping, an encombrance. Implicita, an entangling, an encombring, an
obscurity. Implorare, to implore, to crave beggingly. Impoderare, as
Insignorire. Impolare, to go or enter between the poles of the world. Impolire,
lisco, lito, to vnpolish, to make rude or rough. Impolito, unpolished, rough,
rude. Impolla, a violl glass. Impollare, to put into a violl of glass, to
store with chickens. Impoltronare, to become or make lazy, sluggish, idle or
roguish. Impoltronire, nisco, nito, as Impoltronare. Impoluerare, to bedust, to
bepowder, to make dust or powder. Impoluerizzare, as Impoluerare. Impomitare,
to polish, sleeke or trim with a pumi-stone. Impomolare, to set a pomell or a
round head upon. Imponere, pongo, posi, posto, to impose, to inioine, to lay
upon, to command. Impopolare, to impeople. Also to prop a vine or any thing
else with a pole or stake. Imporre, as Imponere. Importabile, intolerable, not
to be borne. Importante, important, of weight, of moment, of force, earnest.
Importantia, importance, force, earnestness. Importare, to import, to be of
force. Importunamente, untimely, unfitly, importunatly. Importunare, to
importunat, to solicit, to urge, to trouble. Importunita, importunity,
troublesomnes. Importuno, importune, urging, out of season, troublesome,
presumptuous. Importuoso, having no havens, without ports or harboroughs.
Impositione, as Imposta. Impositore, an imposer, an inioyner, a charger, a
commander. Impossible, impossible. Impossibilita, impossibility. Imposta, an
impost, imposition, inioyning, command or charge. Impostare, to cosen, to
decieue, to beguile by false promises. Impostema, an impostume. Impostemare, to
grow to an impostume. Impostumare, as Impostemare. Impostumatione, an
impostumation. Imposto, imposed, enjoined, laid upon, commanded. Also an
impost upon any merchandise. Impostore, a deceiuer, a beguiler, a cosener by
false promises, a iuggler, a coniurer. Impostura, a deceit, a beguiling, a
coz^ing cast, a iuggling trick, a coniuration. Impotente, impotent, maimed,
lame, unable. Impotenza, disablenes, lamenes, impotencie, maime, disability,
lack of power. Impouerire, risco, rito, to empouerish, to beggar, to wax
beggarly or poor. Impozzare, to put into a well or ditch. Impraticabile,
vnconuersable, not to be conuersed with. Imprecabile, that cannot or will not
be moved with prayer or entreatise. Imprecare, to desire or wish evil or good
to one. Also to curse. Imprecatione, an imprecation, a cursing, an imploring.
Impregionare, to imprison. Impregione, imprisoned, in prison. Impregnaggine, as
Impregnatura. Impregnabile, that cannot begotten with child or covered or
lined. Also barren. Also that may be gotten with child. Impregnare, to get with
child. Also to cover or line any beast. Impregnatiuo, as Impregnabile.
Impregnatura, a begetting with child or covering or lining of any beast.
Imprendere, prendo, presi, preso, to learn. Also to undertake, to enterprise.
Imprentare, as Improntare. Impresa, an imprese, a mot, an emblem, a word. Also
an enterprise, an action, an undertaking, an attempt. Imprescia, haste, speed.
Also in haste. Impreso, learnt or undertaken. Impressare, to impresse, to
imprint, to stamp. Also to hasten. Impressionato, having an impression.
Impressione, an impression or imprinting or stamping. Impresso, impressed,
imprinted, obstinate, wilful, hard or fixed in. Impressore, an imprinter, a
stamper. Imprestanza, a lone or lending. Imprestare, to lend or give to lone.
Imprestito, Impresto, lent, given to love, a lending or a lone, a borrowing.
Imprestatore, a lender. Impretarsi, to become a priest or impriest himself.
Imprigionare, to emprison. Imprigione, in prison, emprisoned. Imprima, first,
before, erst, sooner. Imprimere, primo, pressi, presso, to impresse, to
imprint. Improbabile, that cannot be proved, improbable. Improbilita,
improbabilitie. Improbare, to improoue. Also to impugn. Improbita,
dishonestnes, malapertnes, wickedness, naughtines, badnes, ilnes. Improbo, ill,
caitife, dishonest, malapert, wicked, wanton, hurtful, bad. Improle, he that
is not yet come to man's estate or that has no children. Impromettere, metto,
misi, messo, to promise, to warrant, to assure. Impromesso, as Promesso.
Impromessa, as Promessa. Impronta, an impression, a stamp, a print, a mark.
Improntare, to stamp, to imprint, to impresse, to mark. Improntitudine,
Improntezza, vnreadines. Also importunity. Impronto, as Impronta. Also
unready, importunate, presumptuous, bold. Also a stamp or print, or coin, or
mark. Improperare, to vpbraid, to twit, to cast in the teeth. Improperatione,
an vpbraiding, a twitting, or casting in the teeth. Improportionare, to
disproportion. Improportione, a disproportion. Improportionalita, a
disproportion. Impropriare, to impropriat, to appropriat. Impropriatione, an
impropriation. Improprio, improper, unfit. Improspero, unhappy, not thriuing.
Improuare, to improve, to impugn. Improuerare, as Improperare. Improueratore,
an vpbraider, a twitter. Improueduto, as Improuiso. Improuidente, improuident,
rash, uncircumspect, without foresight. Improuidenza, improuidence, rashness,
oversight. Improuido, as Improuidente. Improuisare, to sing or speak
extempore. Improuisatore, a speaker or singer extempore. Improuiso, unprovided,
extempore, sudden. Improuista, as Improuiso. Improuostarsi, to become a
provost marshall, used by Caro. Imprudente, unwise, foolish, ignorant.
Imprudentia, imprudencie, folly, ignorance. Imprunare, to prune, to enprune
trees. Also to shroud or cover with brambles, briars, brakes, or thorns.
Impuberi, children of the first age, as of four or five years old, or before
they be twelve. Impuberta, a child's age before twelve. Impudente, impudent,
shameless, graceless, ouer-bold, that will not be dashed out of countenance.
Impudentia, impudency, shamelesnes, saucines, unshamefastness. Impudica,
unchaste, unclean, wanton, incontinent. Impudicitia, unchasteness, uncleanness of
living. Impugnare, to impugn, to resist, to withstand. Also to clinche with
the fist. Impugnatione, a fighting against, a resisting, an impugning.
Impulsare, to perswad often, to urge. Impulsore, an inciter, a perswader, a
motive, a prouoker, a summoner. Impune, scot-free, quit, without danger or
fear of punishment by law. Impunito, unpunished, quit from all danger,
scot-free. Impunita, liberty, lack of punishment, impunitie. Impuntare, to
fix, to point, to sharpen, to resist, to stand upon points, to resolve or
settle in an opinion, to falter. Impunto, fixed, appointed, pointed, sharpened,
or faltred in speech. Impurita, impuritie, vileness, reprochfulnes, sluttishnes.
Impuro, impure, dishonest, vile, reproachful, unclean, sluttish, polluted.
Imputanire, nisco, nito, to become whorish, or a whore. Imputare, to impute, to
ascribe, to attribute. Imputato, imputed, ascribed, attributed. Imputatione, an
imputation, an attribution. In, the preposition, in. In, is also very much
used in composition of other words as a sign of privation as we use un in
english, as Incapace, Infelice, Intrepido, incapable, unhappy, fearelesse,
etc. It is also used in composition for to put, to enter, or work in, as
Insignorirsi, to enpossesse himself, Intraponere, to enterpose, Incauare, to
dig in, or work hollow, etc. Inabandono, carelessly, in forsaken manner.
Inabilire, to enable. Inabilita, unableness, disabilitie. Inabissare, to sink,
to precipitate, to tumble, to strike, or to cast down to hell. Inacerbare, to
make or become sour, sharp, eagre, or tarte, to exasperate, to provoke, to
instigate, or excite to wrath. Inacerbire, bisco, bito, as Inacerbare.
Inacessibile, inaccessible, that no man can come unto. Inacesso, having no
access unto. Inacetare, to make sour as vinegar. Inacetire, tisco, tito, as
Inacetare. Inacquare, to water as they do gardens, or wine, to lay in water, to
sprinkle with water. Inaffettato, unaffected, not curious, natural. Inaffiare,
as Inacquare. Also to fill with wind or breath. Inagitato, not moved, not
tossed. Inagnellarsi, to become a lamb or like a lamb, to become mild and
gentle. Inalbare, to whiten or make white. Inalberare, to climb upon a tree.
Also a word about alchimie, to put into a limbike. Also to furnish with trees,
to rig a ship with masts, to climb trees, to set an enseigne upon his staff.
Inalborare, as Inalberare. Inalborarsi, is when a horse does rise and fall
backward. In alcun luogo, in any place, in some place. Inalienare, to alienate,
to make strange, to allien, or estrange. Inalmare, to quicken or infuse a soul
into. Inalterabile, that can not be altered, immutable. Inalzare, to advance,
to eleuat, to raise, to lift up, to set up, to prefer. Inamabile, not
amiable, unpleasant. Inamicare, to become friends together. Inanellare, to
link together, to frounse, or crisp, or curle hairs. Inanimale, that has no
soul, void of life. Inanimare, to animate, to encourage, to harten. Inanimato,
without a soul or life. Inanimire, as Inanimare. Inanti, Inante, Inanzi,
before, sooner, rather, foremost, forward, lieuer, ear. Inanzi tratto, before
hand, before ones cast. Inapellabile, not to be appealed. Inarborare, as
Inalberare. Inarcare, to bow, to bend, to make vautewise. Also to frown, to
scoule. Inarcato, bowed, bent, made vaultwise, a frowned or scouled
countenance. Inarcata, bending wise. Inarcatura del collo, the bending of the
neck. Inargentare, to silver, to cover over with silver. Inargentatore, a
siluerer of any thing. Inarrabile, that cannot be counted or reported.
Inarrare, to give earnest upon any bargain. Also to declare or report.
Inarsicciare, to sindge, or half burn. Inartificiale, without art,
vnartificiall. Inasimire, to make or become like or of the blockish condition
of an ass. Inaspare, to reele, roll, or wind up as women do yarne.
Inasperare, as Inacerbare. Inaspettato, unexpected, unlooked for.
Inaspreggiare, Look Inacerbare. Also to abuse in words. Inasprire, risco,
rito, as Inacerbare. Inassettare, to order, to settle, to place, to dispose
things in good order. Inassetto, in order, in good sort, in due form, nothing
unready or out of frame, ready. Inaudace, fearful, cowardous. Inaudibile,
not to be heard. Inaudito, unheard, that was never heard, strange to hear,
incredible. Inauersabile, inevitable, unavoidable. Inauertenza, a vnwarmes, or
negligence. Inauertire, tisco, tito, not to mark or regard, to neglect, to
forslowe. Inaurare, to gild, to cover with gold. Inbandinare, to bandle, to
make into skeynes as thread. Also to swathe about. Inbandire, disco, dito, as
Inbandinare. Inbando, outlawed or banished. Inbarcare, as Imbarcare. Inbiscia,
winding-wise like a river, or a winding pair of stairs, winding as a snake
crankling in and out. Inbolare, as Inuolare. Inbracare, as Imbracare. Inbreue,
briefly, shortly, in brief, out of hand. Incacare, to beshite, to becacke, to
bid a turd for one. Incaciare, as Informaggiare. Incadenacciare, to bolt or
bar with bolts of iron. Incagliare, to crud as milk, to make cheese with.
Incagliatura, the rennet wherewith they crud milk to make cheese with.
Incagnesco, doggedly, currishly, like a dog, coyishly, nicely. Incagnire,
gnisco, gnito, to become currish, doggish, skittish, or churlish. Incalcinare,
to lome, to mortar, to plaster, to calcinate. Incalciare, to constrain, to
urge, to provoke, to solicit, to kick, to pursue, to assault, to charge one
upon advantage. Incalciamento, kickings, constrainings, prouocations, secret
wrongs, an assault, a pursuit. Incalciatore, a constrainer, a prouoker, a busy
fellow, an assailer, a pursuer. Incalcio, diligence, a help, a wrong, an
assault, a provocation, an earnestnes, a straightnes, a pursuit. Incallire,
Incallisco, Incallito, to become and grow hard, tough, or braunie, as corns
in laborers hands, or corns upon men's feet. Also to take such a custom or
habit that one cannot leave. Incalmare, to engraffe, to imbranch, to plant, to
prune trees, to insert. Incalmatore, a graffer, a planter, or pruner of trees.
Incalmatura, an engraffing, an enbranching, a planting. Incalmo, a branch, a
sprigge, a young graffe, a syen. Incaluare, to become balde, to loose the
hair. Incaluato, become bald, an allusion taken from the trees, when they
loose their leaves. Incalzare, as Incalciare. Incalzo, as Incalcio. Incamerare,
to chamber, to sue one in the common chamber. Incaminare, to address, to set
forward, to set in the way. Incamino, in the way forward, addressed.
Incamisciata, a camisado, a stratageme, attempted by night with shirts upon
armor, so to deceive the enemy. Incamocciare, ta dress leather, like
shammoise, to tanne leather. Incancarire, risco, rito, to grow to a canker, to
canker, to fester, to rankle. Incanellare, to spice or dres with cinnamon. Also
to chamfure or make hollow. Incanestrare, to put into a basket. Incannare, to
wind silk upon bobbins. Incantare, to enchaunt, to bewitch, to charm, to
witch, to use spells and sorceries. Also to sell goods by a crier, at who gives
most. Incantagione, Incantatione, an enchantment, a charming a bewitching, a
sorcerie, a spell, an incantation. Incantesimo, Incantamento, as Incantagione.
Incantatore, the crier that sels goods at who gives most. Also an enchanter, a
he witch, a charmer, a sorcerer. Incantatrice, a woman witch, sorceresse, or
enchantresse. Incanto, as Incantagione. Also a place where goods are to be
sold by a crier at who gives most. Incanutire, tisco, tito, to become graie,
white or hoarie through age. Incapace, incapable, not able to contain or
conceive. Incapacita, vncapacitie, inability to contain. Incaparbire, bisco,
bito, to take pepper in the nose, to become peevish, angry, or skittish. Also
to become obstinate, wilful, headie, rash, headstrong, foolish, mad, skittish,
toyish, froward. Incapare, as Intestarsi. Incapellare, to hoode as they do
hawks. Also to hat one. Incapestrare, to halter, to bind in halters, to
entangle, to entramell. Incapo, at the end, or on the head. Incapocchiarsi, to
become a dolt, a loggerhead, or nodie, to take a foolish conceit in ones head.
Incapparrare, to give or leave money in earnest upon any bargain. Incappare,
to meet, to light on, or stumble on by chance, to fall upon. Also to cover with
a cloak, to muffle with a cap, to cloak. Also as Incapparrare. Incappricciarsi,
to take a toie or conceit in ones head. Incapucciare, to hoode or cover with a
friars cowle. Incarbonare, to black, to besmeare with coals. Also to broile
upon the coals, to make a carbonado. Incarbonata, a carbonado of broyled
meat, a rasher on the coals. Incarbonchiare, to grow to a carbuncle, or to an
impostume. Incarca, a charge, a burden, an imputation, a blemish remaining on
one. Incarcare, to oppose, to charge a man, to impute or blame one.
Incarcatore, an opposer, a burthener, a charger of one, an imputer.
Incarcerare, in imprison, to put in prison. Incarco, as Incarca. Also taken for
man's body. Incaricare, as Incarcare. Incarico, as Incarca. Incarire, risco,
rito, to endeare, or grow or make dear. Incarnadino, Incarnatino, a carnation
or flesh color. Incarnagione, as Carnagione. Incarnare, to incarnate, to
inflesh, to flesh a dog, to enter or reclaim a hawk. Incarnato, enflesht,
flesht, or entered a dog, reclaimed a hawk. Also as Incarnadino. Incarnamento,
an enfleshing, an incarnating, incarnation. Incarnatione, as Incarnamento.
Incarnatiuo, that does incarnate or make the flesh grow together. Incarognare,
to become or grow a carrian, to infect. Incartare, to fix or hit into a mark.
Also to put into paper, to paper, to cover with paper. Incartocciato, rouled up
in a piece of waste paper. Incasciare, to dress with cheese, to encheese.
Incassare, to put up in a chest. Also to enchase or set a stone in a ring or to
put or set caliuers or such into the stocks, to stock muskets. Also to put
into a cofin. Incastellare, to reduce or bring to a castle: a horse to have his
hoof dride up, so that it sounds hollow, to be hoofebound. Incastellatura, a
disease in a horse, the shrinking of a horse hoof, hoof bound, which is when
there is a dry hollownes in it, which sometimes makes it sound hollow, because
it wants moisture. Incastigato, unpunished, vnchasticed. Incassatura, an
inchasing or setting of a stone in a ring: the hollownes of ones eyes.
Incastrare, to inchase with jewels or gemmes. Incastrato, inchased with jewels
or precious stones* it is taken in Grison when the roll in the mouth or bit of
a horse is set close or well joined to the other parts, as if it were of one
piece. Incastramento, Incastratura, an inchasing with jewels or precious
stones. Incastro, a farriers iron to pare the horses hoofes. Incatenare, to
enchaine or bind with chains. Incatene, bound in chains, in chains.
Incattiuire, visco, vito, to grow bad, naughty or worse. Incaualcare, is when
a horse does set one foot over the other in turning round. Incauallare le
braccia, when a horse does set one fore foot over the other. Incauallare, to
lap one thing over another, properly to hold your rod over the right shoulder
of the horse, to make him bring in the right fore foot over the left.
Incauare, to dig or make hollow. Also to free from under. Also to indent or
grave deep. Incauicchiare, to pin, to claspe, to peg or grapple together.
Incauicchiatura, a pricking of a horse. Incaucinare, as Incalcinare.
Incautezza, vnwarines, vnheedfulnes, folly, simplenes. Incauezzare, as
Incapestrare. Incauto, not wary, not heedfull, fond, foolish, simple.
Incazzare, to rage lecherously with or for a standing prick. Incazzire, zisco,
zito, as Incazzare. Incelebre, nothing famous. Incedere, incedo, incedei,
inceduto, to walk or stalk up and down proudly, leasurely, aloft and high.
Incendere, cendo, cendei, cenduto, to burn, to kindle, to inflame, to urge, to
provoke, to insence. Incendiario, which sets on fire, a kindler. Incendio, a
flame, a burning, a fire, a flashing of fire. Incendioso, burning, flaming,
kindling. Incenerare, to burn or reduce to ashes or to cinders, to cover with
ashes. Incenere, burnt or consumd to ashes, to cinders or in ashes. Incenerire,
risco, rito, as Incenerare. Incensare, to burn, or perfume with frankincense,
to offerre incense, to incense. Incenso, as Incenduto. Also a kind of sweet
gum called frankincense, or incense. Incensorio, a censor or pan to burn
incense or frankincense in, used in churches. Incentiuo, kindling, flaming.
Incerare, to fill or stop up with wax, to wax over, to ceare. Also to grow
stiff or hard. Inceramento, Inceratura, a searing or waxing, a seare-cloth.
Incertare, to assure or ascertaine, to warrant, to fold up in order.
Incertezza, uncertainty. Incertitudine, idem. Incerto, uncertain, unsure.
Inceruello, wise, wary, with his wits about him. Incespare, to encumber or
entangle, as thorns do one with another in bushes or hedges, to trip or
stumble. Incespiare, as Incespare. Incespugliare, to embush, to hedge, to grow
to a bush or shrub. Incessabile, incessant, never ceasing. Incestare, to commit
incest or pollution with one of his own kin. Also to put into a basket.
Incesto, incest or lechery committed with one that is near in kin and blood.
Also all manner of pollution. Incestuoso, an incestuous person that has
committed incest with some of his near kin. Incetra, an ingrosing, a
forestalling of any wares. Also an inquiry. Incettare, to engrosse, to
forestall any market. Also to enquire. Incettatore, an engrosser, a forestaller
of markets, an enquirer. Inche, in what, in which. Inchiancare, to paue.
Inchianettare, to arm with a helmet or caske. Inchiappare, to offend, to
wrong, to misuse, to take or surprise one. Inchiatare, to hurt, wound or
strike. Inchiato, Inchiatato, wounded, hurt, stricken. Inchiauare, to shut or
lock in with a key. Inchiedere, chiedo, chiesi, chiesto, to enquire, to
request. Inchiesta, an inquiry, an enquest, a quesi, searching out. Also an
enterprise, a request. Also a forestalling. Inchiesto, inquired, requested.
Inchietta, as Incetta. Inchiettare, as Incettare. Inchinare, to incline, to
bend, to stoop, to bow, to crouch, to loute. Inchinatione, an inclination, a
bending, a bowing, a louting. Inchineuole, inclining, bowing, bending,
stooping, louting. Inchino, inclined, stooping, bent, crouched, reverenced, a
louting, a courtesy. Inchiocca, plenty, store, hold belly hold. Inchiodare, to
clow or prick a horse with a nail, to nail fast, to clow ordinance.
Inchiodato, clowed or pricked with a nail, nailed fast. Inchiodatura, a
pricking or clowing of a horse with a nail, called a clowing, a nailing in or
fast. Inchiostrare, to encloister, to cloister up. Also to blur or daube with
ink. Inchiostraro, an inke-man, an inke-maker. Inchiostro, ink to write
withal. Inchioua, as Anchioua. Inciampare, to stumble or light upon by chance,
to encounter, to shocke, to trip, to meet, to rub by the way. Inciampatura, a
stumbling upon by chance, an impediment, a let, a tripping, a shocke, a
meeting. Inciampo, a stumble, a fall, an encounter, a shocke, a tripping. Also
a stumbling block, a stone or let or impediment, a rub by the way. Incidente,
incident, falling or that chances. Incidere, cido, cisi, ciso, to cut in, to
make an incision, to gash, to slit, to lance. Incielare, to advance up or place
in heaven, to enter heaven. Incielo, in heaven. Inciermetore, a soothsayer, a
wizard. Incinabrare, to make red with cinabre or red oker. Incinare, to hook,
to drag. Incinaro, a hooker, a dragger. Incinerare, as Incenerare.
Incineratione, incineration, a word of alchimie. Incingere, cingo, cinsi,
cinto, to gyrd or compass in. Incino, an irchen or hedgehog. Also a hook, as
Vncino or Rampino. Incino di mare, a kind of fish with prickles on the back.
Incinqua, in five, or at five times or for five. Incinquare, to divide or
reduce into fiues. Incinta, great or big with child. Also loose or vngyrt.
Incinto, gyrt or compassed in. Incipiente, an incipient, a beginner.
Incirconciso, uncircumcised. Incischiare, to cut, to shave, to cleave sticks,
to chip, to mince small, to chop to pieces, to slice. also to dodge and wrangle
about a matter of nothing. Incisione, an incision, an incutting, a gash, a
garsh, a lancing, a slitting. Inciso, a short member of a sentence. Inciso, cut
in or made an incision, gashed, lanced, slit. Also wrought, graven or carved,
snipt or iagged. Incisore, an incider or maker of an incision, a gasher, a
lancer, a grauer or cutter. Incisorij, the foreteeth of any creature. Incisura,
as Incisione. Incitare, to incite, to allure, to provoke, to egg on, to
incense. Incitamento, Incitatione, an incitement, alluring, provoking or
incitation. Inciuile, uncivil, unmannerly, evil nurtured, rustic, clownish.
Inciuilire, lisco, lito, to grow or become civil or mannerly. Inciuilita,
Inciuilta, inciuilitie, vnmannerlines, baseness in behavior, clownishnes,
rusticitie. Inciuittire, to transform into the quality of an owl.
Inclastare, to enchase, or set stones in rings, or to set in little pieces of
wood as ioyners use. Inclasto, an inchasing or setting in of a stone in a ring
or in laide-worke. Inclaustrare, as Inchiostrare. Inclemente, cruel, rigorous,
severe, merciless, stern, fell, vnclement. Inclemenza, rigorousnes, cruelty,
austeritie, mercilesnesse, inclemencie. Inclinare, as Inchinare. Inclinatione,
as Inchinatione. Inclineuole, as Inchineuole. Inclino, as Inchino. Inclito,
famous, renoumed, of great name, glorious, noble. Inclitezza, Inclita, fame,
renoume, greatness, glory, nobility. Includere, cludo, clusi, cluso, to
include, or shut in. Inclusione, an including. Inclusiuo, inclusiue. Incoare,
to perform, or finish, to begin and leave off. Incoatiuo verbo, derived of a
verb of the second conjugation, and of a certain adjective. Incoccare, to
falter, to mumble, to stut in the throat. Also to twyrle round, to nock, to set
an arrow in the nock. Also as Accoccare. Incodare, to set a tail on or upon.
Incogliere, colgo, colsi, colto, to gather or collect in, to shrinkein. Also to
hit or overtake, to take napping. Incognito, unknown, disguised, unkind,
vnkent, uncouth. Incola, further off, beyond, further that way. Incolare,
Incollare, to glue together. Incolatura, Incollatura, a gluing together.
Incoli, enhabitants or dwellers. Incolorire, risco, rito, to give a color
unto, to dye or color. Incolpare, to blame, to accuse, to lay the fault upon.
Incolpeuole, blameless, faultlesse. Incolto, ungathered. Also gathered or
shronken in, collected or gathered in. Also hit, overtaken, taken napping. Also
as Inculto, unhusbanded, unpolished, unhandsome, imperfect, rough, without
husbandry, unmanured. Incoltrare, as Incoltrecciare. Incoltrecciare, to inwrap
or wind up in a quilt or couerlet. Incolume, whole, safe, sound, vndistained,
healthie. Incominciare, to begin, to commence. Incominciamento, a beginning, a
commencement. Incomodare, Incommodare, to incommode, to trouble, to disease, to
hinder, to disturb. Incomodita, Incommodita, incommoditie, trouble,
hinderance, discommoditie, disturbance, tediousnes. Incomodo, Incommodo,
incommodious, troublesome. Also as Incommodita. Incompagnia, together, in
company, with. Incomparabile, incomparable, unmatchable, matchless.
Incompararsi, to engossip himself, to become a gossip. Incompatibile,
insufferable, that can not be suffered. Incomplesse parole, words not well
described, vncomprised words. Incomportabile, intolerable, insufferable.
Incomposto, vncomposed, unfinished, imperfect, disordred. Incomprehensibile,
incomprehensible, that can not be conceived in mind. Incomprehensibilita,
incomprehensibilitie. Incompreso, vncomprehended, incomprehensible.
Incomutabile, immutable, steadfast, unchangeable. Inconcesso, denied, vngranted,
forbidden. Inconcinnita, unfitness, vnhandsomnes. Inconfuso, unconfounded.
Incongelabile, that will not freeze or congeale. Inconclusione, an
uncertainty. Also in conclusion, finally. Inconcluso, uncertain,
vnconcluded, undetermined. Incongruita, incongruitie, absurdnes. Incongruo,
absurd, against form or rule. Inconocchiare, to wind about a distaffe as they
do flax, to huddle up or take all that commes. Also for a man to entangle
himself about women's matters. Inconquasso, in a hurlieburlie, havoc or
confusion. Inconscio, unwitting, guiltless. Inconsiderabile, that cannot be
considered, or imagined, inconsiderable. Inconsideratione, rashness,
inconsideration, unadvisedness. Inconsiderato, rash, vnregardfull,
inconsiderate, unadvised. Inconsolabile, that can not be comforted. Inconsueto,
unwont, unaccustomed. Inconsumato, unconsumed. Inconsumabile, that can not be
consumed. Incontaminato, undefiled, unspotted. Inconstante, unconstant,
mutable, wavering, fickle. Inconstanza, inconstancy, mutabilitie, ficklenes.
Incontanente, presently, out of hand. Inconte, vnreckoned, not counted,
vncounted, vnkemd, disheueld, disordered. Incontegno, in coins, upon nicenes,
disdainefully, squeamishly. Inconti, vnkemd, undressed, desheueled hairs.
Incontinente, unchaste, vncontinent, unclean of life, intemperate.
Incontinenza, incontinencie, uncleanness of life, intemperancie. Incontinuo,
vncontinuall. Inconto, in account, in part of payment, toward a reckoning.
Incontra, against, opposite, over against, contrary, in exchange, in steed.
Incontrare, to encounter, to meet, to shock, to but, to charge upon.
Incontrario, on the contrary, against, contrary. Incontro, an encounter, a
shock, a meeting, a butting, an assault, a hap. Also on the other side,
contrary, against, over against, opposite. Inconueneuole, inconvenient,
unbeseeming, vnbecomming, unfit. Inconueniente, inconvenient. Also an
inconvenience. Inconuenienza, an inconvenience. Inconuiuente, that moves not,
or twinkleth not the eyes. Incoprire, copro, copersi, coperto, as Coprite.
Incoraggiare, as Incorare. Incorare, to encourage, to harten, to animate, to
imboulden, to persuade. Incorazza, armed with a cuirace. Incorazzare, to arm
with a cuirace, Incorbare, to put into a basket, to bow, or stoop, to make
crooked. Incordare, to stiffen or benum with cold. Also to tune, string, or
cord. Incordato, stiffened, benumbed with cold. Also tuned, strung, and corded
as an instrument. Also the incording or bursting of a horse. Incordatura,
Incordamento, a stiffening or benumming with cold, a tuning, stringing, or
cording, the incording or bursting of a horse. Incoronare, to crown a prince,
to wreath or engarland about. Also to reduce to a perfect shape, form and
body. Incoronato, reduced to a perfect shape, form and body. Also crowned as a
king. Incorotto, as Incorrotto. Incorottibile, as Incorruttibile. Incorporale,
that has no body. Incorporalita, having no body. Incorporare, to incorporate
or join together. Incorporeo, incorporeall, having no body. Incorporatione,
an incorporation or ioining together. Incorreggibile, that can not be
corrected, faultles. Incorrere, corro, corsi, corso, to incur danger, to run
in. Incorretto, uncorrected, unpolished, unhandsome. Incorrigibile, not to be
corrected, blameless. Incorrottamente, vncorruptedly, sincerely. Incorrotto,
uncorrupted, entire, sound, perfect. Incorrottibilita, vncorruptiblenes.
Incorruttibile, incorruptible, that will not be corrupted. Incorruttione,
incorruption. Incorsione, as Incursione. Incorso, stumbled upon any let. also
incurred, incurred into danger, run in. Incortare, to shrink in, to shorten.
Incortinare, to deck or hang about with curtains. Incosi fattamaniera, in
such sort. Incosta, Incosti, further of, beyond, that way, fatteui in costa,
go farther. Incostante, as Inconstante. Incostanza, as Inconstanza. Incostare,
to enribbe, to thrust into the ribs or sides. Incotta, raw^, vnsodden, a
rawhead. Incozzare, Look Accozzare. Increato, uncreated, not created.
Incredibile, incredible, marvelous. Incredulita, incredulity, lack of belief.
Incredulo, vncredulous, unbelieving. Incremento, increase, augmentation, a
growing greater. Incremesi, ingraine, crimson, scarlet. furfante incremesi, a
knave in grain. Increpare, to blame, reprove or chide, to threaten.
Increpatione, a chiding, a threatening. Increscere, cresco, crebbi, cresciuto,
to molest, to grieve, to vex. Also to be sorry, to grieve inwardly, to think
the time long. Increscimento, a vexation, a vexing, a greeuing, or thinking the
time long. Increscioso, tedious, troublesome, ircksome, unpleasant.
Incresciuto, molested, grieved, vexed. Increspare, to curle, to frounze the
hair, to wrinkle, to crispe. Increspatura, Increspamento, a curling or
frounzing of the hair, a wrinkling. Increstare, to set a crest or coxecombe
upon one. Increstamento, Increstatura, a cresting or setting a coxecombe upon
one. Incretare, to lome or daube with clay. Incrocchiare, as Incrocicchiare.
Incrociare, as Incrocicchiare. Incrocicchiare, to cross or go on crutchets, to
crucify. Incrocicchiamento, a crossing, or crucifying, or gving on crutchets.
Incroiare, as Croiare. Incrostare, to thicken or make crustie, to grow rugged,
hard or scuruie. Also to parget or rough cast. Incrostatura, Incrostamento, a
thickning or making crustie, a ruggednes, sandines, or scuruines. Also a
pargeting or rough casting. Incrudelire, lisco, lito, to incrudelize, to become
cruel. Incrudelito, incrudelized, or become cruel. Incrudire, disco, dito, as
Incrudelire. Also to make raw. Incrustolire, lisco, lito, to grow hard or
crustie. Incubi, certain wicked spirits that trouble men sleeping. Also the
disease called the nightmare or night-witch. Incude, Incudene, a smithes
anuile or stithie. Incudine, Incugine, idem. Inculare, to recoile or draw
back, or to thrust into the arse. Inculcare, to pore or thrust in, to repeat
often, to press in by force. Inculto, unhusbanded, unmanured, untilled,
desert, wild, barren, unpolished. Incumbii, certain spirit^ so called, who in
the shape of women will subject themselves to men, as Incubi. Incurabile,
incurable, that cannot be cured. Incurioso, careless, negligent, nothing
curious. Incursione, an invasion, an inrode, or forrey. Incustodito, not kept,
not looked unto, vntended. Incuruato, crooked, bending, bowing. Indanaiare, as
Indenaiare. Indaracare, to become fierce, fell, or cruel as a dragon. Indarno,
in vain, for naught, amiss, for nothing, vainly. Indebitamente, vndulie,
unlawfully. Indebitare, to indebt or grow in debt. Indebito, unjust, undue,
unlawful, unseemly. Also indebt, in debted. Indebilitare, as Indebolire.
Indebolire, lisco, lito, to weaken, to enfeeble, to faint. Indebolito, weakened,
enfeebled, fainted. Indecente, indecent, unseemly, uncomely. Indecenza,
indecencie, vnseemelines, vncomlines. Indeciso, undecided, undetermined.
Indeclinabile, that cannot be declined. Also unavoidable. Indecoro, an
indecorum, an vnseemlines, an inconueniencie, a disorder. Indefaticabile,
unweariable, that cannot be wearied or tired. Indeficiente, a thing that never
fails. Indefinito, not defined, undetermined, undiscussed. Indefinitiuo, that
cannot be defined or determined. Indegnare, to be, make or become wroth or
angry. Indegnita, indignity, unworthiness, wrong, abuse, vnnoblenes, baseness.
Indegno, unworthy, undeserving, unmeet, dishonest, shameful. Indelibato, not
diminished, sound whole. Indello, within or in the. Indemoniare, to possess
one with some evil spirit, to make one devilish. Indemoniato, possessed with a
devil, having an evil spirit in him, devilish. Indenaiare, to store with
money, to make rich or to bribe with money, to money. Indenne, without hurt or
harm, harmless, exempt from harm. Indennita, eschuing of danger, escaping
of hurt. Independente, not depending of others but absolute of himself.
Indeplorato, not bewailed, unlamented. Inderitto, indirect, crooked.
Indesinente, always continuing, without ceasing, vncessaunt. Indeterminabile,
that cannot be determined or decided. Indeterminato, undetermined, undecided.
Indettare, as Imbecherare. Indeuenare, to reele or wind silk yarne or thread.
Indeuenatoio, a reeler or reeling stick. Indeuoto, ungodly, irreligious,
impious, without devotion. Indi, thence, from thence, thereby, thereupon. Also
a kind of plum so called. Indiarsi, to become divine or godlike. Indiato,
become divine or godly. Indica, a kind or precious stone in India, of reddish
color; which being rubbed sweateth purple drops. Indicare, to show, to
declare, to utter, to accuse, as Indicere. Indicatiuo, that whereby any thing
is showed or declared. Indicatiuo dito, the forefinger of ones hand. Indice, an
index, table or direction of a book. Also the gnomon of a dyall. Also the
forefinger of ones hand, atouch stone to try gold, a witness. Also a summarie
or inventory of ones goods, a token, a sign or a show or a guide. Also the
inscription or title of a book. Also the trumpe card that is turned up.
Indicere, indico, indissi, indetto, to disclose, to manifest, to appeach, to
accuse, to detect, to betoken, to declare, to noise abroad, to promise, to
denounce, to proclaim, to summon. Indicibile, unspeakable, not to be spoken
off. Indicio, Inditio, a sign, a mark, a token, a show, a note, a
signification. Indicioso, Inditioso, that has or gives signs, marks,
tokens, shows, notes or significations. Indico, blew Inde, a kind of blew
color, wherewith diers use to die blew. Also a kind of musical instrument
with strings. Indietro, behind, back, backward, after. Indifferente,
indifferent. Indifferenza, indifferency. Indiffesa, in defense, to lie in a
ward, to stand upon a guarde. Indiffeso, undefended, not forbidden.
Indiffensibile, vndefensible, not to be defended. Indigente, needy, poor,
lacking, wanting. Indigenza, need, lack, want, poverty, penury.
Indigestibile, that cannot be digested, ordered or pollished. Indigestione,
indigestion, confusion, disorder. Indigesto, undigested, unpolished, confused,
disordered. Indignato, scalded, vexed, galled, rubd the skin off, wroth, moved
or angry. Indignatione, indignation. Indignita, indignity, unworthiness.
Indigno, unworthy, undeserving. Indigrosso, by great, by the great.
Indiligente, negligent, slothful. Indiligentia, negligence, drowsines. Indigo,
as Indico. Indilnuiare, to ouerflow. Indimesticheuole, vnconuersable, that can
not be conuersed withal or tamed, wild, untameable. Indirettione,
indirection. Indiretto, indirect. Also directed or adressed unto. Also
forthright, or directly. Indiritto, as Indiretto. Indirizzare, to direct,
address, or raise up. Indirizzamento, a direction, an addressing, a raising
up. Indisciplinabile, that can not be taught or broken. Indisciplinato,
untaught, unlearned, unbroken. Indiscretezza, indiscretion, or fondnes.
Indiscrettione, indiscretion, fondnes. Indiscreto, indiscreet, fond, rash.
Indisiare, to possess one with a desire. Indisparte, a part, aside, elsewhere,
far off, out of the way, several. Indispositione, indisposition, vnlustines,
crasednes, weakness, disorder. Indisposto, indisposed, unlusty, crazed, weak,
without order, disordred. Indissecabile, that can not be dried up.
Indissolubile, indissoluble, inseparable, that cannot be loosed, or dissolved.
Indissolubilita, inseparablenes. Indissoluto, not dissolved, still knit
together. Indistintamente, without distinction, confusedly. Indistinguibile,
not to be distinguished. Indistinto, vndistinct, vndistinguished, confused.
Inditio, a mark, a sign, a token or notice of any thing, a show. Inditioso,
as Indicioso. Indittore, a declarer, a denouncer, a proclaimer. Indittione, an
indiction, an indictment, the space of fifteen years, time it self.
Indiuerse maniere, in diverse manners, diverse ways. Indiuerse parti, in sundry
parts, in many parts. Indiuia, the herb we call endive. Indiuiduita,
indiuiduitie, vnseparablenes. Indiuiduo, so small as it can not be divided,
inseparable. Indiuinare, as Indouinare. Indiuinatoria art, the art of
deuining. Indiuisato, comparted, divided. Indiuisibile, not to be divided,
inseparable. Indiuiso, undivided, vnseparated. Indocile, a dullard, a heavy
skonce, unapt to learn. Indocilita, indocilitie, hardness of learning.
Indoglia, a pudding or haggasse. Indoglire, glisco, glito, to be full of smart,
pain, grief or sorrow, to benum with stiffenes or with cold. Indoglito, full
of smart, pain, etc, stiff with cold. Indolcire, cisco, cito, to sweeten, to
make sweet, to mitigate, to appease, to assuage. Indole, a good or bad natural
inclination, a towardnes, an aptnes to good or evil, a virtuous disposition, a
towardnes to virtue. Indolenza, lack or want of pain, when no grief is felt,
sencelesnes in pain. Indolenzire, zisco, zito, to ache or feel any ache or
pain. Indolere, dolgo, dolsi, doluto, as Indoglire. Indomabile, that cannot be
tamed, wild, unbroken. Indomare, to make wild or vntame. Indomesticabile, as
Indimesticheuole. Indomito, that is not tamed, wild, unbroken, unruly,
outrageous, invincible. Indonnare, to become a lord, to make or become
possessor or owner of a thing. Indono, in gift, freely, franckly. Indorare, to
gilde with gold. Indorata, a gilding. Also gilt or gilded. Also the herb
walferne, ceterach, stoneferne, scaleferne, miltwaste, or fingerferne.
Indoratore, a gilder, one that guildeth. Indormentare, as Indormire. Indormire,
dormo, dormito, to fall or bring or lull a sleep. Also to bid a fig, or a turd
for one, not to care for one. Indossare, to put or lay upon ones back.
Indosso, upon, about, on the back. Indotato, without a dowry or iointer. Also
disindowed, not endowed with any gift. Indotta, as Induttione. Indottora^e, to
doctor or take the degree of a doctor. Indotto, induced, urged, constrained,
brought unto. Also unlearned, ignorant. Indottrinare, to teach or instruct.
Indouanadore, a winder of wool or silk. Indouanadura, a winding or reeling of
silk. Indouanare, to wind or reele silk or yarne. Indouare, an old word of
Dante, composed of Dove, to go or enter whether. Indouato, gone or entered
whether. Indouinare, to divine, to guess, to foretell, to soothsay.
Indouinamento, Indouinatione, a deuining, a foretelling, a deuination or
soothsaying. Indouinatore, a deuiner, a soothsayer, a foreteller. Indouinello,
a tell-truth, a tom-tell-troth. Indouino, as Indouinatore. Indozzamento, as
Induttione. Indozzena, in commons, boording in a place as scholars do, at
liuerie. Indozzenare, to be in commons, boorded with others. Also made up in
dozins. Indracare, as Indaracare. Indragare, as Indaracare. Indragonare, as
Indaracare. Indrizzare, as Indirizzare. Indrizzamento, as Indirizzamento.
Indrizzo, a direction or addressing unto. Indubbiare, to make one or put one in
doubt. Indubbio, in doubt, doubtful, uncertain. Indubitabile, as
Indubiteuole. Indubitato, undoubted, certain, assured. Indubiteuole, not to be
doubted, assuredly. Inducere, duco, dussi, dutto, to induce, to put in, to cast
into, to lead into, to bring in, to allure, to persuade, to seduce, to deceive,
to entangle, to bring to naught, to move. Inducimento, an inducing, an
induction, a seducing. Inducitore, an inducer, a perswader, a seducer.
Indugiare, to delay, to demur, to slow, to linger. Indugio, delay, lingering, a
demurre, a slownes. Indulgentia, an indulgence, a permission, gentle entreaty,
mercy, favor, mildness. Indulgentiato, having indulgence or sufferance to
do any thing. Indulgere, to grant lightly, to pardon, to consent, to permit
with favor and mercy, to dispense with. Indulto, forgiven, suffered,
permitted, dispensed with. Indurare, to endure, to last, to suffer, to
tolerate, to abide. Also to harden or grow hard, to stiffen. Induratiuo, that
does harden. Also that may be endured. Indurire, duro, durito, as Indurare, to
harden, to make hard, to obdurate. Indurre, as Inducere. Industria, industry,
travel, labor, endeavor, diligence, pains taking, carfulness. Industriare,
to endeavor, to labor, to take pains, to be industrious. Industre, as
Industrioso. Industrioso, industrious, painful, diligent, endeavoring,
laborious. Indutto, persuaded, induced, provoked, brought in. Induttione, an
induction, an entrance, an inducement, a persuasion. Induttore, an inducer, a
prouoker, a perswader. Inebriare, to be drunken, to tipple, to bouze, to
quaffe. Also to besot. Inebriezza, drunkenness. Inedia, hunger, famine, want of
meat and drink. Ineffabile, ineffable, unspeakable, that cannot be spoken.
Ineffabilita, ineffabilitie. Ineffetto, in effect, indeed, in good sooth.
Ineffettuale, ineffectual, of no force, of no virtue. Inefficace, as
Ineffectuale, of no force. Inefficacia, vneffectualnes. Ineguale, unequal,
uneven, odd, different, not match. Inegualita, inequality. Inelegante,
vneloquent, without grace, or beawty, unhandsome. Inelegantia, vneloquence,
vnhandsomnes, rudenes, sluttishnes. Ineloquente, vneloquent, without eloquence.
Inemendabile, not to be amended. Inemendeuole, as Inemendabile. Inenarrabile,
that can not be spoken, unspeakable. Inequale, as Ineguale. Inequalita, as
Inegualita. Inequita, vnequitie. Inerme, unarmed, unweaponed, vnfensed. Inerto,
base mind, weak hearted, cowardly minded, ignorant, lasie, lither, unlearned,
artlesse, dull, rude, slothful. Inertia, ignorance of arts, lack of
knowledge, idleness, lasines, lithernes. Ineruare, as Ineruorare. Inerudito,
unlearned, untaught, vninstructed. Ineruorare, to vnsinewe, to weaken, or
enfeeble, to benumme, to stiffen the ioints. Inesausto, that cannot be drawn
dry, consumed, or spent. Inescare, to lay a bait, to entice, to allure, to
inueigle. Inescatore, a baiter, enticer, or allurer. Inescusabile, inexcusable,
that cannot be excused. Inescuseuole, inexcusable, which can not be excused.
Inesperientia, inexperience, unskillfulness, vnacquaintance. Inesperto, inexpert,
unskillful, without experience, unacquainted. Inespiabile, inexpiable, that can
not be purged or appeased, unmerciful, deadly, marble-minded. Inesplicabile,
inexplicable, that can not be expounded, intricate. Inespugnabile, inprennable,
invincible, unvanquishable. Inessorabile, inexorable, unappeasable, that cannot
nor will be entreated. Inessorato, as Inessorabile. Inestare, to ingraffe, to
graft. Inestatore, a grafter. Inestatura, Inestamento, a graffing, a graft.
Inestimabile, inestimable, invaluable. Inestimeuole, as Inestimabile.
Inestinguibile, unquenchable, that cannot be put out or extinguished.
Inestricabile, inextricable, that cannot be dissolved. Inestricare, to enfolde
a thing so that it cannot be unfolded, to intricate. Ineterno, eternally,
everlastingly, for ever and ever. Inetrire, trisco, trito, to play the untoward
fool. Inetrimento, as Inettudine. Inettamente, foolishly, simply, fondly,
grossly, clownishly, untowardly. Inettia, folly, foolishnes, fondnes,
simplicity. Inetto, foolish, fond, unapt, inconvenient. Inettudine,
unaptness, untowardness, grossenes, folly, fondnes. Ineuitabile, inevitable,
unavoidable. Infabricato, unbuilt, not wrought. Infaccia, in the face, face to
face, before ones eyes. Infacciare, to vpbraid, to twit, to hit in the teeth.
Infacchinasi, as Affacchinarsi. Infacendare, to busy, to occupy, or lay some
business upon one. Infacendato, busied, occupied, or charged with business.
Infaceto, unpleasant, not merry. Infacondo, vneloquent, unpleasant in speech.
Infaldare, to infolde, to plate, or set in foldes, to tucke up a garment as
milkemaides do. Infaldatura, an enfolding, a plaiting or setting in foldes.
Infaldellare, as Infaldare. Infallibile, infallible, certain, assured.
Infallo, amiss, awrie, for nothing, in error, mistaken. Infamare, to defame,
backbite, or make one infamous, to detect, to slander, to shame, to report ill
of, to dishonest. Infame, infamous, reproachful, detected, shamed, defamed,
slandred, ill spoken of. Also dismal or unlucky. Infamia, Infama, infamy,
reproach, detection, shame, defamation, slander, ill name, obloquie. Infamatore,
a defamer, infamer, backbiter or reprocher. Infamatorio, a defamatorie or
reproachful writing or speech. Infancillire, as Ribambire. Infanciullare, as
Infantare, as Ribambire. Infando, so heinous, so horrible, and so villainous
that may not be spoken or vttred, most wicked. Infangare, to bemyre, to beraie
with dirt, to bedash. Infanta, a woman child. In Spain and Portugal, the
kings daughter or infant. Infantare, to be delivered of child, to play the
child. Infant, a man child or infant. Also a title for the kings sons of
Spain and Portugal. Infanteria, infanterie, soldiers that be footmen.
Infantescarsi, to become a maid servant, or to enter into a maid.
Infantilita, Infantia, infancy, childishness. Infarcire, cisco, cito, to
stuff as they do saddles, to quilt, to farce. Infardato, filthy, bedaubed,
besmeared. Infaretrare, to put in a quiver, to arm with a quiver. Infarina
pastinache, a gull, a drone, a foolish fellow, a simple sot. Infarinare, to
bemeale, to bestower, to bewhite with meal. Infasciare, to swathe or bind
together. Infascinare, as Fascinare. Also to bind up as fagots or bauins be.
Infascie, one in his swatheling cloutes. Infastidire, disco, dito, to trouble,
to molest, to disturb, to be lothsom or weary. Infastidito, troubled,
molested, disturbed, bin loathsome or weary. Infastidio, troublesome, noisome,
lothsom, wearisom. Infaticabile, unweariable, that cannot be wearied. Infatti,
indeed, in effect, in good truth, in deeds. Infauare, to be turned or coupled
into a man's priuities, to turn to a bean. Infauoreuole, not to be favored.
Infausto, unhappy, unfortunate, unlucky, dismal, black, dire. Infecondita,
barennes, vnfruitefulnesse, sterilitie. Infecondo, barren, unfruitful,
sterill. Infedele, unfaithful, infidel, unrighteous, false, disloyal.
Infedelta, unfaithfulness, infidelity, unrighteousness, disloyalty, falsehood.
Infelice, dismal, unhappy, unlucky, unfortunate. Infelicita, unhappiness,
infelicitie, infortunatenes, adversity, misfortune. Infellonire, nisco, nito,
to become a fellon, or ragefull, or cruel. Infellonito, enfellonized, or
become a fellon, or cruel. Infeltrato, grown stiff, tough, stark, as a
horse when he is cold. Infeminire, nisco, nito, to become womanish or
effeminate. Inferiore, inferior, lower, under, or underling. Inferire, risco,
rito, to infer, to implie, to signify, to conclude, to allege. Inferito,
inferred, implied, signified, concluded, alleged, enforced a reason.
Infermare, to become sick, to sicken, to fall sick. Also to shut or lock in.
Infermaria, a place for sick folks, a lazaret. Infermeuole, sickie, sickly,
subject to maladies, crasie. Infermiccio, as Infermeuole. Infermita,
infirmity, sickness, disease or malady, weakness, feeblenes. Infermo, sick,
diseased, sickish, ill at ease, crazed, weak, feeble, unable. Infernale,
Infernoso, infernal, hellish, belonging to hell. Infernare, to bring or put
into hell, to suffer the torments of hell. Infernetichire, chisco, chito, to
grow frantike, rauing, mad, or frenzy. Inferno, hell, the deep pit of hell,
low, nethermost, deepest. Inferocito, become cruel, fell, fierce or moodie.
Inferrare, to lock in irons. Infertilita, unfruitfulness, barrennes.
Inferuorato, become earnest, or fervent. Infesta, infected, molested, annoied,
vexed, infested, hurt. Infestare, to infect, to molest, to annoie, to trouble,
to vex, to hurt with sundry incursions or rodes. Infestamento, a molestation,
an annoyance, a trouble, a vexation or hurt. Infestatione, as Infestamento.
Infestatore, an infester, a molester, an annoier, a vexer, a troubler.
Infesteuole, noisome, troublesome, vexing, irksome, grievous, tedious. Infesto,
hateful, odious, troublesome, combersome. Infettare, to infect, to corrupt, to
stain, to poison. Infettione, Infettatione, a contagion or infecting,
infection or contagion. Infetto, infected, corrupted, stained, poisoned.
Infeudato, enfewded, brought unto a tribute. Infiaccare, to weaken, to tire, to
weary, to faint. Infiacchire, chisco, chito, as Infiaccare. Infiagione, a
swelling, a bunch, a puffing up, a timpanie, a gathering of wind.
Infiammagione, an inflammation, a burning, a kindling, a blistring heat.
Infiammare, to inflame, to kindle, to incense, to burn, to blister with heat.
Infiammatione, as Infiammagione. Infiare, to swell, to puff or blow up.
Infiatura, a swelling, a puffing up, an inflation. Infibbiare, to buckle or
claspe together. Inficato, converted into a woman's priuities. Inficcare, to
thrust or drive in, to fix. Infidele, as Infedele. Infidelta, as Infedelta.
Infido, unfaithful, faithless, trustlesse, traitorous, disloyal, false,
unconstant. Infiebolire, lisco, lito, as Indebolire. Infieuolire, idem.
Infilare, to spinne one thing with another, to work together. Also to order,
range or marshall soldiers in files, ranks, rows, lines, or orders.
Infilzare, to thread as they do pearls or beads upon a thread or riband.
Infilzatura, a threading up of pearls or beads. Infilzatrice, a woman that
threadeth up pearls or beads. Infimo, base, lowest, and most abject, mean,
vile, of no reputation, a common rascal. Infin'a quando, until when? how
long? Infin'a tanto, until such time, until that, so long as. Infin', until,
till that, so far as, even, in fine, in the end, in conclusion. Infine, in
fine, in conclusion, in the end, when all is done. Infingardaggine,
Infingardiggine, idleness, slothfulnes, lasines, lithernes, dulnes, sluggishnes,
retchlesnes. Infingardia, as Infingardaggine. Infirgardire, disco, dito, to
become idle, lazy, lither, artelesse, careless, negligent, etc. Infingardito,
become idle, slow, lazy, lither, retchlesse, careless, dull, or sluggish.
Infingardo, slothful, careless, dull, idle, lazy, slothful, lither, sluggish.
Infingere, as Fingere. Infinita, infinity, that which cannot be numbered, an
vnmeasurablenes. Also generality. Infinita, infinite, numberles, endless,
innumerable. Infinitiuo, the Infinitive mood, defining neither time, number,
nor person. Infinito, infinite, numberles, endless. Infino, until, until when,
even, so far as, so far forth. Infino a quando, how long? until when?
Infino a tanto, so long as, until that. Infino che, so long as, until that.
Infin a qui, hitherto, until this place or time. Infinocchiare, to flatter, to
enfenell, to fetch in with flattery, as Gonfiare alcuno. Infinta, a faining, a
show, a flourishing, a profer. Infintezza, fainednes, faining. Infinto,
fained, dissembled, counterfeit. Infiorare, to flourish, to flower, to adorn
with flowers, to bloome. Infiore, in prime, in youth, in ones flower.
Infiorire, risco, rito, as Infiorare. Infirmare, as Infermare. Infirmaria, as
Infermaria. Infirmita, as Infermita. Infirmo, as Infermo. Infisso, fixed, or
fastened in, that sticks in. Infistolare, to impostume, or grow to a fistula,
to fester. Infistulare, as Infistolare. Inflatione, as Enfiagione.
Inflessibile, inflexible, intractable, that will not bend, yield, or be
entreated, cruel. Inflesso, bowed, bent, crooked, crump. Inflitto, stricken
violently, inflicted, smitten against. Influenza, an influence, or a fatal
gift, a flowing in. Influire, fluisco, fluito, to flow in, to enter in, to
sink into, to run into as water does. Influsso, an influence or flowing in,
an influxe. Infocare, to kindle, burn, inflame, or set on fire. Also to neale
red hot, to bake red hot, to glow, to fire. Infocato, kindled, burned,
inflamed, set on fire. Also nealed or baked red hot. Also earnest, fervent,
hot, and violent. Infoderare, to line a garment, or to sheath a weapon.
Infoggiare, to fashion, to enfashion, to frame or reduce to a fashion, to
accustom. Infogliare, to enleaue with leaves. Info^are, to be leacherous as a
goat, or a salt bitch. Infollare, to become foolish or fond. Also to thicken,
to become thick, to press, to throng. Infolpare, to become foolish or
senseless. Infondere, fondo, fondei, fuso, to infuse, to melt in, to power in.
Infondersi, a disease in a hawk, called the melting of the grease.
Infonditore, an infuser, a melter, a powrer in. Infondo, in the bottom.
Informabile, that can not be framed. Informaggiare, to crud, or dress with
cheese. Informa camera, a promooter or informer. Informare, to give form or
shape to any thing, to form, to frame. Also to inform, to instruct, to give
knowledge, to give information. Also to set a shoe upon a last as shoemakers
use, to put a cheese into the cheesefat or press. Informatione, information,
instruction, a fashioning. Informatore, an informer, an instructor, one that
fashioneth. Inform, formelesse, shapelesse, wanting shape, form or fashion.
Informita, informitie, shapelesnes. Infornare, to put in to an oven. Infornata,
a batch or oven full of bread. Infornaro, Infornatore, a baker, or one that
puts in to an oven. Inforsa, Inforse, in doubt, uncertain, unsure, in
peradventure. Inforsare, to make doubtful, uncertain, or unsure, to put in
doubt. Infortunato, unfortunate, unhappy, unlucky. Infortunio, a misfortune,
a mishap, a mischance, a mischief. Infortunita, misfortune. Inforzato,
enforced, strengthened. Infoscare, to darken, to obscure, to grow cloudie,
mistie, duskie or foggie. Infoscatione, Infoscamento, a darkening or obscuring,
a growing mistie or cloudie or duskie. Infossare, to dig or dike in. Infra,
between, amidst, amongst, among. Infra questo, between this, whilst, mean
while. Infra tanto, in the mean time, in the mean while. Infracassare, as
Fracassare. Infracidare, to rot, to fester, to putrify, to corrupt.
Infracidire, as Infracidare. Infradicciare, to weary or make tedious with fond
discourses and foolish behauiors. Infragidare, as Infradicciare. Infragidire,
disco, dito, as Infradicciare. Infragile, vnfraile. Infragnere, as Infrangere.
Inframettere, metto, misi, messo, to intermit, to interpose, to put between.
Also to inlay, or work in among other things. Inframessa, an intermission, or
interposition. Inframesso, intermitted, interposed, put between. Also any
thing inlayde, wrought, or put in between other things. Inframezzare, to
entermixe, to enterlarde. Inframezzo, in the mean while, in the middle.
Infranciosare, to infect, or be infected with the french pox, to frenchisie.
Infrangere, as Frangere. Infrangiare, to infringe, or deck with fringe.
Infranto, broken, bruised, crashed, burst, shiuered, battered, splinted, riuen.
Infrantoio, any hammer or any thing else to braie, break and bruise with.
Infrascare, to entangle together with twigs or boughs or frashes, to become a
halter sack, to feed with vain hopes, to fetch one over, as Gonfiare alcuno.
Infrascata, Infrascamento, a bower or arboure of twigges or leaves or boughs.
Infrasconare le vele, to fasten the sails to their mastes. Also to hoiste
sails. Also as Infrascare. Infrascritto, underwritten. Infrastagliare, as
Frastagliare. Infratarsi, to become a Friar or religious man. Infratoio, any
kind of breaking or brusing tool. Infreddare, to take or be cold, to cool,
to make cold. Infreddaggione, Infreddura, a cold or taking of cold, a rheum.
Infreddire, disco, dito, as Infreddare. Infrega, a catterwaling, proud as cats
and dogs will be. Also salt as a bitch. Infregiare, to fringe, to deck, to
lace, to adorn, to dight, to mark. Also to scarre, as Fregiare. Infrenare, to
enbridle, to refrain, to stay, to rule. Infrenato, not bridled, unruly,
rebellious. Infreno, in bridle, bridled, restrained, refrained. Infrequenza,
solitarines. Infrequentato, unfrequented, vnhanted. Infrescare, to refresh, to
cool, to ease, to rest. Infretta, in haste, with speed, hastily, speedily.
Infrettare, to hasten, to make haste, to speed, to make speed.
Infrigidatione, a cooling, a freesing, a chilling. Infrigidire, to cool or
take cold. Infringere, fringo, frinsi, frinto, to infringe or break, to
transgress a law, to break or tear in pieces. Infrinto, infringed, broken,
or transgressed a law, broken or torn in pieces. Infrogiare, to besot or
bewitch one with flatteries and fair words. Infrondare, to enbow, to enbranch,
to bud with leaves, to blossom, to bloome. Infrotta, in troops, in heaps, in
squadrons, pell mell, in multitudes. Infruttifero, Infruttuoso, unfruitful,
barren, fruitless, unprofitable. Infula, an ornament which priests in old time
did wear on their heads, used also for a bishops mitre. Also a labell hanging
on each side of a mitre. Infumare, to smoke, to fume, to blote, to dry in the
roof or smoke. Infundere, fundo, fusi, fuso, as Infondere. Infuocare, as
Infocare. Infuora, Infuori, abroad, without, outward, out. Also except, saving.
Infuria, in a fury, ragingly. Infuriare, to rave, to rage, to be furious, to
grow frantic or mad. Infusione, a pouring in, a steeping, an infusion.
Infuso, infused, melted, powered in. Infustare, as Inbracare, or Imbracare.
Infuturare, to make perpetual, to set up to posterity. Infuturo, hereafter,
in time to come. Ingabbiare, to encage, to coope up in coopes or cages.
Ingaggiare battaglia, to wage or gage battle, to engage. Ingaggiato, engaged,
waged. Ingagliardire, disco, dito, to grow strong, or lusty, or disposed,
strengthened. Ingaglioffare, as Ingaglioffire, to put up in ones pocket or
pouch. Ingaglioffire, fisco, fito, to become crafty, subtle, slye or knauish.
Ingallare, Ingalare, to ingall, or lay in steep in galls. Ingallonarsi come
vna nane, to be ready to sink and hang on one side. Ingalluzzarsi, to become
wanton, riggish, cockish, foolish or proud upon some humor or conceit.
Ingannare, to deceive, to beguile, to defraude. Ingannatore, a deceiuer, a
beguiler, a defrauder. Ingannauillano, the name of a leap or sault so called
in Italian, as we should say mock-clowne. Inganneuole, deceitful, fraudulent,
guilefull. Inganno, a deceit, a guile, a fraud, a cosening trick.
Ingarafonare, to perfume or stick with cloves. Also to beset or adorn with
gilloflowers. Ingarbarsi le braccia, when a horse does set down his forefeete
cunningly after the manner of true horsemanship. Ingarbugliare, to entangle, to
confound, to garboile, to trouble. Ingarbuglio, a confusion, disorder, hurly
burly, discord, disagreeing or garboile. Ingasiare, to work or purle stitcht
needle work. Ingauitare, to fear, to doubt, to suspect, to mistrust. Inge,
the name of a loving bird. Also taken for love dalliances. Ingegnarsi, to
endeavor, to take care or thought to do any thing, to apply ones wit about any
matter. Ingegneuole, as Ingegnoso. Ingegniero, Ingeniere, an inginer, a
fortifier, a deviser of engines. Also an artificer, a maker of any tools, one
skillful in fortifications, machines, and stratagems of war. Ingegno, an
engine, a tool, a devise, an artifice, an invention, an implement. Also wit,
art, skill, knowledge, discretion, foresight, fancy, cunning. Also the
nature, inclination or disposition of a thing. Ingegnone, the whole frame that
contains the mil-stones of a mill. Also a notable great wit. Ingegnoso,
witty, wily, ingenious, subtle, wise, cunning, crafty, full of invention.
Ingegnetto, a little pretty wit. Also a little tool or implement. Ingelabile,
that does not or cannot freeze. Ingelido, not frozen, vnfrozen. Ingelosia, in
jealousy, in suspect, hid in a letteise window. Ingelosire, sisco, sito, to
become jealous or suspicious. Ingeminato, doubled, redoubled. Ingemmare, to
wind up thread or yarne, to bud forth as vines and willowes do. Also to
adorn or deck with gemmes, jewels or precious stones. Ingenerabile, that
cannot be engendered, not to be engendered. Ingenerabilita, vnbegetting,
ingenerabilitie. Ingenerare, as Generare. Ingeneratione, as Generatione.
Ingenerato, unborn, unbegotten, coming by nature. Ingeniculo, a figure among
the stars now called Hercules. Ingeniere, as Ingegniero. Ingenito, natural,
given or bred in by nature. Ingente, very great, big, excellent and famous.
Ingentilire, lisco, lito, to make or become gentle, courteous or noble, to
ennoble. Ingenuamente, freely franckly, according to ones conscience,
unconstrained, ingeniously, of a free and liberal disposition, in good sooth.
Ingenuita, freedom or free state, ingenuitie, a liberal, free, or honest
nature and condition. Ingenuo, free borne, natural, good, honest, fine,
dainty, comely, noble. Ingerire, risco, rito, to bring, to carry, to put or
to power in, to throw or cast down, to press into. Also voluntarily to
press into, to press in, to offer himself undesired. Ingerito, brought,
carried, put or brought in, thrown or cast down, pressed into. Ingessare, to
white with chalk, to chalk. Inghiottire, tisco, tito, to englut, to glut, to
swallow, to devour. Inghiottonare, to become a glutton or a cosening knave.
Inghiottonire, nisco, nito, as Inghiottonare. Inghiozzare, as Inghiottire.
Inghirlandare, to engarland or enwreath to crown with a garland. Inghistara, a
glass or pot of glass to bring wine in, to the cubboord. Ingiaccare, to put
one in a iacket, or shirt of maile. Ingiallare, to wax, make or become
yealowe. Ingiallire, lisco, lito, as Ingiallare. Ingigliare, to deck, to
adorn or set with lillies. Inginocchiare, to kneel down. Inginocchiate,
kneeling places. Inginocchio, a knee. Also kneeling. Inginocchioni, kneeling,
or upon the knees. Ingiocondita, vnpleasantnes, sadness, pensiuenes. Ingiocondo,
unpleasant, sorrowful, sad, not merry. Ingioncare, to tie or bind about with
bulrushes, osiers or willowes, to make fresh cheese and cream. Ingioncata, a
kind of fresh cheese and cream or clouted cream. Ingiongere, giongo, gionsi,
gionto, to inioine, to command, to impose, to will, to charge. Ingiontione, an
iniunction, command, imposition or charge. Ingionto, inioined, commanded,
imposed, willed or charged. Ingiorneare, as Giorneare. Ingiouenire, nisco,
nito, to become young again. Ingiouentu, in youth. Ingiro, about compassing,
giring, turning, circling. Ingiu, Ingiuso, downward, beneath, low, below.
Ingiuria, injury, wrong, abuse, misusage, trespass, offense, hurt,
displeasure. Ingiuriare, to injury, wrong, abuse or misuse, to offend, to
hurt. Ingiuriatore, an iniurer, wronger or abuser, an offender. Ingiurioso,
injurious, wrongful, abusiue, offensive, hurtful. Ingiuncare, as Ingioncare.
Ingiuncata, as Ingioncata. Ingiustare, to level, to make even or just.
Ingiustitia, injustice, wrong or false dealing. Ingiusto, unjust, false, wrong,
uneven. Ingluuio, the craw, crop or panell of a bird or hawk. Ingobbare, to
bow, to bend or make crookbacke or bunchie. Ingobbire, bisco, bito, as
Ingobbare. Ingoffire, fisco, fito, to grow foolish, sottish, unwise or
clownish. Ingogna, as Gogna. Ingognare, to torture or rack with a kind of
torment. Look Gogna. Ingolare, to glut, to swallow, to devour without chawing,
to gorge up. Ingolfare, to enter into a gulf or haven, to engulfe. Ingogliare,
as Ingolare. Ingolare, as Ingolare. Ingoire, goisco, goito, as Ingolare.
Ingoluppare, to fold up, to roll up, to wind up, to entangle. Imgombrare, to
encumber, to trouble, to let, to hinder. Ingombramento, an encumbrance,
trouble, let or hinderance. Ingombro, as Ingombramento. Ingordigia, greedines,
rauenouses, couetise. Ingordo, greedy, ravenous, insatiable, covetous.
Ingorgare, to gurgle, to gargarize, to rattle in the throat, to swill, to
gulche, to swallow, to choke or ouerdrowne with water. Ingorgare la lingua,
when a horse does swallow or draw up his tongue. Ingorgamento, a gurgling,
gargarizing or rattling in the throat, a gulching, a swilling, a swallowing.
Ingorgo, Ingurgo, a place where springs do gurgle, or a gargarize, a gulch.
Ingorgogliare, as Ingorgare. Ingottato, sick of the gout, goutie. Ingozzare,
to falter or rattle in the throt to engorge, to swallow up. Ingozzatura, a
faltring, an engorging, a rattling in the throat. Ingradare, to graduate, or
enter into some degree. Ingramare, to make or be sorrowful, sad, mourning, or
pensive. Ingramire, as Ingramare. Ingrandire, disco, dito, to greaten, to make
great, big or high. Also to advance, to prefer, to eleuate, to raise.
Ingrandito, greatned, made or become great or big, or high. Also advanced,
preferred, raised, elevated, set up. Ingranella, the stone that breeds in a
man's bladder, or kidneis. Ingranellare, to grow to corns or little grains,
to grain. Ingrannire, nisco, nito, as Ingramare. Ingrassare, to fatten, to
become or make fat. Ingratitudine, unthankfulness, ingratitude. Ingrato,
unthankful, ungrateful, unpleasant, unacceptable. Ingrauare, to aggrauate,
to oppress, to ouercharge. Ingrauidare, to get with child, to become big with
child, to cover or line a beast. Ingrauidanza, as Grauidanza. Ingredere,
gredo, gressi, greduto, to go or enter in, to put in. Ingrediente, an
ingredient, a putting in. Ingreduto, gone or entered in, put in. Ingressione, an
ingression, or going in. Ingresso, as Ingreduto. Also an entrance, an egresse,
an access. Ingremire, misco, mito, as Griffare. Ingrognare, to grumble, to
loute, to poute, to grunt as a hog. Ingrommare, as Grommare. Ingroppare, to
knot, to knit, to tie in knots. Ingrossare, to make great or big, to
engrosse. Also as Ingrauidare, to swell. Ingrosso, by great, in big, by great
sums, as to sell by the great. Ingrottare, to enter or put into a grot,
cauerne, or cave. Ingrugnare, as Ingrognare. Inguagiare, as Ingagiare.
Inguaire, isco, ito, to enwoe, or make sorrowful, to fill with woes.
Inguantare, to glove, to put on gloves or gantlets. Ingufato, hoodded, muffled
about the head as an owl. Inguidarescare, to gall or rub off the skin till
rotten matter come out. Inguinaia, Inguinaglia, the groine, or part near the
priuities of man or woman. Inguisa, in such sort, in manner, so. Inguisache, so
that, so as, in such manner. Inguisare, as Infoggiare. Ingugiare, as Ingolare.
Inguistara, as Inghistara. Ingustabile, not to be tasted, without taste,
tastelesse. Ingustoso, Ingusteuole, as Ingustabile. Inhabile, unable, unapt,
unfit, improper, not able, unwieldy. Inhabilitare, to enhable, to make apt,
fit, proper, or able. Inhabilita, disabilitie, unaptness, unfitness.
Inhabitabile, uninhabitable, that cannot be abidden or dwelt in. Inhabitare, to
inhabit, to dwell, to wone. Inhalatione, a breathing in. Inhibire, bisco,
bito, to inhibite, to forbid, to hinder, to withhold. Inhibitione, an
inhibition, a forbidding. Inhonesta, dishonestie, vndecencie. Inhonesto,
dishonest, dishonest, shameful. Inhonorato, without honor, dishonored.
Inhospitale, a miser, a snudge, a wretch that keeps no hospitality, a churl
that suffers none to harbor or lodge with him. Inhospitabile, idem.
Inhospitalita, rudeness, inciuilitie, ill using of strangers, lack of
humanity. Inhospite, as Inhospitale. Also unhaunted, unfrequented, or wild.
Inhumanita, inhumanitie, ungentleness, unkindness, cruelty. Inhumano, ungentle,
cruel, inhumane, unkind, wild, beastly, ignorant, discourteous. Inhumidire,
disco, dito, to moisten, to water, to soften, to wet. Inhumido, moist, wet,
waterish, dampish. Inimaginabile, that cannot be imagined. Inimicare, to become
an enemy, a foe, or unfriendly, to vary. Also to make enemies, to set
together by the ears. Inimicitia, enmity, fude, variance, hostility.
Inimico, an enemy, a foe, an adversary, a back-friend. Also quicksilver,
according to Alchimists phrases. Inimitabile, that cannot be imitated or
followed, inimitable, without compare. Iniquita, iniquity, unrighteousness,
impiety, wickedness, injustice, inequality. Iniquo, wicked, unrighteous,
ungodly, impious, partial, unjust, unreasonable. Inlaudabile, not worthy of
praise, that cannot be praised. Iniscambio, in exchange, mistaken, in steed,
in liewe, in mistaking manner. Initiamenti, the first instructions in any kind
of religion, science or knowledge. Initiato, which has ended, his
apprentisehood, one entered into rules, instructed in the principles. Initio, a
beginning, an entrance, a platform. Iniungere, as Ingiongere. Inlagare, to
ouerflowe and become as a lake. Inlardare, to larde as cooks do rostmeate, to
enterlarde. Inlecito, unlawful. Inleiare, to come or enter into her.
Inlendinare, to have or to store with nits. Inlendinire, nisco, nito, idem.
Inliuidire, disco, dito, to make black, blewe, wanne. Also to envy and hate
secretly. Inliuidito, Inliuido, black, blew, wan or of the color of lead and
ashes. Also envied or hated. Inlordare, to foul, to pollute, to defile, to
soil, to sully. Inluogo, in liewe, in stead, in place. Inlustrare, as
Illustrare. Inmalhora, with a mischief, in an ill hour. Inmano, in hand,
fastholding. Inmantare, to inmantell, to inrobe, to dight, to inuest.
Inmantellare, as Inmantare. Inmarare, to become a sea, to enter into the sea.
Inmattire, tisco tito, to become foolish, mad, or sottish, to run mad. In men
d'un che, in a trice, on a sudden, in the twinkling of an eye. In men d'un
batter d'occhio, in less then the twinkling of an eye, suddenly. Inmentre,
whilst, whilst that, so long as. Inmirare, to look inlie into, inlie to
view. In molle, in steep. Inmetriare, to enmitre, to crown with a mitre.
Innaffiare, to water a garden in hot weather, to sprinkle with water. Also to
fill with wind or breath. Innalzare, to advance, to ^leuat, to raise, to
prefer, to lift up, to enhance. Innalzamento, an advancement, a preferment, a
raising, an elevation, a lifting up. Innamoracchiare, to fall foolishly in
love. Innamorare, to enamour, to fall in love. Innamorato, inamored, fallen in
love. Also a lover, an amorous fellow. Innamoramento, Innamoranza, an
inamoring, a falling in love. Innamorata, a shee-louer, ones mistres, or sweet
heart, an amorous woman. Innamoraccio, filthy, absurd, beastly love.
Innamoracciare, to fall wantonly or foolishly in love. Innamoracchiarsi, as
Innamoracciare. Innamorbare, to infect, to pollute, to corrupt, to fester.
Innamorbamento, an infection, pollution, corruption, festring or contagion.
Innanti, Innanzi, before, sooner, rather. Also forward, onward, on, before.
Innanzi che, rather then, before that. Innarcare, as Inarcare. Innarrare, as
Narrare. Innascere, nasco, nacqui, nato, to be borne inward, to inbreede, to
engender in one. Innaspare, to reele or wind yarne. Innaspatore, a reeler or
winder of yarne. Innaspettato, unexpected, unlooked for. Innastrare, to tie or
bind up in fine ribands, as Inostrare. Innastri, bindings or dressings with
ribands. Innato, inbred, inborne, natural, inward, engendered in one. Also
borne in or with, naturally bred. Innauerare, to wound or hurt to death.
Innauigabile, innauigable, that can not be sailed through. Inneccitabile, that
can by no means be enticed, provoked, allured, or stirred up. Innegrare, to
black, to obscure, darken, ensable or smoke black. Innegrire, as Innegrare.
Innescare, to entice, allure, bait, to catch with a bait. Innestare, to
engraffe one thing within another. Innesto, a graffe, a young scien.
Inneuitabile, unavoidable, that can not be shunned, incuitable. In niun luogo,
in no place, no where. In niun modo, by no means, in no wise. Innobilitare, to
ennoble, to make noble, to nobilitate. Innocciolare, Look Snocciolare.
Innocente, innocent, guiltless, harmless, silly, hurtlesse. Innocentia,
innocence, sillines, without harm, hurt, or guilt, integrity, harmelesnesse,
true intent, guiltl^snes. Innominabile, not to be named. Innorare, as Honorare.
Also to guild. Innouare, to innouate, to breed some innovation, to alter.
Innouatione, innovation, alteration, disturbation or change. Innouatore, an
innouator, alterer, disturber or changer. Innuba, she that was never married.
Innubo, he that was never married. Innumerabile, innumerable, vncountable, that
cannot be numbered. Innumero, innumerable. Inobediente, disobedient,
stiffnecked, stubborn. Inobedienza, disobedience. Inoffeso, vnoffended,
untouched, vnwrongd. Inofficioso, ungentle, that does no good turn for his
friend. Inogni luogo, in every place, each where Inogni modo, howsoever, by
every means. In ogni part, in every part, every where. Inoltra, Inoltre,
furthermore, besides, beyond, further. Inoltrare, to go further, or beyond.
Inominabile, not to be named. Inondare, to ouerflowe, to surrounde, to
ouerwhelme or cover with water. Inondatione, an inundation, an ouerflowing, a
spring tide, a deluge. Inopaco, not shadowed, open. Inopia, penury, scarcity,
necessity, want, poverty, need lack of necessaries. Inopinabile, that no
man would have thought, contrary to common sense. Inopina^e, to neglect, not
to think upon. Inopinato, neglected, not thought upon, unlooked for. Inopioso,
needy, poor, wanting. Inopportuno, untimely, unseasonable, unmeet, out of
season. Inorbato, made blind, blinded. Inordinatezza, excess, inordinatenes,
intemperancie. Inordinato, inordinate, excessive, immoderate, intemperate,
disordred. Inornato, vndeckt, disadorned, untrimmed, disaraide, without
eloquence. Inorpellare, to gild with painters gold, or base gold.
Inospitabile, Look Inhospitale. Inossare, to enter or pierce into the bones,
to grow hard or close together to the bone. Inosse^uabile, that can not be
kept or observed. Inosseruanza, inobseruancie, not keeping. Inostrare, to deck
with purple, to beautify in grain colors: to dress up a woman's head with
fine ribands and pretty devices, and knots. Inpadellare, to put, set, or lay
in a pan. Inpalese, openly, apparently, in sight, in view, in the fa^e.
Inpaludare, as Paludare. Inparte, in part, partly, in some sort. Inparuccare,
to attire with a pernwig, to put on a peruwig. Inpendente, in doubt, in
suspense, hanging by, a slope. Inpettinente, vnpertinent, not fit, not
belonging. Inpertinentia, impertinencie. Inperuccare, as Inparuccare.
Inpeuerare, to pepper, to dress with pepper. Inpeuerata, a kind of black
pottage they use in Germany, made of much pepper. Inperuersare, to grow worse
and worse, to grow perverse and stubburne. Inpie, Inpiedi, on foot, standing,
upright. Also in steed or in lieu. Inpo^, except, saving. Also hereafter,
afterward. Inponto, as Inpunto. Inpot^sta, in the power or jurisdiction.
Inp^endere, to undertake, to learn, to enterprise. Inpresentia, in presence,
in view, in sight. Inprima, at first, before, first. Inprole, having no child
or issue. Inpronto, ready, prepared, prompt, dight. Inpruoua, as Apruoua.
Inpunto, ready, prepared, at all assaies, at all points, in the nicke, in a
readiness. Inputare, as Imputare. Inputatione, as Imputatione. Inquadernare, to
ensquare, to join some part together. Inquadrata, a thrust at fence where he
that offers it turns presently his back to his enemy. Inqualche modo, in
some sort, in some manner, some way. In qual maniera si voglia, in what manner
soever. Inqualungue modo, in what manner soever. Inquanto, for as much, in
as much, concerning, touching, as for, so far forth. Inquanto si potra, in
as much as may be done, so far forth. Inquartare, to quarter ones cote or
arms with others. Inquella, Inquello, in the mean while, at that instant.
Inquesto mezzo, in the mean while, whilst. Inquietare, to disquiet, trouble,
disease, or molest. Inquiete, unquietness, trouble of mind, disease,
molestation, unrest, care, lack of rest. Inquieto, unquiet, troublesome,
busy, troublous, that has no rest. Inquietudine, as Inquiete. Inquilino, he
that dwells where neither he nor his ancestors were borne. Inquirire, risco,
quisi, rito, to enquire, to search after, to make inquiry, to ask, to
demand, to examine, to make inquisition. Inquisitione, an inquiry,
inquisition, or promoting, a search or examination. Inquisitiuo, enquiring,
searching, seeking, inquisitiue, busy. Inquisito, examined, enquired.
Inquisitore, an inquirer, an inquisitor, a promooter, an examiner. Inrationale,
unreasonable, brutish. Inrationalita, unreasonableness. Inreppatare, to fasten
in and unto. Inreprobabile, as Irreprobabile. Inresoluto, irresolut,
unresolved. Inritrosire, sisco, sito, to grow or become froward, squeamish,
waiward, fon^e, or peevish. Inrosare, to enrose, to strew with roses.
Inrotellare, to role up in roles. Inrotta, overcome, defeated, overthrown,
discomfited, in ruin. Inrubinare, to die or make red, to make rubie-like.
Inruginire, nisco, nito, to ruste or wax rustie. Insaccare, to put up in a
sack, to pocket up, to sack up, to put in a bag. Insacco, in the bag, in
the sack, put up. Insaffranare, to die or to color, or to season with
saffron. Insagna, a letting of blood. Insagnare, to let blood. Insalami, any
kind of salt meat that will keep, as bacon, neates-toongs, and martelmas
beef. Insalare, to salt, to powder, to lay in brine, to pickle, to make
brackish. Insalata, a sallet. Insalatuccia, a little sallet,, a medlie sallet.
Insaldare, to solder metal with solder, to make stiff, hard, or fast.
Insaldatura, soldering, solder. Insalicare, to paue a high way, to make a
causie. Insalicata, a pauement, a causie. Insalicatore, a pauer or causie
maker. Insaluatichire, chisco, chito, to make or grow wild or desert, or
strange. Insalubre, unwholesome, unhealthful, noisome, contagious. Insalubrita,
vnhealthfulnes. Insaluo, safely, surely, in safegarde, in safety, safe enough.
Insalutato, unsaluted. Insanabile, incurable, that cannot be healed or cured,
recureles. Insanguinare, to besmeare or gore with blood, to bloody.
Insanguinacci, clods, or gore blood. Also bloodlings, or blood-puddings.
Insanare, to be mad, to dote, to be peevish, to rave, to play the idiot, to
make unsound, or unwholesome. Insanabile, that cannot be cured, incurable,
recureles. Insanire, nisco, nito, as Insanare. Insania, folly, fondnes,
madness, foolishnes, skittishnes, sottishnes, witlessenes, peeuishnes, dotage,
frowardnes. Insano, unsound, unhealthful. Also foolish, fond, senceles, an
idiot, raging, wood, furious, witless, unruly, mad, doting, peevish.
Insanto, unholy, not holy. Insaponare, to ensope, to soap clothes, to lather,
to lay in suds. Insaponamento, a soping, a lathering, a suds. Insaporare, to
ensauour, to give a taste or savor to any thing. Insapore, in savor so as
ones teeth water for longing. Insaporetto, somewhat longing, till ones teeth
run a water. Insaporire, risco, rito, as Insaporare. Insatalare, to become a
satelite, a guard, a halbardman, an officer, a catchpole, a sergeant, or some
such base office. Insatelire, lisco, lito, as Insatalare. Insatiabile,
insatiable, greedy, that cannot be filled, that never has his fill.
Insatiabilita, as Insatieta. Insatieuole, as Insatiabile. Insatieta,
insacietie, greedines, rauenousnesse. Insatio, unsatiate, greedy. Insaturabile,
as Insatiabile. Insauire, visco, vito, to grow wise, witty, or discreet.
Insauorrare, to fill with duste, rubbish, or chafe, to stuff. Insberleffo, a
skonce, a skewe, all-aflant. Inscambio, in steed, in place, in lieu, in
exchange, in counterchange. Inscio, an ignorant, a simple man, a natural, a
fool. Inscolpire, pisco, pito, to engraue, to grave, to carue. Inscoltore, an
engrauer, a grauer, a caruer. Inscoltura, an engrauing, a grauing, a caruing.
Insconciare, as Sconciare. Insconciatura, as Disconciatura. Insconcio, as
Disconcio. Inscriuere, scriuo, scrissi, scritto, to write in. Inscrittione, an
inscription, or superscription. Inscritto, in written, made an inscription or
superscription. Inscrittore, a secretorie, a superscriber, a writer.
Inscrittura, an inscription, a writing. Also in writing. Inscrutabile,
inscrutable, unsearchable, not to be sounded. Inscurare, to obscure, to darken,
to disable a man. Insegna, an ensign, a standard, a banner, a band of
soldiers. Also a company of men, so many as march under one ensign. Also a
mark, a token, a sign, a note. Insegnamento, a teaching. Insegnare, to teach,
to instruct. Insegne, ensigns, arms, scutchions, monuments, cotes in arms.
Inselciare, to fill or paue with flintstones. Inselciata, a pauement, a causie
of flintstones. Inselciatore, a pauement, or causie maker of flintstones.
Insella, the name of a point of war sounded upon the trumpet. Also in the
saddle, in a saddle. Insellare, to saddle, to ensaddle, to leap or put into
the saddle. Inseluare, to grow to a wood, to become a wood. Also to enter a
wood or forest. Inseme, Insembre, as Insieme. Insemitare, to follow ones
steps or footing. Insempiterno, for ever and ever. Insemprare, to eternize,
perpetuate or make eternal. Insempre, for ever. Insempremat, for ever and
ever. Insensabile, insensible, senceles, without reason, unfeeling. Insensare,
to be or make senseless or insensible, to grow out of reason. Insensato,
insensible, senceles, grown out of reason. Also foolish, fond, without reason.
Insenseuole, as Insensabile. Insensibile, as Insensabile. Insensibilita,
sencelesnes, vnfeelingnes. Insensitiuo, senceles, unfeeling. Inseparabile,
inseparable, that cannot be divided. Insepolto, unburied. Insepoltura, in his
grave, intoombed. Also the vnburying of one. In serbo, in keeping, in store, a
forehand. Inserire, risco, rito, to set, put or bring in, to add, to meddle,
to mix, to insert, to join, to ingraft. Inserito, Inserto, set in, put in,
ingrafted, added, joined, mixed, brought in, inserted. Inserrare, to lock or
shut in. Insertare, as Inserire. Insertatione, an intermedling, a grafting an
implying, an insertion. Insertatore, a medler, an intermedler, a grafter, an
insertor. Insessioni, certain bathing medicines. Inseuerire, risco, rito, to
grow or become severe, cruel or austere. Insetti animali, small vermin
beasts having no blood, flesh nor sinewe, as flies, gnats, pismiers, and such.
Insida, the name of an office in Venice belonging to the custom house.
Insidiare, to lie in wait, to deceive, to practice wiles, to seek to entrap,
to lie in ambush, to molest, to trouble. Insidiatore, one that seeks to
deceive, that practices wiles, intrappeth, spreads snares, a treacher.
Insidie, wiles, deceits, intrappings, ambushes, treacheries. Insidioso,
deceitful, treacherous, crafty, wily, full of secret intrappings. Insieme,
with, together, withal, moreover, besides, therewith, jointly, yfere, in
company. Insiememente, wholly, together, altogether, therewithal.
Insiemeseco, together with himself. Insignorire, risco, rito, to become lord,
patron or possessor. Insignorirsi, to become lord or possessor of any thing.
Insignorito, made lord, possessor or master of any thing. Insilicare, to paue
or to make a causey. Insincero, corrupt, not pure, false. Insino, until, so
far as, even unto, until when, so far forth, unto. Insino a quando? how
long? until when? Insino a tanto, so long as, until, till that, whilst.
Insino che, until that, so long as, whilst. Insin' hora, until now, until
when. Insinuare, to ins^nuate, to conioine, closely to creep into ones bosom
or mind. Insinuatione, an insinuation or close creeping into ones bosom or
mind, a colorable or crafty beginning of an oration, whereby we covertly
creep into the favor of the audience. Insinuatore, an insinuator, a crafty
sly creeper into ones bosom, favor or mind. Insipa, foolish, fond, witless,
unsavory, without reason. Insipidire, disco, dito, to take away all savor or
taste, to deprive of reason. Insipiditia, Insipidezza, vnsauorines, tasting of
nothing. Also folly, fondnes, lack of wisdom and discretion. Insipido,
unsavory, unseasoned, wallowish, without any taste or smacke fond, without
relish. Also quicksilver according to alchimists phrases. Insipiente, without
discretion, foolish, unjust, an ignorant, a sot, an idiot. Insipienza,
foolishnes, ignorance, doting, folly, lack of discretion. Insistere, sisto,
sistei, sistuto, to insist, to persist, to continue, to stay, rest or lean
upon. Also to urge, to enforce, to pursue, to solicit. Insistuto, insisted,
persisted, continued, urged, enforced, pursued, solicited. Insistenza, a
persisting, an insisting, a staying or pausing. Insitare, to ingraft, to join
or put together, to put or set in. Insitamento, a grafting or ioining together.
Insitatore, a grafter or ioiner of things closely. Insito, a graffe, a stock,
a plant, an instinct. Insoaue, unsweet, sower, unpleasant. Insoauire, as
Addolcire. Insoauita, vnsweetnes, vnsauorines, vnpleasantnes. Insociabile,
insociable, not to keep company with. Insognare, to dream. Insogno, dreaming.
Also a dream. Insoldatarsi, to become a soldier or put on the habit of a
soldier or to take on the profession of a soldier. Insolente, insolent,
proud, haughty, arrogant, not accustomed, vnwoont. Insolenza, insolency,
pride, arrogancy, haughtines, vnwoontednes, strangenes. Insolfare, to set
prick song. Insolido, a law word, in the whole and for the whole, thoroughly
and fast. Also not sound or weak. Insolito, vnwoont, unused, unaccustomed,
strange. Insollare, to make loose or vnsteadie. Insolubile, insoluble, that
cannot be dissolved or loosed, indissoluble. Insomma, in fine, in sum, at
last, lastly. Insommo, in a readiness, at full, plenty, at hand. Insonare, to
sound or play upon an instrument. Insongiare, to tallowe or grease. Insonnare,
to lull or bring a sleep. Insopito, watchful, sleepelesse, not drowsy.
Insopportabile, intolerable, insufferable. Insorgere, surgo, sursi, surto, to
rise up. Insorte, by lot, in lot, by chance, by fortune. Insorire, risco,
rito, to loathe, to shun or to be weary of the sight of any thing.
Insospettire, tisco, tito, to make or become suspicious or mistrustfull.
Inspeciale, in especial, especially, namely, particularly. Inspeciare, to
enspice, to spice, to mingle with spices. Inspec^e, as Inspeciale. Insperabile,
not to be hoped for. Insperato, unhoped for, unlooked for, unexpected, sudden,
contrary to expectation. Inspessare, to thicken, to make thick, to enspisse.
Inspessire, sisco, sito, as Inspessare. Inspirare, to inspire, to breath or
blow into Inspiratione, an inspiration, a blowing or breathing into.
Inspiritare, to possess with a devil or evil spirit. Inspiritato, possessed
with some devil or evil spirit. Insporcare, to foul, to sullie, to distaine.
Instabile, unconstant, wavering, mutable, unstable, sickle, shittle, skat^sh.
Instabilire, lisco, lito, to establish, to settle. Also to be or grow
unconstant or sickle. Instabilita, inconstancy, instabilitie, mutabilitie,
ficklenes. Instante, instant, urging, pressing, importunat, diligent, earnest.
Also an instance, a motion, a moment, without ceasing. Also being neigh or at
hand. Instantemente, instantly, pressingly, importunatly, presently,
incessantly, diligently, earnestly. Instanza, an instance. Also earnestnes, or
importunity, earnest and continual diligence, a constraint that urges.
Instare, to urge, to press, to importune, to solicit. Instauratione,
repairing, renewing, reedifying. Instaurare, to make new, to reform, to
repair. Instazzonare, to stationize. Instercorato, durtie, beraide, beshitten.
Instigare, to move, to stir, to provoke, to egg on, to prick forward.
Instigatione, Instigamento, an instigation, a provocation, a motion, a pricking
or egging on. Instigatore, an egger on, a prouoker, a pricker forward, an
instigator. Instillare, to drop, to trill, power or put in drop by drop, to
drizell in. Instillatione, Instillatura, infusion, instillation, dropping or
putting in by little and little. Instinto, an instinction or persuasion, an
inward motion or stirring, an inclination, an inspiration. Institore, as
Institutore. Instituire, isco, ito, to institute, to appoint, to ordain, to
depute, to begin, to set in good order, to found, to intend or devise, to
invent, to instruct, to train up. Institutione, an institution, an iniunction,
a deputation, an order, an instruction, a bringing or training up. Also books
or precepts preparing a way to some art. Instituto, as Institutione, an
ordinance, a decree, a statute, a trade, or custom. Institutore, an
instituter, a deputer, an appointer, an orderer, an instructor, a teacher, a
trainer up, a deviser. Instizzare, to provoke, to exasperat, to set on, to
stir up as brands of fire be. Instruire, isco, ito, to instruct, to teach.
Instruito, Instrutto, instructed, taught. Instruttione, instruction, teaching,
learning. Instruttore, a teacher, an instructor, a tutor. Instrumentale,
isntrumental, used as an instrument, or means. Instrumento, an instrument, a
deed, a writing, an evidence, an indenture, a conueyance, a bond, an
obligation, a patent, a charter, a musical instrument, any engine or devise for
war, a mean, a help, a direction, a tool for any occupation, an implement.
Instupidire, as Stupidire. Insturione, a fish called a Sturgeon. In su, Insuso,
upward, aloft, a high, up. Insuaue, unsweet, sower, unpleasant, irksome.
Insuauita, vnsweetnes, vnsauorines, vnpleasantnes. Insubia, a shoomakers awle.
Insubiare, to prick with an awle. Insubbiare, to roll upon a beam as weauers
do their cloth when they weaue it. Insucidire, disco, dito, to defile, to
beray, to sullie, to foul, to pollute. Insufficiente, insufficient, unable.
Insufficienza, insufficiency. Insueto, not used, unwont, unusual. Insulare,
belonging to an i will. Insulfatto, ipso facto, with the deed, napping, upon the
nick, on the instant. Insulsare, to make or taste unsavory. Insulsita,
foolishnes, vnsauorines. Insulso, unsavory, foolish, without smack or salt, or
wisdom. Insultare, to insult, to injury, to delude, to scorn, to offer
wrong, to reproach. Also to leap, to rebound or leap up for joy. Insultamento,
Insultatione, an insulting, wronging, or scorning, wrong, injury, reproach, an
offense, an assault. Also a leaping up. Insultatore, an insulter, an iniurer, a
scorner, a proud man, scornful, reproachful, a reproacher. Insulto, as
Insultamento. Insuperabile, unvanquishable, invincible, that can not be
overcome. Insuperato, unvanquished, unconquered, undaunted, not overcome.
Insuperbire, bisco, bito, to become, make or grow proud. Insuppare, to feed
with sops as birds be. Also to lay in sops, to sop. Insurgere, surgo, sursi,
surto, to rise up against, to resist by force, to rebel, to oppose.
Insurgittura, a rising, an insurrection, a resistance, a rebellion.
Insurgittore, a riser, a resister, a rebel. Insurettione, an insurrection, a
commotion, a rebellion. Insurto, raised up against, resisted by force,
rebelled, opposed against one. Insusare, to lift up, to go up to, to advance.
Insuso, Insu, up, upward. Intabaccare, to russianize, to panderize, to play the
baude, to besot or dote in lust, namely for boys. Intabacchinare, as
Intabaccare. Intabarrare, to cover or muffle with a riding cloak. Intabarro, a
man in his cloak, with his cloak on. Intaccare, to cleave, to hew, to cut
timber. Also to piece or patch together, to debase, to blame, to vilify, to
disable, to charge one with some fault, to cleave or fasten unto, to lay hold
unto. Intaccatura, a cleaving of timber, a ioining or patching together.
Intacconare, to cloute, to soute, or patch shoes. Intagli, cuttings, iaggings
in fine neat apparel, all manner of cut works. Also shreads or od ends.
Intagliare, to cut in, to grave or carue. Intagliatore, a grauer, or cutter, or
caruer. Intagliatura, a grauing, an incutting or caruing. Intaglio, cutting,
grauing, or caruing work. Also fitly, handsomely, properly, curiously.
Intalentare, to have, possess, or make one to have a will, a desire, a lust,
or a longing. Intalguisa, in such sort, in such manner, so. Intal modo, as In
tal guisa. Intal sort, as In tal guisa. Intaminato, not defiled, vndestained.
Intanare, to indenne, to put, enter, go, or creep into a cave or den.
Intanto, whilst, in the mean time. Intapezzare, to hang or furnish with
tapestrie. Intaraccare, to arm or cover with shield or target. Intargare, to
arm with a target, to enshield. Intaracconare, as Intaraccare. Intarlare, to
motheate, to wormeeate, to consume, to waste with mothes. Intarsire, sisco,
sito, to work mosaicall work, or inlayd work. Intasato, having the pose or
murre, stopped or stuffed with the cold. Intascare, to pocket up, or put up in a
pouch. Intatto, untouched, unspotted, uncorrupted, not defloured, unviolated,
vndistained. Intauolare, to table, to board, to wainescot, to pale about with
boords. Also, to set any song to musical notes. Intauolato, tabled, boorded,
wainescotted, paled about with boords. Also set in song or notes. Also a pale
of a park, a floor of boords, a wainescot work. Intauolatura, any song or
music set in notes, prick song. Integerrimo, entyre, whole, safe, sound,
upright, honest. Integnere, tegno, tinsi, tinto, as Intingere. Integramente,
wholly, entyrely, vprightlie. Integrare, to make whole, to make sound, or
entire again. Integrissimo, most full, or entire, honest, righteous, or
upright. Integrita, integrity, honesty, innocence, vprightnes, soundnes,
healthfulnes. Integro, entire, whole, sound, honest, healthful, not broken,
and whole of lym and joint. Also upright, honest, righteous. Also vngelded.
Intelletto, understanding, wit, discretion, capacity, knowledge, skill,
reason, discourse, perceiving, intelligence, sense, or judgment.
Intellettuale, intellectual, belonging to understanding. Intelligente,
intelligent, knowing, understanding, skillful, perceiving. Intelligentia,
understanding, intelligence memory, knowledge, sense, skilfulnesse.
Intelligentiere, an intelligencer, or news-bearer. Intelligenza, as
Intelligentia. Intelligibile, that may be understood, plain and easy to be
understood. Intemerando, holy, consecrate, that may not be profaned.
Intemerata, undefiled, unspotted, unpolluted, uncorrupted, not violated. Also
as Fagiolata. Intemperante, intemperate, not master of his own appetites,
immoderate. Intemperantia, intemperancie, disorder, unruliness of mind,
excess, wantonness, vnstaiednes. Intemperare, to dispemper, to disorder.
Intemperato, distempered, disordered, intemperate. Intemperie del aria, the
vntemperance or vnseason of the weather. Also an outrage, madness, or fury, or
rage of mind. Also vnseasonablenes, or evil disposition. Intempestiuo,
untimely, unseasonable, disordred, abortiue, out of time and season. Also that
gives a sign of some evil to come. Intendacchio, of good understanding, of a
good wit and conceit: it is used in derision. Intendente, skillful, of
understanding, having knowledge, intending, purposing. Intendere, tendo, tesi,
teso, tenduto, to purpose, to mean, to intend, to apply. Also to
understand, to know, to have skill of. Intenduto, Inteso, understood, known,
had knowledge of. Also purposed, intended, meant, or applied. Intendeuole, able
to understand, that may be understood. Intendimento, as Intelletto, a
purpose, an intent, an intendment. Intenditore, an understander. Intenerire,
risco, rito, to soften, to make tender, to mollify. Intenso, Intento,
attentive, intentive, fixed, vehement, diligent, bent, great, big.
Intentabile, that cannot be assaied. Intentato, unattempted, not assaied.
Intentissimo, most diligent, most attentive. Intento, an intent, or purpose, a
meaning. Also attentive. Intention, a purpose, an intent, an intention, a
meaning, a will, a mind. Also an earnest consideration of the mind.
Intentato, unattempted, unassayed. Intenza, has bin used for intention.
Intepidire, disco, dito, to cool, to ease, to assuage, to make luke warm.
Intercalare, put or set between, to enterlace. Intercalare giorno, the odd
day of the leap year. Also a time put or set between that the year may
agree with the course of the sun. Intercalare calende, the calends of March,
because in the latter end of February, which is reputed as the calends of
March, the odd days of the leap year were added. Intercalare verso, the
foot or refret of the dittie. Also a verse interlaced. Intercalario, the time
that is put or set between that the year may agree with the course of the
sun. Intercalatione, a putting or setting between. Intercalare anno, the
leap year. Intercapulo, the place between the loins and the back.
Intercedere, cedo, cessi, cesso, or ceduto, to make intercession, to sue for,
to go between, to let, to hinder, to forbid, to be surety, to undertake for
another, to mediate. Interceduto, made intercession, sued for, gone between,
let, hindered, forbidden, bin surety, or undertaken for another.
Intercessione, an intercession, a mediation, a surety. Also a prohibition, a
withstanding, a gainsaying. Intercesso, as Interceduto. Intercessore, an
intercessour, one that makes intercession, that sues, that goes between, that
lets, hinders, or forbids any thing, that is surety for another, a
mediator. Intercettare, to prevent, to forestall, to incroch, to intercept.
Intercetti, interceptings of forfaited goods. Intercetto, Intercettato,
prevented, forestalled, encroched, intercepted. Intercettore, a preuenter, a
forestaller, an en^rocher, an interceptor. Interchiudere, chiudo, chiusi,
chiuso, to enclose, to shut in between. Interciare, Look Interzare.
Intercidente, falling, decaying, or perishing. Interciglio, the space between
the eye brows, where the nose begins. Interciso, intercut or cut between.
Intercolonnio, the place between pillars. Intercorrente, running or going
between. Intercute, between the skin and the flesh, secret, hidden. Interdire,
dico, dissi, detto, to prohibit, to forbid, to restrain, to bar, to keep
from, to let, to hinder, to give charge to the contrary, to interdict.
Interditto, Interdetto, prohibited, forbidden, etc. the participle. Interdetto,
Interdittione, an interdiction, a prohibition, a forbidding, a hindrance, a
let. Also an iniunction made by the magistrate. Interessare, to interesse, to
touch in the maine or fee-simp^e of ones state, to touch, to appertain or
concern a man's estate or reputation. Also to let out to interest. Interessato,
interessed, touched in honor, or reputation. Interesse, Interesso, the inttrest,
or profit of money for lone. Also what touches or concerns a man's state or
reputation. Interezza, entyrenes, wholenes, integrity. Interfinio, the middle
part or bridge of the nose. Intergettione, a putting between, an Interiection.
Interiora, the interior or inward parts, bowels or entrails of man or beast.
Interiore, inward, inmost, familiar, in time. Interito, the death, end or
desolation of all things. Interizzare, to rise or grow, stiffe-standing.
Interlacciare, to enterlace, to tie, to bind, to claspe, to lace together.
Interlasciare, to omit, to leave off, to forsake, to neglect. Interlassare, as
Interlasciare. Interlocutione, an interlocution, an interposition of speech.
Interlocutore, an interlocutor, a speaker. Interlunio, the space or time when
neither the new nor old moon is seen. Intermedio, Intermezzo, that lies or
is between two; the music that is between the acts in a play. Intermestro,
belonging to the space between the old moon and the new. Intermettere, metto,
misi, messo, to intermit or put between, to cease, to discontinue, to give
over, to defer or put off. Intermesso, Intermettuto, intermitted, put between
or delaied time, ceased, discontinued, given over, put off. Intermettitore, an
intermitter, a delayer of time. Intermezzare, to interlade, to interlace, to
intermit, or work between, to intermixe. Intermezzo, between, in the middle,
an intermission. Interminable, that cannot be determined. Intermissione, an
intermission, a putting between, a delay of time, a letting pass, a ceasing
for a time, a breaking off. Interminato, unbounded, boundles, unlimited.
Intermisto, intermixed, put between, mingled together, mixte among or
between. Intermondio, the space or distance between diverse worlds according
to the imagination of Epicures. Intermurale, that is between two walls.
Internale, internal, inward. Internare, to enter or pearce into ones mind
secretly. Internere, terno, ternei, ternuto, to enter go or pass in. Interno,
internal, inward, inmost. Internuntio, a messenger that goes between man and
man. Internuto, entered, gone or passed in. Intero, whole, perfect, sound,
untouched, entire, unbroken, vnguelded. Also honest, just, upright. Interogare,
to ask, to question, to demand, to examine. Interogatorio, an interrogatorie.
Interogatione, an interrogation, a question, a demand, an examination.
Interogatiuo punto, a point of interrogation. Interogatore, an examiner, a
demaunder of questions. Interotto, interrupted, let, hindered. Interponere,
pongo, posi, posto, to interpose, to intermit, to put between, to intermeddle,
to prolong or drive off. Interporre, as Interponere. Interpositione,
Interposito, an interposition or putting between. Interposto, interposed, put
between, intermitted, intermedled, put off. Interpretare, to interpret, to
expound. Interpretamento, as Interpretatione. Interpretatione, an
interpretation or exposition. Interpret, Interpretatore, an interpretor or
expounder, a translator, a declarer. Interramento, an interring, a burial.
Interrare, to bury, to enter. Interregnare, to reign between. Interregno, an
interraigning, an interraigne, the space of government between the death of one
ruler and the creation or election of another, an interregnum. Interrito,
without fear, vnamazed. Also as Moscio. Interrompere, rompo, ruppi, rotto, to
interrupt, to confound, to break in the midst. Interrompimento, an
interruption, a breaking off. Interrotto, interrupted, broken off, confounded.
Interruttione, an interruption, a breaking off. Intersecatione, a cutting off
in the middle. Interserire, risco, rito, to interweaue or work together.
Intersiatore, a squarer, or hewer of timber. Intersiare, to square or hew
timber or any thing else. Intersitio, Interstitio, a division, a distance, a
separation. Also a space between. Also the space between the old moon and
the new. Intertenere, tengo, tenni, tenuto, to entertain, to delay, to hold
off. Intertenuto, entertained, delaied. Intertenimento, an intertainment, a
delay. Intertessere, tesso, tessei, tessuto, to interweaue, to weaue or work
between, as tinsell or striped canuasse is. Also to knit, to fold, to wrap
in, to plate or enterlace with other works or things. Intertessuto,
interweauen or wouen between or tinseled, knit, folded, wrapped in, plated or
interlaced with other work. Intertessitura, an interweauing or weauing
between, a tinseling. Intertessitore, an interweauer or weauer between, a
tinseler. Intertigine, a panching of one, filthiness of sweat: but properly the
galling or rubbing of the skin with going, or rubbing one lim against another.
Interuallo, a distance or separation, or space between of time and place. Also
a pause or respite. Interueniente, that comes, flows or runs between.
Interuenio, a space between veins. Interuenire, vengo, venni, venuto, to
happen or come between or in the mean while, to meet together, to befall, to
chance, to happen. Interuenuto, happened or come between, come to pass, met
together, befallen, chanced, happened. Interuenimento, a hap, a coming to pass,
a chance, a meeting together, an ouertaking, a coming between. Interuentione,
a coming between or among, a happening. Interuento, as Interuenimento.
Interzare, to pack or set the cards, to put three and three together, to
prick the cards. Interzamento, a packing or setting of the cards, a pricking
of the cards. Interzo, a pack or setting of the cards. Also by a third. Also
a pricking of the cards. Inteso, understood, attentive, intentive, diligent,
applied. Intessere, as Intertessere. Interssitura, as Intertessitura.
Intessuto, as Intertessuto. Intessitore, as Intertessitore. Intestabile, that
cannot make a will, intestable, that by law can make no testament. Intestare,
to put into ones mind or fancy, to take an opinion or grow headstrong.
Intestarsi, to take a headstrong opinion or conceit. Intestato, one that dies
without making of a will or testament, intestate. Also put into ones mind or
head, taken an opinion, become headstrong in some conceit. Intestatura, a
headstrong opinion. Intestino, intestine, inward, the inward parts of ones
belly, the intrailes, a bowel, a gut, a garbage, that belongs to the inward
parts, hidden, privy, secret, deadly, spiteful, long borne in mind. Intestino
primo, the beginning of the guts or the gut which is fastened to the nether
mouth of the ventricle called in latin Pilorus. Intestino digiuno, the second
gut from the ventricle called the hungry gut: because it is always empty.
Intestino tenuo, as Ilio, the small guts. Intestino ceco, or cieco, the fourth
gut; which by reason of the several and diverse enfoldings and turnings of it,
seems to have no end. Intestino retto, the straight gut or arse gut.
Inteuidire, vidisco, vidito. Look Intepid^^e. Intiero, as Intero, as Integro.
Intimare, to denounce, to proclaim, to intimate, to set abroach, to show, to
signify. Intimatione, a denouncing, an intimation, a setting abroach, a
signifying or declaring of any thing. Intimatore, a proclamer, a denouncer, a
broacher, a signifier, a declarer. Intimelle, pillowbeeres, or tikes for
boulsters, or pillowes. Intimo, most inward, most secret, hearty, affectionat,
in the heart, entirely beloved, a nigh, especial, and very friend. Also mortal
or deeply rooted in the stomach. Intingere, tingo, tinsi, tinto, to dip in,
to kiche up, to steep or put in water. Intinto, dipped in, kiched up, steeped
or put in water. Intingolare, to make sauces, to dress meat, to dip in.
Intingoletti, little pretty sauces to provoke appetite, dippings. Intingoli,
sauces to whet the stomach withal, dippings. Intirisi nel sangue, soiled,
stained, defiled in blood. Intirizzare, to wax stiff or benumbed with cold.
Also to stretch forward. Intirizzato collo, a long outstretched stiff neck.
Intisichire, chisco, chito, to grow pursie, or sick of a consumption, tisicke.
Intitolare, to entitle or lay claim to any thing. Intitolatione, an intitling,
or intitulation or claiming of a thing. Intitulare, as Intitolare.
Intitulatione, as Intitolatione. Intoccabile, that cannot be felt or touched.
Intoccato, untouched, unfelt. Intodescarsi, to become dutch, or drunk.
Intolerabile, intolerable, insufferable. Intolerando, intolerable,
insufferable, not to be borne. Intoleranza, intolerablenes, impacience.
Intonare, to make to sound, to tune, to raise the voice, to resound, to tune a
voice or instrument. Also to thunder, to make a rumbling. Intonicare, to
clothe, to inuest, or put on a friars garment. Also, to lyme, to loame, to
mortar, or plaster a house, to be paste, to compass about. Intonicatura, a
loaming, a liming, a mortering or plaistering of a house. Also a clothing, or
putting on a friars garment. Intoppare, as Inciampare. Intoppicciare, as
Inciampare. Intoppo, a stumbling block, a stumble, a let, a hinderance, an
encounter, a shocke. Intorbidare, as Intorbolare. Intorbidamento, as
Intorbolamento. Intorbidire, disco, dito, as Intorbolare. Intorbolare, to
trouble, to vex, to move, to fret, to urge, to sorrow, to molest, to stir,
to scoule, to frown. Intorbolamento, a troubling, a vexing, a molestation, a
thickning of water. Intorcere, torco, torcei, torto, to wreath, to turn, to
wriggle, to bend, to wrye. Intorcetta, a little torch, or a taper. Also a
link. Intorcia, a torch, a link, a taper. Intorciare, to entorch, or light
with a torch. Also as Intorcere. Intorcicchiare, as Intorcere.
Intorcicchiamento, as Intorcimento. Intorcimento, a wrying, a wrigling, a
bending, a crookednes. Intorciuto, wreathed, turned, wriggled, bent, crooked,
wryed. Intornare, to compass, to go round, to turn about, to incircle about.
Intorneare, as Intornare. Also to tourney. Intorneamento, a tournie, a
tourneament. Intorneatore, a tournie-man, a man at arms fit to tournie, a
tournyer, a tournoyer. Intorniare, as Intornare. Intorniatura, Look Giro.
Intorno, about, touching, concerning, as for, round about, gyring, reeling
round. Intortogliato, a kind of wreathed bunne or roll or simnell, or
cracknell of bread. Intossicare, to exasperate, to vex, to poison, to
enuenome. Intossicatore, a poisoner, an inuenomer. Intra, among, between,
betwixt, amongst. Intralasciare, as Interlasciare. Intralciare, to entangle, to
encumber, to intricate, to make hedges, to hedge young trees. Intralciamenti,
entanglings, encombrances, hedging or binding of hedges. Intrambi, Intrambo,
both together, both. Intramettere, as Intermettere. Intramezzare, as
Intermezzare. Intramezzo, as Intermezzo. Intraperto, when a horses forelegs and
shoulders are as we call split or stretched wide from the body, that he has no
use of them. Intrapertura, a splitting of a horses lims. Intraponere, as
Interponere. Intrapositione, as Interpositione. Intraposto, as Interposto.
Intraprirsi, is properly when a horse does split himself. Intrare, as Entrare.
Intrata, as Entrata. Intratanto, in the mean while. Intrate, as Entrate.
Intratenere, as Intertenere. Intratenimento, as Intertenimento. Intrattabile,
intractable, that cannot be treated of, unruly, troublesome, intolerable.
Intrauagliare, to travel, to trouble, to molest, to grieve. Intrauaglio, in
travel, in trouble, in grief, in sorrow. Intrauenire, as Interuenire.
Intrauegnente, happening, chancing, coming to pass. Intrauentura, a hap, a
chance or fortune coming between. Intrauenimento, as Intrauentura.
Intrauersare, to cross, to trauerse, to thwart, to overthwart. Intrauerso,
acrosse, athwart, overthwart. Intreanni, in the space of three years.
Intreare, to make a thread, to reduce three together. Intrecciamento di parole,
an entangling of words. Intrecciare, to tresse, to plot, to weaue. Also to
pack or prick the cards. Also to entramell. Intrecciara, a tressing, a
plaiting, a packing, an entrameling. Intreccie, in her tresses, in her hair
entrameled. Intredi, in three days. Intremodi, three manner of ways.
Intrepidezza, fearelesnes, hardines, stoutnes, boldness. Intrepidita, as
Intrepidezza. Intrepido, fearelesse, undaunted, stout, bold. Intresca, jesting,
ingling, dancing, iumbling, all a hoit, tumbling. Intricare, to intricate, to
turn, to toss up and down, to entangle, to entrap. Intrico, Intricamento, an
intricatenes, a labirinth, a maze, an entangling or ensnaring, an encumberment,
an enwrapping. Intricoso, intricate, entangled. Intridere, trido, trisi, triso,
to kneade meal, to make paste or battre. Also to mince, slice, or cut small.
Also to enfolde or enwrap. Intrigare, as Intricare, or Intrecciare. Intrigo, as
Intrico. Intrinsicamente, inwardly, heartily, familiarly. Intrinsicarsi, to
become familiar, friendly, or inward with one. Intrinsichezza, familiarity,
acquaintance, inwardnes, friendlines. Intrinsico, familiar, acquainted,
friendly or inward, and on the inside. Intriso, Look Intridere. Also enwrapped
or enfolded. Intristire, tisco, tito, to become worse and worse. Also to
become knauish. Also to become sad or pensive. Introdurre, duco, dussi, dutto,
to introduce or bring, or lead in. Introdotto, Introdutto, introducted, led,
lead or brought in. Introduttione, an introduction, a help, a mean, an
entrance, a bringing or leain, a beginning. Introduttorio, a help, a mean or
entrance to bring one in. Introire, to enter or go in. Introi^o, entered or gone
in. Also an entrance, an entry or going in. Intromettere, metto, misi, messo,
to take in, to introduct, to intromit, to put in, or to conuaie in, to let in.
Intromesso, introducted or put in, conuaied in, let in. Also a judge, an
vmpire, an arbitrator, a compromiser. Intromissione, a putting or letting in,
an intromission. Intronare, to enthrone. Also to thunder, to amaze, to
astonish. Intronato, enthroned. Also thundered, amazed, astonished, as Stordito.
Intronizzare, to enthrone. Intropiccare, as Inciampare. Intropiccata, as
Inciampo. Introque, in, further in, within, used by Dante. Introsire, as
Inritrosire. Intrudere, trudo, trusi, truso, to intrude, or thrust in
violently. Intrusione, an intrusion, or intruding. Intuare, to become thine, to
enter into thee. Intuonare, to sound, to resounde, or enthunder, to tune, to
raise the voice. Inturbolare, as Intorbolare. Intutto, wholly, altogether, in
all. Inuadore, vado, vasi, vaso, to invade, to enter, to assail, to set upon.
Inuaghire, ghisco, ghito, to become amorous, loving, desirous or feign.
Inuaghito, become amorous, desirous, loving or feign, enamoured. Inuaghimento,
a falling in love, a becoming desirous, loving or feign. Inualere, vaglio,
valsi, valuto, to make or be no value, force, worth, or virtue. Inualido, of
no force, virtue, strength, worth, or power, feeble, weak. Inualidare, to
make valide, lawful, or forcible. Inualidita, inualiditie, want of force,
virtue, worth, or value. Inualigiare, to put up in a male or clokebagge.
Inualisgiare, as Inualigiare. Inualitudine, feeblenes, weakness. Inualuto, made
or been of no virtue, no worth, no value or force. Inuano, Indarno, in vain,
void, for naught, idly, vainly, hootlesse. Inuasare, to put into a vessel,
to vessel up, to be amazed, confounded or affrighted, to fetch one over the
coals. Inuasato, put into a vessel, vesseled up. Also amazed, confounded,
affrighted, one fetched over the coals. Also one possessed with some ill spirit.
Inuasati dal sonno, oppressed with sleep, deadly asleep. Inuasione, an
invasion or entering upon by force. Inuaso, invaded or assailed. Inudito,
unheard of, never heard of. Inuece, in steed, in place, in lieu. Inuecchiare,
to grow old or aged. Inuecchiaia, in age, in eldership. Inueggia, envy,
hatred, malice, spite, malignitie. Inueggiare, to envy, to hate, to malice, to
spite, to malign. Inuelenare, to poison, to enuenom, to rankle, to fester.
Inuelenire, as Inuelenare. Inueltrato, become of the nature of a graihound, or
beset and baited with graiehounds. Inuelutare, to put or cloth in velvet.
Inuenia, a device, an invention, a new found out thing, a surmise. Inuenire,
has bin used of some old writers for Trouare, to find. Inuentare, to invent,
to devise, to forge, to surmise, to feign. Inuentario, an inventory, register,
record, or memorial. Inuentione, an invention, a devise, a forgerie, a
surmise, a finding. Inuentitia, to be found out. Inuentiuo, inuentiue, that can
devise, surmise, or forge. Inuentore, an inuenter, a forger, a deviser, a
surmisor. Inuentrare, to enbowell or go into some place, to enwombe.
Inuentrice, a she inuenter, or deviser, a forgeresse, or surmiseresse.
Inuerare, to verify, to auerre, to confirm, to prove true. Inuerdire, disco,
dito, to grow green or young. Inuer', toward, toward. Inuerecondia,
shamelesnes, impudency. Inuerita, in truth, verily, truly, in verity,
certainly, surely, in sooth. Inuernale, wintrie, for the winter. Also wintrish.
Inuernare, to winter, or pass, or live the winter. Inuernata, a winter, a
wintring. Inuernecciare, to varnish. Inuernicare, to varnish. Inuernicatore, a
varnisher. Inuerno, a winter, the winter season. Inuero, in truth, in verity,
verily, truly, certainly, surely, in sooth. Inuersione, an inuersion, a
turning inside out, or vpside down, a misplacing. Inuertere, verto, vertei,
verso, to inuert, to turn one against another, to wrest to another sense, to
turn vpside down, to turn in, to pervert. Inuerso, inuerted, turned one
against another, wrested to another sense, turned in, turned vpside down, or
the inside out, perverted, misplaced. Also toward or toward. Inuescare, to
lime, to trap, to entrap, to entangle, to allure, to entice, to ensnare, to
enueagle. Inuescamento, a lime twigge, an entrapping, an allurement, an
enticement, an enueagling, an ensnaring. Inuescatura, as Inuescamento.
Inuestigabile, that may be found, searched, sisted, or sought out.
Inuestigando, idem. Inuestigare, to seek, to search, or find out diligently,
to discover by the steps or print of the feet, to trace out. Inuestigatione, a
searching, a seeking, a finding, or diligent discovery. Inuestigatore, a
searcher, or seeker, a finder or discouerer with diligence. Inuestire, vesto,
vestito, to inuest, to install, to cloth, to enrobe, to put in possession. Also
to charge upon an enemy. Also to lay out or emploie ones money upon any
bargain for advantage. Inuestitione, as Inuestitura. Inuestitore, an inuestor,
an installer, an enrober, an endower, a presentor. Inuestitura, an enstalment,
an enrobing, an endowrie, an imploiment, an inuesting. Inueterare, to become
old and aged, to inueterate. Inueterato, become old and aged, inueterate,
confirmed by long use. Inuetriare, to glaze, to calcinat, or inuitriat, as new
earthen pots be within. Inuetriato, glased, calcinated, inuitriated. Also a
brazen face fellow. Inuetriata, a glass window. Inuettione, as Inuettiua.
Inuettire, tisco, tito, to inueigh, to rail against in words. Inuettiua, an
inuectiue, cursing or railing discourse, an outrage in words. Inuettiuo, an
inuectiue, railing or inuaighing man. Inuiare, to send, to adresse, to set in
the right way. Inuidare, as Inuidiare. Inuidenza, as Inuidia. Inuidia, envy,
hatred, rancor, spite, malice, grudge, ill will, grudging, repining, grief to
behold and hear that another prospers. Inuidiate, to envy, to hate, to
spite, to malign, to grudge, to repine, or have a spite and grief to see
another prosper. Inuidioso, envious, hateful, spiteful, grudging, repining,
malicious. Inuido, as Inuidioso. Inuigilare, watchfullie to study or take
pains. Inuilire, lisco, lito, to vilify, to despise, to embase, to disparage,
to disable, to set at naught. Also to become a coward. Inuiluppare, to turn,
to toss, to tumble. Also to enwrap, to entangle, to huddle up, to enfould.
Inuiluppabile, that may be wrapped up, folded up, or enfolded. Inuiluppo, a
bundle, a huddle, a wrapping, an enfolding, a fardle. Inuincibile, invincible,
unconquerable, not to be overcome, unvanquishable. Inuiolabile, inviolable,
that cannot be violated, broken or corrupted. Inuiolare, to adorn with violets
or to make to smell of violets. Inuiolato, adorned with violets or made to
smell of violets. Also inviolable, incorrupt, unspotted, clear, pure. Also
firm, constant, inuiolated, true, faithful, uncorrupted. Inuiperare, to
become venomous as a viper Inuiperire, risco, rito, as Inuiperare. Inuischiare,
as Inuescare. Inuischiatura, as Inuescamento. Inuisibile, invisible, unseen,
that may not be seen. Inuisitato, not visited. Inuiso, as Inuista. Inuista, in
sight, in the presence, in view, before the face. Inuitabile, delectable,
alluring or bidding and inuiting one. Inuitamento, an inuiting, a bidding, a
desiring to do any thing, a vying at play, an alluring or provoking.
Inuitare, to inuit, to bid, to desire to entreat, to move to do any thing,
to allure, to persuade, to entice, to desire, to come, to provoke. Inuitare a
far brindesi, to inuit one to drink a health. Inuitare al giuoco, to vie or
to reuie at any game, to drop vie. Inuitata, as Inuitamento. Inuitato, enuited,
bidden, desired, entreated, moved to do any thing. Also vied or reuied at any
game, played at drop vie, persuaded, allured. Inuitatore, an inuitor, an
intreator, a bidder of any feast. Inuito, a vie at play, a vie at any game.
Also an inuiting, offer, proffer or bidding, a persuading, an alluring.
Inuitiare, to grow vicious or wicked, to corrupt, to inuitiate. Inuitto,
unconquerable, invincible, unvanquishable, valiant, mighty. Inulto,
unrevenged, not punished, without hurt or danger, sans ieopardie. Invn, In uno,
together, in one, withal, therewith, at once. In un balneo, in the twinkling
of an eye. In un batter d'occhio, idem. In un fiato, in a breath, in a sudden.
In un instante, in an instant, in a moment. In un soffio, in a breath, in a
sudden. In un momento, in a moment, in an instant. Inunire, nisco, nito, to
make or join one with. Inuocatione, an invocation or calling upon, as when
one demands aid. Inuocare, to inuoke, to call upon for aid and help.
Inuoglia, a table basket, wherein napkings, knives, salt, and bread is brought
to the table. Inuogliare, to become or make one willing or consenting or
desirous. Also to roll or fold up. Also to make one long for any thing.
Inuogliato, rouled or foulded up. Also possessed with a longing desire. Also
become or made willing, desirous or consenting. Inuogliere, volgo, volsi,
volto, to enwrap, to infold, to bundle, to roll. Inuoglio, a bundle, a fardle,
a trusse, an enfolding, an inwrapping, the husk or hull enclosing any fruit.
Inuolare, to steal, to filch, to purloine, to to pilfre, to con^eigh away.
Inuolatore, a thief, a stealer, a filcher, a purloiner, a conueigher away.
Inuolgere, as Inuogliere. Inuolgimento, a turning or winding about, a gadding
about. Also an enfolding or inwrapping. Inuolontario, not voluntary,
unwilling. Inuolta, made vault-wise. Also turning or ranging about. Inuolta,
about, rouing, gadding, wandering about, back-turning, turning back Inuoltare,
to make as a vault, to arche, to turn back. Inuolto, in the face, in view, in
presence, in sight. Also inwrapped, infolded, bundeled, swathed, folded or
rouled up. Also vault-wise, arch-wise, bending, aslope. Inuoluere, as
Inuogliere. Inuoluolo, an enfolding, an inwrapping, an intangling. Also a worm
like a cancre that destroieth vines, called a vinefretter. Inuoluppare, as
Inuiluppare. Inuolutare, to toss, or wallowe in mud or mire. Inuoluto,
vnwilled, never consenting. Also a gut called the blind gut. Inuotare, to vow,
to promise, to make an oath. Inurbare, to endenizen, to become or make a
citizen or a civil man. Inurbanita, inurbanitie, rudenes, discourtesie,
clownishnes, vnmannerlines. Inurbano, uncivil, discourteous, rude, clownish,
unmannerly, homely, discourteous. Inusitare, to vnuse, to forget, to leave off,
to disaccustome. Inusitato, unused, forgotten, disaccustomed, left off,
strangely, not wont. Inustione, an inward burning or scalding. Inutile,
unprofitable, to no use, unserviceable, nothing worth. Inutilire, lisco, lito,
to make void, to disanull, to make unprofitable and of no effect. Inutilita,
disprofit, inutilitie, unprofitableness. Inuulnerabile, that cannot be hurt,
wounded, pierced or thrust through the skin. Inuulnerato, unhurt, not wounded.
Inzaccherare, to defile, to make foul, to dash with dirt or mire. Inzafranare,
to die, to color or dress with saffron. Inzampognare, as Gonfiare alcuno.
Also as Infinocchiare. Also to put a bell about some cattles neck.
Inzamprognare, as Gonfiare alcuno. Inzazzeare, to go walking wantonly, idly or
feminatlie up and down the streets, to gaze up and down foolishlie.
Inzazzerare, to wear long locks of hair curled or bushie. Also to make the
hair on the head curled. Inzeppare, to fill brim full. Inzessare, to whiten or
color with chalk, to chalk. Inzoppare, to become or make one to halt or to
cripple. Inzuccherare, to sugar, to candie, to comsit, to cover with sugar.
Inzuccherata, any paste candied or made of sugar, a sugar cake. Inzuppare, to
sop, or lay in sops. Io, the first pronoune primitive, sing. I, my self. Also
a kind of wood that they use to make oars with. Io proprio, medesimo or
stesso, meselfe, I me self. Io per me, as for me, as for my self. Io
t'afferro, I have you fast, I know your mind. Io t'ho per il becco, I have you
by the bill, I have you by the fingers ends. Io t'ho dove si soffiano le noci,
I care not a turd for you. Io vi dico di no, I tell you no, I bid you no. Ione,
a kind of flower. Also a precious stone of the color of that flower, which
rubbed, draws paper and straw to it. Ionica, a kind of ancient
Architecture. Also a kind of music among the Grecians. Ionici, a kind of
verses so called. Iontio, a kind of raye or thornebacke fish. Iosa, plenty,
store, hold belly hold, good store, good plenty. Iota, a jot, a nifle,
nothing, a whit, a crumme, naught. Iozzo, as Ghiozzo. Iperborei, as Hiperborei.
Ippopatamo, a beast in India, with feet like an ox, back and maine like a
horse, tusked like a bore, and a long winding tail. Ipricon, the name of an
herb. Ipsilonne, the letter y. Ipostasi, as Hipostasi. Ira, anger, ire,
wrath, stomach, displeasure, choler, disdain, desire of revenge, vexation,
rage, or such passions that last not. Iracondia, Iracundia as Ira, but that
lasts. Iracondo, Iracundo, wrathful, angry, cholerike, moodie, fretfull,
raging, irefull, fumish, testie. Iradiare, to shine upon, to lighten, to cast
his beams upon, to flare, to stream. Iradiatione, an inlightning or casting
of beams. Iradiante, shining upon, lightning, or casting his beams upon,
flaring, glistring, streaming. Iragioneuole, as Irationale. Irare, to anger, to
wroth, to vex, to fret, to displease, to rage. Irato, angered, wroth, vexed,
fretted, grieved, moved, raged. Irascere, to be angry, moved, or displeased,
to grieve, or be sorry for. Irascibile, subject to anger or wroth, or rage,
unreasonable. Irationale, unreasonable, brutish, without humane reason.
Irationalita, unreasonableness, brutishnes. Ire, Gire, Andare, to go, to wend,
to walk, to march, to wander, to yode. Ireconciliabile, inexpiable, that can
admit no reconciliation. Ireiate, a kind of precious stone. Irice, a hedgehog.
Iride, as Irride. Iringio, a kind of shrub or pricking weed. Iringo campestre,
as Eringo campestre. Iritare, as Irritare. Irios, a kind of sweet white root
called oris-roote. Iritatione, as Irritatione. Iritire, to make void, of no
force or effect, to disappoint, to assuage or mollify. Iritto, unlawful,
undue, unfit, unright. Ironia, a figure in speaking when one means contrary
to the word, a mocking or skoffing. Ironico, erroneous, mocking, meaning
contrary to his words. Iroso, wrathful, cholerike, angry. Irpice, a rake
with iron teeth, wherewith they pull up weeds and roots. Irragioneuolezza,
unreasonableness. Irragioneuole, as Irrationale. Irrecompensabile, that can not
be requited. Irrecordabile, that can not be remembered. Irrecuperabile,
unrecoverable. Irregolare, irregular, void of rule, subject to no order.
Irregolarita, irregularitie, disorder, confusion, want of order, rule or form.
Irregulare, as Irregolare. Irregularita, as Irregolarita. Irreligione,
irreligion, ungodliness. Irreligioso, irreligious, profane, vndeuous, ungodly,
without fear of God. Irremeabile, never to return or pass again.
Irremediabile, remediless, not to be redressed, irremediable, recurelesse.
Irremissibile, irremissible, that can not be forgiven or remitted.
Irremunerabile, that can not be rewarded or recompensed. Irreparabile, that can
not be withstood, warded, resisted, or repaired. Irreprehensibile, faultlesse,
that can not be reproved, without fault. Irreprobabile, as Irreprehensibile.
Irrepugnabile, as Irreparabile. Irresolutione, an irresolution, an
uncertainty. Irresolubile, that can not be resolved, or determined.
Irresoluto, irresolute, unconstant, uncertain, wavering. Irretare, to entrap,
to entangle, to ensuare or take in a net or ginne, to entramell, to ennet.
Irretire, tisco, tito, as Irretare. Irreuerente, vnreuerent, rude, unmannerly.
Irreuerentia, irreverence, rudeness. Irreuocabile, irreuocable, that can not
be revoked or called back. Irride, the rainebow. Also a flower deluce. Also a
kind of precious stone which sparkles all the colors of the rainebow. Also
the circle which is between the white and the apple of the eye, replenished
with diverse colors. Irridere, rido, risi, riso, as Deridere. Irrigare, to
water ground, or fields, to bring water into fields by little gullets, to
stream or streake along. Irrigamento, a watering of any fields by little
gullets. Irrimissibile, unpardonable, that can not be remitted, irremissible.
Irrisione, as Derisione. Irritabile, quickly moved to anger. Irritare, to
provoke, to kindle wrath, to move, to stir, to incense to anger. Irritatione,
a provocation, an incensing, or moving to wrath. Irritire, tisco, tito, as
Irretare. Irrito, void, of no effect or force, nothing worth, vain, blunt,
that can not hurt. Irrocare, to have a boarse voice, to wax hoarse.
Irrochiare, as Irrocare. Irrochire, chisco, chito, as Irrocare. Irrochimento, a
hoarsenes, a hoarse voice. Irrocita, hoarsenes, a hoarse voice. Irrogiadare, to
bedew or dew, to sprinkle. Irrondine, a swallow. Irrompere, rompo, ruppi,
rotto, to break, rush, burst, or enter in by violence, or maine strength, to
make a forcible entry. Irronia, as Ironia. Irrotto, broken, rusht, burst, or
entered in by maine force and violence. Irrottione, a forced entrance, a violent
breaking or bursting in. Irrugare, to grow or make full of wrinkles or to
frown and wrinkle ones brow. Irrugiadare, as Irrogiadare. Irrugiadoso, dewie,
full of dew. Irruggire, gisco, gito, to rore, to roine, or braie out as a
lion. Irrugginire, nisco, nito, to rust, or grow rustie. Irrugginoso, rustie,
full of rust. Irrumare, to commit all manner of villainy or mischief. Irtare,
to thrum, to make rough, hairie or brislie. Irto, thrummed, rough, hairie,
brislie. Also high or steepie, or upright, as Erto. Also foul or filthy.
Isagogico, of, or belonging to an introduction, or beginning. Isame, as Essame.
Isaminare, as Essaminare. Isaminatione, as Essaminatione. Isatide, woade to die
blue withal. Isbadagliare, as Sbadagliare. Isbadigliare, as Sbadigliare.
Isbadiglioso, as Sbadiglioso. Iabaiaffare, as Sbaiaffare. Isballare, to
vnpacke, to unload. Isbarleffare, as Sbarleffare. Isbarleffo, as Sbarleffo.
Isbarbare, to vnbeard. Isbattere, as Sbattere. Isbattuto, as Sbattuto.
Isbauare, as Sbauare. Isbigottire, as Sbigottire. Isbigottimento, as
Sbigottimento. Isbizzarrire, as Sbizzarrire. Isboccaggine, as Sboccaggine.
Isboccato, as Sboccato. Isbollarsi, as Sbollarsi. Isborsare, as Sborsare.
Isbracciata, as Sbracciata. Isbramare, as Sbramare. Isbranare, as Sbranare.
Isbrigliare, as Sbrigliare. Isbruffare, as Sbruffare. Isbucare, as Sbucare.
Isbuffare, as Sbroffare. Isbuttafattore, as Sbuttafattore. Iscacciare, as
Scacciare. Iscalciare, as Scalciare. Iscambiare, as Scambiare. Iscambio, as
Scambio. Iscampanare, as Scampanare. Iscampare, as Scampare. Iscampo, as
Scampo. Iscapucciare, as Scapucciare. Iscapoli, as Scapoli. Iscarso, as Scarso.
Iscarmigliare, as Scarmigliare. Iscarognato, glutted or gorged with carrion,
vncarioned. Iscarpore, as Scarpore. Iscede, as Sceda. Iscelerattezza, as
Sceleraggine. Iscemare, as Scemare. Iscempio, as Scempio. Iscesa, as Scesa.
Ischerzare, as Scherzare. Ischerzeuole, as Scherzeuole. Ischerzo, as Scherzo.
Ischia, a disease, as the Sciatica. Ischiacciare, as Schiacciare. Ischiacciata,
as Schiacciata. Ischiamazzare, as Schiamazzare. Ischiamazzo, as Schiamazzo.
Ischiantare, as Schiantare. Ischiarire, as Schiarare. Ischiatta, as Schiatta.
Ischiena, as Schiena. Ischiettezza, as Schiettezza. Ischifare, Ischiuare, as
Schifare. Ischifo, Ischiuo, as Schifo. Ischifetto, Ischiuetto, as Schiuetto.
Ischifezza, Ischiuezza, as Schifezza. Ischifilta, Ischiuilta, as Schifezza.
Ischio, a kind of tree, some take it for a kind of wild radish. Also the
huckle bone of the hip. Ischiodare, as Schiodare. Ischiudere, to shut out, to
lock out. Ischiumare, as Schiumare. Ischiuma, as Schiuma. Isciabordo, as
Sciabordo. Isciagura, as Sciagura. Isciagurato, as Sciagurato. Iscialacquare,
as Scialacquare. Iscialacquaggine, as Scialacquaggine Isciancare, as Sciancare.
Isciancato, Isciano, as Scianco. Isciede, as Sceda. Iscientiato, as Scientiato.
Iscimonito, as Scimonito. Iscludere, as Escludere. Isclusione, as Esclusione.
Iscluso, as Escluso. Iscnotesia, a certain inco^gruitie in speech Iscodella, as
Scodella. Iscolare, as Scolare. Iscollare, as Decapitare. Iscolatura, as
Scolatura. Iscomessa, as Scomessa. Iscomesso, as Scomesso. Iscomettere, as
Scomettere. Iscomiatare, as Licentiare. Iscompagnato, as Scompagnato.
Iscompisciare, as Scompisciare. Iscomunicare, as Scomunicare. Iscomunica, as
Scomunicatione. Isconciare, as Sconciare. Isconciatura, as Sconciatura.
Isconcio, as Sconcio. Isconosciuto, as Sconosciuto. Isconoscenza, as
Sconoscenza. Isconquassare, as Sconquassare. Isconquazzare, as Squaccarare.
Isconsolato, as Sconsolato. Iscontro, as Scontro. Isconueneuole, inconvenient.
Isconueneuolezza, vnconuenience. Isconuenire, as Sconuenire. Iscopare, as
Scopare. Iscorciare, Iscorcio, as Scorciare. Iscorticare, as Scorticare.
Iscorzare, as Scorzare. Iscotere, Iscuotere, as Scuotere. Iscosso, as Scosso.
Iscossale, as Scossale. Iscoria, as Iscuria. Iscretio, Iscritio, as Scritio.
Iscriuano, as Scriuano. Iscriuere, as Scriuere. Iscritto, as Scritto.
Iscrittura, as Scrittura. Iscroccante, as Scroccante. Iscroccare, as Scroccare.
Iscrocco, as Scrocco. Iscrollare, as Scrollare. Iscrollo, as Scrollo. Iscuria,
a disease or stopping of a man's water in the bladder or passage of it.
Iscusare, as Scusare. Iscusa, as Scusa. Iscusabile, as Scusabile. Iscuscire, as
Scuscire. Iscuscitura, as Scuscitura. Isdebitato, as Sdebitato. Isdegnare, as
Sdegnare. Isdegno, as Sdegno. Isdegnoso, as Sdegnoso. Isdentato, as Sdentato.
Isdiceuole, as Disdiceuole. Isdogliarsi, as Sdogliare. Isdogliatiuo, as
Sdogliatiuo. Isdrusciolare, as Sdrucciolare. Isdruscire, as Sdruscire.
Isdrusciolo, as Sdrusciolo. Isfacciato, as Sfacciato. Isfacendato, as
Sfacendato. Isfacchinarsi, as Sfacchinarsi. Isfacciatezza, as Sfacciatezza.
Isfagumato, as Sfagumato. Isfamare, as Sfamare. Isfalcare, vide Isfalcatura.
Isfalcatura, when the shoulder of a horse or any other lim is bent, or by
violence forced from the right place. Isfasciare, as Sfasciare. Isfilare, to
rauell out in threads. Isfilatura, a raueling out in threads. Also a disease in
some horses. Isfinire, as Sfinire. Isfiorare, as Sfiorire. Isfiorire, as
Sfiorire. Isfogare, as Sfogare. Isfortunato, as Sfortunato. Isforzare, as
Sforzare. Isforzo, as Sforzo. Isfratare, as Sfratare. Isfregiare, as Sfregiare.
Isfrenato, as Sfrenato. Isfrondare, as Sfrondare. Isfrontato, as Sfrontato.
Isfuggire, as Sfuggire. Isgallinare i pollai, as Sgallinare. Isgannare, as
Disingannare. Isgarare, as Sgarare. Isgarrire, as Garrire. Isgombrare, as
Sgombrare. Isgomentare, as Sgomentare. Isgomento, as Sgomento. Isgommare, as
Sgommare. Isgorgare, as Sgorgare. Isgramaticare, as Sgramaticare. Isgualembro,
as Sgualembro. Isitare, to sing, chirp or cry as a stare. Islandra, as
Slandra. Isleale, false, untrue, disloyal. Islealta, disloyalty. Islogare, as
Slogare. Ismaccare, as Smaccare. Ismacco, as Smacco. Ismaltare, as Smaltare.
Ismaltire, as Smaltire. Ismalto, as Smalto. Ismancerie, as Smancerie. Ismania,
as Smania. Ismaniare, as Smaniare. Ismanire, nisco, nito, as Smaniare.
Ismarrire, as Smarrire. Ismascellare, as Smascellare. Ismattonare, as
Smattonare. Ismemorare, as Smemorare. Ismemoraggine, as Smemoraggine.
Ismemorataggine, as Smemoraggine. Ismenticaggine, as Smemoraggine. Ismerdare,
as Smerdare. Ismerdolare, as Smerdare. Ismetriare, as Smetriare. Isminuzzare,
as Sminuzzare. Ismoccolare, as Smoccare. Ismoderato, immoderate, intemperate.
Ismoltato, bare, shaven, made bald. Ismontare, as Smontare. Ismouere, as
Smouere. Ismosso, as Smosso, strained or put out of joint. Ismucciare, as
Sdrucciolare. Isnello, as Snello. Isneruare, as Sneruare. Isocolo, when two
sentences are alike in length. Isodomo, a form of building where every thing
is equally straight, level work. Isofago, a part of man's belly so called.
Isola, an island, a place compassed with waters. Isolano, Isolare, an ilander
of an island. Isolare, to reduce into an island, to compass about with waters.
Also pertaining to an island. Isoletta, a little island. Isonomia, equality of
laws to all manner of persons. Isoperimite, that which is of equal compass
or circuit to any thing. Isopiro, the herb Phaselium, and has leaves like a
nise. Isopleuro, a figure with all the sides equal. Isopo, the herb Isop.
Ispacciare, as Spacciare. Ispaccio, as Spaccio. Isparagnare, as Sparagnare.
Isparagno, as Sparagno. Isparauiere, as Sparauiere. Isparare, as Sparare.
Isparecchiare, as Sparecchiare. Ispargere, as Spargere. Ispargimento, as
Spargimento. Isparigli, an odd number. Isparmiare, as Sparagnare. Isparmio, as
Sparagno. Ispassare, Spassare. Ispasseggiare, as Spasseggiare. Ispasso, as
Spasso. Ispatio, as Spatio. Ispauenteuole, as Spauentoso. Ispauento, as
Spauento. Ispaurire, risco, rito, as Spauentare. Ispecchiare, as Specchiare.
Ispecchio, as Specchio. Ispediente, as Espediente. Ispedagliera, a spittle
keeper. Ispedire, disco, dito, as Spacciare. Ispedito, as Spedito, as
Spacciato. Ispeditione, as Speditione. Ispegnare, as Spegnare. Ispegnere, as
Spegnere. Ispelato, as Spelato. Ispendere, as Spendere. Ispensierato, as
Spensierato. Ispergiuro, as Spergiuro. Isperientia, as Sperientia.
Isperimentare, as Sperimentare. Ispesa, as Spesa. Ispeso, as Speso. Ispessire,
as Spessire. Ispesso, as Spesso. Ispetiale, as Speciale. Ispianatore, an
explainer. Ispiare, as Spiare. Ispianare, as, Spianare. Ispiccare, as Spiccare.
Ispiccate, as Spiccate. Ispiditiuo, dispatching, full of expedition.
Ispidocchiare, to louse, to vnlouse. Ispietato, as Spietato. Ispione, as Spia.
Ispirare, as Inspirare. Ispiritare, as Inspiritare. Isplicare, as Esplicare.
Isplicatione, as Esplicatione. Isponere, as Esponere. Isporre, as Esporre.
Isporcare, as Sporcare. Isporcitia, as Sporchezza. Isporco, as Sporco. Isposa,
as Sposa. Isposo, as Sposo. Ispositore, as Spositore. Ispositiua, expounding,
declaring. Ispositione, as Spositione. Isposto, as Esposto. Ispretare, as
Spretare. Ispresso, as Espresso. Isprimere, as Esprimere. Ispronare, as
Spronare. Isproportione, as Sproportione. Ispulare, to filch, to steal, to
pilfer cunningly. Ispultrice virtu, expelling or expulsive virtue.
Isputacchiare, as Sputacchiare. Isputare, as Sputare. Isputo, as Sputo.
Isquadra, as Squadra. Isquadrare, as Squadrare. Isquadro, as Squadro.
Isquarciare, as Squarciare. Isquarscina, as Squarcina. Isquassare, as
Spuassare. Isquatro, as Squadro. Isquietare, as Squietare. Isquisito,
exquisite, perfect. Isreuerenza, as Irreuerenza. Issilon, the letter Y, so
called in Italian. Issa, even now, presently, at hand, by and by. Issuto, used
for Stato, the participle of Essere, bin. Also as Vscito. Ista, as Questa.
Istabilita, as Stabilita. Istaccare, as Staccare. Istanchezza, as Stanchezza.
Istanco, as Stanco. Istanga, as Stanga. Istangare, as Stangare. Istante, as
Instante. Istantia, as Stantia, as Instantia. Istantiare, as Stantiare. Istate,
the summer season. Istatico, as Statico. Istato, as Stato. Isteccato, as
Steccato. Istecco, as Stecco. Istendere, as Stendere. Istentare, as Stentare.
Istento, as Stento. Istenuare, as Stenuare. Istenuatione, as Stenuatione.
Isterminato, as Sterminato. Isternutare, as Sternutare. Isteso, as Steso.
Istessa, Istesse, as Medesima. Istesso, Istessi, as Medesimo. Istia, a coope,
or pen for poultrie. Istiacciare, as Schiacciare. Istiertezza, as
Schiettezza. Istigare, as Instigare. Istigatione, as Instigatione. Istigatore,
as Instigatore. Istima, Istimatione, as Stima. Istimare, as Stimare. Istimiera,
a fence, a cover, a shroude, a shelter, a defense. Istinguere, as Estinguere.
Istinieri, greues for men's shins. Istinto, extinguished, extinct, quenched, put
out, an instinct or natural disposition, or inclination. Istipulare, as
Stipulare. Istiracchiare, as Stiracchiare. Istirpare, as Stirpare. Istitico, as
Stitico. Istitichezza, as Stitichezza. Istituire, as Instituire. Istitutione,
as Institutione. Istituto, as Instituto. Istizza, as Stizza. Istizzare, as
Stizzare. Istizzolo, Istizzone, as Stizzone. Istizzonare, as Stizzare. Istmici
giuochi, certain sacred games among the Graecians. Istmo, a narrow part of a
country where two seas are but a small distance asunder, enclosing the land on
both sides. Also the middle part or bridge of the nose. Istmos, a stone of the
color of saffron, which is so soft, that it may be spunne, and no fire will
consume it. Istoccata, as Stoccata. Istocco, as Stocco. Istolto, as Stolto.
Istomacaggine, lothesomnes. Istomacheuole, as Stomacheuole. Istomacoso, as
Stomacheuole. Istolto, as Stolto, as Distolto. Istordire, as Stordire.
Istordito, as Stordito. Istoria, a history. Istoriale, historical, pertaining
to history. Istoriare, to write or compose a history, to historize. Istorico,
a historian, a history writer. Istoriographo, as Istorico. Istorlomia, as
Astronomia. Istorlomo, as Astronomo. Istorre, as Distorre. Istortura, as
Stortura. Istraboccheuole, as Straboccheuole. Istracchezza, as Stanchezza.
Istraccare, as Stancare. Istracco, as Stracco. Istracciare, as Stracciare.
Istracurataggine, as Stracuraggine. Istramortire, as Stramortire. Istrapazzare,
as Strapazzare, Istratiare, as Stratiare. Istratio, as Stratio. Istremare, to
draw or set out to the uttermost, to force, to constrain, to bring to
extremity. Istremita, as Estremita. Istrenuita, as Strenuita. Istrenuo, as
Strenuo. Istretta, as Stretta. Istrettezza, as Strettezza. Istretto, as
Stretto. Istriano, a kind of marble stone coming from Istria. Istrice, a
porpuntine, or porkepine, a beast like a hedgehog, whose pricks are dangerous,
an vrchin. Istringere, as Stringere. Istrologia, as Astrologia. Istrologo, as
Astrologo. Istroncare, as Stroncare. Istronzo, as Stronzo. Istruffare, as
Struffare. Istruffo, as Struffo. Istrumentale, as Instrumentale. Istrumento, as
Instrumento. Istruire, as Instruire. Istruttione, instruction or teaching.
Istrutto, taught, instructed, trained. Istruttore, a teacher, an instructor.
Istuccare, as Stuccare. Istucco, as Stucco. Istudiare, as Studiare. Isturare,
as Sturare. Isturione, a fish called Sturgeon. Isuagare, as Vagare.
Isualiggiare, as Sualiggiare. Isuarieta, as Varieta. Isuegliare, as Suegliare.
Isuenire, as Suenire. Isuentare, as Suentare. Isuentate, foolish fancies,
sudden toys, humorous conceits. Isuentolare, as Suentolare. Isuerginare, as
Suerginare. Isuenare, as Suenare. Isuernare, as Suernare. Isuiare, as Disuiare.
Isuillaneggiare, as Suillaneggiare. Isuergognare, as Suergognare. Isuiscerare,
as Suiscerare. Isuiscerato, as Suiscerato. Isuolgarizzare, as Suolgarizzare.
Ita, has bin used of Dan^e, in the latin sense, yea, yes. Itaco, as Galgolo.
Iterare, to iterate, to redouble, to renew, to repeat. Iterario, a book or
note of repetitions, or reiterations. Iteratione, an iteration, an iterating, a
renewing, a redoubling, a repetition. Itifalico verso, a verse of filthy
bauderie. Itinerario, a commentary, or hook of remembrance. Also a calendar
of miles, as the gestes or remooues of princes. Itinere, a way, a passage, a
going, a trade, a course, or a mean. Ito, Gito, gone, wandered, marched,
walked. Itteritia, as Mal verde. Ittiocola, a great fish which some take for a
Sturgeon. Iua, ground pine, herb iuie, or field cipres. Iuane, a kind of
serpent in India, which is very good meat. Iubar, the day star called also
Lucifer. Also brightness, or a sun beam. Iugero, as Giugero. Iugulare, as
Giocolare. Iui, Quiui, there, yonder, in that place, thither. Iui a non guari,
not long after. Iulca, Look Foce. Iumenta, as Giumenta. Iurisconsulto, as
Giurisconsulto. Iurisdittione, as Giurisdittione. Iurista, a lawyer, a
professor of the laws. Iusdicente, as Giurisconsulto. Iuspatronato, as
Giuspatronato. Iusquesito, a rightful, just, or lawful demand or suit.
Iusquiano, the herb henbane.
L
LA, an article of the feminine gender, the, but being joined with a verb it
is a pronoune, she, her, it, or the same. It is sometimes an aduerbe of place,
there, thither, yonder, or in that place. It is also a note in music, La. La
dove, whereas, whether, whereupon. Labante, fainting, drooping, decaying.
Labarda, a halbard. Labaro, a streamer, banner, or ensign that is hung up in
churches over noble men's tombs. Also a rich banner or streamer, beset with
precious stones that till Constantine his time, who commanded the figure of the
cross to be carried before him, was wont to be carried before the emperors,
and was worshipped of the soldiers. Labbia, Labbra, the lips, the brims of any
thing. also a man's look or countenance. Labbro, Labro, a lip. Also the brim
or brinke of a fountain, the brim, tip, or edge of a pots mouth, or any thing
else. Labroso, Labbruto, that has big lips, or is well lipped. Labdace,
filthiness in the mouth. Labdoide, that suture or seame which is in the hinder
part of the head and in the foundation thereof, where it goes on both sides
toward the ear, the going up of which in the beginning is broad, but ascending
higher becomes narrower. Labe, a spot, a blot, or a blemish. Also a violent
fall or torrent of rain waters. Labile, to wash with, sliding, slipperie, or
fading, faint or weak, unstable. Labirinto, Labirintho, a laberinth or place
full of intricate windings and turnings, made in such wise that whosoever came
into it could not get out again without a perfect guide, or without a thread
directing him, the clew or bottom whereof should be left at the entry, we
call it a maze. It is also taken for an oration, or any other thing very
intricate, difficult, and entangled. Labizo, a kind of gum not much, unlike to
myrrh, but much more odoriferous and precious. Labole, weak, faint.
slipperie, flitting. Laborioso, laborious, painful, taking pains, difficill,
wearisom. Labretto, a little lip. Labrusca, as Lambrusca. Laca, as Lacca. Also
a rock, a cliffe, a downfall, a ruinous hill. Lacca, white lead, or a kind of
gum. Also a ditch, a puddle, a poole, or muddie place. Lacca ogliata, a kind
of ointment for swelling. Lacche, taken for spaniels with long flapping ears.
Lacchietto, the sweet bread of a breast of veale. Lacchia, as Laccia, Chieppa,
or Alosa. Also a kind of drink made of spices. Laccia, a fish called a
chewme, others take it for a blaye or a bleake. Lacciare, to tie, to bind, to
lace, to claspe, to snare or entangle, to tramell. Laccietto, as Lacciolo.
Laccio, a snare, a tramell, a binding, a lace, a spring or gin to catch birds
with Also a fish who for desire of a vain in a tunnies iawe kills him: a
latchet. Lacciolo, Lacciuolo, a little snare, tramell, binding, ribond, lace,
or string: a latchet of a shoe. Also a maze. Lacerabile, that may be torn.
Lacerare, to tear, to rende, to totter in pieces, to mangle, to dismember, to
torment. Lacerna, a kind of cloak to keep the rain out. Lacero, Lacerato,
torn, rent, ragged, tottred in pieces, mangled, dismembered. Lacerto, the
braune or sinews or muscles of a man's arms or legs. Also the arm from the
elbow to the pitch of the shoulder. Also a muskle because it is like a lizard.
Also a fish which some say grunteth as a hog, and other some take to be the
makrell. Also a lizard. Also a kind of disease in a horse among the muscles
and sinews. Lache, a lackie or footeman. Lachetta, a gum called gum lack.
Lacchezzini, prouokings, enticements, allurements, drifts, devices, sleights.
Lacessitore, he that provoke or abuses one in speech. Lacessire, sisco,
sito, to provoke, stir, or egg a man to wrath, to abuse in speech, to rail
against one, to vex and molest. Lacessita, provoking, provocation, vexation,
or abusing in speeches. Lacinio, a barbers basin, or a milk pan. Lacinioso,
cut in sundry fashions, iagged, snipt, crumpled, full of plaits, intricate,
crankling in and out. Lacno, a dogs name, as we say a shaghaire or ruffian.
Laco, Lago, as Lago. Laconico, brief, laconicall, short, witty, or compendious
in speaking. Laconismo, a short kind of speaking containing in few words much
matter. Laconizzare, to speak compendiouslie. Lacrima, a tear in weeping, a
drop, a trilling, a trickling. Also rosin, turpentine or gum drops.
Lacrimabile, lamentable, to be bewailed. Lacrimare, to weep, to shed tears,
to distill, drop, or trill in tears, to trickle. Lacrimale, Lacrimeuole, as
Lacrimoso. Lacrimoso, weeping, wailefull, whining, distilling tears or drops,
trickling, full tears, sorrowful, lamentable, shedding tears. Lacuna, a
marsh, a moore, a fen, a fennie, marish or waterish ground, a ditch wherein
water stands, a furrowe or trench whereby fields are drained. Lacunoso,
fennie, moorish, or waterish, full of ditches or holes. Lada, a swift runner.
Also a kind of Iuie. Also a kind of Cassia smelling like wine mingled with
spices. Ladano, a kind of sweet gum to perfume with. Also a kind of fish.
Ladetta, a hymn, a psalm or song of praise. Ladino, large, wide, broad. Also
easy and facile. Ladone, the name of a dog as we say harier, or hunt hair.
Ladoue, whereas, there where. Ladrarie, as Ladroncellerie. Ladro, a thief, a
stealer, a filcher, a pilfrer. Ladronare, to filch, to steal, to pilfre or
play the thief. Ladroncello, a little thief, stealer, filcher or pilfrer.
Lardoncellerie, pilfring, stealing, or filching tricks. Ladroncellesco,
theeuish, pilfring. Ladrone, a great or old thief, a high way thief.
Ladroneccio, theft, larcenie, theeuing, stealing, filching, pilfring.
Ladroneggiare, to play the thief, to steal. Lagana, a kind of chough in
India. Lagagnosia, weakness, sloth, faintnes, lazines, negligence, idleness,
lithernes. Lagare, as Allagare. Lagari, a kind of bird. Lagaro, the part of
the body from the stomach to the navel. Laghetto, a little lake, pond, or
poole. Laggio, the aloye or loss of money by exchange, coining or bank.
Lagiono, as Lambena. Lagna, sorrow, trouble, grief, vexation, wailing, moning,
complaining. Lagnare, to wail, to lament, to bemone, to complain. Lago, a
lake, a meare, a poole, a fen, a marrish, a deep place always full of waters.
a kind of foul that always loves storms and foul weather. Lagopo, the herb
haresfoote. Some take it for trinity grass or trinity herb. Lagotalmo, a
disease in the eyes, when as the upper eielid does not move downewarde.
Laguna, as Lacuna. Lagunoso, as Lacunoso. Lagrima, as Lacrima. Lagrimabile,
Lagrimeuole, as Lacrimoso. Lagrimare, as Lacrimare. Lagrimoso, as Lacrimoso.
Lagrimatione, a weeping, a moaning, a distilling or shedding of tears.
Lagrimetta, a little tear, distilling or drop. Laguardia, a kind of cheek of
a horses bit, so called by Grison. Lai, lays, wailings, lamentations, moanes,
complaints. Laia, sea grass, ducke weed or reeke. Laico, a layman, a temporal
man, a secular man. Also popular or vulgar. Laidezza, filthiness, foulenes,
deformity, ilfauourednes. Laido, filthy, foul, deformed, ill-favored.
Lainero, a kind of hawk called a lanard or a lanaret. Laiuolo, the place where
fishers stand to draw their nets to shore. Laldetta, a song of praise, a
thanksgiving song. L'althrieri, the other day, the day before yeasterday.
Lama, a blade of any sword, any thin plate of iron to make armor with, any
wedge or sow or thin plate of metal. Also a laund, a down or plain. Also a
standing water, poole or puddle or deep ditch with little water in it. Also a
gad of steel. Lambena, a fish which changes his color: for all the year she
is white, and in the spring time speckled. Lambicare, to distill, to limbecke.
Lambicatore, a distiller of waters. Lambichi, stillatories or stils. Lambire,
bisco, bito, to lick or lap with the tongue, to touch softly, to flow, to
glide or slide softly. Lambrace, a fish which having swallowed the hook, does
so much shake himself that he castes it out again. Lambrusca, Lambrasca,
wild, desert, savage, rural. Also a kind of sour wine. Lambruscare, to
prune, to crop or trim the vines. Lamella, a thin plate of metal. Lamentanza,
as Lamentatione. Lamentabile, as Lamenteuole. Lamentare, to lament, to
complain, to bewail, to waiment, to weep or mourn for. Lamentatione, a
lamentation, a complaint, a bewailing, a wailing. Lamentatoria, wailing,
plaining, lamenting. Lamenteuole, lamentable, doleful, moanfull, pitiful,
wailefull, drerie, woofull, mournful. Lamenti, lamentings, bewailings,
moanings, complaints. Lamento, as Lamentatione. La mia passera e nel nido, a
kind of christmas game used in Italy, called my sparrow is in her neast.
Lamia, a beast that has a man's face and the feet like a horse. Also a sea-dog
or dog-fish. Also a kind of fish that has so great a iawe, and is so ravenous
that it will devour an armed man. Also a witch, a sorceresse or a hag. Also
women that were thought to have such eyes as they could put out and put in at
their pleasure, or rather certain devils in a counterfeit shape, which with
flatterings allured fair young springals and boys, and taking upon them the
likeness and fashion of women were thought to devour them and bring them to
destruction. Some thought them to be ladies of the fairies or such as make
children afraid, or such witches as suck childrens blood to kill them. Also
an arche, a vault or such hollow place. Used also for a whore or harlot or
shameless woman. Lamina, any kind of flat stone, plate or slate, wedge or sow
or ingot of metal, as a gad of steel, a thin plate of iron or any other
metal; namely such as they make tags for points. Also a gad of steel or
iron, a shingle or slate. Lamio, dead or blind nettle, archangell. Lamiola, a
kind of dog-fish. Lampada, Lampana, a lamp. Also a torche. Also a leame of
fire or brightness. Lampante, bright, glistring, shining. Lampare, as
Lampeggiare. Lamparo, a lamp-maker. Also the socket of a candlestick.
Lampasco, a disease in a horse called the lampase, it comes in the mouth.
Lampazo, the weed we call a bur, a clotbur. Lampeggiante, lightning, flashing,
sparckling, blazing, flaring, twinkling. Lampeggiare, to lighten suddenly, to
twinkle, to sparkle, to flash, to blaze. Lampere, certain stars. Lampiro, a
kind of lizard or euets. Lampo, a lightning, a flashing, a flash, a sparkling,
a blaze. Lampreda, the fish called a lamprey or luckestone. Lampsana, an herb
growing among corn. Lampuro, white tail or fox. Lana, any kind of wool.
Lanaio, Lanaro, as Lanaiuolo. Lanaiuolo, a wooll-man, a wooll-w^nder. Lanaria,
cotton-weed, sullers herb, cudwoort. Lanario, a lanard or lanaret hawk.
Lance, a balance, or skale of a balance. Lancella, Lancetta, a lancet or fleame
as surgeons use to let blood with. Also a kind of measure. Lanci, as Lanzi.
Lancia, a lance, a spear, a horsemans staff or iauelin. Lanciare, to lance,
to throw, to cast, to hurl, to darte, to fling, to pitch: used also for
Sbalestrare. Lanciar' il dardo, to cast a darte. Lanciar' il palo, to pitch the
bar. Lanciaspezzata, as Lanciere. Lanciata, Lanciamento, a lancing, a throw,
a cast, a hurl, a darting. Lanciatore, Lanciiuolo, a lance-man, a pike-man, a
darter, a hurler, a thrower. Lanciere, a soldier on horseback using a lance
for his chief weapon, but not so heavily armed as is the man at arms, a
lancier. Lancio, a throw, a cast or a darting. Also a skip, a hop, a leap, a
friske. Lanciola, a kind of plantaine called ribwort. Lancione, a great lance,
pike or spear. Landa, a laund, a down, a plain. Also a going. Landrica, the
flower of virginity. Lanefice, bearing wool, woollie, a woll-man, a
wooll-winder. Lanfa, a kind of sweet water made of Orenges flowers. Langa, as
Landa. Langanino, a kind of bird. Lange, a kind of foul or bird. Langio, a
disease in a horse about the crupper. Langore, as Languore. Languente,
languishing, failing, fainting, pining away, feeble, weak, faint or weary.
Languidezza, as Languore. Languido, languishing, faint, lingering, weak, tired,
drooping, pining, feeble, wan, sick, idle, lazy, lither, slow, decayed, as it
were without spirit or life. Languire, guisco, guito, to languish, to linger,
to droope, to faint, to pine, to be sick or feeble, to be timorous, to
decrease, to be afraid, to be idle or lither, to be as it were without life or
spirit. Languito, languished, lingered, pined, drooped, fainted, etc. Languore,
languishment, languor, faintnes, drooping, pining, failing of strength, and
natural moisture, wearines, grief, pain, idleness, lithernes, lack of life
and spirit. Languria, a kind of beast. Langurio, a languet of amber like to a
bead stone. Laniare, to break, to tear, to rent, to splinter in pieces.
Laniatione, a renting, a tearing or breaking in pieces. Lanicio, clothing or
the craft of making woollen clothes. Lanifero, bearing wool, fruitful in
wool. Lanificio, the art, trade or dealing for wool. Lanoso, woollie, full
of wool, thrummie, soft, full of nap. Lantana, the waifaring man's tree.
Lanterna, a lantern. Lanternare, to make lanternes, to dally, to spend time
idly, to loyter, to play the fool, to seek others and loose himself.
Lanternaro, a lantern maker, a loyterer, an idle companion. Lanternetta, a
little lantern. Lanterniere, as Lanternaro. Lanugine, the soft and tender
hairs, down, or mossines which first appears in the visages of children and
women. Also the soft wool, cotton, or furre in fruits or herbs, as in
Clarie, the first down feathers in young birds. Lanuginoso, downie, soft, full
of down, mossie, full of soft cotton, covered with soft hair. Lanuto, as
Lanoso. Also used for a sheep. Lanza, as Lancia. Lanzare, as Lanciare. Lanzi,
dutch men, because in dutch they are called lanceknights, muffs. Lanzinetti,
idem. Lanzo, taken in mockery for a high dutch man or lanceknight. Laonde,
whereupon, whereby, whence. Lapida, any manner of stone. Lapidare, to stone, to
beat, to kill or batter with stones. Also to rain stones. Lapidario, a
lapidarie, a ieweller. Also a mason or digger of stones. Lapidatione, a stoning
or hurling of stones. Lapidoso, stony, full of stones, hard as a stone,
grettie, grauellie. Lapiena, the tide, the full sea, the full tide. Lapis
lazuli, a kind of blue precious stone called an azull stone. Lapitudine de gli
occhij, as Lippitudine. Lappa, Lapa, a burre, a clotburre, a lapping, or
burre-dock. Lappagine, the herb called maidens lips, shepherds rod, or
teazill. Lappare, to lap as dogs do, to lop trees. Lap, il culogli fa lap,
his tail makes buttons, his buttocks goes a twitter twa^ter. Lappola, as
Lappa. Lappolare, as Lappare. Lappolette, stubbles, chafs, little strawes,
sticks or strawes. Lapso, a fall, a sliding, a gliding, a glance or flying.
Lappolone, an importunat fellow, that will stick as close to one as a burre.
Larantola, a kind of sea-crab, or lobster. Lardare, to larde, or enterlarde.
Lardaruola, a lardrie, a larder, a larding pin. Lardaruoli, chandlers. Also
such as sell dride salt meats, as larde, bakon, sauceges, neates-tongs, and
poudred beef. Lardatore, a larder, one that lardes meat. Lardegli, Lardelli,
the pieces of larde, or larder that they put into rostemeate. Also a witty,
quipping, girding jest, skoffe, or tante. Also a kind of fig so called.
Lardiera, a lardrie, or lardnes. Lardiero, a larder. Lardoni, as Lardegli.
Lardirone, Lardirolo, a Ferret, some take it for a Wezell. Larese, as Larice.
Laresino, a kind of fish. Largare, to enlarge, to make broad, wide or open,
to open or make room. Largheggiare di parole, to talk, to promise or speak
more then is true or one means to perform, to speak unadvisedly. Larghezza,
largenes, breadth, amplenes, widenes. Largiloquente, full of words, free and
liberal of his tongue. Largire, gisco, gito, to give or bestow liberally
upon one, to grant, to permit, to offer himself. Largita, Largitate,
largess, liberality, bounty, free gift, abundance. Largitore, a liberal
giver, a prodigal spender. Largo, large, wide, open, ample, liberal, free,
prodigal. Lari, the sides of an oven. Larij dei, familiar spirits, household
gods, good or evil angels. Larice, a tree called the larix tree, larch tree,
or turpentine tree, which will not rot, nor no fire can consume. Larince, a
bone in the head of man, by which we receive and put forth breath, and also
form the voice. Laro, a waterfowle called a Sea-cob, or Sea-gull. Larua, a
vizard or a mask, a vision, a night-ghost, a hag, a spirit, a ^^bgoblin, a
walking or appearing spirit. Lasagna, a kind of thin paste meat used in
Italy. Lasagnera, a woman that makes or sels the said kind of meat. Lasca,
limber, or thin wouen. Also a fish which some take for the roch. Some take it
for a fish like our Seuerne Shad. Lascia, Lasciata, a lease of land, a legacy,
gift, or donation left to another. Also a leash for dogs. Also a bequeathing.
Lasciarci del pelo, to pay well for any thing, to leave some good thing
behind. Lasciare, to leave, to forgo, to abandon, to forsake, to cast off, to
let alone, to suffer, to let, to lin, to permit, to slacken, to let loose. Also
to let to lease, to farm also to leash as hunters do, to bequeathe. Lascita,
Lasso, as Lascia. Lasciuia, lasciuiousnes, leacherie, wantonness, lust,
uncleanness of life, ribaudrous jesting or behavior. Lasciuiare, to be or play
the lascivious or leacherous part in bodily lust. Lasciuetto, somewhat
lascivious and wanton. Lasciuire, visco, vito, as Lasciuiare. Lasciuo,
lascivious, wanton, leacherous, lustful with women, wanton in behavior,
rank, dishonest, womanish. Lasciuolo, a kind of night bird. Some take it to
be the night bat. Lasene, stiffhaires, or hogs brissels, as they make head
brushes with, and shomakers use. Also the arm pits. Laserpitio, the herb
Angelica, or maisterwort, or fumitorie of Spain. Lassana, a kind of herb.
Lassare, to be, to make, or grow weary, faint, or tired, to tire. Also as
Lasciare. Lassatiuo, laxatiue, loose. Lassero, the tree that brings Belgioino.
Lassezza, faintnes, wearines. Lassito, as Lascia. Lasso, a lease, or letting of
any land for term of years. Also weary, tired, faint, or weak. Also an
interiection of lamentation alas, aye me, welladaie. Lassu, Lassuso, as Lasu.
Lastra, a plate, a leaf, a wedge, a sow, a gad of steel, or an ingot of any
metal, a slate, or any thin stone. Also balast for a ship. Also a lath of
wood. Lastrare, to balast a ship, to slate a house, to cover with plates, to
lath. Lastregare, to paue with stones. Also to slate or tyle a house.
Lastregatore, a pauier, a tyler. Lastricare, as Lastregare. Lastricatore, as
Lastregatore. Lastrico, paued. Also a pauement of stones. Lasu, Lasuso, above,
there above, above yonder. Lata, a sow, or plate, or gad of metal. Latace,
vide Herba Latace. Latarina, a fish, in latin Atherina. Latebra, darkness,
obscurity, secrecy, a corner, a den, a lurking hole, a covert for beasts,
the form of a hair. Latebroso, full of holes or corners to hide or lurk in.
Laterale, collateral, or of and pertaining to the side. Laterina, a fish
called in latin Atherina. Laterino, a close stool, a iakes, a privy. Lati
campi, broad wide fields. Latici, wide, large, broad, spacious. Laticlauo, a
kind of long robe or mantle which Emperors and Poets were wont to wear.
Latifolio, that which has broad leaves. Latina, the mizen sail of a ship.
Also the Latin tongue. Latinare, to speak, write, or compose latin. Latinita,
pertaining to the latin tongue, latinitie. Latinizzare, as Latinare. Latione, a
bearing, an ordaining, a marking, a giving. Latino, the latin tongue, latin:
also clear, bright, open, easy, broad, wide. Latitudine, latitude, breadth,
broadnes, largenes, widenes. Lato, broad, ample, large, big, great, wide,
spacious. Also a side. Latora, sides. Latore, a bringer, a bearer, a porter, a
messenger. Latrare, to bark, to baie, to baule as a dog. Latrato, barked, or
baide as a dog, a barking or baying of a dog. Latratore, a barker, a
bauler, a houler, a railer, a detractor. Latria, the divine service of God,
duty, homage, service or reverence to God. Latrina, a iakes, a privy, a close
stool. Latro, Latrone, as Ladro. Latroneccio, as Ladroneccio. Latroneggiare,
as Ladroneggiare. Latrocinio, as Ladroneccio. Lattace, vide Herba Latace.
Lattaccini, white meats, as milk, cream and cheese. Lattacino, a custarde, a
flaune, an egg pie made of milk or cream. Lattaciuoli, doucets, custards,
flawnes, egge-pies, or any thing made of cream or milk. Lattamento, any thing
made of milk. Lattaiuola, as Lattaria. Lattaiuoli, any thing that suckes, or
sucklings. Also the first teeth that any creature has. Also such as sell milk,
or that make white meats. Also custards, doucets, flaunes or egge-pies.
Lattante, giving suck or milk. Also young and sucking. Lattare, to milk, to
give suck or milk, to suck milk. Lattaria, herb Tithimale, spurge or
milkweede. Also wartewoort. Also a deary house. Lattarini, any soft rowed fish.
Also a kind of mackrell fish. Lattario, made of milk, or that brings forth
milk. Lattaruolo, one that sels milk, or is a dairie man. Lattaruola, a
dairie maid. Lattatirce, a nurce that gives suck. Also a dry nurce. Latte,
milk, any kind of milk, whitish. Lattemele, a kind of clouted cream. Latte
di pesce, the soft roe or spaune of fishes. Latteo, of milk, milkie, milken.
Also a milk white color. Latte premulo, curded milk, curds. Latte rapreso,
curded milk, curds. Latterone, the herb sowthistle, or milkethistle. Latti,
the small guts by which first the meat passes out of the stomach, some take
them for two kernels under the canell bone, which in a man are slender, but
thicker in beasts. Latticinio, any thing made of milk, as we say white meat.
Also the sweet bread of a breast of veale. Latticino, a kind of composition
that glasse-makers use to make glass with. Lattisicio, Lattisiccio, with
milk, any thing milkish or made of milk, white-meate. Lattine, the scurffe
or scalde growing on childrens heads. Lattoaro, Lattouario, an electuarie.
Lattone, the metal we call laton or lattin Lattonaio, Lattonaro, a brasier.
Lattoso, milkie, fat, full of milk. Lattuaro, Lattuario, an electuarie.
Lattuca, Latuca, the sallet Lettuce. Lattucella, Latucella, a milk thistle.
Lattuche, Latuche, the sallet herb lettuce. Also ruffe-bands. Also
chitterlings. Laua, a running gullet, stream, or gutter suddenly caused by
rain. Also a washing place. Lauaceci, Lauacenci, as Lauaceti. Lauaceti, a vile
base person, a dung farmer or such a drudge good only to wash shitten rags or
dish-cl^uts. Lauacciare, to wash, bedabble, or rense in the water. Lauaccio,
dishwash, swines-draffe. Lauacro, a font, a lauer, an ewer. Lauagnotto, a kind
of ship or pinnace or such vessel. Lauana, as Lauanese, Lauanda, the herb
lauender. Lauandaia, Lauandara, a laundresse or washing woman. Lauamento, a
washing or lauing. Lauanese, goats rue, or Italian fitch. Lauare, to wash, to
laue, to bathe. Lauarone, a fish called in latin Atherina. Lauatoio, Lauatorio,
a washing or lauing place, a wash house. Lauastracci, as Lauaceti. Lauatora, a
washing or bucking tub. Lauatare, to dabbie, or paddle in the water. Lauatina,
a washing, a rencing, a dabling, a padling. Lauatione, a washing. Lauatrice, a
washing woman or laundresse. Lauatura, as Lauamento. Lauda, praise,
commendations, laud, thanksgiving, a hymn, a song or psalm. also the hinder
part of the head. Laudano, a kind of sweet gum. Laudabile, laudable,
commendable, praise worthy. Laudare, to praise, to laud, to commend.
Laudatiua, commendatorie, praising, laudatorie. Laudatoria, as Laudatiua.
Laud, praise, commendation, as Lauda. Laudentio, the fiftieth part of any
bargain. Laudesi, schoolmasters or such as sing in churches songs of
praises. Laue, where, there where, whereas. Laueggio, a kind of seething pot
made of one piece of thin stone like a kettell. Laueggiaro, one that makes
those kinds of pots. Lauello, a lauer in a barbers shop. Lauezzo, as Laueggio.
Lauezzaro, as Laueggiaro. Lauorare, to work, to labor, to travel. Also to
till, to manure, or husband grounds. Lauorato, wrought, labored, or traueled,
manured, tilled, or husbanded. Lauoratore, a labourer, a worker, a workman, a
husbandman, a ploughman. Lauoratrice, a work or laboring woman. Lauoro,
Lauorio, work, labor or workmanship. Lauoretti, pretty, fine, little works.
Lauorieri, laborers or workmen. Laurea corona, a crown or wreath of bay or
laurel. Laureare, to laureate or crown with laurel as poets be. Laureato,
laureate, crowned with baie, a poet laureate. Laureo, made of laurel or bay.
Laureola, the herb perwinkle. Also the shrub lowrie or laurel. Lauretto, a
place where laurel trees grow. Lauro, Laurio, laurel or bays. Lautezza,
daintines, finenes, trimnes in bankets. Lautie, presents and gifts that the
Romans sent to the Ambassadors of other realms. Lauto wel-seasoned and
trimmed, dainty, fine, wealthy, rich, costly, stately, neat, trick, spruce.
Lautrice, the wives of two brethren. Lazoli, an azure or lazull stone: it is
bluish of color. Lazza, as Lasca. Lazzare, as Lasciare. Lazzaretto, an
hospital for the poor diseased. Lazzarico, a fruit called in latin Hipomelis
or Trigonium. Lazzarina, a kind of scurffe, itche or tettera, leaprosie.
Lazzarino, a lazare or one that has the leprosy. Also a little hospital or
spittle. Lazzarito, a lazare or a leaper. Lazzeroso, a worm breeding in a
horse: whereof there be eight kinds. Lazzaruoli, a kind of fruit in Italy.
Lazzo, as Laccio. Also sour, sharp, tarte or wallowish in taste. Le, the sem.
article plur. the, a pronoune of the Dat. and Accusat. cases, to her, her. Also
of the Ablat. from her. Leale, loyal, true, trusty, upright, faithful,
honest, righteous. Lealta, loyalty, faith, truth, vprightnes, integrity,
faithfulness. Leandro, as Rododafne. Leanza, Leana, as Lealta. Leardo, dapple,
flea-bitten, with red tawnie spots. Leate, Lealare, to make loyal. Lebarre,
the places where the bit should rest in the horses mouth. Lebbra, the disease
we call the leapre or leaprosie. Lebbraccia, as Lebbra. Lebbroso, one that is a
leaper. Lecanomante, he that practices Lecanomantia. Lecanomantia, a kind of
divination by water in basins and fish shells. Lecca altari, a dissembling
puritan. Leccafune, a halter-sacke, a knauish wag. a gallowse-clapper.
Leccagine, lickrishnes, gluttony, gormandize or licking. Leccami, all manner
of dainty meats. Also lappings or lickings. Leccardia, gluttony, surfaiting,
gurmandizing. Leccardo, Leccardone, a glutton, a friand, a gurmand, a lickerish
fellow, a gullie gut. Leccapiatti, a licke-dish, a scullion in a kitching, a
slouen. Leccapignatte, a lick-pot, a drudge, a scullion in a kitching, a
slouenly greasy fellow. Leccare, to lick, by a metaphore, to claw, to
flatter. Leccatore, a licker. Also a flatterer. Leccatura, a licking. Also
gluttonishnes, lickrishnes. Leccetto, Lecceto, a grove of holmes, a maze, a
labirinth. Lecchetto, a bait, an allurement, a sweet intisement. Also a little
pleasant roll in the mouth of a bit. Lecchia, a kind of fish like a tunnie
that has no scales. Some take it for a kind of dog fish. Some for a kind of
mackrell fish: and others for a fish like our Seuerne shad. Leccio, a tree much
like an oak, and be^reth acornes. Some call it a holme. Lecco. Is properly the
master or mistres at bowels or quoits, whereat all men cast or play. Also a
glutton or a gullie gut. Leccone, a glutton, a gormand, a lickrish man.
Leccornia, as Leccardia. Lece, it is lawful, or it is seemly. Le cernite, the
trained or choice or llings of any thing, and of men especially. Lecitare, to
allow, to make lawful. Lecito, lawful, convenient. Lecora, Lecoro, a bird
called in latin, Liguris or Nucedula. Ledere, ledo, ledei, or lesi, leduto, to
offend, to wrong, to mis^se or injury in word or deed. Leduto or leso,
wronged, misused, offended in word or deed. Lega, a league, a confederacy, a
truce, an agreement or condition. a french league, that is two english miles by
land and three by sea. The aloy, quality or worth of gold or silver that is
coined, as we say sterling: the solder, to solder, unite or combine metals
together. Also a kind of measure of corn so called in Italy. Legaccia, a
band, a garter, a fillet, a swathe, a rouler, a bandle, a binding. Legaccio,
as Legaccia. Legaggio, a packet, a bundle or trusse of any thing. Also a bond
or an obligation, a list, a checkroule or note in writing, a schedule or bil.
also the hire that porters have for making up of packes of merchandise. Also
the binding of any thing. Legale, lawful, belonging to the law, or triable
by law. Legame, Legamento, a ligament, a binding, a tying, any thing that
binds, the ligatures or strings of the body, wherewith the ioints of bones
and the gristles are compact and bound together: so that by every violent
motion they cannot be loosed one from another. It is a substance white, hard,
and void of sense and hollownes. Legare, to bind, to tie, to fasten together,
to solder or combine metals. to leave or bequeath by will and testament. to
agrize or set ones teeth an edge. to bind, tie, or nick a cast at dice. Also
to set any precious stone in a ring or jewel. Legar'i dadi, to tie, to bind
or nick a cast at dice. Legato, bound, fastened, tide, soldred or combined
metals, left or bequeathed by will and testament, tide, bound, or nickt a cast
at dice, agrized or tide ones teeth on edge. Also a lease or legacy or any
thing left one by will and testament. Also a legate, a delegate, an ambassador,
a deputy, or substitute. Legatione, a legateship, an embassage, a message, or
deputation. Legatorio, pertaining to legacies. Legazza, as Legaccia. Leg, a
law, a statute, an ordinance, a decree, a rule, an order, a covenant or
condition. Leggenda, a legend or writing. Leggendario, a legendarie, of or
pertaining to legends. Legge^e, leggo, lessi, letto, to read any book or
writing. Leggia, fleshie, fast, braunie, tough. Leggiadramente, gallantly,
wittily, beawtifullie, finely, prettily, graciously, seemly, comely,
handsomely. Leggiadria, gallantnes, wittie-handling, beawtifulnes, finenes,
graciousnes, seemlines, comelines, handsomnes. Leggiadro, gallant, witty,
fair, comely, gracious, handsome, seemly, fine. Leggiero, Leggero, light,
nimble, easy, swift, fleet, speedy, light minded, mutable, wavering,
unconstant, fickle, vain. Leggierezza, lightness, nimblenes, swiftnes,
speedines, inconstancy, mutabilitie, ficklenes. Leggibile, legible, that may
be read. Leggio, a deske or pulpit in a church or school to set books on.
Leggislatore, a lawgiuer, or lawmaker. Leggista, a lawyer, or professor of the
law. Leggitore, a reader. Leghe, leagues, confederacies, conspiracies,
complots, practices, french miles or leagues. Legionario, a legionarie, a
soldier pertaining to a legion. Legione, a legion or squadron containing (as
the Romans were wont to have them) six thousand footmen, and 730 horsemen.
Legislatore, as Leggislatore. Legista, as Leggista. Legitimare, to make
legitime, or lawful, to legitimate. Legitimatione, a legitimation, or making
lawful. Legitimo, legitime, right borne, truly begotten, lawful, right,
convenient, meet, just, according to law and order. Legnaio, Legnaro, a
woodmonger, or dealer in timber or wood. Legnaiuolo, a carpenter or woodmonger.
Also a ioyner. Legna, any kind of firewood, or fuel. Legnaggio, lineage.
Legname, all kind of timber. Legnata, a blow given with a cudgel or any piece
of wood. Legnato, a heap, or pile of wood or timber, a frame of wood. Also
waneskotted. Legnetto, a little piece of wood, a little boat, bark, barge,
whirrie, cockboate, skiffe, or any other little vessel. Legno, any kind of
wood, any kind of ship. Also a kind of musical instrument. Also used for the
wood Guaiaco. Legnoso, wooddie, of wood, full of wood. Legoro, a hawks lure.
Also as Lugarino. Legramento, a kind of blacking that cobblers use to black
lether or old shoes with. Legumaro, one that sels all manner of pulse. Legume,
any kind of pulse, as peason and beans. Legumoso, a ground bearing pulse,
full of pulse. Leguro, a Newte, an Eft, or a Lizard. Also as Lugarino.
Legustro, as Ligustro. Lei, she, hirselfe, her. Lella, the herb Elicampane.
Lellare, as Nicchiare. Lema, a humor congealed hurting the eye sight, matter
like sniuell in sore eyes. Lemargia, gluttony. Lemargo, a glutton. Lembire,
bisco, bito, to cut and tear in pieces. Also to lick or lap, to touch
softly. Lembo, a purfle, a welt, a lace, a border, or guard about a long
garment. Also a hem or skirt of a garment. Lemma, an argument, a reason.
Lemone, the fruit we call a lymond. Also a lymond tree. Lemonino, a kind of
lymond color. Also a little lymond. Lemosina, an alms or gift for devotion
or gods sake. Lemosinare, to beg or give alms. Lemosinaro, an almes-giuer, one
that lives by alms, an almoner. Lemosiniere, as Lemosinaro. Lemuri, the ghosts
or spirits of such as dye before their time, or hobgoblings, black bugs, or
nightwalking-spirits. Lena, breath, wind, breathing, force, toughnes, or
strength of any creature. Lendene, Lendine, the little nits whereof lice
breed. Lendenoso, Lendinoso, nittie, full of nits, or louzie. Lenesini, the
sweete-bread of a breast of veale. Lengua, Look Lingua, with all the
compounds. Lenguaggio, as Linguaggio. Lenguattola, the flat long fish which we
call a Sole. Lenguella, Lenguetta, as Linguella. Lenita, lenity, meekenes,
ge^tlenes, smoothnes, mildenes, facility. Lenitiuo, lenitiue, asswaging,
appeasing. Leni^ce, a surgeons lancet or fleame to let blood withal. Lennia, a
kind of easing or swaging ointment, or medicament. Lenocinio, baudrie,
leacherie, enticement, allurement, blandishment. Lenone, a bawd that brings
men and whores together, a merchant of whores. Lenonia, bawderie, letcherie.
Lenosa, a kind of plaster for a horse. Lensa, as Lenza. Lentare, to slow, to
slack, to relent, to stay, to linger, to loyter. Lent, a kind of pulse,
called lintle or lentill. Also a nit, or a chit. Lentezza, slownes, slacknes,
softnes, lingering. Lentecchia, Lenticchia, as Lent. Lenticolaria, ducksmeate,
or fenne lintell. Lenti di paludi, ducks meat, ducks weed or herb.
Lentigine, a speck, a freckle or pimple in a man's face, red or wanne like a
lintle. Lentiginoso, full of freckles, spots, or specks or pimples. Lentima, a
kind of sackcloth so called. Lentisco, a wood called prickwood, or foul
rice, whereof they make toothpicks in Italy. Some call it the lentiske or
mastike tree. Lento, slow, soft, lazy, late, idle, drousie, mild, meek,
negligent, lither. Lenza, fine linen cloth, as lawne or cambricke. Also a
longing to laugh when one dares not, but stops his breath to keep it in.
Lenzare, to bind, to hoodwinke, to roll about with a skarfe. Lenzuolo, a
sheet for a bed. Leocorno, as Lioncorno. Leofante, Leonfante, a famous beast
called an elephant. Leona, Leonza, Leonessa, a liones or of the nature of ash
lion. Leonato, the color of a lion, or tawnie. Leoncino, a lions whelpe.
Leone, a lion, a fish called a lobster fish. Leoneggiare, to be furious or
play the lion. Leonesco, lyonish, of a lions nature. Leonessa, a she lion.
Leonina, an herb whose flowers are like a lions mouth when he gapeth.
Leonpardo, a leopard. Leontofano, a little woorme breeding where lions do,
which if the lion eat he dies. Leontopetalon, the herb called Pat a de lion
or lion foot. Leontopodio, the herb lion foot, or Pied de lion. Leontio, a
kind of precious stone like a lions skin. Leonza gattesca, an ounce, or cat of
mountain. Leopardo, a leopard. Lepe, the belly, panch, or womb of man.
Lepidio, a kind of herb which some take for Dittander. Lepido, pleasant,
blithe, cheerful, merry, gamesome, neat, pretty. Lepidote, a kind of
precious stone like the skale of a fish. Leporaccio, the name of a weed.
Leporario, a kind of kite or ravenous bird. Lepore, a bucke of a hare.
Lepore, pleasantnes and grace of speech, comelines and pleasant grace.
Leporina, Lepporina, a leueret or young hare. Also a kind of herb. Leporini,
a kind of disease in the eyebrowes of a man. Leporino, a leueret, a young
hare. Also a hare. Leppo, bleere eid, spur-blind, sandblinde. Also a fish that
is poison to man, and man to him. Lepra, a she hare, a do hare. Lepre, a he
hare, a bucke hare. Also a fish that is poison to man, and man to him.
Lepretino, a leuret or young hare. Leprosia, a sickness called the leaprie or
leprosy. Leproso, sick or full of the leprosy, a leprie. Lepto, a greek
little weight, about a minute. Lepusculo, a leuret. Lequila, a bird called a
siskin. Lerce, as Lerze. Lerco, a glutton, a gurmond, an epicure. Lercola, or
Lergola, a bird called a bunting. Lerlichirollo, a bird called a blackmacke or
merle. Lerna, a water serpent. Lerze, the blew or black wales or mark of a
blow or stripe. Some have taken this word to signify legs or shanks. Lesa
magestatis, offense against the kings majesty. Lescia, as Liscia, or as Lessa.
Lesciare, as Lisciare, or Lessare. Lesegno, a bale or bundle of flax. Also a
distaffe full. Lesina, a shooe-makers end or awle. Lesione, a hurting, a
harming, an annoying, a hurt or dommage. Also loss, hinderance, offense, or
wrong. Leso, hurt wronged, iniuried, offended, endommaged, wounded, violated.
Lessare, to boil or sees meat. Lesso, boiled or sodden, all manner of boiled
meat. Lesto, nimble, quick, sly, lively, full of agility, quick-sighted,
wimble and wight. Letale, moornefull, deadly, obliuious. Letamare, to mucke and
dung ground. Letamaio, Letamaro, a mucker or dunger: Also a muckhill, a
dunghill. Letame, mucke, dung, dure. Letania, a letanie sung or said in
churches. Letargia, Lethargia, Letargo, a letargie or the drowzie ill, a
disease contrary to frantikenes, wherein is leannes and a necessity of
sleeping in a manner not to be resisted, whereby memory and reason almost
perishes, and the power sensitive is greatly annoyed. Letargico, drowzie,
dull, heavy, sleepie, sick of the drowzie evil. Letargio, Lethargirio,
lythargie or the foam or dross of melted lead or silver. Lethale, mortal,
deadly, pestilent, obliuious. Lethe, mortality, death, pestilence, oblivion.
Letitia, gladness, joy, mirth, or blithenes, pleasure, delight, reioicing of the
mind. Letitiare, to glad, to joy, to make merry or blithe, to rejoice, to
delight. Letificare, to glad or rejoice. Letificatione, gladding or reioicing.
Letregani, a kind of fish. Letroso, froward, tedious, peevish, fond, skittish,
akeward. Letta, a fish called a mullet. Lettera, Lettra, a letter or a
character, an epistle or a missiue, or a letter missiue. Also taken for
learning, knowledge, good letters, or any writing or evidence. Letterare, to
endoctrine, to teach, to instruct in learning. Letterato, endoctrined, taught,
instructed in learning, learned, literated, possessing letters. Letterale,
literal, according to learning. Letteratura, literature, learning, knowledge
in letters, lore, cunning. Lettera di procura, a letter of attorney. Lettere di
credenza, a letter of trust or favor or credit. Lettere di scatola, such great
letters as Apothecaries have upon their boxes. Letterina, a little letter,
scrole, writing, bill or epistle, a little letter of the crisse-crosse row.
Lettica, Lettiga, a litter, a horse litter. Letticaio, Lettigaro, a maker or
keeper of horse-litters. Letticello, Letticciuolo, a little bed or couch.
Lettione, a lesson, a lere or lecture, a reading, an exercise of reading.
Lettiera, a bedstead, a couch. Letto, the participle of Leggere, read any
letters. Also a bed, a couch or pallet. Also the bottom or bed of any river.
Letto da giardino, a square or bed in a garden. Lettoaro, Lettouario, an
electuarie. Lettore, a reader. Lettuccio, a little bed, a little couch, a
pallet on the ground. Lettura, a lecture, a lesson, a reading. Leua, as Lieua.
Leuame, leaven for bread. Also solace, comfort or consolation. Leuamento, a
raising, a rising, a heauing or rearing up, an advancement. Also a remoouing or
taking away. Also leaven for bread. Leuante, the east wind, the country lying
toward or in the east. Also a limlifter, a shifter, an vptaker, a pilfrer, a
bold b^yard, one that has learnt his taking up. Leuantiere, an easterly wind.
Leuantino, a lifter, a shifter, a limlifter, a pilferer, an vptaker, a bold
bayard. Also one borne in the east countries, an easterlin. Leua macchie, one
that takes out spots. Leuare, to take away, to remove, to set away, to raise,
to rise, to lift up, to hoiste up, to heave, to rear, to advance, to set up,
to prefer, to eleuate, to levy, to deliver a woman of child or bring her a
bed, to draw a draw bridge, to leaven bread, to abate, to diminish, to
assuage, to mitigate, to make easy or light, to unburden, to ease, to
lighten. Leuato, taken away, removed, set away, raised, risen, lift up,
hoisted up, heaued, reared, advanced, set up, preferred, leauied, delivered or
brought a woman a bed. Also leaven for bread, abated, deminished, made easy or
light, unburdened, lightened, eased. Leuata, delivered a woman of child or
brought a woman a bed, a rising, a heauing or rearing up, a leauie. Also a kind
of march sounded upon drum and trumpet in time of war. Leuata, huomo di poca
leuata, a man of no worth, scarce worth the taking up. Leuar le carte, to cut
the cards before one deal. Leuar li panni della scena, a proverb, to manifest
or make apparent some secret. Leuare la beretta, il capello, to put off ones
cap or hat. Leuare il pane, to leaven the bread, to make the bread rise.
Leuatelli, a kind of dainty pies or chewets or other paste meat. Leuatoio, a
leauer. Also that may be drawn or lifted up. Also a drawing bridge or
trap-bridge. Leuatore, a leauer, a raiser, a riser, an aduancer, a remouer,
etc. Leuatura, a rising, a raising up, a lifting, a heauing, an vprising, a
delivery or bringing a woman a bed, a preferme^t or advancing, worth the
taking up or stooping for, as Huomo di poca leuatura. Leuatrice, a midwife, a
nurce or woman's keeper. Leuca, a measure of ground containing fifty paces.
Also a kind of herb. Leucacantha, saint Marie thistle. Leucacathe, a kind of
white precious stone. Leucatheme, the herb cammomill. Leucisco, a kind of
mugle or lamp fish. Some take it for a fresh water mullet. Leuci, a kind of
measure among the Grecians, a white poplar tree, an herb like Mercury. Also a
foul spottines in the body like morphew. Leucoio, a flower called a stock
gillo-flower. Leucopetra, Leucogagea, Leucografia, as Galatide. Leucoma, the
web in the eye. Leucoplemmantia, a kind of dropsy rising of fleame in all
parts of the body, and makes all the body to swell. Leucrocuta, a beast that
has all his teeth of one piece, as big as an ass, with neck, tail and breast
like a lion, and head like a cammell, and counterfeits the voice of a man.
Leuce, as Leggiero. Leuero, a leauer as carpenters use to heave timber with.
Leuertigi, the weed or leaves, we call hops to brue withal. Leuistico, that
wood or bush we call priuet. Also a lisander or louage. Leuita, lightness,
leuitie, inconstancy, mutabilitie, nimblenes, smoothnes or polishing.
Leuitare, to lift, to rear, to raise up, to heave, to make light, to leaven
bread. Also to smooth or polish. Leuitistico, a kind of herb growing in
fennie places. Leuito, leaven for bread. Leurera, Leuriera, a bitch grayhound
or harier, a hunt hare. Leuorocuta, as Leucrocuta. Leurero, Leuriero, a dog
grayhound, a harier, a hunt-hare. Leure, a hare. Leuti, certain hand-barrowes
to carry corn with. Leuto, a lute. Lezza, a dead standing water, a puddle, a
mire, a durtie bog. Lezzo, a rammish, goatish, leacherous, sweatish stink.
Lezzoso, rammish, goatish, stinking of goats, of sweat or fi^h. Li, an
article of the masculine gender and plural number, the. also a pronoune, him,
to him, them, to them. Also an Aduerbe of place, there, thither, in that place.
Liardo, a horse marked with red or tannie spots or sleabitings. Liardo argento,
a white liard like silver. Liardo rotato, a dappled graie. Liardo pomato, a
dapple graie. Liatico, a kind of wine so called. Libamenti, whatsoever was
tasted by the priests in old sacrifices. Libano, the frankincense tree.
Libanoto, the northeast wind. Libare, to taste, to assaie, to cull out or to
offer in sacrifice. Also to sacrifice. Libarda, a halbard or such glaue.
Libatione, a sacrifice offered. Also a tasting in offering. Libeccio, the
northeast wind. Libello, a libell, a pasquine, a defaming libell, a little
book, a manual book. Also a declaration of a man's plea or process.
Libellatore, a libellor, a maker of libels. Liberale, liberal, francke, free
in giving, free hearted, full of largess, bountiful. Liberalita, liberality,
franknes, bounty. Liberalona, alla liberalona, after the plain, homely or
dunstable way, after the free hearted fashion. Liberare, to free, to
enfranchise, to deliver, to quit, to set free, to release, to rid out off.
Liberatione, a freedom, an enfranchisment, a delivery, an acquittance.
Liberatore, a freer, an enfranchiser, a deliverer. Libero, free, enfranchised,
open, quit, discharged, at liberty, not bound, not subject. Liberta, freedom,
liberty, free choice. Libertino, a libertine, a freeman, one that is
manumissed or one that is borne of him that was once bound and is now free.
Liberto, a libertine, a freedman, one that of bond is made free, a late
servant or bondsman. Libidine, leacherie, lust, pleasure, luxury, desire,
sensuality, unlawful appetite, wanton lust of body, concupiscence.
Libidinoso, leacherous, lustful, given to pleasure, desirous, incontinent,
baudie, fleshly, given to the lust of the body. Libito, will, pleasure,
self-will. Libra, Libbra, a pound weight. Also a sign in heaven. Librare, to
houer, to soar in the air, to poise, to weigh. Libraria, a library. Libraro,
Libraio, a stationer* also a bookbinder. Libreria, as Libraria. Libricciuolo,
Libretto, a little book. Libro, a book. Liburnica, a kind of light and swift
foist, pinnace or ship that pirates were wont to have. Libso, the southwest
wind. Lica, the span from the thumbs end to the forefingers end stretched out.
Licano, the forefinger string. Licantrofia, a kind of frenzy or madness,
wherewith some being haunted do forsake the company of men, and hide
themselves in caves and holes, howling like wolfes. Licaone, a kind of wild
beast of all colors in the rain bow. Lice, it is lawful or convenient, it is
permitted. Licentia, Licenza, license, leave, sufferance, permission, liberty,
wantonness, boldness, unruliness, license to do as one will. Licentiare, to give
license or leave, to permit, to license. Licentiato, licensed, permitted, given
leave, admitted. Also a licensed man or batcheler of divinity or law.
Licentioso, licentious, luxurious, sensual, wanton, given to pleasures,
ouerbold. Lichena, the herb liuerwort. Lichinco, a kind of sparkling stone
which rubbed draws sticks unto it. Licchetto, liquorishnes. Also a liquorish
fellow. Also alluring. Also a bait for fish. Licchetto del mele, a honey pot,
a honie-combe. Lichnide, an herb which if scorpions eat they lose their
senses. Licci, as Lici. Licciatura, the ends or weauing threads of a web. Lici,
hurdes of flax or hemp. Also there or in that place. Also the ends, the thrum
or threads of a seluage, or weauing threads at the end of a web of cloth.
Licinia, the base or slat varuen. Also a kind of olives. Licio, box thorn or
thorn box. Licischo, a dog engendered of a woulfe and a dog. Licitare, as
Lecitare. Licito, as Lecito. Licofo, clear light or the first appearing of day
light. Liconobio, he that in stead of the day uses the night, one that turns
day into night. Licontopia, a kind of disease or passion in the brain.
Licopo, the herb motherwoort. Licopodio, a kind of moss called woulfes clawe.
Licopside, garden buglosse. Some take it for hounds tongue. Licoptalmo, a stone
of four colors. Licore, liquor or moistnes. Licorno, as Lioncorno.
Licostaphilo, water elder or dwarf plane tree. Licostomo, a kind of long fish.
Licotono, a kind of poison that hunters use to kill woulfes. Licuide, a kind
of herb bearing a fine flower. Lidio, a kind of mournful solemn music.
Also a touchstone to try gold and silver. Lido, a bank, a side, a coast, or
shore or strond of the sea, or of a river. Liduna, the ebbing of the sea.
Lienteria, a kind of flux of the stomach and belly, which can keep nothing
therein, but presently voideth the same undigested. Lienterico, one sick of
the flux of the stomach. Liepre, a hare, as Lepre. Liesena, as Lesena. Lioto,
glad, merry, joyful, pleasant, glee, buckesome, joyous, frollike, luckie,
fortunate, battle, fruitful, cheerful. Lieua, a bender to bend a crossebow
with, a rack, a gaffel. Also a leauer, an iron crow or such to lift up any
thing with. Lieuame, as Leuame. Lieuare, as Leuare. Lieuato, as Leuato.
Lieuata, as Leuata. Lieuatoio, as Leuatoio. Lieuatore, as Leuatore. Lieuatrice,
as Leuatrice. Lieue, light, smooth, plain, polished. Also slipperie. Also
wanton, effeminate, or vain. Lieuero, as Leuame. Lieuitare, to leaven paste,
or to make it to rise. Lieuito, leaven for bread. Lieuo, as Leua. Lieuito, as
Leuame. Lisiasi, a kind of disease about a man's eyes. Liga, as Lega. Ligaccio,
as Legaccio. Ligame, as Legame. Ligamento, as Legamento. Ligare, as Legare.
Ligato, as Legato. Ligatura, as Legatura. Ligidino, a kind of marble stone to
build withal. Ligio, a liegeman, subject, or vassal. Ligname, as Legname.
Lignaiuolo, as Legnaiuolo. Lignite, a kind of precious stone of the color of
glass. Lignola, a mark, line, or streake with red oker. Lignolare, to mark
with red oker, as carpenters do their timber. Ligoritia, the sweet wood we
call licorice. Ligula, a measure used in Greece, containing three drammes and a
scruple. Also a lace or point. Also a shoelatchet. Also a little slice or
scummer. Also a lingel, a little tongue, a tenon, a spoone or ladle that
apothecaries use. Also a hosegarter or any binding. Ligurino, a canarie bird.
Ligurio, a precious stone that slancheth the bloody flix, and draws straw
unto it. Liguro, an eft, a lizard, a nute or ask. Ligustico, Lombardie louage.
Ligustro, the priuet or prime print tree used in gardens for hedges. Also a
kind of white flower. Lima, a file to file withal. Lima sorda, a deaf file,
the noise whereof can not be hard, thieves use them. Limaca, Limaga, as Lumaca.
Limaccioso, muddie, durtie, boggie, mirie, slimie. Limare, to file, to fret, to
gnaw, to polish, to trim, to amend, to correct. Limaria, a fish called a tunie.
Limaro, a filer or maker of files. Limato, filed, fretted, gnawne. Also
polished, neat, pure, elegant, curious, amended, corrected. Limatore, a filer.
Limatura, filing dust, or filing that comes of filing. Limbello, Look Cauare
fuori il limbello. Limbellerto, a carpenters tool. Limbico, a limbeke or
still. Limbo, as Lembo. Also it is used for hell. Limea, an herb wherewith
hunters poison their arrows. Limfe, pretty fresh-siluer-streaming springs, or
waters. Limiero, a hound, properly a limehound, or bloodhound. Liminale, the
trestle, or first step of the door, the haunse of a door. Also a frontire, or
an entry. Limitale, as Liminale. Also a meare-stone, or mark or bound or
limit. Limitario, a beam or trauerse, that is laid over a door. Also a mantle
over a chimnye. Also a haunse of a door, a frontire or an entry. Limitare, to
limite, to bound, to prescribe, to stint. Also a limit, a bound, or a stint.
Limitatione, Limitanza, a limitation, a bound, a stint. Limito, Limite, a
limite, bound, prescription, mark or meare-stone, a stint, a frontire, a
border, a land mark, a bound or butting in fields. Limo, dirt, mire, mud, bog,
puddle, slime, clay in water. Limone, a limon. Also a limon tree. Limoncello, a
little limon, or limon tree. Limonia, the herb anemone. Limoniato, a precious
stone called Smaragdus. Limoncino, a kind of limon color. Limonea, a kind of
sauce made of limons. Limonino, as Lemonino. Limonio, the herb wintergreene,
or wild beetes. Limosa, a kind of moore hen. Limosina, as Lemosina.
Limosinare, to give alms. Also to beg alms. Limosinaro, as Lemosiniere.
Limosiniere, as Lemosiniere. Limoso, durtie, mirie, muddie, boggie, slimie,
full of slime or mud. Limpidezza, cleerenes, brightness, transparancie. Limpido,
clear, bright, transparent, through shining, sheene. Limula, a little file.
Linaccio, course flax. Also canuas, or holland cloth. Linaloe, the aloes tree,
a wood that is very bitter. Linaria, a bird called a Lenet, or a lackbacker.
Linaruola, a flax woman. Linaruolo, a flax man. Lince, a beast like unto a
woolfe, having many spots, exceeding quick of sight, called a los or linx.
Lince, as Lupo Ceruiero. Also a loss, or a linx. Linci, thence, from thence.
Lincur^o, a stone which is congealed of the urine or water of a luzard, which
draws iron, leaves, and straw to it. Linea, any kind of line, streake, or
draught in general, a carpenters line, a sounding plummet, an angling or fish
line, a degree of kindred. Also among mathematicians, a length without breadth
or thicknes. Linea abba, the line or hollow tying from the navel, the white
line, the vmbelicall vein. Lineale, lineall, successiue. Lineamenti,
lineaments, features, forms, proportions, draughts or shapes of a body or
visage drawn out. Also streekes, lines, or draughts in painting or geometry.
Lineare, to draw lines, to line, to streake, to draw the figure of any thing
in lines. Linfe, all manner of fresh fine silver streaming springs or waters.
Linfico, a kind of precious stone. Lingua, a tongue. Also language or speech.
Also an instrument to take salues out of a box. Also a narrow piece of land or
long ridge running into the sea like a tongue blearing out of the mouth. Also a
kind of herb good against the falling of the hair. Linguaccia, herb adders
tongue. Lingua bouina, the herb buglosse or ox, tongue, lang de beuf.
Linguace, as Linguacciuto. Linguacciuto, a tell-tale, a pratler, a railer,
tatler, or a blab. Lingua ceruina, the herb hearts tongue. Lingua di cauallo,
horse tongue, tongue blade, or double tongue. Lingua d'agnello, lambs grass,
or sheep grass. Lingua pagana, as Lingua di cauallo. Lingua di bue, the
herb buglosse, or lang de beuf. Lingua di cane, hounds grass, or dogs grass.
Lingua di ceruo, the herb hearts tongue. Lingua serpentina, the herb adders or
serpents tongue. Linguaggio, a language, or speech, or tongue. Linguella,
Linguetta, a little tongue of any thing. Also as Vgola, the little tongue of a
pair of balances. Also the tongues of a ravens quill used in virginals, etc.
Linguatta, Linguattola, as Lenguattola. Lini, linen. Also sheets. Liniamenti,
as Lineamenti. Linimento, a kind of ointment. Also an anointing. Lino, line,
flax or linen. Also all kind of stuff fit for weauing, or any yarne that is
spunne, whether it be hemp or flax. Linosa, a stopple of flax or tow, or a
handful of flax. Linoso, full of flax, flaxie. Linostrofo, the herb
horehound. Linozoste, the herb mercury. Linterna, as Lanterna. Linternaro, as
Lanternaro. Linzuolo, any kind of sheet for a bed. Liona, Lionessa, as
Leonessa. Lionato, as Leonato. Lioncino, as Leoncino. Lioncorno, an Unicorn.
Also unicorns horn. Lione, a Lion, whose neck is of one bone alone.
Lioneggiare, as Leoneggiare. Lionpardo, a Leopard. Lipare, Liparia, a stone
which has the property to draw all wild beasts unto it. Lipiria febbre, a
hot ague or fever, but outwardly very cold. Liposichia, a swouning when one
seems to be dead. Lippa, a trap or cat, such as children play at. Lippare,
Lipare, to cry or pule like a kite. Lippitudine, a blearednes, rednes, or
running of sore eyes. Some call it a bleare-eyednes, or bloudshot of the eyes.
Lippo, bleare-eyde, whose eyes are watrish, and run matter. Also properly
sandblinde, poreblinde, or dim of sight, as Leppo. Liptota, a figure, when as
the force of words is not answerable to the matter. Lippoftalmia, an
inflammation through sharp humors in the eyes which makes them almost blind.
Liquabile, moist, liquid, full of liquor. Also which may melt. Liquefare,
Liquefaccio, Liquefeci, Liquefatto, to thawe, to moisten, to melt, to make
liquid, to dissolve. Liquefatto, thawed, moistened, made liquid, melted,
dissolved. Liquefattione, a thawe, a thawing, a moistning, a making liquid, a
melting. Liqueritia, the sweet wood liquorish. Liquidambro, liquid amber.
Liquidare, as Liquefare. Also to make up an even reckoning. Liquidita,
moistnes, softnes, waterishnes, humorousnes, dampishnes. Liquido, liquid,
moist, wet, dampish, soft, melted, pure, dissolved. Liquiritia, the wood called
liquorish. Liquore, any kind of liquor. Lira, an instrument of music called
a lyre or a harp. Also a pound sterlin. Also a kind of coin. Also as Solco.
Also a kind of measure of liquid things. Lirare, as Solcare. Lirico, a kind
of verse or song made to the harp. Lisaro, a kind of narrow cotton cloth.
Lischa, Lische, the finnes or bones of fishes. Liscezza, smoothnes, or softnes
in feeling. Liscia, as Lisciua, all manner of lie. Lisciare, to wash in lie or
in a bucke, to buck, to slide, glide, or slip upon ice, to smooth or slecke, to
polish or painte, as women do their faces, to flatter, to cog, to clawe, or to
stroke smoothly. Lisciato, washed in lie, or buckt, slided, glided, or slipped as
upon ice, smoothed, slicked, polished or painted as women do their faces,
flattred, clawed, or cogged withal, stroked smoothly. Lisciamento, a
smoothing, a polishing, a sliding, a gliding, a slipping, a painting of faces,
a flattring, a clawing, a smooth stroking, a washing in lie. Lisciatrice, a
woman that paints hirselfe or others. Liscio, a kind of painting that women use
for their faces. Also as Lisciato. Lisciolare, to slide, slip, or glide upon
ice. Lisegna, a handful of flax or hemp, a lock or tuffe of wool.
Lisimachia, willow herb, loosestrife, or water willowe: if a horse eat of it,
it makes him very faint. Lisina, as Lesina. Lisciua, Lissiua, such lie as they
wash bucks with. Lista, a list or seluage of any cloth, a list where tilting or
turneaments are used, a role, a checkrol, or catalogue of names, an inventory.
Listare, to list or seluedge about, to welt or guard about. Also to lace.
Listoso, full of listes or seluedges. Listra, as Lista. Litame, as Letame.
Litamare, as Letamare. Litamaro, as Letamaro. Litargia, as Letargia.
Litargirio, Litargo, as Letargirio. Lite, strife, contention, variance,
controversy, debate, or ^arring. Also a suit, a plea, a process, or pleading
in law. Literale, literal, according to the letter. Literario, of or
pertaining to learning or letters. Literatura, grammar, learning, lore,
literature, cunning. Litergirio, as Letargirio. Lithiasi, the disease of a
stone engendered in man's body. Also a little white and hard push or swelling,
growing upon the eyelids. Lithoide, the bone in the temples which in the upper
part toward the Sagittall Suture is equally circumscribed with the skalie
agglutinations, but behind with the parts or additions of the Suture
Labdoides. Litica, Litiga, a litter, a horse litter to carry sick folks in.
Litigante, a litigious, suing, contending or troublesome man, a wrangler.
Litigantia, as Lite or Litigio. Litigare, to plead, to sue, to debate, to
contend or go to law, to wrangle, to vary, to strive. Litigatione, as Lite or
Litigio. Litigatore, as Litigante. Litigio, Litigo, a plea, a pleading, a suit
or controversy in law, debate, variance, contention. Litigioso, Litigoso,
litigious, debatefull, contentious, full of strife and wrangling. Lito, as
Lido, Lidi. Litohospermo, as Dispiron. Litora, shores, banks, sides or
strondes of the sea, or of a river. Litorale, of the sea side or sea shore,
shore bordring. Litospermo, some take it for grummell or graie mile, and some
for stone crop. Litotoma, a surgeon that cutteth out the stone in the
bladder. Litra, a worm in a dogs tongue, which makes him mad if it be not
taken out. Littori, sergeants or such like ministers to execute corporal
punishment among the Romans. Lituo, a crooked staff that augures used in
divination to point the quarters of the firmament. Also a crosier or bishops
staff. Also a kind of crooked horn or trumpet. Liuellamento, a swinging or
hurling, a sounding or fadoming. Also a leuilling or aiming, a houering or
soaring. Liuellare, to level, to aim at, to houer, to soar, to swing, to
cast, to sound, or fadome the sea. Liuello, level, smooth, plain. Also a
ruler or squire to level any thing by. Liueranza, deliverance. Liuerare, to
deliver. Liuero, delivered, free. Liuidare, to envy, to malice, to spite, to
bruise black and blew, to fester. Liuidezza, envy, malice, rancor, spite, a
festring, a deadly bluish bruzed color, ghastlines, palenes, the print or
mark of any stripe or beating. Liuidita, as Liuidezza. Liuido, swollen,
festred, rankled, black and blew, wanne, bruzed, of a leaden, ghastly, and
dead color, envious, spiteful, malicious, backbiting, detracting. Liuidori, a
kind of ringworme or tetter. Liuore, Liuidore, as Liuidezza. Liurare, to
deliver. Liurea, a liuerie garment, or suitable suit. Liureare, to give or go,
or put into liueries, to iet it idly gazing up and down. Liuto, Liutto, an
instrument called a lute. Liutiere, one that plaieth upon a lute. Lizza, as
Lista. Also a combating or tilting place. Lo, an article masculine of the
singular number used before vowels, the: a pronoune when it is joined with a
verb, it, the same, that, or him. Lobrico, as Lubrico. Lobricita, as
Lubricita. Locale, local, of or pertaining to a place, as Memoria locale,
local or places memory. Locanda, that is to be let or hired, as Camera
locanda. Also a siquis or a bill denoting the letting of a house or selling of
any thing. Locare, to place, to settle, to order, to dispose, to bestow, to
lay up, to set up. Also to let, to set, to rent, to farm. Locarna, a kind of
fish. Locaro, Locarino, as Lugarino. Locatione, Locagione, a farming, a
renting, a letting or setting, a demising, a placing, etc. Locca, Locchia, a
cob, or gudgeon fish. Locchetto, a padlocke, a little padlocke, such as we use
upon trap doors. Locco, an owl, an owlet. Loche, the which, that which.
Locignoli, as Lucignoli. Loco, as Luoco, Luogo. Locolo, a bird called in latin
Nictionax. Locotenente, as Luocotenente. Locotte, a buckle, a button, a clasp.
Also a padlocke. Locuino, a kind of fly shining in the night. Locusta, a
locust or grasshopper. Also a lobster or sea-crab. Loda, Lode, as Laud.
Lodabile, as Laudabile. Lodano, a kind of sweet perfuming gum, called in
latin Artilus. Lodare, as Laudare. Lodeuole, as Laudabile. Lodola, the bird we
call lark. Lodra, Lotria, as Lontra. Lodrare, to lure a hawk, to call with a
lure. Lodro, a kind of rugged and shagged beast that lives in water. Also a
hawks lure. Loffa, a fizle, a fiste, a close fart. Loffare, to fizle, to fiste,
to fart closely. Logara, Logaro, a lure for a hawk. Also a bait. Logare, as
Locare. Logaro, Logarino, as Lugarino. Logatione, as Locatione. Loggia, a
gallerie, a dining chamber, a fair hall, a terrace or walking place, a fair
porche upon the street side, a lodge, a banqueting house. Loggiare, to lodge,
to harborough. Loggietta, a little lodge, etc. Logica, Loica, logike, dialect,
the manner or art of reasoning or the way and means to reason. Also a subtle
disputation according to the art of logike without rhetorical ornaments.
Logicale, Loicale, according to the rules of logic. Logico, Loico, a
logician. Logicone, the breast plate of judgment made of gold, blew silk,
scarlet, purple, and fine linen four square and double, having in it twelve
precious stones. Loglio, cockle or darnell growing amongst corn. Logista, he
that casts an account or does diligently weigh a thing, one that causes
writings to be made. Logistilla, has been used for reason it self.
Logodedalo, an inuentour or forger of new words and strange terms. Logomachia,
a contention in words, an indiscreet alteration. Logorare, to wear out, to
consume with wearing. Also to lure a hawk. Logorato, Logoro, woren out, spent,
exhauste, consumed with wearing, lured a hawk. Logoro, as Logorato, a hawks
lure. Lograre, as Logorare. Logio, as Logoro, or as Logorato. Loica, as Logica.
Loico, as Logico. Lolla, stubble, straw, litter or hawme. Loligine, a fish
called a Calamarie or cuttle fish. Loligno, idem. Lombagine, as Lumbagine.
Lombardo, a kind of Sea-crab or lobster. Lombi, as Lumbi. Lombo in the
singular. Lomboli, as Lumbi. Lombricelli, as Lumbricelli. Lombrico, as
Lumbrico. Lombrina, a fish called an halibut. Lonchite, great or wild spleen
woort. Longa, a long in music. Longamente, as Lungamente. Longanimita, long
sufferance or forbearance. Longagnola, Lungagnola. Longanone, the arsegut, of
some called the straight gut. Longare, as Lungare. Longhezza, length,
longitude, length of time. Longia, Lonza, a loyne. Longia di castrato, a loyne
of mutton. Longietta, a little loyne. Longinquita, long distance of place,
length of time, long lastingnes. Longinquo, distant, far off, long, continual.
Longitudine, longitude, length of time, place or other things: the length of
heaven is measured in the ecliptike line, beginning at Aries: and in the earth,
in the equinoctial, and begins at the fortunate and Canarie islands. Longo,
long, tedious, irksome, importunate. Longone, a long gangrill, a slim, a long
tall fellow that has no making to his length, a tall slang. Also a tedious
wearisom man. Longurio, a long and thwart pole or piece of timber laid
acrosse. Lontananza, distance, a great distance. Lontanare, as Allontanare.
Lontano, far, far off, distant. Lontra, an otter which lives both on land and
in water, a beauer. Lonza, a beast called an ounce, a panther or cat of
mountain. Also as Longia. Lontro, such a boat as the Indians use, made of one
piece called Canoa. Lopadi, a kind of hard shell fish. Lopello, a disease in a
horse proceeding of corrupt and venomous humors. Lopola, a cob or gudgeon.
Loppa, any kind of dross, trash, filth or dregs. Also a stopple of claie that
founders use. Also clods or flakes of soot in a chimney. Loquace, a prating,
speaking or prattling fellow, or a man full of words, very talkatiue.
Loquacita, prating, prattling, speaking, tittle tattle, babbling. Loquela,
Loquella, speech, speaking. Loquentia, speaking, talking. Lora, a tunnell. Also
as Vappa, a small thin wine. Lordare, to pollute, to defile, to sullie, to
foul. Lordezza, ordure, filth, foulenes, slouenlines, filthiness. Lordo, foul,
filthy, full of ordure. Lordone, a lubberlie slovenly filthy fellow.
Lordura, Lorditia, as Lordezza. Loro, they, them, those, the same, theirs,
those men's, to them, unto them, them. Lorica, a brestplate, a iacket, a
habergion, a cuirace, a brigantine, or cote of maile. Also a place made upon
walls like an open gallorie with grates of timber or hurdles to keep men from
falling. Also the coping or head of a wall made to cast off the rain.
Loricare, to put on a habergeon, cote of fence, or shirt of maile, to arm.
Also to cover with a crust of clay or dirt. Loripede, croompfooted,
wrye-legged. Losa, any bait to catch fish or foul with, a trap, a spring, or
devise to catch birds with. Loscare, to look dimly, squintingly or blearing.
Loschetto, somewhat dimme-sighted or sand-blinde, that sees somewhat by day
light, worse after sunnerising, and no whit at night. Losco, dimme-sighted,
sand or purblinde, squint-eyd, or having but one eye. Losingare, as Lusingare.
Losingatore, as Lusingatore. Losinghe, as Lusinghe. Losingheuole, as
Lusingheuole. Lotho, a kind of herb with a flower like poppie. Loto, dirt,
mire, mud, bog, puddle, clay, lome. Also the lote tree, of the fruit whereof
whosoever does eat, forgets his own country and state. Lotofagi, men that
eat of the lote tree, and live as senseless and forgetful people. Lotoso,
durtie, mirie, muddie, boggie, puddlish. Lotta, Lutta, the game of wrestling.
Lottare, to wrestle. Lottatore, a wrestler. Lotto, a lot, or chance in a
lotterie. Louazzo, as Lupasso. Louino, a kind of fruit. Lubiano, a kind of
linen cloth so called. Lubricare, to slip, to slide, to waver, to stagger.
Lubricita, slipperines, sliding, wavering, or staggering. Lubrico, slipperie,
wavering, unconstant. Also quicksilver, according to the alchimists phrases.
Lucanica, Lucaniga, a pudding, a haggas, a sausage. Lucanicaro, a pudding
maker. Lucaria, feasts solemnized in the holy woods. Lucarino, Lucaro, as
Lugarino. Luccide, as Lucciole. Luccio, a fish called a pike, a pickrell, or a
jack. Also a fish called in latin Studis. Lucciola, the herb adders tongue,
or serpents tongue. Lucciola del'occhio, the apple of the eye. Lucciol^, glow
worms, or glaze worms. Lucciolo, a little pike or jack, a pickrell. Lucco, a
padlock. Lucchetto, a little padlock. Luce, the light, brightness, daylight.
Also sight, to glow, to glaze, to blaze. Luce del' occhio, as Lucciola del
Occhio. Lucegni, the angles or corners of a lamp. Lucengola, the itch or
tetter. Also a slow-worme, or a glow worm. Lucegnolo della lucerna, the cotton
or week of a lamp. Lucente, shining, bright, resplendent, clear. Lucerdo, a
disease in a horse called the cricke, which makes him to carry his neck awry.
Lucere, luco, lucei, luciuto, to shine, to give light, to be bright. Lucerna, a
lamp, a candle, a light. Also a gournard, a red fish, or a rotchet. Lucernale,
a lamp, a light, a candle. Also the week of a light. Also torch-herbe or
loongwort. Lucernario, a bearer of a lamp, or a lamp-maker, a candlestick.
Lucernetta, a little lamp or candle. Lucerniere, a great lamp. Also a lamp
bearer. Also a brazen plate candlestick, that some set on stairs heads.
Lucerta, as Lucertola. Lucertola, a lizard or newte, or eft. Luce^tone, a great
eft or lizard. Luchela, as Loquela. Luchetto, as Locchetto. Luci, lights,
lamps, candles. Also the eyes. Lucido, shining, bright, splendent, light.
Lucidezza, shining, brightness, glistring, splendour. Lucignola, a kind of
serpent. Lucifero, that brings light. Lucifugo, that flies light and loves
darkness. Lucignolare, to give fire with a match, to put week or cotton in a
candle or lamp. Also to frounze, or curle, or dress up in fine knots as women
now a days do their hair. Lucignolato, I find used for an abrome color of a
woman's hair. Lucigno, a week, a match or cotton of a lamp or of a candle.
Lucignoli, or Lucignuoli, locks, flocks, tuffs, tassels, or feakes of wool,
hemp, hairs or flax, roules of wool or flax ready for the spinners, a lock
of hairs, peakes or tips of beards. Also weeks or cottons of candles. Also
certain sliding knots, entramelings or curlings of hairs wrought and
enterlaced together with ribands, and made in rings as women wear. Also
matches or match cords, as musketeers use. Lucignoletti, the diminutiue of
Lucignoli. Lucimoni, men so called of their madness, because they made those
places unhappy or unlucky whereunto they came. Lucinio, pink-eide or that
has little eyes. Lucio, a child borne at the sun rising. Lucisco, one that
sees little in the night and in the morning. Luco, a thick grove or wood
untouched and uncut, consecrated to gods or nymphs. Lucore, a great light or
blaze or splendour. Lucrare, to gain, to profit, to win, to get. Lucro, lucre,
gain, profit, vantage. Lucroso gainful, profitable, full of lucre.
Lucubratione, a study or work by candle. Lucubrare, to make or study by
candle light. Luculentia, brightness, shining, beauty. Luculento, full of
light, brightness, shining fair, beautiful, pleasant. Luculleo, a kind of
bright shining marble. Lucumone, a man that makes the place unhappy where he
comes. Ludificatione, a deceiving, a mocking. Ludibrio, a mock, a mockery,
or mocking stock to be laughed at. Ludro, a hawks lure. Also a bait.
Ludimaestro, a schoolmasters. Lue, a plague, a pestilence or murrian, or
common destruction in men and cattle. It is also used for the french pox.
Luffo, the skirt or quarter of a cote or ierken. Also a lap or fold of a
garment. Luganiga, Luganica, a pudding or sausage. Luganigaro, a pudding maker.
Luganighette, little small puddings or sausages. Lugarino, a bird called a
siskin, some take it for a goldfinch, and others for a canarie bird. Lugaro,
Luganello, as Lugarino. Luggiala, the name of an herb that is sharp in taste.
Luglio, the month of Iulie. Lugubre, mourning, wailing, grievous, sorrowful,
lamentable, funeral. Also mourning apparel. Lui, Lu, he, the same, him. Lui
medisimo, or stesso, himself. Lulla, a barell, a pipe or hog shead, the
bottom board of a barrel, a teale board to make barrels with. Lulligine, a
kind of sea fish near Mauritania which coming in a skull is able to
overthrow a ship. Lumaca, Lumaga, any kind of snaile. Scala a lumaca, a
winding pair of stairs. Lumaca di mare, a sea snaile, or perawinkle, or other
kind of cockle. Lumacone, a great snaile, a gull, a loggerhed, a ioulthead, a
patch, a lubie, a sneaker, a lurking companion. Lumbagine, feeblenes, pain, or
ach in the loins. Lumbi, the loins, hanches, flanks, or raines of a body,
that part of a body we call the chine. Also the ridges of a house Lumbolo, a
little loyne or leg. Lumbrici, little easses or earth-wormes. Also worms
breeding in any creatures belly, belly worms, or mawe worms. Lumbricelli,
very little earth worms or mawe worms. Lumare, to light, to kindle, to
lighten, to give light. Lumato, lighted, kindled, lightened, given light. Lume,
a light, a lamp, a candle, a brightness, a shining, the seeing or sight of the
eye, or the eye of a man alone. Lume di rocca, roche alume. Lume scaiola, a
kind of allome so called. Lume zuccarina, a kind of allome so called. Lumi,
lights, lamps, candles, shinings, the eyes. Lumia, the slime of fishes.
Lumicino, a little light. Lumiera, as Lume. Luminare, to shine, to give light,
to kindle, to illuminate. Also as Luminario. Luminato, shined, given light,
kindled, illuminated. Also a light or lightning. Luminario, a light, a lamp, a
beacon, a sign fire, a torch. Luminoso, bright, splendent, shining,
transparent. Lumoso, bright, shining, brightsome. Luna, the moon, one of the
seven planets. Also the metal silver according to alchimists phrases. Luna
nuona, the new moon. Luna piena, the full moon. Lunare, of or pertaining to
the moon, like the moon, made like a half moon, crooked, two horned, or
with two peakes like the moon. Also the monthly disease of women. Luna scema,
the waining moon. Lunaria, the herb called torch herb or woollblade.
Lunario, a calendar of the moon, or monthly almanacke. Lunaticare, to be
lunatike or frantike. Lunatico, lunatike, frantike or frenzy at certain times
of the moon, a kind of staggring, or falling disease in a horse, moon sick.
Lune, moons. Also monday, the first day of the week. Lunedi, monday.
Lunetta, a little moon, a cressant. Lunette, a kind of horse shoes, called
half moon shoes. Also the name of a goldsmiths tool. Also loope-holes, and
glasses to look through to keep the dust out of ones eyes in riding. Also
spectacles. Lungagnola, a fishing rod, a fishing pole, an angling rod.
Lungamente, a long time, very long time. Lungare, to prolong, to lengthen, to
stretch forth in length. Lunge, Lungi, far off, far away, wide off, distant,
asunder, far. Lungheria, length, tediousnes, a long flim flam tale, a delay, a
demur. Lunghetto, somewhat long or tedious. Lunghezza, as Longhezza. Lungi, as
Lunge. Lungo, as Longo. Lungone, as Longone. Luogare, Luocare, as Locare.
Luogo, Luoco, a place, a seat, a stead, a rome. Also a state, condition, case,
quality, credit, reputation or account. Also occasion, estimation, leisure,
calling. Also a family, a house, a kindred or country. Also a point in the
tables or in the check board. Luogora, places. Luogotenente, Luocotenente, a
lieutenant, a vicegerent, a substitute, a deputy, a vicar. Lupa, a she wolf,
a disease called a wolf, a disease about a horses legs. Lupaga, a kind of
sea-crab or lobster. Lupanari, stews, brothels or baudie houses. Also wolfes
dens. Lupasso, a gournard, a redfish or a rotchet fish. Some take it for a
dace. Lupato, a horse of a wolfes color, a kind of bright dunne color.
Lupazzo, as Lupasso. Lupeca, Lupecca, a bird called a houp or dunghilcocke.
Some think it to be the lapwing. Lupegaiare, to play the wolf, to howl as a
wolf, to devour greedily. Lupercalia, solemn sacrifices and plays dedicated
to Pan. Luperci, certain priests of Pan. Lupertica, the print, the mark, the
bruze, or swelling of a blow, the black and blew skin after a stripe or blow.
Lupicini, young wolfes, whelp-wolfes. Lupi di fiume, a fish called a sea wolf.
Lupino, a kind of pulse called Lupines or figbean^* Lupo, a wolf. Also a kind
of fish that some take to be a pike. Also a disease called a wolf. Also a kind
of hook or drag to draw things out of a pit, a well or such deep place. Lupo
ceruiero, a beast like a wolf, but spotted and exceeding quick of sight, it
does somewhat resemble a stag which we call a luzarde. Lupo del' api, a
wood-pecker or eate-bill. Lupuli, Lupoli, the herb hop or hops, to brew beer
with. Lurco, Lurcone, a glutton, a cormorant, an Epicure, a gurmond. Lurido,
pale, wan, black and blew. Luriuole, a kind of plum in Italy. Luscignolo,
Lussignolo, a nightingall. Lusciolo, a night bat, a rear mouse. Lusco, as
Losco, purblind. Lucello, a gold-smithes or founders tool. Lusinga, flattery,
adulation, fauning, inticement, allurement, blandishment. Lusingare, to
flatter, to entice, to faune, to allure, to blandish or to claw with fair
words. Lusingaria, as Lusinga. Lusingatore, a flatterer, an inticer, a fauner,
an allurer, a blandisher. Lusingatrice, a woman flatterer, etc. Lusingheuole,
flattering, enticing, alluring, etc. Lusone, a gamster, a player. Lusquiame,
something about Alchimie. Also the herb called Henbane. Lussare, to commit or
live in all voluptuousnes, luxury, and sensuality. Lusso, all manner of
voluptuousnes, luxury, sensuality or worldly pleasure. Lussurare, as
Lussuriare. Lussureggiare, as Lussuriare. Lussuria, leacherie, lust, uncleanness
of life, luxury, all superstuitie and excess in carnal pleasures, riot or
ranknes. Lussuriare, to commit leacherie, to be leacherous, luxurious or
wanton, to exceed in carnal pleasures, and all manner of riot. Lussurioso,
leacherous, luxurious, lustful, wanton, riotous, rank. Lustra, a den, a grot,
a cauerne, a hole where wild beasts do abide. Also a jest or a mockery. Also
a show or proffer to do any thing, a countenance upon any matter. Also a
compassing or going about a matter with fair words. Lustrale, certain
sacrifices or ceremonies that were used every five years, Look Lustro.
Lustrare, to give a luster or a glass, to shine. Also to offer sacrifice once
in five years, as some ancients were wont to do. Also to purge, to cleanse, to
prune. Also to shine, to brighten, to lighten, to burnish or give a glass
unto, to sleeke paper. Luster, Look Fare le luster. Lustrezza, brightness,
clearnes, shining. Lustro, a luster, a glass, a shining. Also the space or
time of five years. Lustrore, as Lustro. Lustroso, shining, bright, clear,
splendent. Luta, a sparcke or sparckle of fire. Lutello, an oil pot, an oil
vessel. Luteo, yellowish or somewhat yellow in color like the yolke of an
egg. Luterani, Protestants, or of Luthers religion. Lutero, a kind of beast so
called. Luto, a kind of deep measure of dry things. Lutta, wrestling.
Luttare, to wrestle. Also to dirt, to mire. Also to mourn, to blubber.
Luttatore, a wrestler. Lutto, Luto, weeping, wailing, mourning, blubbring,
dirt, mire, mud. Luttoso, Lutoso, mourning, wailing, wailfull, muddie, durtie,
mirie. Luttulente, as Luttoso. Luttuoso, as Luttoso. Luzziola, as Lucciola.
Luzziolo, as Lucciolo. Luzzo, as Luccio.
M
MA, but, except, but that, but if. Also joined with other words used for Mia.
Mache? but what? but then? but that. Mapoi, but then, if then, but after.
Mapure, but yet, nevertheless. Ma se, but if, what if Macalepo, a kind of
perfume or sweet smell. Macanopoietico, an inginer, an engine-maker. Macarco,
a barrel, a tub, a steane, a fat or vat or tun. Macarello, the fish called
mackrel, which comes in April. Some have taken Macarello, for a band or a
pander. It is taken from the French. Some take it for a ravenous foul.
Maccagnano, as Magagna. Macca, a bruise, a spot, a tainting. Also a frocke or
such like garment. Also plenty, store, Gods plenty, hold belly hold. Maccare,
to bruise, to batter, to pester. Also to spot, to taint. Maccatura, a bruise, a
spot. Maccarone, a gul, a doult, a patch, a fool a lubber, a loggerhead.
Maccaroni, a kind of paste meat boiled in broth, and dressed with butter,
cheese, and spice. Maccheroni, as Maccarone. Macchia, a spot, a blemish, a
speckle, a note of infamy or reproach. Also a brake, a bramble, a bush, a
brier, a firrie place, a purley, a shrub, a thicket of briers. Macchia nel'
occhio, a pin and web or blemish in ones eye. Macchiare, to spot, to blemish,
to bespeckle. Macchietta, a little spot or blemish. Also a little brake, bush,
or bramble. Macchione, a great brake, bramble, bush, or place full of firres.
Macco, plenty, store, hold belly hold. Maccole, spots, freckles, specks,
blemishes. Maccoloso, speckled, freckled, or spotted. Macedonica, the name of
an herb. Macellaio, Macellaro, a butcher, a slaughterer. Macellare, to kill,
to butcher, to slaughter, to shamble. Macello, a butchery, a shambles, a
slaughterhouse, a flesh market. Macerare, to macerate, to mortify, to
suppress, to tame, to make wanne, to weaken, to mortify with beating or
pressing, to soke or steep in water. Macerie, leanenes, barrennes. Also a row
or set of teeth. Macerie herb, all manner of usual known pothearbs. Macero,
Look Macerare, torn, tottered, ragged, hauocked. Maceroni, a kind of herb
good for sallets. Match, a kind of beast that has no ioints in her legs. Ma
che, but, only, except, but what. Machera, a kind of curtelaxe or woodknife.
Machila, the robe of the Ephod made altogether of blue silk, having round
about the skirts thereof 72. pomegranats of blue silk and purple and scarlet,
and as many bells of gold between them round about. Machina, a frame, an
engine, a devise, a building, an edifice, an invention, an instrument. Also a
conspiracy, a stratagem, a contriuing, a plot, a complot, a skaffold in
building. Machinare, to frame, to devise, to build, to complot, to contriue, to
conspire. Machinatione, a complot, a conspiracy, a contriuing, a framing, a
subtle invention or devising. Machinatore, a framer, a deviser, a builder, a
contriuer, a conspirer, an inuentor, an author, a maker of engines. Macido,
filthy, pale, hoarie, mustie, soft, rotten, mouldie. Macignare, to grow
rustie, rough, rugged, hard, stony, or crabbed. Macigno, rustie, grettie,
stony, rough, rugged, crabbed, grisly, stearne, filthy, pale, hoarie,
mustie, rotten, mouldie, a kind of gray hard stone. Macilente, lean, meagre,
gant, barren, thin. Macilenza, leanenes, meagernes, gantnes. Macina, a
millstone, or grinding stone. Macinare, to grind. Macinato, ground, or
grinded. Also greast or corn to grind. Macinatore, a miller, a grinder.
Macinatura, a grinding. Macine, taken for the teeth and jaws together,
grinding stones, millstones. Macinella, a little mustard mill for a kitchen.
Macinette, little grinding millstones. Also little mils. Also a kind of
shrimps or praunes. Macinio, the grinding or greest. Also taken for carnal
copulation. Macis, the spice we call mace. Maciulla, Macciula, a brake to
kneade dowe withal, or a block to break hemp or flax upon. Maciullare,
Macciullare, to break or beat hemp or flax, after it is dry. Macola, as
Macchia, a spot, a blot, a blemish, an infamy, or reproach. Macolare, as
Macchiare. Macrare, to make or grow lean. Macrezza, leanenes, gantnes,
meagernes. Macro, lean, meagre, gant. Macrologia, long and tedious talk,
wherein is no substance, frivolous idle speech. Macula, as Macchia. Maculare,
as Macchiare. Maculoso, full of spots, freckles, or speckles. Madaglio della
campana, the clapper of a bell. Madale, a barrow hog. Madarazzo, a clown, a
loobie, a loggerhead, a gross fellow. Madeno, no forsooth, no indeed. Madesi,
yea forsooth, yes indeed. Madera, a kind of stuff to dye red withal, called
Mather. Madia, a spokeshaue, a maund to put in bread. Also a kneading tub, a
hutch. Madoni, treene dishes, bowls or treyes of wood used in a kitchen.
Madonna, mistres, mistresmine, madam. Also taken for our lady. Madonna no, no
forsooth mistres, no madame. Madonna si, yea mistres mine, yes madame. Madre, a
mother, a damme. Also taken for the earth. Also the disease called the mother.
Also a woman's womb or matrix. Look Matre. Madrebosco, woodbinde, boniesuckle.
Madremagna, the earth who is the mother and bringer forth of all things. Madre
perla, mother of pearl. Madre selua, woodbinde or bonniesuckle. Madregna, a
stepdam or mother in law. Madremma, Madrema, my mother, my mam, as children
say. Madrezzuola, as Madrebosco. Madrifoglio, knapweede, bullweede, or
matfellon. Madrigali, Madriali, madrigals, a kind of short songs or ditties in
Italy. Madrigaletti, short madrigals. Madrigna, Madrina, a stepdame, a mother
in law. Madrone, a disease called the mother. Madune, a brick or red square
pauing stone. Madunelli, small bricks, or little pauing stones. Maesa, land
that lies fallow. Maesare, to break or grub up land, to let it lie fallow.
Maesta, majesty, soueraintie, dignity, honor, lordlines, honorable dignity,
royal authority, or supremacy. Maestale, maiesticall, sovereign, great,
royal, lordlike. Maesteuole, maiesticall. Maestra, a mistres, or chief, Look
Strada maustra. Maestrale, a magistrate, a superior over other. Maestranza,
maistrie, or cunning, or skill, or workmanship. Maestrare, to teach, to
instruct, to master. Maestrato, taught, instructed, maistred. Also a
magistrate, a great head officer. Also the authority, office, power, and
dignity of a ruler or magistrate. Maestreggiare, to sail north-west. Also to
play the master. Maestreuole, cunning, learned, artificial, like a master,
skillful. Maestria, as Maestranza. Maestro, a master, a teacher, a ruler, an
ouerseer, one that has the instruction of others. Also the north-west wind,
or north-west and by west. Maestro tramontana, the north-west wind. Maestro di
campo, a marshall of a camp, a master of the field. Maestro di casa, a
steward of a house. Also the master or chief gut in any body, in a horse it
is taken for his whole or great paunch. Maestro d' art, a master of arts.
Maestra di scuola, a schoolmaster. Maestro di stalla, a noblemans gentleman of
his horse. Mafaro, the sail of the foremaste. Also a bung or stopple of a
barrel. Maffe, in good sooth, by my faith, yea by our lady. Maga, an
enchantres, a witch, a sorceresse. Also the art of witchcraft or pertaining to
sorcerie. Magace, a kind of musical instrument. Magade, a musical instrument
of twenty strings. Also the bridge of a lute that holds up the strings.
Magagna, fault, corruption, rottenness, addlenes, putrefaction, defect, want,
imperfection, waste, riot, hurt, loss. Also a rankling, a festring. Magagnare,
to rot, to addle, to putrify, to corrupt, to be defective, to hurt, to bruise
to battre as a boar does with his tusks, to rankle, to fester, to mangle.
Magagnoso, rotten, addle, full of corruption, tainted, rankled. Magalda, a
queen, a harlot, a strumpet, an old trot, a trull or minxe, a gixie. Magara, a
witch. Magari, I would to God it were so, would to God. Magaria, witcherie,
witchcraft. Magasi, as Maggiorini. Magazzino, Magazzeno, a storehouse or a
warehouse. Magazzino di grano, a store house for corn. Magazzino reale, a
storehouse for the king. Magazzino d' artegliaria, a storehouse for ordinance.
Magazzino publico, a public storehouse. Magazzinetto, a little storehouse or
warehouse. Magazziniero, a storehouse keeper. Magese, as Maiese, or Maggese, or
Magiese. Magesta, has bin used for Maesta. Maghero, as Magro. Magherire, as
Magrire. Maggio, the month of May, it has bin used for Maggiore. Maggiorana,
the sweet smelling herb Marieram. Maggioranza, eldership, superiority.
worship, precedencie, greater greatness. Maggiorale, has been used for
Maggiore. Maggiore, greater, superior, better, higher, bigger, more ancient, a
senior or a mayor. Maggiordomo, the steward or chief officer of a house.
Maggiorengo, an alderman, a chiefeman in a town or of any society, an elder,
a greater. Maggiorente, idem. Maggioretto, somewhat greater or higher. Maggiori,
elders, greatest, aldermen, chief. Also our elders, ancestors, predecessors,
progenitors, or forefathers. Maggiorini, a kind of ducke, mallarde, or wiggin,
or such foul. Magi, wise men, whom we call the three kings of Collein, wise
philosophers. Magia, natural Magike, witchcraft or sorcerie. Magica, art
magike, or sorcerie, magical. Magicale, according to the art of magike,
magical. Magico, a magitian or enchanter. Magiese, as Maiese, carable land, or
fallowe land. Magione, a house, habitation, or mansion. Magiorana, sweet
marieram. Magiriano, a kind of serpent which is said to grow out of a dead
man's back or chine bone. Magisterio, Magistero, maisterie, mystery, cunning,
art, skill. Magistrale, a magistrate, or capable to be made a magistrate, like
a magistrate. Magistrato, a magistrate, a governor, a judge. Maglia, is
properly the holes in any net. Also a shirt or iacket of maile, as Giacco di
Maglia. Magliare, to maile, to arm with maile, or iackets, to b^^te with a
mallet. Also to beat a pack of wool to make it lie close. Maglie, mailes.
Also little holes through a net or cages. Maglietta, a little maile, a shirt of
maile. Maglio, a mallet or a beetle, as carpenters use, a sledge. Magliuoli,
little stakes driven into hedges. Also slips of vines to be set to grow. Magna,
Look Madre. Magnanimita, magnanimity, high courage, greatness and noblenes of
mind. Magnanimo, magnanimous, high minded, all daring, stout hearted. Magnano, a
locke-smith, a key-maker; but properly a tinker or a forger. Magna pagnotte, a
deuourer of Panadoes, a glutton, a cormorant. Magna guadagno, as Mangia
guadagno. Magnare, to eat, to feed. Also food or meat. Magnarie, any thing
that is to be eaten. Magnati, the ancients, elders, chief, head officers or
aldermen of a town or corporation. Also noble men or great peers of a realm
or state. Magnatione, a ripening or corroding plaster. Magnatore, a feeder, an
eater, a deuourer. Magnatora, as Mangiatoia. Magnesia, the load stone which
draws iron to it. Some call it a magnet stone. Magneti, a kind of stone
called catsiluer. Magnificare, to magnify, to honor, to advance, to extol, to
exalt. Magnificat, the song of our Lady, called Magnificat. Magnificente,
magnificent, noble, nobly minded. Magnificentia, magnificence, the doing or
atchieuing of great things, sumptuousness. Magnifico, magnificent, noble,
nobly minded. Also a Magnifico or chief man or one of the chief men in
Venice. Magniloquentia, a lofty and high style or manner of speaking.
Magniloquo, he that has a lofty style and speaks of great matters.
Magnitudine, greatness, amplenes, largenes, couragiousnes, noblenes. Magno,
great, high, mighty, large, big, notable, noble. Magnosa, a coife or caul.
Magnosetta, a little coise or caul. Mago, Magolo, a magitian, an enchanter, a
sorcerer, a wiseman, a philosopher. Magone, the maw or gizard of capons, hens,
or other foul. Magotto, a kind of bird or foul. Magrana, a kind of disease,
the megram. Magrare, to make or grow lean. Magreria, any lean, poor or cold
jest or devise or leannes. Magrezza, leannes, meagrenes, gantnesse. Magro,
lean, meagre, lanke, gant. Maguei, Meth, as Cardone. Maguno, a kind of
cormorant or seagull. May, ever, never, at no time, at any time. It has also
been used for branches. Look Maio. Maid, tush, fie, no, away, will you?
Maimone gatto, a catte of the mountains. Mainare vna naue, as Amainare. Maino,
tush, no, no forsooth no, away, will you? Maipiu, never more, evermore. May
sempre, for ever, ever and ever. Maiesta, Magesta, as Maesta. Maiese, land
sown every other year, any land that lies fallowe, and is newly ploughed or
broken up. Maio, a green bough newly cut from the tree, a may pole, a
may-bough. Also a mallet or beetle to cleave wood with, or a sledge or great
hammer or iron crow. Also a kind of sea-crab called a frill. Maiolica, as
Maiorica. Maiolichino, a kind of small coin. Maiorana, the herb Marioram.
Maiordomo, a chief or steward of a house. Maiore, as Maggiore. Maioranza, as
Maggioranza. Maiorica, the earth we call porcelane, whereof China dishes are
made. Maisi, yea marie, yes indeed. Maiz, a kind of grain or wheat whereof
they make bread in India. Maiuscula, greater then others, text letters, letters
of the greatest sort. Mala, the ball of the cheek. Also taken for the iawe or
cheek bone. Look osso Malo. Malabatro, a kind of leaf that swimmeth in
pooles without any apparent root: whereof is made a kind of sweet oil.
Malaccorto, vnheedful, foolish, unwary, il-aduised. Malachite, a stone of a
darkegreene color. Malacreanza, evil nurture, bad education, vnmannerlines.
Maladicenza, as Maldicenza. Maladire, dico, dissi, detto, to curse, to banne,
to speak ill, to rail, to slanuder. Maladetto, cursed, banned, spoken ill,
railed, slandred. Mala dispositione, ill disposition, crasednes in body or
mind. Maladittione, a curse, a banning, a malediction, a railing, a
slaundring. Maladra, a water foul called a teale: some take it to be the
Mallard. Malageuole, hard, difficile, uneasy. Malageuolezza, vneasines,
difficulty. Malaghetta, a flower called the flower of Paradise. Malagiato, ill
at ease, ill provided for, ill looked unto, hardly bested. Malagro, a disease
in a hawks head. Malagurato, unfortunate, unlucky. Malandrinare, to rob by
the high way, to play the thief. Manlandrino, a high way thief, a robber, a
spoiler. Mal' anno, an ill year, continual trouble and sorrow. They use it as
a curse in Italy. Il mal' anno che Dio ti dia, an ill year God give thee.
Malanuro, a kind of fish. Malare, to fall sick, to sicken. Malato, fallen
sick, sickned, sick, crazed. Malatia, Maladia, a malady, a sickness.
Malaticcio, sickish, subject to sickness. Mala sort, ill hap, ill chance, ill
luck. Malattaccaticcio, contagious, infecting, infectious or sticking unto.
Malaueduto, simple, negligent, vnheedful, foolish. Malauentura, ill luck, ill
fortune, ill hap. Malauenturoso, unhappy, unlucky, unfortunate.
Malauoglienza, ill will, hatred, dislike. Malbauisco, marsh mallows.
Malcaduco, the falling sickness. Malcomposto, ill framed, ill contrived. Mal
concio, ill dressed, in an ill plight, hardly bested. Malcontento, malcontent,
displeased, discontent. Mal creato, ill brought up, unmannerly, ill nurtured.
Mal del' asimo, Look Asima. Mal del corno, a disease about a horses neck. Mal
del panno, a disease about a horses head or neck. Mal destro, unhandsome,
improper, unfit. Maldetto, cursed, banned, forespoken, detracted, ill spoken,
ill said, an ill saying. Maldicente, a detractor, an iniurer, an ill speaker, a
backbiter. Maldicenza, detraction, injury, backbiting, slander, a curse, an
ill report. Maldisposto, ill disposed, unlusty. Mal di pietra, the sickness of
the stone collicke. Mal di febbre, an ague or fever. Mal di tisico, a pining
or lingering disease, a consumption. Male, harm, hurt, evil, ill, mischief,
sickness, disease, infection, pain grief, smart. Also ill, bad, naughty,
hurtful, unseemly, indecent, sickly, euilly, badlie, ill at ease, unhappily,
not well, shreudly, wickedly, lewdly. Male affare, of mischief or ill doing.
Malearriuato, at an ill stay, in ill plight, in bad taking, ill bested.
Maledicente, as Maldicente. Male del orzuolo, a falling or staggring disease in
a horse. Maledicenza, as Maldicenza. Malediceuole, as Maldicente. Maledico, a
cursed man, a cursing man, an evil speaker, ill toonged, foul mouthed, a
railer, an ill speaker. Maledire, as Maladire. Maledetto, as Maladetto.
Maledittion, as Maladittione. Malefattore, a malefactor, an offender, a
misdoer. Maleficiare, to misdoe, to do evil. Maleficio, an ill fact, an ill
deed, a misdoing, a shrewd turn. Malefico, hurtful, noisome, wicked, evil,
deadly, venomous, ill doing. Malfare, faccio, feci, farto, to misdoe, to do
ill, to do wrong, to abuse. Malfatto, misdone, ill done, ill made, a misdeede,
an offense, a fault, a wrong, an abuse. Malferito, the name of a disease in a
horse. Malenaggia, a curse, as we say an evil year on him, for Malanno
habbia. Malenanza, as Maleuolentia. Maleoli, the ankles or ankle bones.
Malescalco, as Mariscalco. Maleuolere, to hate, to loathe, to detest, to wish
evil unto, to grudge. Maluoluto, hated, lothed, grudged at. Maleuadore, a
pledge, a surety, a bail, an hostage. Maleuolentia, ill will, hatred, grudge,
malice. Maleuolo, malicious, maleuolent, spiteful, that owes ill will, that
bears a grudge, envious. Maluedere, to loathe, to see unwillingly. Malueduto,
lothed, unwelcome, not seen willingly. Mal del l'anca, broken hipt, or
hipbroken. Mal del fico, a disease rising in the sole of a horses foot, of
evil carrying a former disease. Mal di lingua, the sorenes of the tongue in a
horse. Mal di napoli, the french pocks. Mal del dosso, a hurt in the back,
which in some horses is suffered to run so long that it is not easy to be
cured afterward. Mal francese, the french pox. Malfranciosato, infected with
the french pocks, pockie. Malforo, a mischievous hole, taken for a woman's
priuities. Malgrado, maugre, in despite. Malgrado, vnpleased, vnaccepted,
unthankfully. Malgradeuole, as Malgrado. Malgradito, as Malgrado. Malgramma,
the name of a goldsmiths tool. Mal gratioso, unhandsome, ungracious,
unwelcome. Mal napolitano, the french pockes. Malhora, an ill hour, a
mischief, ill fortune, bad luck. Malia, witchcraft, witcherie, sorcerie.
Maliare, to bewitch, to witch. Maliarda, a she witch, a sorceresse. Maliardo,
an enchanter, a he witch. Malichite, a kind of dark greenish stone of the
color of Malua. Malificare, to do or commit evil. Maligie, Maliglie, young
chibols, oinions, scalions, or ciues. Malignanza, as Malignita. Malignare, to
malign or bear ill will unto, to spite, to malice, to envy, to grudge.
Malignita, malignitie, ill will, spite, despite, malice, envy, grudging,
naughtines, wickedness, frowardnes. Maligno, wicked, malicious, spightfull,
envious, naught, evil, malignant, grudge-bearing. Malinconia, melancholy,
sadness, pensiuenes, black choler. Malinconico, melancholy, sad, sullen,
solitary, heavy, or pensive, full of black choler. Malinconioso, as
Malinconico. Malioso, an enchanter, a witch, full of sorcerie or witchcraft.
Maliscalco, Maliscialco, a marshall, or such like officer. Also a farrier, or
horsesmith. Also a horseleach. Malitia, malice, ill will, spite, envy,
knauerie, naughtines, lewdnes, shrewdnes, a craft, a device, a policy, a
slight, a wyle. Malitiare, to malice, to envy, to spite, to bear a grudge or
envy to one. Malitioso, malicious, spiteful, envious, shrewde. Maliuoglieza,
ill will, hatred, maleuolence. Maliuolo, churlish, dogged, currish, hating,
bearing ill will, ill minded. Malleo, a beetle, a mallet. Malleolo, a little
mallet that carpenters use. Also a kind of darting weapon. Also the lower part
of the leg, or ankle bone. Also bundles of sticks with pitch and so set on fire
are floong over walls upon men. Malleuadore, a surety, a pledge, a bail, an
hostage. Malleueria, bail, maineprise, or suretiship. Also a trespass or
offense. Mallo, as Maglio. Mal in assetto, disordered, confused, in ill plight,
in ill estate. Mal in ordine, as Mal in assetto. Mal in punto, as Mal in
assetto. Malmenare, to misuse, to abuse, to evil entreat. Malmenato, ill
used, ill handled, in ill taking, in poor plight. Malmendo, a fault annexed to
another fault, fault upon fault. Malmerito, that has deserved ill. Malnetto,
unclean, polluted, foul. Malomello, a kind of apple called a sweeting.
Malore, a sickness, disease, evil, harm, or malady. Malpica, the herb
watercresses. Malpro, hurt, harmefull, that does not good. Malsano, unwholesome,
vnhealthie. Malsicuro, unsafe, unsure, dangerous. Malsottile, a pining lingering
disease, a consumption. Malta, mortar, lime, plaster of Paris, loame. Also a
kind of monstrous sea fish. Maltare, to mortar, to lome, to plaster.
Maltaruola, a trowell. Maltatore, a plastrer, or mortar-man. Maltire, tisco,
tito, to digest, to brook, to digest. Malua, Malba, the herb Mallows.
Maluagia, Maluasia, the wine called Malmesie. Maluagio, wicked, bad, ill,
naughty. Maluagita, wickedness, badnes, illnes, naughtines. Maluaresca, marsh
or water mallows, or white mallows. Maluauisco, as Maluaresca. Maluauone, as
Maluaresca. Maluerde, a disease called the yellow iaundise. Also the green
sickness. Maluiccio, a thrush, or field fare. Maluolontieri, unwillingly.
Malusare, to misuse, to abuse, to use ill. Maluso, a bad custom, an ill use,
an ill fashion. Mamalucco, a kind of soldiers, that the Souldans of Egypt
were wont to have. Mamau, a machound, a bugbeare, a rawhead and bloody bone.
Mamma, a teate, a pap, a dug, an vdder, a breast. Also the word that children
use to call their mother by as we say Mam, or my Mother. Mammana, a Midwife, or
keeper of a woman in childebed. Mammata, thy mam, thy mother. Mammella, a
little dugge, teat, pap, or vdder. Mammellare, to suck a dugge. Mammetta, as
Mammella. Also a pretty little mam or mother. Mammillari processi, processes in
the temple bones hanging down like the broken brows of banks, representing
the fashion of teates in a cowes vdder. Mammina, as Mammetta. Mammola, a whore,
a strumpet, a harlot, a crafty queen. Mammole viole, a kind of violets so
called. Mammolino, whosht, quiet, and still as children are. Mammolo, an old
crafty lad, a subtle slye fox, an old babie. Mammone, a kind of cat of
mountain. Mamucco, a kind of great foul that flies, runs and swimmeth
very swift, and lives by the air in the Moluccas. Manacchia, a bird called a
chough. Manacordo, as Monacordo. Managetto, a bird so called. Manaia, Manara,
an axe, an adze. Manantiale, flowings of the sea, perpetual, endless, always
coming. Manaretta, Manarino, a hatchet. Manatto, a kind of excellent fish in
India, round in shape, with two feet, and a head like a calfe. Mancanza, want,
defect, lack, ailing. Mancanza della luna, the wane of the moon, the fall of
a tide. Manca, left, as the left hand, mano manca. Also, it wants or lacks.
Mancamento, want, lack, ayling, defect, waning of the moon. Mancare, to lack,
to want, to ayle, to fail, to miss, to err, to cease, to leave off, to be
defective, to defalke, to fall, to make less. Also to wane as the moon does,
to fault. Mancatore, a breaker, a failer, or misser of his word. Mancheuole,
wanting, defective. Mancia, a drinking penny, a newyeares gift, handsell.
Manciata, a bait by the way for man or horse. Also a drinking penny. Also a
handful of any thing, a bundle, a wad, or wispe of any thing. Mancinare, to
play with the left hand, to dissemble. Mancino, a left handed man, a blow
given with the left hand. Mancino e^dritto, both right and left handed.
Mancipare, to subject, to enthrall, to embondage or deprive of liberty. Also
to sell, to let, to hyre, or farm by order of law. Mancipatione, a selling,
letting or farming by course of law, a liuerie and season. Mancipio, a
bondsman, a thrall, a slave, a vassal, a subject, a captive, a manciple, a
farmer, a letter, a baily, any thing taken with the hand. Manciulla, a devise
in Italy to break hemp and flax withal. Also to knead bread or dowe. Manco,
less, lesser, not so much, failing, ayling, wanting, lacking, defective,
imperfect. Also one that lacks a lim or that has but one hand. Manculo,
left handed. Mandaia, Mandara, as Manara. Mandamento, a commandment, a sending
for, a warrant, a commission. Mandare, to send, to address, to direct.
Mandato, sent, addressed, directed. Also a mandate, a commandment, a
commission, a warrant. Mandar a cresima, to defer and put off a matter till
doomes day. Mandar' al palegro, to send to ones last home. Mandar' ad effetto,
to put in effect, to effect. Mandar' a male, to spoil, to waste, to consume,
to riote. Mandar' a chiamare, to send for, to call for. Mandar giu, to send
down, also to digest or put over as a hawk does her meat. Mandar per, to
send for. Mandaria, as Mandra. Mandatore, a sender. Mandatorio, a command, a
mandatorie. Mandatuccio, a small commandment. Man destra, the right hand.
Mandestro, right handed. Also a blow given with the right hand. Mandibula, the
mandible or iawe wherein the teeth be set. Mandiglione, a mandillion, a
soldiers iacket. Mandola, Mandorla, an almond. Mandolata, a kind of tarte
made of almonds. Mandolo, Mandorlo, an almond tree. Mandra, a herd, a drove, a
flock of any cattle. Also a fold, a pownde, a sheepecote, or pen to put
cattle in. Also a stable, a stall or place for fodder. Mandragola, Mandragora,
a mandrake, which is of a very cold temperature, and therefore is used to cast
men into deep sleeps when they must be cut by surgeans, and for many other
purposes in physic. Mandrano, Mandraro, a herdesman, a drouer, a grasier.
Mandretta, a little sheepecot, a little fold, a little heard or drove. Mandria,
as Mandra. Mandriale, Mandriano, a heardesman, a grasier, a drouer, as
Madrigale. Mandriano, the name of a tool that a potter or founder does use.
Mandritto, a right hand blow, a downeright blow. Mandrolina, a little
almonde. Also a dainty queen, a pretty wench. Manducare, to eat, to feed,
to chewe. Manduco, a disguised or ugly picture used in shows to make children
afraid, as we say a snapdragon, a turk, or a bug-beare. Mane, early, betimes,
to morrow morning Manecchia, a handle or haft, to handle a thing by, a ploughs
handle. Maneggiare, to manage, to handle, to deal with, to touch with the
hands, to exercise, to trade, to trafique, to plie, to solicit, to govern,
to follow. Maneggiatore, a manager, a handler, a dealer, an exerciser, a
trader. Maneggiabile, as Maneggeuole. Maneggiamento, a managing, a handling, a
dealing, a negotiation, a trading, an exercising. Maneggiante, as Maneggeuole.
Maneggiare a repoloni, to pace, trot, or gallop a horse too and fro in one
path: and still returns to the same. Maneggeuole, manageable, tractable,
gentle, that may be handled. Maneggiere, as Maneggiatore. Maneggio, a business,
a managing, a handling, a negotiation or affair, a trade, an exercise.
Manegoldo, a hangman, a headsman, an executioner. Manelle, sheafes or handfuls
of any thing. Also bracelets. Manera, manner, fashion, use, course, style,
order. Also a hatchet. Manner, mango, manei, manuto, to remain, to abide, to
stay, to dwell. Manuto, remained, stayed, dwelt. Also having hands. Manescallo,
Manescalco, as Marescallo. Manesco, ready, nimble or quicke-handed, working
with his hand, a tall man-of his hands. Manestra. Look Menestra. Manetia, a
muffe, a snufkin, a mitton. Manette, manicles, fetters for the hands, mittons,
gives. Manezza, a manchon, a sleeue, a muffe, a mitton, a snufkin, a long
glove. Manezza di ferro, an arming gantlet. Manezze, bracelets. Also manual
things. Manfrigoli, a kind of dainty dish meat, or quelquechose used in
Italy. Mangano, a kind of press to press buckrom, fustian or died linen
cloth, to make it have a luster or glass. Manganare, to press all manner of
linen cloth died, to put a luster or glass on it. Manganaro, a presser of
linen clothes, namely of buckrom or fustian. Manganello, a silly garment of a
sheepeheard. Also a musical rusticall instrument. Manganese, a stuff or stone
to make glasses with. Also a kind of mineral stone. Mangano, as Manganaro.
Mangetta, Mangeola, a young heifer, a young cow, a steer. Mangerie,
unthriftiness, spendings. Also as Angarie. Also all manner of meats. Mangetto, a
pretty kind of meat, a dainty dish, a heifer, a runt, a young calfe.
Mangiaglia, all manner of things to be eaten, food or feeding. Mangiare, to
eat, to feed. Also meat, food, sustenance or nourishment. Mangiar in
tinello, to eat in the common hall, to feed in a hutch, or homely. Mangiar a
scrocco, to eat and drink and make good cheer at freecost, to shift for
victuals. Mangiar e bear, meat and drink, to eat and drink. Mangia guadagno,
a fellow that is good for nothing but to steal another man's dinner away, and
that lives by other men's gain, an unthrift. Mangiaguerra, a kind of strong
wine so called in Italy. Mangiar pan pentito, to eat bread of repentance, to
repent all days of his life. Mangiamento, all manner of things that are to be
eaten, belly cheer. Mangiatiuo, that may be eaten, eatable. Mangiatoia, a
manger, a rack in a stable, a cratch. Mangiatore, a feeder, an eater, a
glutton. Mangio, a heifer, a steer, a young ox, a runt. Mangione, a glutton,
a cormorant, a great feeder. Also a great heifer, runt, steer or young ox.
Also as Magione. Mangiolo, as Mangetto. Mangiucone, a glutton, a deuourer, a
cormorant, a gormand. Mania, madness, outrage, fury, properly a disease rising
of too much abundance of good blood having recourse to the head; whereby the
party is in a fury or rage, brainsicknes. Maniare, to be mad, raging,
outrageous, brainsicke, and fantastical. Mani, hands. Also ranks, courses or
files or rows of things or men. Also spirits, souls, and ghosts of the dead,
the good and bad angels. Also the punishment that the souls do abide. Also
hobgoblins or elfes, or such misshapen images or imagined spirits that nurces
fraie their babes withal to make them leave crying, as we say bug-beare, or
else raw head and bloody bone. Manica, any kind of sleeue or manche. Also a
haft or handle, any flap covering the hand, a manche in armorie. Manicare, to
eat, to feed. Also to sleeue any garment. Also to haft or put on a handle
upon any weapon. Manicaretti, minced small meats, dainty quelquechoses, fine
sauces. Manicatore, a feeder, an eater. Also a sleeuer, a hafter, a handler.
Manicelle, Manine, little, pretty hands or bracelets. Maniche, sleeves,
manchons. Maniche di ferro, sleeves of iron or of maile. Manichetto, Manichino,
a little haft or handle. Manico, a haft or a handle or helue. Manico di scopa,
a handle for a broom. Bocace does use it for a hard turd, a turd as hard as a
stick. Manicone, a great sleeue, manchon, muffe or snufkin. Manicordo, an
instrument like unto a rigoll or pair of virginals, a claricorde, guise.
Maniera, manner, fashion, use, custom, wont. Maniero, a gentle or reclaimed
hawk, any thing that will be handled. Manifattore, a handie workman, a
hand-labourer. Manifattura, workemanshippe, handieworke. Manifatturare, to
counterfeit or frame by art or handie labor. Manifestare, to manifest,
reveal, declare or publish, to bewraie, to make apparent. Manifestatione, a
manifestation or declaration. Manifesto, manifest, clear, certain, undoubted,
open, apparent, public, evident. Also a manifestation or declaration.
Manigliare, to adorn with braslets, to manicle. Maniglie, Manigli, Manili,
braslets. Also manicles, ornaments about the arms or hands. Manigoldaggine,
the part or trick of a hangman. Manigoldarie, hangmens tricks. Manigoldo, an
executioner, a hangman, a headsman. Manili, manicles or gives for the hands.
Manine, little pretty young or tender hands. Also a kind of mushroms or todes
stools. Maninconia, as Malinconia. Maninconico, as Malinconico. Manipola, a
part of so many ranks and files of soldiers throughout a battle or squadron of
pikes drawn forth to march through any straight or passage. Some think it to
be but a band of ten soldiers under one captain, as it were but a handful in
comparison of a greater number. Also a handful, a gripe, a bundle, a bottell.
Manipolare, Manipulare, to gripe with the hands, to make bottles or wads of
hay. Also to arm with a gantlet, to bundle up. Manipolo, Manipulo, a gantlet,
a racket to play at tennis with, a handful, a bottle of haie, a wad of straw,
a gripe, a bundle. Maniscalco, as Marescalco. Maniscalcheria, as
Marescalcheria. Maniscintola, an idle, lazy, slothful companion, lazines,
idleness, sloth. Manizza, as Manezza. Manna del cielo, the dew of heaven or
manna. In the scripture it is a delicate thing that god caused to fall from
heaven in great abundance in manner of dew, white in color and like a
Coriander seed, and very pleasant in eating. In physic it is a manner of dew
congealed on trees and plants, and so is gathered in certain hot countries and
reserved as a gentle purge of choler. Mano, a hand, a rank, a course or file.
Also a maine in game and play. Also power or authority. Manocordo, as
Manicordo. Man destra or dritta, the right hand. Man manca, sinistra, mancina,
zanca, stanca, the left hand. Manomettere, metto, misi, messo, to manumit, to
make free, to enfranchise. also to broach or set a broach any thing. Manomesso,
manumist, made free, enfranchised, set a broach. Manomissione, deliverance out
of bondage, or making free of a bondsman. Manopola, a gantlet, a iacket, a
handful, a bottle of haie, as Manipola. Manopretio, wages or reward for
workmanship. Manoualderia, an administration or proouing of ones will.
Manoualdo, an administrator of ones will. Manouale, a workman, a handiecrafts
man, a day labourer, a trades man. Manouelle, the name of a rope-makers tool.
Also little pieces or parcels. Mansano, a coopers tool or something about a
tub or barrel. Manse, meek, humble, mild, gentle. Mansionaro, a homekeeper,
a houslin, one that seldom goes abroad. Mansorio, a muscle which springing in
circled sort from the throat bone, and from the first bone of the upper iaw
moves the nether iaw. Mansuefare, faccio, feci, fatto, to humble, to make
lowly or mild, to tame, to make meek and tractable. Mansuefatto, made mild,
tamed, humbled, and made tractable. Mansueto, mild, meek, gentle, humble,
lowly, tame, tractable. Mansuetudine, mildnes, meeknes, lowlines, humility,
gentleness. Manta, a mantle, a robe, a long cloak. Mantaio, Mantacuzzo, the name
of a goldsmithes tool. Mantaro, Mantarro, a cloak, a riding cloak, a
shepherds frocke. Mantare, to enrobe, to enmantle, to cloak. Mante, a diuiner,
a foreteller, a soothsaier, a teller of things to come. Mantegate, a kind of
paste meat used in Italy. Mantellaccio, a filthy, course, great cloak.
Mantellare, to mantle, to enrobe, to cover, to cloak, to shelter, to shroude,
to flatter. Mantellaro, a mantle, a cloke-maker. Mantelletti, penthouses of
boordes, couers, shrouds, shelters. Also little clokes. Mantellina, a little
loose mantle as women are wont to wear. Mantello, a cloak, cover or mantle.
Also the coat or color of a horse. Also a kind of broad flat fish.
Mantellizzare, to flatter, to faune, to claw, to sooth up, to cog and foist
with, to give one court holy water. Mantenere, tengo, tenni, tenuto, to
maintain, to uphold, to sustain, to defend, to protect, to keep, to back,
to countenance. Mantenuto, maintained, vpheld, sustained, defended, protected,
backed. Mantenimento, maintenance, sustenance, upholding, a defense, a
protection. Mantenitore, a mainteiner, a sustainer, an vpholder, a defender, a
chalenger. Mantia, divination, fortelling of things to come. Mantica, a bag, a
wallet, a budget, a capcase. Also the broad side of a pair of bellows with a
hole in it. Mantice, Mantici, Mantico, a pair of bellows. Also the guts
whereby every creature draws breath. Manticora, a beast in India, having three
rows of teeth, the face of a man, body of a lion, and coueteth much man's
flesh. Manticciaro, a bellows maker. Mantile, a table cloth or napkin.
Mantiglia, a kind of clouted cream called a fool or a trifle in English.
Mantiletto, a napkin, a drinking cloth, a cubboord cloth. Manto, a robe, mantle
or cloak, a long upper garment. Also taken for the coat or color of any
beast. Mantone, a great robe, with a train. Mantouarie, mantuan or baudy
tricks. Manuale, manual, wrought with the hand or that may be handled.
Manualista, a handiecrafts-man, a hand-labourer. Manubia, the pray or booty
taken of enemies. Also the generals or chief captains part of the booty.
Also a spoil taken of a noble person that yields himself, or the money that
is made of it. Manucare, to eat, to feed hungerlie. Manucatore, a hungry
feeder, a glutton, an eater. Manuche, a fine colored bird in India, which never
touches the ground but when he is dead. Manuelle, as Falde. Manufatto, made or
wrought by hand. Manumissione, as Manomissione. Manumettere, as Manomettere.
Manumesso, as Manomesso. Manupretio, wages or reward for workmanship. Manutia,
the plough tail. Manuto, Masto, Look Manner. Manuzza, a little hand. Also a
bracelet. Manza, a young cow, a steer, a heifer, a runt, a man's sweetehart,
love, or mistres. Also a pretty less or girl, as Mancia. Man zanca, the left
hand. Manzetto, a young calfe, a little runt, a heifer or steer. Manzo, a
young ox, runt or steer, or bullock. Also beef, Carne di Manzo. Maona, a
kind of great hulke. Mappa, a map, or type, or card of any country. Mappa
mondo, the map of the world, all the world at will, joy, solace. Mappello, a
kind of poison or venom. Maragone, a kind of waterfowle, or cormorant.
Marana, a kind of ship, hoy, boat, or hulke. Marangonare, to play the
carpenter. Marangone, a carpenter. Maranello, a young pig, or a porklin.
Marano, a Jew, an Infidel, a renegado, a nickname for a Spaniard. It has also
been used for a kind of pinnace or flye-boate, or such ship. Marasandola, a
water-lizard, or newte. Marasca, a kind of sour cherrie. Marasco, a sour
cherrie tree. Marasmo, the third degree or extremity and end of the hectike
and consuming fever when unnatural heat has so prevailed in the
substantial parts of the heart and other members, that the natural moisture
thereof is clean exhausted and consumed, and thereby is become utterly
incurable. Marasmode, a kind of hecticke fever which happens of a burning
ague so far spread as that it consumes the humor of the whole body.
Marasso, a viper. Marauiglia, a wonder, a marvel. a viper. Marauigliare, to
wonder, to marvel. Marauiglioso, wonderful, marvelous, miraculous. Marca,
the bounds, limit, confines or marches of any country, thereof comes the word
Marchese, for he was called a Marquess that had the charge of some bordering
country, or that kept the marches. Also a mark, a sign, a token, or a
brandingiron. Some take it to be a horse, for in such a sense it has bin
taken, a coin called a mark. Marcantare, to cheapen, to bargain, to
merchandise, to mart. Marcante, a merchant, a chapman. Marcantesca,
marchandlike, Mano Marcantesca. Marcantia, merchandise. Marcare, to mark, to
note, to brand, to stamp. Marcasita, as Marchesita. Marcello, a coin current
in Rome. Marchesana, Marchegiana, the wife of a Marquess, a lady Marquess.
Marchesato, a Marquisate, a Marquess his Lordship, Marqueship. Marchesata, a
woman having the monthly flowers running upon her. Marchese, a Marquis, next
before an Earl. Also the monthly flowers of women. Marchesita, a kind of stone
called a marquesite or fire-stone. Marchetto, a coin current in Italy.
Marchia, a march or marching. Marchiare, to mark or brand horses, to march in
rank and order as soldiers do. Marchio, a brand or mark upon horses. Also a
branding iron. Marchio della stadera, a counterpoise, any thing put in the
balances or scales to make even weight. Marcia, a march or marching of
soldiers or upon the drum. Also rotten matter, corruption or putrefaction
coming from any sore or fistula. Marciacotto, the metal wherewith glasses
are made, as it is in the pots in furnaces. Marciare, to march in order, as
soldiers. Marciapane, a kind of banqueting meat called a marchpane. Marcido,
rotten, feeble, unlusty, withered, flagging, lither, corrupt. Marciliana, a
kind of hulke, pinnace, ship, barge or flie-boate. Marcire, cisco, cito, to
rot, to putrify, to corrupt, to addle, to become faint, unlusty, and
drooping. Marcio, rotten, addle, corrupt, putrified. Also a lurch or a maiden
set at any game. Marcita, as Marcia. Marco, a mark upon any thing, a
goldsmithes weight. Marcozza, a kind of game so called. Mardore, a beast
called a martinet. Marea, a tide, a full sea, a full tide. Mare, the sea, the
ocean, the maine, the watery wilderness. Mareggiare, to flote upon the sea, to
keep the course of the sea. Maremma, the sea strond or shore. Marenda,
Marendare, as Merenda. Marene, a kind of great cherrie. Marescalco,
Marescialto, a marshall of field or house. Also a farrier or horsesmith.
Marescalcheria, a farriers forge. Also a marshalfie or marshalship. Marga, a
pick axe or hedge-hill, a ploughshare or any such cutting tool. Also a kind
of earth named marle, which is a fat claie and chalk together, serving to dung
fields. Margarita, a pearl, a margarite, a gem. Also a flower called a daizie.
Margaritaro, one that makes bugles, or one that pierces and boareth pearls.
Margaritine, bugles or seed pearls. Margaulzo, a strange bird in India.
Margello, sniuell or snot, or filth of ones nose. Marginare, to heal up a scar
or wound, to keep along the coasts of the sea, to leave or make a margin,
side, or bank. Margin, a margin, a brinke, a border, an edge, a brimme, a
bound, a frontire or side of any thing, a scarre or mark or sign of any cut
or hurt healed up. Marginoso, having a large margin, side, border, brim or
edge. Mariche, a kind of wild beast in China, with a face like a woman, a
body like a a lion, and a tail as a scorpion. Mariconda, a kind of dainty
chewet or little pies used in Italy. Marina, the sea coast or stronde, or of
the sea. Also the sea. Marinare, to play the mariner, to travel by sea, to
marl or dres fish with vinegar to make it keep long to storm, to chafe, to
fret, or rore as the sea does, to scoulde, to wrangle aloud that all may hear.
Marinaro, Marinaio, a mariner, a seaman, a shipman, a sailer. Marinaresco,
Marinesco, marrinerlike. Marinarezza, the seafaring trade, or art of
navigations. Marincusach, a monstrous beast in Persia, with a face like a woman,
a body like a lion, and a tail like a scorpion. Marine, Marinelle, sour
cherries. Marinella, Valerian, capons tail, or Setwall. Marino, of the sea,
near or bordering upon the sea, borne or bred in the sea. Also sea water
green, Pesce marino, sea fish. Marino pescatore, a kind of sea frogge.
Mariolare, to play the cutpurse, rogue, or coni-catcher. Mariolarie, cutpurse
or coni-catching tricks, or knaueries. Mariolo, Mariuolo, a cutpurse, a
conicatcher, a villain. Marische, a disease called the pyles or hemorrhoydes
in the fundament. Maritaggio, a marriage, a spousall, or wedding. Maritale, of
or pertaining to marriage or to a husband. Maritare, to marry, to spouse, to
wedde. Maritato, married, spoused, wedded, a bridegroom, a married man, a
husband. Maritata, a bride, a married woman, a wife. Mariteuole, marriage-able,
fit to be married. Maritimo, pertaining to, or of the sea, of the sea side or
coaste, bordering on the sea. Marito, a husband. Mariuolare, to play the cut
purse or conicatcher. Mariuolo, as Mariolo. Marmarita, the herb beare-breech.
Marmegge, a kind of bird. Marmo, marble. Marmocchio, a gull, a fool, an
idiote, a patch or coxcombe. Marmoreo, made of marble, hard as marble. Also a
marble color. Marmoroso, Marmorino, idem. Marmotta, a marmoset, a babie for a
child to play withal, a pugge. Marobio, as Marrobiastro. Maroelle, a disease
called the hemorrhoides or pyles. Maroncini, a kind of simnell, cracknell, bun
or roll of bread. Maroni, Marroni, a kind of greater chestnuts then any we
have. Also something about a plough. Maroso, rough, stormy, full of billows,
tempestuous, blustering. Marra, a mattocke, a spade, a shouell, a rake to mingle
sand and lome together, a pickaxe, or such rusticke instrument. Marrobiastro,
the herb horehounde or marrube. Marrubio, as Marrobiastro. Marrochino, spanish
lether, frizeleather. Marro, the name of some part of a horses back. Marrobio,
as Marrobiastro. Marrone, a great mattocke, paring shouell or pickaxe or iron
rake. Marrucca, a hemp or flax pit, a place in water to rot or steep hemp
or flax in. Also a kind of thornie shrubbe or tree called ram or hearts
thorn. Marruffino, the yoongest prentise in a house, one that is put to all
druggerie, a swobber in a ship. Marsione, or Marsone, as Ghiozzo. Some take it
also to be the dace, the menowe: others the merlane fish. Marsori, a kind of
pot, pitcher, pipkins glass, or other vessel. Marsupio, a kind of pot that
alchimistes use. Also a pouch or a purse. Martagnone, a kind of herb bearing
a fine flower. Martaro, Marturo, as Martora. Mart, tuesday, Mars the God of
war, and one of the planets. Also the metal iron according to alchimists.
Martanica, goats rue, or Italian fitch. Martedi, tuesday. Martedi grasso,
shroue-tuesday. Martegone, as Martegnone. Martellare, to hammer, to forge, to
knock, to make one jealous or appassionated in love, to make ones heart to
pant. Martelletto, Martellino, a little hammer. Martello, a hammer, a sledge, a
carpenters mallet. Also jealousy or suspicion in love: panting or throbbing of
the heart. Martera, a bakers kneading or boulting tubbe. Martiale, a martial
man, a man of Mars his constitution. Martialista, a martialist of the nature of
Mars. Martinacci, a kind of ravenous cormorant or such foul. Martinello, a
gaffell, a rack or bender of a bow. Martinisti, martinists, of Martins
profession. Martingalla, a martingall about a horse. Martino, taken for the
arse or bumme of a man. Martin pescatore, a fish so called, resembling a
frogge: in latin Piscatrix. Martinello, Martinetto, a bender, rack or gaffell
of a crosse-bowe. Martino pescatore, a kings fisher. Also a kind of fish.
Martire, a martyr, one suffering in witness of another. Martire, Martirio,
affliction, torment, martyrdom. Martirizzare, to martyr, to torment, or
afflict. Martora, a beast called a martin, whose furre is very dear.
Martorella, a young martine, or a she martin. Martori, the furre of martins.
Martoria, as Martorella. Martorizzare, as Martirizzare. Martoriare, as
Martirizare. Martoro, Martorio, as Martire. Marturio, as Martire. Marubia,
Egrimonie, the herb horehound or Marub. Maruca, as Ma^ruca. Marucco, a
prating fool, or selfe-conceited ass. Maruda, a kind of Greek measure.
Marulose, a kind of salt fish. Maruzza, a kind of shell fish. Marza, as Marcia.
Also a grass, a plant, a scien or an imp. Marzapane, marchpane. Also a panter
fish. Marzacotto, an instrument or tool that p^tters use. Marzarolo, a haggard
hawk. Marzemino, in latin Armisium, a kind of wine. Marzire, as Marcire.
Marzo, the month of March. Also as Marcio. Marzocca, a game at cards used in
Italy. Marzocco, a nickename for a dog, an Island cur. Also an ape, a
pusse-cat, a munkie or pug. Marzolino, a kind of cheese in Florence. Marzone,
the fish we call a gudgeon. Mascalzonare, to play the rogue, rascal, base and
abject fellow. Mascalzone, a rogue, a rascal, a base, an abject shifting
companion. Mascara, a mask, a vizzard, a covert. Mascarare, to mask, to
revel, to mum, to cloak, to hide. Mascarata, a masking, a mask, a mumming or
reuelling. Mascarone, a chimney sweepers vizzard to keep the dust from his
face. Mascarpa, a kind of fresh cheese or thick clouted cream. Mascella, a
iaw, a chap, a cheek, the cheek bone, the iawe bone, the mandible, or iaw
wherein the teeth are fixed. Mascellare, belonging to the iaw bone. Denti
mascellari, the cheek teeth or grinders. Mascellone, a box, a blow, a clap or
whirret on the cheeks Maschera, as Mascara. Mascherare, as Mascarare.
Mascheraro, a mask or vizard maker, a masker or mummer. Mascherata, as
Mascarata. Maschile, male, masculine, of man kind. Also manly or manlike.
Maschio, a male, a mankind, a masculine. Also a keep or hold or fort, or
tower in the mid of a castle, a strong tower or cittadell. Mascolino, as
Maschile. Mase, but if, but what if. Maselli, something about minerals.
Masnada, a company, crew, knot, rout, huddle or cluster of knaves or thieves.
Masnadiero, a ruffler, a swashbuckler, a swaggerer, a high way thief, a
hackster. Massa, a mass, a heap, a store, a huddle, a pile, a wedge, a lump,
a chaos of any thing, a cub, a haie mow or stacke. Also paste. Massacara, a
kind of shrimps or praunes. Massara, Massaia, a household or kitching woman
servant, a kitching drudge, a huswife. Massare, to heap together, to gather,
heap or pile or lump up together. Massario, stacke-fish. Massaritie, all
manner of household stuff or implements. Massaritioso, thriftie, full of good
husbandry. Massaro, Massaio, a groom or household servant, a husbandman, a
bailife or ouerseer, a good husband, a thriftie or thriuing man. Also
stock fish. Massata, as Massa. Massera, as Massara. Masseritie, as Massaritie.
Masseritioso as Massaritioso. Massero, as Massaro. Massi, heaps, lumps, cubs,
hillocks, or little hills. Massiccio, Massiuo, massy, lumpish, substantial,
thick, tough, heavy, full. Massima, as Coppa di Gioue. Massima, a maxim, a
principle, a rule, a specialtie, an axiom. Also excellent, high, chief, or
most good. Massime, Massimamente, especially, namely, principally, chiefly,
most of all. Massimo, greatest or most in estimation, most worthy, noble, and
excellent. Masso, a rock, a shelfe, a cliff, or a shallow standing in the sea,
a mass, a heap, a lump. Mastella, a bathing, washing, or bucking tub.
Mastellaro, a couper or tub-maker. Mastelletta, Mastellino, a little tub, a
bowl, a trough, a tray, or such vessels of brass as be set by a cupbord of
plate to put pots of drink in them. Mastello, a tub of any kind, a bruers or
vintners fat, a trough, or washingbowle. Also a kind of measure of liquid
things. Masticare, to chaw, to chew, to eat, to gnaw, to play on the bit, to
champ. Masticatorio, a champing, or chawing bit for a horse, any thing that
chaweth. Masticatura, a chawing, chewing, eating, or gnawing, or playing on the
bit. Mastice, a gum we call mastike. Mastinare, to play the curre, to be
doggish. Mastino, a mastie dog. Mastrare, to teach, to master, to instruct.
Mastro, as Maestro. Mastro d' ascia, a hewing carpenter. Mastro di campo, a
marshall of the field. Mastro di casa, a steward, or controuler of a house.
Mastrozzo, a clout, a wad, or roll of cloutes, as milke-maides carry things
upon their heads. Mastruca, a garment or robe made of wolves, deeres, or goats
skins. Masturzo, the weed we call watercresses. Masuole, the name of a
roapemakers or glassemakers tool. Matapane, a kind of base piece of coin.
Matara, a maund to put bread in. Mataraccio, Matarazzo, a mattresse. Matarazzo,
a mattres, or flock-bed. Matarozza, a wood-cleauers beetle. Matarozza,
something about a piece of ordinance or bell, the sinnewes wherewith the
clapper of a bell is hanged up. Matassa, a skeane of thread or yarne. Also a
bundle or cluster. Matassara, a reeler of yarne or thread. Matassare, to make
or reele up in skeines. Also to kneade paste. Matassina, a little skeine or
lock of wool. Materaccio, Materazzo, as Matarazzo. Materazzaro, an vpholster,
a mattres maker. Matarozzolo, a bunch to hang keys at. Materia, a matter,
stuff, or substance whereof any thing is framed. Also a thing. Also occasion.
Materia, madness, folly. Materiale, material, substantial, made of any
matter. It is also taken for a foolish, grosseheaded or shallowheaded fellow.
Materna, Materno, motherlie, maternall, of the mother, of the mothers side.
Matematica, or Mathematica, the art or profession or knowledge in mathematike,
which is skill in Augurie, Geometry and Astronomy, or to cast natiuities.
Matematicale, mathematical or pertaining to the Mathematickes. Matematico, a
Mathematician, he that has cunning in Augurie, geometry and Astronomy, one
that casts ones nativity. Materozzolo, as Matterozzolo. Matesia, Mathesia,
learning by demonstration. Maticare, to heal the shrunken sinews in a horse.
Matina, as Mattina. Matinata, as Mattinata. Matita, a thing to color withal,
as blacklead or oker. Matonzini, a kind of goldsmiths work in chains so
called. Matre, a mother, a damme. Also the matrix or womb of a woman. Also a
disease in women called the mother. Matre magna, the earth, for it is the
general mother of all things. Dura matre, the hard and thick pannicle or
membrane, which in compassing the brain about gathers the same not
straightly and closely together, but loosely and in remiss order, after the
manner that Pericardio inuolueth the heart: Pia matre the caules of filmes of the
brain. Matregna, a stepdame, or mother in law. Matremma, mother mine, my
mother. Matrebosco or selua, Woodbine, or honey suckle. Matre perla, mother of
pearl. Matricaria, feuerfeu, whitewoort or motherwoort. Matricali vapori, as
Prefocatione. Matrice, the matrix, mother, or womb of a woman. Matricida, the
murderer of his mother. Matricidio, the murdering of ones mother.
Matricolare, as Matriculare. Matricula, a role or check, or catalogue or
register of names. Also a sea snaile or Venus shell. Matriculare, to
matriculate, to enregister, or admit of a society or university.
Matriculatione, a matriculation, registring, or admitting. Matrigna, as
Matregna. Matrignale, like a stepdame, unnaturally, unkindly. Matrimoniale, of
or belonging to marriage. Matrimoniare, to marry, to wedde, to spouse.
Matrimonio, a matrimony, a marriage, a wedding, a wedlock. Matrona, a matron,
a sage dame, a grave sober woman. Matronale, matrone-like, gravely, soberlie.
Mattacchione, a merry lad, a good fellow, a simple gull. Mattacciuola, a
silly fool, a simple gull. Mattacini, a kind of antique dance or morris
used in Italy. Mattalone, a gull or ninnie, a patch, a meacocke. Mattana, has
bin used in jest for Mattina. Also a madding or gadding humor. Mattapane, a
kind of base little coin. Mattare, to play the fool, gull, or noddie, to
become foolish, to mate or give a mate. Mattarie, foolish toys, fooleries,
mad tricks, sotteries. Mattarozza, the head or big end of a beetle or iron
crow or club. Mattea, as Poauola. Also as Mattana. Matteggiare, to play the
fool or coxcomb, to become foolish. Mattelico, a foolish conceited fellow, a
gul. Mattera, as Madia. Matterie, fooleries, foolish or mad tricks. Mattero, a
stick, a truncheon, a cudgel, but properly a butchers prick, a pegge, a
pin. Matterozzolo, a gull, a noddie, a fool, a patch. Also a bunch or knob
at a bunch of keys. Matresco, foolish, mad, fond. Mattezza, madness, folly,
fondnes, foolishness. Matti, a rope-makers cart, which as the rope twists so
it creepes. Also fools Matrina, a morning, a forenoone, early in the morning.
Mattinata, a morning space, a mornings work, mornings music or hunts up
played in a morning under ones window. Also a mattins. Mattinare, to pray in
the morning, to say mattins. Mattino, as Mattina. Also mattins sung in
churches. Matto, mad, fond, foolish, simple, a mad, foolish simple gul. Also a
mate or checkmate at chesse. Also the middle or ninth pin at keeles, or nine
pins, the mistres bowl to cast at. Mattonaio, Mattonaro, a brick-layer, a
brickler, a brickmaker. Mattonare, to paue or to lay with bricks. Mattonato,
paued with bricks, laid with bricks, a pauement, a street or market place.
Also a fool borne. Mattone, a brick or little pauing stone, a square red
stone. Mattonelle, a weauers tool. Mattoni cotti, baked brickes, red bricks.
Mattoni crudi, vnbaked brickes, white bricks. Mattonelli, Mattoncelli, little
brickes or square tyles. Mattoniera, a brick-kill. Mattonzini, a kind of work
in chains of gold used in Italy. Mattorelle, some instrument or part about a
weauers loome. Mattotta, a queen, a harlot, a gill, a minx gixie or trull.
Mattutina, early, or morning, or morn, La matutina rosa. Mattutino, mattins
or morning prayer. Also early in the morning. Also of the morrow or morning.
Maturare, as Maturire. Maturezza, ripenes, judgment, prudence, consideration.
Maturire, risco, rito, to be or wax ripe, to ripen, to come to full grouth,
bigness, and perfection, to become mellowe, to grow due. Maturita, ripenes, ripe
age, mellownesse, perfection, maturitie, good season, time convenient. Maturo,
ripe, aged, old, sage, mellowe, fit, convenient. Also grave, wise, discreet,
considerate, perfect, constant. Also due as any payment is, debito maturo, a
due debt. Mauro, the graie color of a horse, a dark graie. Mauseolo, a great
rich tomb or grave, or monument. Maza, a kind of meat made of meal, milk,
oil, and water that countrymen were wont to eat. Mazza, a clubbe. Also a
beetle to cleave wood with. Also a pensioners polaxe. Also a great sledge or
hammer. Look Andar' alla mazza. Also a mace or any thing with a great knob at
the end of it. Mazzabuo, a butcher, an ox killer. Mazza cani, a dogs-slayer.
Mazzacaballo, a great knobbed cudgel, a club. Mazzacara, the tender part of
any bird. In a goose we call it the soul. Also a kind of shrimps or praune.
Mazzacare, to bruise, to beat black and blew. Mazzachera, an angling rod, a
fishing pole. Mazzacotto, a kind of stuff whereof glass is made.
Mazzaferrata, an iron club. Mazzafrusto, a sling to hurl stones withal. Also
a club with some chain or stone or lead or iron fastened to it. Mazzagattone, a
killer of cats, a bugbeare to fear children with. Mazza gente, a killer or
queller of people, a man queller. Mazzapengolo, as Mazzaruolo. Mazzare, to
kill, to slay, to quell, to brain, to knock on the head. Mazza sorda, the
herb cats tail or flags. Mazzaruolo, a sprite, a hag, a hobgoblin, a
robin-goodfellow, a hodg poker, a lar in the chimney. Mazzasorgij, a
rat-catcher, a rat-killer. Mazzata, a blow given with a cudgel or a club.
Mazzenetta, a kind of shrimp or praune. Mazzera, as Mazziero, as Mazza.
Mazzerare, to diue, to cast, to steep or lay in water, as Macerare, Also to
knock or kill with a club. Mazzetto, a little bunch, or bundle, a bu^ch of
cards. also a little mace or verge born before Princes. Also a nosegaie or
posie of flowers, a sheafe or handful of corn or such like. Mazzetta,
Mazzuola, a kind of little anuile that goldsmithes use. Mazzicare, to swallow
or glut down. Mazziere, Mazziero, a mace bearer, a verger, a sergeant of the
mace. Also a halbardier or poleaxe man, such as the Queen of Englands
gentlemen pencioners are. Mazzina, a sheafe, a handful or bundle Also a little
club. Mazzo, a heap, a mass, a lump, a bundle, a sheafe, a bottle or wad of
straw, a bunch, a club, a hammer, a sledge, a beetle. Also a codde or cod-fish.
Some take it for a sea-tench. Some use it also for a whiting mop. Mazzo di
siori, a nosegaie, a posie or bunch of flowers. Mazzocca, as Mazza. Mazzoccola,
as Mazzuola, a woman's roll or rowler for her head. Mazzuola, a little club,
bunch, bundle, sledge or beetle, or mallet. Mazzuolo, a little bunch, a
handful, a poesy of flowers, a nosegaie, a little sheafe or club. Me, me,
meselfe, to me, to meselfe, from me, from meselfe. Also mine. Me, used for
Meglio, better. Mea, mine, mine own. Meabile, that which runs or passes
and glideth away easily. Meandro, a winding, a turning or a crankling in and
out. Meanta, a kind of water foul. Meare, to go or pass on further. Meato,
gone or passed on further. Also a way, a passage or moving course. Also the
pores or holes in any body. Mecanico, mechanical, base, vile, a workman in whom
there is a good hand and a good wit, a handicrafts man, a man of an occupation.
Meccere, as Messere, but rather in ill part and as a nickename, as we say sir
knave. Meccole, a kind of disease in a horses legs. Mecenato, a Mecenas, a
patron, a favorer of learning. Meco, with me, together with me. Meco medesmo,
or stesso, with me self. Medaglia, a jewel, a monument, any embossed or
graven work, a bruche, an ouch. It is also taken for a woman's bum or gear.
Also any ancient coin. Madaglietta, any little brouch, ouch, jewel, monument
or ancient coin. Medaglista, a ieweller or an antiquarie of old coins. Medea,
a kind of precious stone, black with veins in it, yielding a sweat like
saffron, and taste like wine. Medela, has been used for a medicine or
physic. Medesimamente, likewise. Also in such sort. Medesimo, self,
selfsame, same, the same. Medemo, Medesmo, idem. Mediale, a black sacrifice
which was offered at noone day. Mediane vene, the middle vein or black
vein, branches of Cefalica and Basilica, constituting the common vein in the
arm. Mediante, by means, through, by. Mediastino, that partition which is
made by certain thin skins, dividing the whole breast from the throat to the
midriffe into two bosoms or hollowes: the one on the right side, the other on
the left Mediate, by means or intercession. Mediatore, a mediator, an
intercessor. Medicale, Medicabile, curable, medicinable, that may be cured.
Medica, a kind of clauer grass or Spanish trefoile. Also a woman physician.
Medicamento, a medicine, a medicament a salve, a curing, a physic, a remedy,
a slibber sauce. Medicame, as Medicamento. Medicante, a physician, a leach.
Medicare, to cure, to heal, to dress, to give physic, to salve, to leach.
Medicastro, an empirike, a foolish physician, a horse-leach. Medicina,
Medecina, physic, a medicine or purgation, the art of curing the sick.
Medicinale, Medecinale, medicinable, good for physic. Medicinare, as
Medicare, to practice physic. Medico, a physician, a leach. Also a kind of
tree in Media which at all times has blossoms. Apples half ripe, and apples
ripe; which when they fall, others come presently in their place. Medimno, a
certain measure used in Greece. Medio, the middle finger of a hand. Also a
kind of black stone. Also a kind of herb. Mediocre, mean, indifferent,
moderate, not too big nor too little. Mediocrita, a mediocritie, an
indifferency, a mean, a measure. Meditare, to meditate or muse with the
mind, to ponder or consider, or study with diligence. Meditatione, a
meditation or musing, a deep discreet consideration, an exercise of the mind.
Mediteraneo, in the middle of the land, in the maine land, far from the sea,
in land country. Meditore, a mower of hay. Medolla, the marrow, pith,
substance or core of any thing. Meffe no, No, no no, no in good sooth, no by my
fay, no sir. Mefite, as Mephite. Mege, a disease in horses feet. Megge, a kind
of sea fish. Megistani, governors, princes, great men, states, nobles, heroes.
Megliaccio, as Migliaccio. Megliarina, a bird called a yellow hammer, a golden
hammer or yowlring. Meglio, Megliore, better, or best, rather. sooner, more, Io
amerei meglio. Megliorare, to mend, to redress, to recover, to better.
Meglioramento, a mending, a recovery, Meguei, a tree among the Indians,
whereof their gardens be full, for of the leaves they make their shoes, and use
them in stead of paper to write upon: of the juice thereof they make wine,
vinegar, honnie, and sugar, the fruit thereof and the roots are very good
meat. Mei, a kind of fish like the Cefalo. Mel', for Mi il, as Mel disse, he
told it me. Mela, any kind of apple. Melabatro, an herb like to camomill.
Melacotogno, the fruit we call a quince. Melacchino, full of honey, honnied,
sweet, a kind of wine in Italy. Melagrana, granata, a Pomegranate. Melagrano,
a Pomegranate tree. Mela insana, a kind of fruit, in latin Melongeua.
Melampiro, an herb full of branches, having a seed like fenigreeke. Melampo,
black-footed, a dogs name used of some poets. Melampodio, an herb called
black hellebor. Melanconia, Melanconico, as Maninconico. Melancio, an orange
tree. Melandrino, a kind of broad flat fish. Melaneto, a bird called a Saker.
Melangole, a kind of cytron, or limon. Also the parings of them, or of other
fruits. Melane, a stone which yields a juice. Melaneo, cole-blacke, a dogs
name so called. Melano, sweet like honey. Melanteria, a kind of black or
ink wherewith physicians use to consume putrified flesh. Melantio, the herb
narde, gitte, or pepperwort. Also a kind of monstrous sea fish. Melanuro, a
kind of fish called a sea breame. Melanzana, the herb mad or raging apple.
Melarancia, an orange. Melarancio, an orange tree. Melare, to sweeten with
honey. Melato, sweetened with honey, honied, sweet, of the color of honey.
Mele, bonie. Also any kind of apples. Also a man's or woman's bum, arse, or
buttocks. Mele cotogna, a quince. Mele d'api, stone-honie, bee-honie. Mele di
canna, has bin used for sugar. Melega, the name of an herb: some take it for
a kind of corn. Melensaggine, foolishnes, or simplicity of wit. Melensare,
to become or play the gull or simple fool. Melerugiadoso, as Manna.
Melesiogallo, a bird called a witwall. Melenso, foolish, gullish, simple
witted. Melia, a tree bringing forth a pleasant fruit. Also a kind of earth
used in physic of the virtue of allom; painters use it to make their colors
last the longer. Meliceride, impostumes that run a kind of matter like honey.
Melico, musical, or musician-like. Melicrato, a drink of water and honey
sodden together. Melifero, Mellifero, bearing or breeding honey. Melificare, to
make or bring forth honey. Melifluo, Mellifluo, honnied, sweet, mellifluous.
Meligine, a mell-dew falling on trees or corn, honie-dew. Meliloquente, a
sweet speaker. Meliloto, the herb melilote, or clauer. Melino, a kind of
sweete-smelling ointment. Also a kind of color that painters use,
honie-colour. Melire, lisco, lito, to honnie, to sweeten, or season with honey.
Melissa, the herb baulme mint, or baulme gentle. Melissofillo, as Melissa.
Melite, a kind of yellow stone, which broken and put in water yields the
savor of honey. Melito, honied, or mixed with honey. Melitena, a kind of
herb. Melitera, a dry medicine serving to fill up the hollownes of ulcers
after they are cleansed. Mellonaggine, as Melensaggine. Mellone, the fruit we
call a musk melon. Also a gull, a log garhead, or a fool. Also a kind of
play that children use in Italy. Also rowels in the mouth of a horses bit like
melons. Melo, any kind of apple tree. Melochite, a kind of green stone.
Melode, melodious, harmonious, musical, sweetly singing. Melodia, melody,
harmony, sweet singing, a tunable singing, whereof be three kinds, that is to
say Harmonia, Chronia, and Diatonia. Melodioso, melodius, harmonius, sweet
singing. Melogna, a kind of fish or beast. Melonaggine, as Melensaggine.
Melonare, as Melensare. Melone d'acqua, a cucumber. Meloparadiso, the paradise
apple. Meloteragno, a kind of shrub, or weed. Meltusio, the fish we call a
hadock, or a cod. Melza, the spleen or milt of any body. Membrana, a
parchment, a sheepeskin, or vellame, the pill or skin between the bark and
the tree, the uppermost thin skin of any thing, a membrane. Membranza,
remembrance. Membrare, to remember, to join together, to form or shape
limbs, parts, and members in due proportion. Membratura, the settling or
order of members or parts. Membreuole, proportionable, according to true
proportion of limbs. Also mindful. Membro, a member, a limme, or a part of
ones body or any other thing, in an oration it is a short sentence or clause.
Membro virile, the priuities of man. Membroso, as Membruto. Membruto, limmed,
strong, long limmed, having great members. Memfite, a stone fattie and of
diverse colors, in curing or burning any member, it takes away sense and
feeling without any danger. Memorabile, memorable, notable, renoumed, to be
remembered, worthy of remembrance. Memoraggine, as Memoria. Memoranza, as
Memoria. Memorando, as Memorabile. Memoria, memory, mindefulnes, remembrance,
souenance. Also time, days, chronicles, writings, histories, records. Memore,
as Memoroso. Memoreuole, as Memorabile. Memoriale, a memorial, pertaining to
memory, a record, a remembrancer. Memorioso, as Memoroso. Memoroso, mindful,
remembering, memorable, that will remember, that is thankful. Men', for Me ne,
Io men vado. I am going hence. Also for Meno. Mena, behavior, fashion, carriage
of a man. Also a kind of weight. Also a cackrell, because it makes whosoever
eats thereof laxatiue. Some take it for a herring or a pilcherd. Menacordo,
the instrument we call Claricords. Menaculo, a smug, nice, wanton, effeminate
fellow. Menaia, as Manara. Menadi, certain women that were wont to sacrifice
to Bacchus, dancing at the sound of horns, and crying as mad women, carrying
staves wreathed about with vine leaves. Menare, to lead, to bring, to conduct,
to direct, to guide, to frig, to wriggle, to iumble, to wag or stir to and
fro. Menamenti, stirrings, friggings, wriglings, leadings. Menata, a leading, a
bringing, a conduct, a wrigling, a frigging, a iogging, a iumbling. Menatina, a
thrust, a frigling, a wrigling, a iogging, a ierk^. Menar il cazzo, to frig, to
wrigle, to frigle ones et cet. Menar l'agresto, as Menar il cazzo. Menar la
rilla, as Menar il cazzo. Menar la danza, to lead the dance, to begin, to give
the onset. Menar giu, to bring down, to put over as a hawk does her meat.
Menar moglie, to marry or bring home a wife. Menar le mani, to lay about, not
to be idle, to go freely about a matter. Menar alla mazza, to bring to
destruction. Menare i mantici, to blow the bellows. Menar il cane per l'aia,
to undertake some foolish action. Menar tanta puzza, to keep a stinking coile.
Menar per il naso, to lead by the nose, to make a fool of one. Menar di
punta, to thrust or foine at. Menarosto, a jack to turn the spit, a
turnespit. Menar l'arosto, to turn the spit. Menar di taglio, to strike
edgling, with purpose to cut. Menar le calcole, to be a free whore, to occupye
freely. Menatore, a leader, a guide, a conducter, a directer, a bringer.
Menchiatte, the name of a game at Cards. Menchia, sport, pleasure, game, glee,
pastime. Also a woman's gear. Menchiattaro, a gull, a fool, a cheater, a
cogger, a shifter. Menchionarie, foolish, sottish, gullish, simple tricks.
Menchionare, to gull one, to cosen, to flout in words, and jesting. Menchione,
a fool, a sot, a gull, a coxecombe, a patch, a noddie, a freshman. Menda, a
fault, an error, a blemish, trespass, damage, condemnation, or a fee. Mendace,
false, lying, untrue, leasing, a liar, a counterfeite. Mendacia, a lie, a
leasing, an untrue tale, an untruth. Menda squarci, a botcher, a findefault.
Mendatore, a find fault, a Momus, a Zoilus, a mender. Mendicare, to beg, to
procure, and get. Mendicante, a beggar. Also begging. Mendicanti frati, begging
friars. Mendicita, beggerie, poverty, beggerlines. Mendico, a beggar, a needy
poor body, one that goes a begging. Mendo, false, that may be mended,
faulty. Mendose, with fault, corrupted, full of errors, that may be mended.
Mendoso, faulty, that may be mended. Men dotto, less learned. Also less then
eight. Mend'uno, less then one. Mean, a little fish that in winter is white,
and in summer black. Menescalco, as Mariscalco. Menestra, any kind of pottage
or broth. Menestrare, to dress meat, to make pottage, to kich up potage.
Menestrella, Menestrina, any kind of fine pottage or broth. Menestrino, a
little porringer, a pottage dish. Also some fine kind of pottage. Menfite, a
stone fattie and of diverse colors, in curing and burning any member it takes
away sense and feeling without any danger. Menia, a certain pillar in Rome
whereunto fugitives and thieves were bound. Menince, the thin skin or filme
inwrapping the brain. Dura menince, as Dura matre. Menna, a dug, a pap, a
teat, an vdder. Menno, as Menco. Meno, less, also I bring or lead. Menola, the
fish herring or pilcherd, or a cackrell, as Mena. Menoma part, the least part.
Menomare, to diminish, to lessen. Menomamento, a diminishing or making less.
Menome, low, least, base or abject. Menomo, a simple gul, a shallow wit. Also
the least. Menospreggiare, to despise, to contemn, to scorn, to vilify.
Mensa, a table or board to eat meat on, a square table, a merchants table or
counting board. Also the broader part of the grinding teeth which chaweth the
meat. Mensale, pertaining to a table or board. Menscredenza, misbeliefe,
incredulity. Menso, foolish, gullish, without order, form or proportion.
Mensola, a stay of stone or timber, carpenters call it a bragget: the mazones
a corbell; and some others a shouldring piece. Also a little table. Menstruale,
of or pertaining to a month, or to the monthly disease of women, menstruall.
Menstruo, a woman's monthly terms or flowers or fluxes or issues. Also
quicke-siluer according to Alchimistes phrases. Mensula, as Mensola. Menta, the
herb called mint. Also a man's yard. Menta greca, a kind of sage called Roman
sage. Mentagra, a foul tetter or scab running over the face, breast or neck
of some. Mentale, mental, pertaining to memory or mind. Mentastro, a kind of
herb or weed. Mente, the highest and chiefest part of the soul, the mind,
understanding, wit, memory, intent, will, advise, remembrance, counsel,
prudence, judgment, thought, opinion, imagination, conceit, knowledge, heart,
wisdom, providence or foreknowledge of man. Mentecaggine, madness, foolishnes,
folly. Mentecatto, Mentecato, ravished of his wits, senseless, out of his
wits, besides himself. Mentecattaggine, as Mentecaggine. Mentegate, a kind of
paste meat so called. Mentionare, to name, to mention, to ming, to nominate.
Mentione, mention, naming, minging, nomination. Mentire, mento, mentito, to
lie, to belie, to give the lie, to speak falsely, to forge, to feign, to
counterfeit, to disguise. Mentito, lide, belide, spoken falsely. Also the
party belide. Also false or counterfeit or untrue, fained, forged, disguised.
Mentita, a lie, a leasing, an untruth. Also false, untrue or counterfeit.
Mentitamente, falsely, untruly, leasingly, lyingly. Mentitore, a lier, a
leaser. Mento, the chinne or under chap of any creature. Mentoare, Mentouare,
to name, to mention, to ming, to nominate. Mentole, a man's or woman ingendring
parts or priuities or quaint. Mentouanza, naming, mencioning, minging or
mention. Mentone, as Mento. Mentre, whilst, while that, in the mean time, so
long as. Mentre che, whilst that, while that, so long as. Mentuccia, young
mint. Also as Mentola. Mentula, as Mentola. Menutezza, as Minutezza. Menzogna,
a lie, an untruth, a leasing. Menzognare, as Mentire. Menzogniere, as
Mentitore. Meo, has been used for Mio, mine or my. Also the herb spign^ll,
^ew, beare-woort or baldmoney. Mephite, a stink or damp of corrupt water mixed
with mud or brimstone. Merauiglia, a wonder, a marvel, a rare thing, a
miracle. Merauigliare, to wonder, to mar^^ile. Merauiglioso, wonderful,
meruellous. Mercadante, a merchant, a trafficker, a chapman, a trader.
Mercadantia, merchandise or ware. Mercadantare, as Mercantare. Mercadantesco,
mrechantlike. Mercantare to bargain, to cheapen, to play the chapman, to
merchant, to marting. Mercante, as Mercadante. Mercantia, as Mercadantia.
Mercantesca mano, a hand that merchants use to write. Mercantesco, merchant
like. Mercantile, merchant like, full of merchandise or traffic.
Mercatantare, as Mercantare. Mercantantuccio, as Mercantuccio. Mercantuccio, a
poor silly merchant. Mercatantia, as Mercadantia. Mercatante, as Mercadante.
Mercare, as Marchiare, as Mercantare. Mercatare, as Mercantare. Mercato, a
market, a market place, a fair a mart. Also cheapned, bargained or trafickt
or merchandized. Also cheap, as Buon mercato, good cheap. Also cauterised,
marked or branded with a hot iron. Mercato caro, dear bought, very dear.
Mercatura, the trade of merchandise, a bargaining. Merce, as Mercatantia, as
Mercede. Also mercies, thanks, gramercies, commiseration, pity, ruthe,
compassion. Also wages or hire, the reward of science. Mercede, a reward, a
meede, a hire. Mercenale, as Mercenario. Mercenario, mercenarie, that labors
for hire, a hireling, corrupted with money. Merceria, Merciaria, mercerie ware.
Merciaio, Merciaro, a mercer, a peddler, a haberdasher of small wares. Merco, a
white or but, or mark to shoot at. As Marchio. Mercole, Mercoledi, wednesday.
Mercol, Mercoldi, wednesday. Mercore, Mercoredi, idem. Marcorella, the herb
Mercury or dogs caul. Mercorella saluatica, wild Mercury or dogs caul.
Mercuriale, of the nature of the planet Mercury. As Mercorella. Mercurio,
Mercury or quickesiluer. Also the God of eloquence and merchandise: he is
feigned to be son of Jupiter and Ma^^. And is also called the messenger of
the Gods. Merda, the excrement or ordure of man or beast, a turd. Merdare, to
beray, to beshite. Merdoso, beraide, beshitten, dirtie, full of turdes.
Merenda, a repast between dinner and supper, a nunchin, a beuer and
andersmeate. Merendare, to eat between dinner and supper. Merendina, a
hungry scambling, nunchion, or andersmeate. Merendone, an idle loggerhead,
good but to feed, that will eat six meals a day. Meretrice, a whore, a
harlot, a strumpet. Meretricio, whoorish, like a strumpet, adulterous, or
whooredome. Mergere, mergo, mersi, merso, to diue, to duck, to drench, to
plunge, to dippe, to sink, to drown under water. Merso, diued, duckt,
drenched, plunged, dipped, sunk or drowned over head and ears. Mergo, a diuer,
a di-dapper, or arsefoote. Also a name common to sundry birds of the sea as a
cormorant, a seagull, or a pewet, etc. Mergolare, to build with pinnacles or
battlements. Mergolo, as Mergo. Also a pinnacle or battlement. Mergone, a
diuer, a didapper. Meri, the throat or winde-pipe. Mericonda, a kind of meat,
sauce, or pudding. Meridiano, the noone mark, the meridian noone tide, a
meridian. Meridionale, of or belonging to the meridian or to the south.
Meriggiare, to dine, to feed at noone. Also to watch and not sleep in the
day time. Meriggio, midday, noone-tide, highnoone. Also the south part of the
world. Merismo, a figure called also Distributione. Meritamente, woorthily,
deseruingly, deservedly, justly. Meritare, to merit, to deserve, to earne.
Meriteuole, deserving, worthy, meriting. Meritissimo, most worthy. Merito,
a merit, a desert. Also a benefit, a deserving, a good turn, a reward, a
merit. Meritorio, meritorious, deserving. Meritrice, as Meretrice. Meritricio,
as Meretricio. Merla, a fish called a whiting or a merling. Merlare, to make or
build with battlements, pinnacles or loope-holes. Also to very, a word of
armorie. Merlato, made or built with battlements, pinnacles, or spikeholes.
Also very, or varrie. Merletti, the several wards of a lock. Merli, little
turrets, spires, pinnacles or battlements upon walls. Merlo, the bird called an
owsell, a mearle, or a blacke-birde: a fish called a merling or a whiting. Some
have used it for the fish Lambena. Gesner says that it is a fish that cheweth
his meat like a beast, and takes it for the gilthead. Merlo alpadico, a bird
that feed, much upon nuts and will crack them. Merlo delle vesti, a guard or
hem, or fringe, or binding of a garment. Merlo di muraglia, the battlements of
a wall. Also loope-holes in a wall. Merlone, Merlotto, a fool, a gull, a dolt,
a patch. Merluzzo, the fish we call a haddocke: others say it is another fish
with white and purple spots on his belly. Mero, mere, simple, sheare or true,
pure without mixture, very right. Merope, a bird that eats bees, whose
nature is to feed and keep his parents, which never com abroad, called a
woodpecker or eate-bee. Merra, used for Menera, the future of Menare. Mertare,
as Meritare. Merso, Look Mergere. Merto, as Merito. Merula, a bird called a
black-mack, an owzell, a mearle, or blackbird. Also a fish called a whiting or
merling. Merzamino, a kind of strong wine so called. Mesa, victuals or
provision for travelers or waifairing men. Also a spokeshaue, or maund for
bread. also a kneding tub Mesale, as Mensale. Mesanca, a fish called in latin
Phycides. Mesareone, as Mesenterio. Mescere, mescio, mescei, mesciuto, to
skinke, fill, or power out wine. Also to mix, to mingle, to meddle or put
together, to blend, to meshe. Mesciuto, skinkt, powered or filde wine, mixed,
mingled, meddled together, blended, meshed. Mescianza, Meschianza, as
Mescolanza. Mesciandola, idem. Meschia, as Mescolanza. Also a braule, a
quarrel, a fray, a hurli-burly. Mesciare, Meschiare, as Mescolare. Mesciere,
as Mescere. Meschina, a maid household servant, a kitchen drudge. Meschinare,
to go a begging, to beg. Meschinello, poor, silly, wretched, pitiful.
Meschinita, wretchedness, sillines, poverty. Meschino, a wretch, miserable,
poor, silly man or groom. Also poor, wretched, silly or miserable.
Meschio, mixed, mingled together. Also a medlie or partie-coloured color.
Mescirobba, an eawer or lauer to give water with, a water pot. Meschita, a
church or temple among the paganes and turks. Mescitore, a skinker, a filler
of wine, a cubboord keeper, a mixer, a mingler, a medler. Mescola, a mazons or
carpenters squire ruler or plummet, a bricklayers trowell. Also a plummers
melting ladle, any kind of ladle or great spoon. also a kind of measure like
unto a bushel or a streeke. Also a medlie, a mixture, a blending, a mesh, a
hochpoch. Also taken for a foolish idle huswife, a sluttish driggle draggle.
Mescolanza, Mescolamento, used for a salet of many sorts of herbs: a minling,
a medlie, a mesh, a melling, a blending, a mixture, a hochpoch or galliemafrey
of diverse things mixed together without order. Mescolare, to mix, to mingle, to
blend, to meddle, to intermeddle, to mash, to mesh, to mell. Mescolato, mixed,
mingled, blended, meddled, intermedled. Also a kind of diverse colored medley
cloth. Also a mixture or blending. Mescolarsi, to intermeddle with. Mescolate,
minglings, mixtures, medlings. Mescolo, as Mescuglio. Mescolino, a little
mixture of diverse things together. Mescugliare, as Mescolare. Mescuglio, a
hochpoch, a medley, a mixture, a mesh, a mash. Mese, a month, the middle
string. Also a-lam-ire in music. Mesenterie vene, branches of the vein
Porta, which convey the juice of the meat concocted from the stomach to the
liver. Mesenterio, the middle of the bowels or intrailes. Also the double fat
skins that fasten the bowels to the back and each to other, and incloseth a
number of veins, being branches of the carrying vein, by which the guts are
nourished, and the juice of the meat concocted is conuaide to the liver to be
made blood. Meseraice vene, as Mesenterie. Mesio, the month of May. Mesochoro,
one that standing among singers gives a sign when they should begin to sing.
Mesocraneo, the crown of the head, the midst of the skull. Mesolabio, an
instrument to find out one or many middle proportional lines. Mesoleuco, a
black precious stone having a white stroke in the midst. Mesomelo, a precious
stone having a black vein parting every color by the midst. Mesopleuria, the
middle space between the ribs. Messa, a mass or sacrifice. Messacara, a kind
of shrimps or praune. Messaggio, a message or embassage. Messaggiere, a
messenger, an ambassador, a pursiuant. Messale, a missall or massebooke.
Messedare, as Mescolare. Messer, Messere, a sir, a master. Messer no, no sir,
no master, no forsooth. Messersi, yea sir, yea forsooth, yea master.
Messettaria, the name of a magistrate or office over brokers in Venice, and to
correct their abuses. Messetti, brokers or messengers that go between man and
man to make bargains, and sell merchandise. Messia, an hebrew word signifiying
our anointed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Messo, a messenger, a pursiuant,
an ambassador, a message, an embassage. Also of Mettere, put, placed, seated,
set, laid, waged, situated. Mestara, as Mestura. Mestiere, Mestieri, Mestiero,
a trade, an occupation, a craft, a mystery. Also need, necessity, lack,
ayling or want. Mestitia, sadness, sorrow, pensiuenes, heaviness of heart. Mesto,
sad, sorrowful, pensive, heavy in heart, woeful, full of lamentation.
Mestola, Mestela, a skummer. Also a ladle or a trowell, as Mescola. Also a
foolish simple idle huswife, that can do nothing but skum a pot. Mestolare, to
stir with a ladle, to kiche up pottage. Mestolone, a noddie-peake, a foolish
fellow, a log gerhead, a slouen. Mestro, Mestruo, as Menstruo. Mestura, any
filthy rotten corrupt matter or bealing. Meta, a bound, a mark, a limit, an
aim or but, or prick to shoot at, a pyramides, a mearestone. It has bin
also taken for a soft turde. Also a beacon. Also a haie reeke, or a stacke.
Also a mark or gole in the field whereunto men or horses do run. Also a staff
or stake set at the end of a race. Meta, Metade, a moytie or half. Metacarpio,
the back of a man's hand. Metacismo, certa incongruita nel parlare. Metadella,
a kind of measure for liquid things. Metafisica, things supernatural.
Metafisico, one that professes things supernatural. Metafora, a metaphor, a
figure, when the word is translated from his proper signification to another.
Metaforico, metaphorical, figurative. Metallaro, a founder or dealer in
metals, a coyner. Metallificarsi, to grow hard or congeale to metal.
Metalessi, a figure whereby a word is put from his common signification.
Metallino, a kind of glistring stone so called. Also of the color of iron or
other metal. Also made of metal. Metalloso, full of metal, having metal
in it. Metamorphosi, a transformation or changing of one likeness or shape into
another. Metaplasmo, a figure called a transformation, when some thing is
necessarily changed. Metafreno, the part of the back that is against the
heart. Metatesi, a transposition, when one letter is put for another.
Metempsicosi, a passing from one body to another of the souls. Meteore, as
Metheore. Meteoria, speculation of high things. Meteoroscopo, a beholder of
high things. in it. Metella, a kind of Indian nut. Meteorologo, a student of
high things, as of stars and planets. Metere, meto, mietei, metuto, to mow
haie or corn, or to reap. Meth, Maguei, as Cardone. Methodo, a ready way to
teach or do any thing, a method. Metheore, meteors, imperfect mixed things,
engendered in the air. Metitore, a mower. Also a measurer, a reaper. Metonomia,
a figure when the cause is put for the effect. Metodico, methodicall. Metodo,
as Methodo. Metoposcopo, a metaposophist, one that by the favor and face of a
man will guess his qualities and conditions. Metope, a kind of dorike work in
building. Also as Metope in latin. Metra, a bishops mytre. Also mitre. Metrare,
to mitre, to versifie, to rhyme. Also to mytre or crown with a mytre as bishops
are. Also to measure. Metraro, a rimer, a mytre^, a measurer. Metrenchito, an
instrument with which phisicions use to convey medicines into the belly.
Metretta, a measure used among the Grecians, containing about eleven gallons.
Metria, any kind of measuring. Metrico, pertaining to measure. Also a Poet.
Metrocomia, a chief village or town about other villages and towns. Metro,
any kind of rhyme, verse or mitre, measure or demension. Metroposcopia, a
divination of men's conditions by looking in their faces. Metroposcopo, one that
looks in ones face and thereby judges his conditions. Metropoli, the chief
head city or town of any land. Metropolitano, a metropolitan, a bishop of a
chief city. Also one of a chief city. Mettere, metto, misi, messo, to put,
to lay, to set, to place, to found, to situate, to wage or lay a wager.
Metutto, Messo, put, laid, set, settled, placed, founded, situated, waged, or
laid a wager. Metter' al'incanto, to put to sale, at who gives most. Metter'
all' ordine, or in ordine, to prepare, to make ready, to set in order. Metter
auanti, to propose, to exhibit, to prefer, to set forward.. Metter' a monte,
to heap up, to swigge the cards. Metter' adosso, to put on, to lay on.
Metter' amore, to settle ones affection. Metter' a fill di spada, to put to the
sword. Metter' a ferro efuoco, to put to fire and sword. Metter' a sacco, to
sack, to spoil, to havoc, to ransacke, to massacre. Metter' a ^schio, to
hazard, to adventure, to endanger. Metter' in voce, to proclaim or publish.
Mettersi a fare, to begin or prepare to do. Metter' in campo, to enter the
listes, to begin, to propose. Metter' in aia, to put a man in hope, to feed a
man with fair words. Also to meddle with business that one has nothing to do
with. Metter' in assetto, to prepare, to settle, to order, to dispose. Metter'
la chiesa sopra il campanile, to set the church upon the steeple, id est, to
set the woman upon the man. Metter' il capello, to put on a hat. Metter in
letto, to go to bed, to lie down in bed, to lay or bring a bed. Metter da
banda, to lay aside, to put bie. Metter' in molle, to lay in steep, to lay
in water. Metter diligentia, to employ or endeavor all diligence. Metter' il
chiauistello al vscio, to lay or set a bar before the door. Metter' il freno,
to put on the bridle, to bridle. Metter' in scritto, to set down in writing.
Metter fuori, to publish, to set forth. Matter in fuga, to put to flight.
Metter in rotta, to overthrow, defeat, or put to flight. Metter in non cale,
to neglect, to despise, not to set by, to care nothing for. Metter' in banco,
to put, set, or lay in a bank, or in safety. Metter' in mare, to go to sea,
to go out into the maine, to put to sea. Metter la faua nel bacello, to put the
bean into the cod. Metter la casa sopra il camino, to put the house upon the
chimney. Mettersile scarpe, to put on his shoes. Mettersi in letto, to go to
bed, to lie down in bed. Metter mano, to set abroch, to broch, to manumitte,
to tame. Metter la via tra le gambe, to begin a journey. Metter paura, to make
one afraid. Metter pegno, to lay a wager. Mettere scala, to ride at an an^re
near the shore, to come near the shore. Mettere vna camiscia, to put on a
sh^rt. Mettersi in ceruello, to call his wits together, to put into his wit.
Mettere sotto, to subdue, to vanquish, to put under. Metter sotto sopra, to
overthrow, to turn topsie turuie. Metter' un pulce nel' orecchio, to put a toie
in ones head. Mettigarzoni, a placer of boys or serving men. Metti massare, a
woman that helps maids to service. Mettitoio, the name of a tool that
goldsmiths use. Mettitore, a putter, a setter, a laier. Mezza, a kind of
measure holding about a pottle. Also rotten, ripe or mellowe. Also half or a
moitie. Mezzaaria, is taken among horsemen when a horse does bound high
continuing it without rest, whereof comes mezzaaria aspra, which is, bounding
with a yerke. Mazzalancia, as Lanciere, a demilance. Mezzalana, a stuff called
linsic woolsie, or any stuff made of half wool and half silk or linen.
Mezzana, a sail in a ship called the poope or misen sail. Also a mean string
of an instrument. Mezzanamente, by way of mediation, or intercession. Also
meanly or indifferently. Mezzanare, to mediate, to deal between others.
Mezzanaro, a mediator, an vmpier, an arbitrator, a compromiser. Mezzano, a
mean or countertenour in music or singing. Also a mean man between great
and little. Also a mediator, an intercessor, an arbitrator, an vmpier.
Mezzanita, a mean, a help, an occasion, a cause, a mediocritie. Mezzara, a
play called nine pinnes, or keeles. Mezzare, to divide, to keep the middle, to
mellow, to rot as fruit. Mezzaruola, a kind of small wine measure. Mezza
sella, the second kind of saddle used to coultes. Also the time of the ryder,
or the horses exercises. Look Cauallo and Huomo. Mezzene, the middle rib of a
piece of bacon or porke, or brest-peece of porke. Mezziauolo, a dai-laborer, a
mean husbandman. Mezzenoci, a kind of drinking glass. Mezzetta, a kind of
wine measure, it is about a pint. Mezzina, idem. Mezzo, a mean, an occasion,
a cause, a way, a help. Also half, middle, moitie, mid, midst, or mid part.
Also mellow or rotten ripe. Mezzo di, noone-tide, midday, noone, high noone.
Also the south. Mezzo giorno, midday, noone-tide. Also the south part of the
world. Mezzo sapore, neither sower nor sweet. Mezzule, the middle boords of
the bottom of a barrel, the middle ribs. Mi, to me, my self, from me. Also a
note in music. Mia, Mie, mine, my. Miagolare, to meaw as a cat does. Also as
Nicchiare. Miagro, the herb Cameline. Miarese, a kind of great weight used in
Italy. Mica, a whit, a jot, a crum, a little, a nothing, a corn, a grain, or
very small quantity of any thing. Micancalo, cockle, or field niggel weed.
Micca, scot and lot, a shot, a payment of any reckoning, any fees. Micchi, used
for A me, to me. Miccia, a niggardly, paltrie, scuruie, piskitchen wench, a
fool, a gull. Also a pug, an ape, a munkie, a pusse-cat. Miccie, a kind of
food that asses feed upon. Miccino, a little bit, mangiare a miccino, to eat
minsingly, a crum, a jot. Miccio, a week of a candle. Also a match to fire
with. Micco, a beck, a sign, a nod. Michelazzo, an idle, lazy, loytring
fellow. Micia, a pusse-kat, a kitlin. Micida, a manslayer, a murderer.
Micidiale, a murderer, a manqueller. Micidio, murder, manslaughter. Micista, a
kind of powder made of dride beef, which in Earberie, and among the
Fuoruscitos of Italy they use to give to their horses and soldiers to keep
them in breath: and they say, that a horse with half a pound of it will go a
hundredth miles upon the spur, and they never go without some. Micola, a
crumme, a whit, a jot. Micolare, to crum, to cramble. Micolino, a little crum,
whit, jot, or nothing. Miconij, people that be commonly balde of the Island of
Mycos. Microcosmo, a little world. Also used for man. Micrologia, curiosity
about things of no value. Midolla, the marrow that is in the bones, or pithe.
Midolla del'albero, the pithe of a tree. Midollone, the pith of any thing.
Midolloso, full of marrow, strong, lusty. Midriasi, a disease in the eyes,
which though it change not the color of them, yet it makes things seem less
then they are. Mie, Miei, mine, my, my own. Mielare, as Melare. Miele, honey.
Mietere, mieto, mietei, mietuto, to mow grass or corn, to reap. Mietuto,
mowed, reaped. Mietitore, a mower, a reaper. Miga, as Mica. Miglia, miles, of
thousand paces. Migliaccio, a kind of pottage, tarte or custard made of millet
and hogs blood. Migliaia, Migliara, Migliaro, thousands, a thousand.
Migliarese, a kind of coin in Italy. Miglio, a mile. Aso a grain called
millet, or hirse. Miglioranza, Miglioramento, a bettering, or mending,
mendment. Migliorare, to better, to mend. Migliore, better. Also best.
Miglioria, as Miglioranza. Migliosole, the herb gromell. Mignatta, a
horseleach or bloodsucker. Mignatti, a kind of silke-worme. Mignattola,
Mignera, as Mignatta. Mignocco, a gull, a meacocke, a silly fool. Mignone, a
minion, a fauorit, a dilling, a minikin, a darling. Mignore, used for Minore.
Migrare, to remove or go to dwell from one place to another. Also to return
back again. Also to issue or go out. Migratione, a removing from place to
place, a returning back. Mila, thousands. Milanta, a number numberless,
spoken skoffingly. Milantare, to brag, to crake, to vaunt, to boast.
Milantarie, braggings, crakes, vaunts, boastings. Milantatore, as Milantiere.
Milantesimo, the thousand in number or order. Milantiere, a bragger, a boaster,
a vanter. Milesimo, the thousandth in order. Milia, thousands. Mili, a gold
drawers tool. Miliaia, Miliara, Miliaio, thousands, a thousand. Milicchio, a
surname given to love, id est, pleasant, sweet, mild or gentle. Milione, a
million in number. Also a puttock, a buzzard, a kite or a glade. Miliosole, a
kind of shrub. Militante, militant, fighting, warring. Militare, to
warrefarre, to follow the wars, to fight, to war. Also military, warlike.
Milite, a soldier, a man at arms. Also a knight at arms. Militia, warfare,
military profession, the exercise of war. Mill, a thousand. Millesimo, the
thousandth in order. Millefoglio, milfoile, yarrow or nosebleed. Millepiedi, a
worm having many feet called a furrie or a palmer. Millione, a million in
number. Millosphilo, as Melitena. Milo, a goldsmiths tool. Miluio, a kite, a
puttocke or glade. Miluogo, middle place, in the midst. Milza, as Melza. Also a
filme or skinlet. Mimare, to jest, to play the vice, to scoff, to counterfeit
actions. Mimesi, a figure called imitation or counterfaiting of words and
gestures. Mimico, mimike, jesting, scoffing, full of counterfeit actions. Mimo,
a iester, a vice, a counterfeiter of men's actions, a scoffer, a tumbler.
Mimografo, a writer of wanton matters. Mina, a mine or digging under ground, a
coin of ten crowns. Also a kind of measure for dry things. Minacciare, to
menace, to threaten. Minacciatore, a menacer, a threatner. Minaccie, menaces,
threats, threatenings. Minaccioso, Minaccieuole, threatening, menacing.
Minacciamento, a threatening, a menacing. Minaide, a venomous herb. Minale, a
measure of corn about a bushel. Minare, to mine or dig under ground.
Minatore, a miner or underminer. Minchia, as Menchia. Minchionare, to play the
fool, the gull, the sot or simple ass. Minchionarie, as Menchionarie.
Minchione, as Menchione. Minda, a play called hoodman blind, blind bob or
blindman buffe. Minella, a kind of little measure. Minera, a mine that yields
metals. Minerale, mineral, containing metals. Minerarie, mineral, of or
pertaining to metals. Minestra, as Menestra. Minestrare, as Menestrare.
Minestrino, as Menestrino. Mingherlina, a dainty less, a minnikin smirking
wench. Miniare, to die, to paint, to color or limne with vermilion or sinople
or red lead. Miniatore, a painter or limner with vermilion. Miniatura, a
limning, a painting with vermilion. Minima, a minim in music. Minimamente,
leastly, in no wise, at no hand, in no case, least of all. Minimi, an order of
Friars in Italy so called. Minimo, the least or yoongest, or smallest of all.
Minio, vermilion, a kind of red color or sinople or red lead. Also a limning,
a painting. Ministerio, a ministry, a service, a labor, a vocation, a
function. Ministrale, a minister or officer of justice Ministrare, to minister
unto, to serve, to afford, to offer or afford unto. Ministratore, an
administrator or assign Ministro, a minister, a vicar, a person, a priest.
Also a servant, a squire, an officer, a deputy, an instrument, one that deals
for another. Minone, a kind of game at cards. Minore, less, lesser, the
yoonger, the least. Minoretto, somewhat less, somewhat little. Also a kind of
game so called at tables with dice. Also at cards. Minoringo, one of the least
of a society, as we say one of the court, but none of the counsel. Minotauro,
a minotaure, half a man and half a bull. Minugia, the small guts, the
entrails or garbage of a dear. Also any small thing or little trifles or
shreads or s^raps. Minugiare, to play the ioyner. Minugiere, Minusiere, a
ioyner. Minuire, isco, ito, to diminish, to make less, to abate, to appaire.
Also to favor the voice in singing, as it were to fall from the highest to the
lowest. Minuitione, a diminishing, a diminution, an appairing, an abating.
Minuscula, little, least, smallest. Minuscula lettera, the smallest letter.
Minutaglia, the basest kind of people, the skum of the earth, as Plebe.
Minutaglia dipesce, the fry of fish. Minutamente, peece-meale, distinctly,
particularly. Minu^are, to mince or cut in small pieces, to shread. Minuta, a
rough draught or copy of any writing. Also small as powder. Minutezza,
smalnes, littlenes. Minutia, a particularity, a copy. Minutie, as Minugia.
Minutille, all manner of small wares. Minuto, small minced, shredded small, a
minime or a minute. Also an herb so called. Minuzzare, as Minutare. Minuzzami,
mammockes, pieces, scraps, vailes, shreads. Minuzzarie, mincings, shreddings,
small pieces. Minuzzolare, as Minutare. Minuzzolarie, as Minuzzarie. Minuzzoli,
mammockes, shreads, little pieces. Mio, Miei, mine or my. Mira, an a^me, a
leuelling, an intent or purpose. Also the sight hole of a stone bow or any
other shooting artillery. Mirabao, a prying knave, a sneaking companion, an
cawes dropper. Mirabile, admirable, wonderful, marvelous, strange.
Mirabilita, wonderment, admiration. Mirabolani, a nut of Egypt called of the
Apothecaries a Ben. Also a kind of dainty plum. Also a kind of precious
sweet ointment. Mirabondo, admiring, looking with admiration. Mirach, as
Abdomen. Miracolo, a miracle, a wonder, a monstrous thing, a thing exceeding
ordinary reason. Miracoloso, miraculous, wonderful. Miraglio, an admiral of
the sea. Also a looking gl^sse. Miragliato, an admiraltie or office of an
admiral. Mirando, admirable, wonderful. Mirante, as Miraglio. Miraos, a
kind of pottage so called. Mirare, to behold, to pry, to look, to watch, to
aim, to level at, to sneake, to view, to consider, to regard, to advise, to
ponder. Mirasole, as Girasole. Also in latin Croton or Ricinus. Miratron, a
prince of faces. Miria, a kind of small weight or measure. Mirifico,
woondrous, marvelous. Miriofillo, the herb milfoyle, or yarrow. Mirite, a
kind of yellow precious stone, which rubbed with woollen cloth, yields a
swe^t sm^ll. Mirmecia, warts in the privy parts. Also a kind of blackish
stone. Mironi, were those who for their deformed mouths were greatly woondred
at. Miro, a kind of measure of liquid things. Mirra, a kind of gum called
myrrh, or the tree that bears it. Mirrare, to preserve with myrrh, to
enbalme. Mirride, a kind of herb. Mirrite, as Mirite. Mirtea, made of myrtle,
vide Corona. Mirtidano, of myrtle or tempred with it, Also a knob or bunch or
gall growing upon mirtles. Mirtilli, young myrtle trees. Mirto, a myrtle tree.
Mis, an adiunct added to verbes or nounes to alter the sense of them, to a
contrary or bad signification, as Mis, in English. Misalta, a smirking lusty
wench, a good trull. Misantropo, he that hates the company of men.
Miscellame, things mixed together without any order, a gallie-mafrie, a mesh or
hotchpotch of diverse things. Miscellioni, they which do not hold any certain
opinion, but are of diverse and mixed judgment. Mischia, as Meschia, as
Mescolanza. Mischianza, Mischiamento, as Mescolanza. Mischiare, as Mescolare.
Misciare, to awaken or rouse from sleep, Also as Mescolare. Mischina,
Mischino, Look Meschina. Mischio, a medlie, a mixture, mixed. Miscio barbaro,
he that has a Grecian to his father, and a Barbarian to his mother. Miscoceto,
a kind of long fish. Misc^edenza, misbeliefe. Miscredere, to misbeleeue.
Miscreduto, misbeleeued. Miscredente, misbeleeuing. Miscuglio, as Mescuglio.
Mise, he did put, set or lay. Miserabile, Misereuole, miserable, wretched,
silly, lamentable, pitiful, pitious, to be pitied. Miserando, as Miserabile.
Miseratione, commiseration, pity, compassion, ruthe, mercy. Miserello, poor,
silly, wretched, miserable Miserere, the name of one of the seven Psalms so
beginning. Miseria, misery, wretchedness, distress, misfortune, infelicitie,
adversity. Also couetise, niggardize, or sparing. Misericorde, as
Misericordioso. Misericordia, mercy, pity, ruthe, compassion.
Misericordioso, merciful, tender hearted, that has pity and compassion.
Miserrimo, lamentable, wretched, to be pitied. Miseritia, as Miseria. Misero,
miserable, wretched, silly, ruthful. Also greedy, covetous, niggard,
sparing, or straight handed. Also of Mettere, they put or did put. Miserone, a
chuffe, a snudge, a niggard, a miser, a pinch-penny, a paltrer, a penie-father.
Misfare, to misdoe, offend or trespass. Misfatto, misdone, offended,
trespassed. Also an offense, a misdeede, a trespass. Misfattore, an offender,
a misdoer, a trespasser. Mislea, as Mischia, a hurli-burlie. Misleale, false,
disloyal, untrue. Misleanza, Mislealta, disloyalty, faithlesnesse, falsehood.
Misoginia, the hate or contempt of women. Misolidio, a kind of song or
music. Missiua, a missiue, a letter, an epistle. Missolidio, Mixolidio,
mournful, melancholic, or grave music. Missore, as Becca in cauo. Mista, he
that learneth, or he that is expert in the mysteries of religion. Mistagogo, a
chief enterpreter of mysteries or ceremonies, he that had the keeping and
showing of church relics to strangers. Mistate, a measure of liquid things.
Misterio, Mistero, a mystery or secret in holy things, properly a thing
secretly hid in words or ceremonies, whereunto the common sort might not come.
Misterioso, misterious, containing some mystery or secret meaning. Mistico,
Misticale, mystical, figurative, secret. Mistiero, Mistiere, as Mestiere. Also
as Mistero. Mistione, as Mescolanza. Misto, mixed, or mingled, or mesht.
Mistro, a measure used in Greece. Mistura, a mixture, a mingling, a medley, a
hochpoch, a mangle. Misturaggine, idem. Misturare, as Mescolare. Misuendere,
vendo, vendei, venduto, to mis-sell, to sell wrongfully. Misuenire, vengo,
venni, venuto, to decay, to fall in a swoune, to come to ill, to miscarie.
Misuenuto, decaid, fallen in swoune, come to ill end. Misura, a measure, a
rule, a direction, a method, a proportion. Misurare, to measure, to consider,
to poise, to weigh, to moderate. Misurato, measured, considered, weighed,
poised, pondred, moderated. Also a wary, circumspect, advised, staid, or
considerate man. Misurare a peso, to measure by weight. Misurare ad occhio, to
measure by the eye. Misuratore, a measurer. Misusare, to misuse, to abuse.
Misuso, an abuse or misusing. Mita, Mitade, a half, or a moitie. Mite, mild,
meek, lowly, gentle, pacient, tractable, soft, simple, not striving, quiet.
Mitigare, to mitigate, to assuage, to appease, to allay. Mitigatione, a
mitigation, an asswaging, an appeasing. Mitigheuole, that may be appeased,
mittigated, or assuaged. Mitissimamente, most lowly, mildely, meekely.
Mitologia, a declaration of fables, a moralizing of a tale. Mitologo, he that
expounds fables or tales. Mitra, Mitria, a bishops mitre. Also the skin
wherein the stones or cods are wrapped. Mitrace, a stone of the color of
damask roses, which laid in the sun, shines of diverse colors. Mitrare,
Mitriare, to enmitre, as bishops be. Mithridate, a confection used in physic,
called Mithridatum. Also as Mitrace. Mituli, a kind of shell fish. Miuolo, a
kind of drinking glass, it is a Lombard word. Mizzare, to rot, to wither as
fruits do, to be mellow. Mizzato, Mizzo, rotten, withered, squeazed, bruised, or
mellowed. Mizzi frutti, rotten, withered, bruzed or squeazed fruits, mellowe.
Mo, now, even now, at this instant, joined with other words, it stands for Mio.
Momo, even now, now now. Mobile, moveable, mutable, inconstant, wavering, that
may be moved. Mobili, moveable goods, chattles. Mobilita, mutabilitie, motion,
moving, inconstancy, waueringnes, ficklenes. Mobilmente, mooueably, mutably,
inconstantly, waueringly. Mocca, a mowing mouth, an apish mouth. Mocaiaro, as
Moccaiaro. Moccaiaro, Moccaiorro, the stuff we call moccado. Moccaiuolo,
Moccatoio, a mucketor, a handkercher, a snuffer. Moccamento, Moccatura, a
snuffing, a blowing of the nose. Moccare, to snuff or blow the nose, to blow
or cleanse the nose, to snuff a candle. Also to mock, flout, or skoffe.
Moccato, Mocco, snuft, blown, or cleansed, (the nose) snuft, (a candle.)
Moccatore, Moccadore, a snuffer, or a muckador. Also a pair of snuffers.
Moccatura, the snuff of a candle. Mocceca, as Moccicone. Moccenigo, a kind of
coin current in Venice. Mocci, the snots or snuffings of ones nose.
Mocciaccia, a flurt, a trull, a rigge, a harlot. Mocciare, to pare, or clip
about, to snuff or blow the nose, to snot. Mocciatura, any kind of snot or
snotting, any kind of paring or clipping. Moccicone, a snottie, slovenly,
lubberly fellow, a gull, a ninnie. Moccicoso, snottie, sniuelie, slovenly,
dropping at the nose. Moccioso, Moccignoso, as Moccicoso. Moccinigo, a kind of
coin used in Venice. Mocchiare, to heap or pile up. Mocchignoso, snottie,
slovenly, filthy. Mocchio, a heap, a huddle, a pile, a mass of any thing, a
hey mow. Mocco, Moccolo, a snuff or candles end. Also wild fitch or cichling.
Moccolare, to snuff ones nose, or a candle. Moccolino, a little snuff or
candles end. Moccolone, an idiot, a gull, a ninnie, a patch. Moccoloso,
snottie, slauering, slabberie, sniuelie. Mocenigo, as Moccenigo. Mocherino, an
arm, whose hand is cut off, a stump of an arm. Mochi? but who? Moco, a kind
of pulse called tare. Modale, according to mood and form. Modellare, to
model, to frame, or cast in a frame, to plot. Modello, a model, a frame, a
plot, a mould. Modeno, a tool that a stone-cutter uses. Moderabile, that may
be moderated. Moderanza, Moderatione, temperance, moderation, moderate rule.
Moderare, to moderate, to temper, to refrain, to measure with reason.
Moderatamente, temperatlie, moderatlie, meanly, with reason, patiently.
Moderato, moderated, tempred, temperate, moderate, patient. Moderatore, a
moderator, a temperer, a guide, a ruler. Modernaglie, new, fresh, last, or
modern sights: it is taken for young wenches. Modernare, to reduce or fashion
to late and new fashions. Moderno, Modernale, modern, new, of this age. Also a
masons or caruers tool. Modestia, modesty, civility, mannerlines,
temperance, shamefastnes, sobernes, humility, humblenes. Modesto, modest,
temperat, mannerly, civil, moderate, shamefast, sober, humble. Modi, means,
fashions, behauiours, manners. Also the measures, rest, times, or pauses in
singing or playing. Modica, Modico, a little, a modicum, a bit, or somewhat.
Modificare, to measure, to poise, to ponder. Modificatione, a measuring, a
poising, a pondering. Modiglione, a kind of yonike work in building. Modione,
Look Mensola. Modo, manner, way, fashion, guise, mean, custom, measure,
rule, form, quantity, bigness, or size. Also a mood of a verb. Modolantia,
singing, musical measure, pleasant tuning, modulation. Modolare, to sing or
make harmony, to measure, to tune and accent, to sing tunable, and according
to due number. Modolatione, as Modolantia. Modolatore, he that sing^th or
learneth to sing in measure, in tune and accent. Modolo, the measure, bigness or
quantity of a thing, a model or frame, a conueiance for water through pipes
or conduits. Also that whereby a whole work is measured or squared. Modorra,
the drowsy ill. Modulantia, as Modolantia. Modulare, as Modolare. Modulatione,
as Modolatione. Modulatore, as Modolatore. Mofolo, a kind of great horned
goat with so hard horns that fall he never so high upon them he never hurts
himself. Moggia, bushels, or strikes. Moggiare, to measure by bushels, to
heap or stacke up. Moggio, a kind of corn measure as our bushel is, a
heap, a mass, a lump, a stack, or rick of hay. Mogliaccio, Mogliazzo, wiuing
or marying, foolish wiuing. Mogliata, thy wife. Moglie, Mogliera, Mogliere, a
wife, a wedded wife. Mogliemma, my wife. Moglieta, thy wife. Mognere, as
Mongere. Moia, tush, fie, phough, gup, no no, what? and is it so? good Lord.
Also, let him dye. Moiette, mullets, fire-tongs, pincers. Moina, a nun. Also
a simpring fauning leering wench, a mowing face, or simpring countenance.
Moinare, to flatter, to faunt, to cog, to foist, to simper it, to make a mowing
face. Moinatore, Moinero, a flatterer, a fauner, a cogger, a foister. Moine,
flattries, faunings, coggings, foistings, Look Dare moine. Mola, a millstone,
a grinding stone, a wheel. Also a lump of flesh in women's bellies which they
call a tympanie or a moon calfe. Also a lump or piece of flesh without shape.
It is also used for the whirrle bone of the knee. Mola del ginocchio, the
whirrle bone of the knee. Molagrana, the fruit called a loue-apple. Molare, to
grind or wheel or turn about. Also a mill or grind stone. Also such a stone
as they make millstones of. Molari denti, the great iaw or eye teeth of any
creature called the grinders or cheek teeth; which being five on each side of
the mouth both above and beneath are made to grind and fret asunder finely the
meat received into the mouth. Molcere, molcio, molsi, molciuto, to please, to
make much of, to hug, to pacify, to appease, to mitigate, to comfort, to
refresh, to assuage, to delight, to polish, to anoint, to stroke or smooth, to
make tame or gentle. Molcire, Molcio, etc. as Molcere. Molciuto, Molto,
pleased, fauned upon, made much of, hugd, pacifide, appeased, mitigated,
comforted, refreshed, assuaged, delighted, polished, anointed, stroked or
smoothed with blandishments, made tame and gentle. Mole, a mass, a lump, a
chaos, a cub or heap of any thing. Also a iaw or eie-tooth of any body. Also a
great pile or bulwark. Also a wharfe by the water side, or as we call it a
key. Molecche, a kind of crabbe-fish or lobster. Molegnare, a kind of plum so
called. Molendina^o, whatsoever pertaines to a mill. Molestare, to molest, to
trouble, to vex, to grieve, to pain, to disquiet. Molestatione, as Molestia.
Molestazzo, some part of a mill. Molestia, molestation, trouble, vexation,
grief, sorrow, pain, tediousnes, disquietnes. Molesto, troublesome, tedious,
grievous, painful, disquiet, offensive, yrkesome. Molgere, as Mongere.
Molette, as Mollette. Moli, rue, hermall or herb grass. Molichino, a kind of
purple color. Molinello, Molinetto, a little wheel, a spinning wheel, a
little mill, and as Ventarello. Also a wheel for a dog to turn the spit in.
Molinaio, Molinaro, a miller. Molinaia, Molinara, a woman miller. Molinamento,
a winding, a reeling or turning like a mill. Molinare, to grind in a mill, to
full cloth. Also as Ghiribizzare. Molino, any kind of mill. Molino a braccia, a
handmill. Molino ad acqua, a water mill. Molino a vento, a wind mill. Molino
gazzino, a kind of mill so called. Molino da poglia, an oil mill. Molino
terragno, a kind of low mill or handmill. Moliri, a iocust that destroieth
corn. Molitore, a bird like a swan braying like an ass. Molla, a wheel of a
clock that moves all the rest called the spr^ng. Mollare, to moisten, to
steep in water, to laue, to wet, to wash, to bathe. Also to leave off, to
cease, to finish, to give over. Also to slack, to loosen, to let go a hold.
Molle, soft, tender, sle^der, limmer, lithe or soft in feeling. Also pliable,
gentle, tractable, yielding, effeminat, nice, ^emisse, easy, delicate,
pleasant, calm, mild, wanton. Also moist, wet, watrish, dampish or soft under
foot. Also a pair of tongs, pincers or mullets. Also a whiting fish or any
soft fish: in music it is taken for flat. Molle di fuoco, fire tongs.
Mollechi, all manner of soft row fishes. Also a kind of shrimps. Mollemente,
effeminately, wantonly, softly, tenderly, slenderly, limmer, watrish. Mollette,
mullets, pincers or tongs or nippers. Mollette da fuoco, fire tongs. Molletine,
little mullets or pincers or nippers. Mollica, any kind of crumme or
crumbling. Mollicare, to crumble, to crum. Molliche, crumbs. Also a kind of
small pulse. Mollificare, to mollify, to make soft or tender. Mollesino,
Mollosino, Molesino, soft, limmer or slender in feeling, smooth, or lythe.
Mollitia, softnes, wantonness, effeminacie, dalliance, delicatnes, tenderness,
nicenes, calmnes, smoothnes. Mollitre, softnes in feeling, as Mollitia.
Mollitiuo, softning, suppling. Mollo, as Molle. Molo, a wharfe or hithe by the
water side made by art, we properly call it a key. Molobatro, an ointment made
of mallows. Molochino, a kind of color like a whitish purple, or like the
flowers of mallows. Molochite, a kind of precious stone of a thick green
color like to mallows. Molocuccia, an herb so called taken for mallows.
Molosso, a mastiue dog, a bull dog. Also a foot of a verse consisting of three
long syllables. Molte cose, many or sundry things. Molte volte, many or diverse
times. Molti, many, diverse, sundry. Moltiforme, of many fashions, forms or
shapes. Moltiformita, that has many forms, a multiformitie. Moltifidi, cloven
or cleft many ways, having many slits or full of scotches. Moltilatero, having
many sides. Moltigenio, of diverse kinds or sundry sorts. Moltinomio, having
many names. Moltiloquente, much speaking or full of words. Moltiplicare, to
multiply, to increase, to augment. Moltiplicabile, that may be multiplied or
augmented. Moltiplicatione, multiplication, increase or augmenting.
Moltiplicatore, a multiplier, an augmentour. Moltiplice, manifold, of diverse
and sundry sorts. Moltipotente, of great power, that may do much. Moltiradice,
the lesser centorie. Moltissimi, very many. Moltitudine, a multitude, a many
or great number. Moltiuoco, of many significations. Moltizzo, a skinners tool
so called. Molto, much, store, very, a great deal, mickle, a long time or
season, a great while. Molto a buon hora, very timely, very early. Molto been,
very well. Molto fa, long ago, long since. Molto meno, much less. Molto per
tempo, very early, very timely. Molto piu tosto, much sooner, much rather.
Molto tempo fa, long time since, very long ago. Molto volontieri, very
willingly, most willingly. Molua, the fish we call cod. Some take it for the
hadocke. Molucro, a square piece of timber whereon painims were wont to
sacrifice. Momentale, of moment, of consequence, Also during but a little time.
Momentano, momentarie, transitory, which dureth but a little while. Momentare,
to moment, to make of consequence. Momento, a moment, a minute, the least part
of time which cannot be assigned, a very little quantity or portion of any
thing or matter, a little jot. Also the estimation, force, value, weight,
importance, strength or virtue of a thing. Also advantage or help. Also
consequence, worth, moment or respect of a matter. Also a grain or little more
then weight. Momentoso, that is of some weight or value. Mommea, a mumming.
Mommeare, to mum or go a mumming. Mommeo, a mummer. Momo, even now, by and by,
now now. Momo, a Momus. The god of reprehension, he that carpeth at all things
and is pleased with nothing. Momordica, a kind of herb. Mona, an ape, a
munkie, a p^g, a kitlin, a munkie face. Also a nickname for women, as we say
gammer, goodie, goodwife, such a one. Monaca, a nun or religious woman, a
solitary woman. Monacale, monastical, after munkes or nuns life. Monacare, to
become a munke or nun. Monacarie, the whole order or profession of nuns.
Monachelle, a kind of ravenous water foul. Monacherino, a stump of an arm, a
man that has his arm cut off. Monachetta, Monachina, a young little nun.
Monachetto, Monachino, a young munke or a nouice. Monacordo, an instrument with
one string. Also as Monocordo. Monaco, a munke or religious and solitary man.
Also a kind of fish. Monacuccie, the flower of Galingale or Sword-grasse or
Corne-flag. Monangolo, having but one corner, of one corner. Monanno, the last
year, a year ago, now one year since. Monarca, a monarch or sole ruler, a
prince ruling without peer. Monarchia, a monarchy, a rule or government of
one prince alone. Monaro, Monaio, a miller. Monasteriale, belonging to a
monastery. Monasterio, Monastero, a monastery, a convent, a nunnerie, a
religious house, a cloister for solitary livers. Monastico, monastical, living
solitary. Monatto, a burier of the dead. Monaulo, a pipe or a recordor.
Moncano, Look Frenguello. Moncara, dry, barren, parched, rough, unprofitable.
Moncare, to stump, to maime, to lame or cut off any lim. Moncato, Monco,
stumped, maimed, lamed or cut off any lim. Moncerare, to bugger, to commit
sin against Nature. Moncherino, a stump of an arm without a hand. Monco,
maimed, lame, stump armed or legd, as Moncato. Mondanita, wordlines. Mondano,
mundane, worldly, of the world. Mondare, to pare, to pill, to shale, to shell,
to vnhuske, to cleanse, to neatifie, to purify, to mundifie, to make clean,
to sift, to winnow, to fan, to purge. Mondatore, a clenser, a purifier, a
purger, a parer, a sheller. Mondatore del aratro, the plough staff. Mondature,
parings, shales, husks, suftings, chafe, dross, dregs. Mondezza, cleanlines,
neatnes, finenes. Also dung or ordure or filth of man or cattle. Also sweepings
or dust. Mondezzaro, a dunghill, a muckhill. Also a scauinger. Mondiale,
pertaining to the world. Mondiale machina, the worlds frame, the whole world.
Mondicare, as Mondificare. Mondificare, to mundifie, to make clean, to purge.
Mondificatione, a mundifying or purging. Mondificatiuo, that does purge or
mundifie. Mondiglia, cleansings, purifyings, sweepings, parings, shellings.
Also chafe. Mondino, a measure for dry things. Monditia, cleanlines, neatnes,
clensings. Mondo, the universe, the whole world, a mound such as Princes are
painted with in their hands. Also neat, pure, clean, cleansed, purified,
winnowed, sifted, pared, shaled, vnhusked. Mondora, Mondi, worlds. Moneta,
Moneda, money or coin, the stamp of money. Also used for the womb of a
woman. Monetaio, Monedaro, a coyner, a money maker, a minter, a monter.
Monelle, a roguish or fustian word, a word in pedlers French, signifying
wenches, strumpets or whores. Monetere, Monetario, as Monetaio. Monetoso,
monied, pecunious, having money, full of money. Mongara, a kind of meat used
in Italy. Mongaro, wettish, moist, marrish, fenny, waterish. Mongere, mongo,
monsi, monto, or mongiuto, to suck or draw a teat or dugge, to milk.
Mongibello, a continual burning flame, a burning hill in Sicilie. Mongiere, as
Mongere. Mongitore, a milker of any cattle. Mongiuacche, as Couamele. Mongiuto,
Monto, milked, sucked, or drawn a dugge or teate. Mongrellino, an effeminate,
wanton, coy, fond smell-feast, a spruce-fellow. Moniache, the fruit called
apricocks. Moniaco, an apricocke tree. Monibile, that is easily warned, or may
be warned. Monicchio, a pugge, a munkie, an ape. Monile, a carcanet, a
billament, a collar, a border, a jewel about ones neck, a neck lace having
jewels or pearls in it, an ouche, a tablet or a brouch. Monimento, a monument,
a grave, a tomb, a sepulcher, a memorial, a record, a chronicle, a history,
a remembrance left to posterity of some notable act. Monina, a woman's geere
or conie, a quaint as Chaucer calls it. Monipolio, a conspiracy, a complot, a
conuenticle. Monire, nisco, nito, to admonish, to warn. Also to furnish, to
munite with preparation for defense. Also to advertise, to advise of something
to come. Monito, admonished, warned. Also furnished, munited, fenced, guarded.
Monitione, admonition, warning, advertisement. Also all manner or munition.
Monitore, an admonisher, a warner, an informer, an aduertiser, a monisher, a
counselor. Also a furnisher, a muniter. Monitorio, that warns, that
signifies somewhat to come. Mono, the number of one, or a unity, namely in
composition. Monna, as Mona. Monocentauro, a fained beast like a horse and a
man. Monocerote, a strange monster who has the body of a horse, the feet of
an elephant, the tail of a hog, the head of a stagge, and one only long
shining horn in his forehead, taken for an unicorn. Monocca, a nun.
Monocordo, an instrument having many strings of one sound, which with little
pieces of cloth make distinct sounds, called claricords. Monocroma, a kind of
picture all of one color without mixture. Monoculo, that has but one eye.
Also the gut that is called Cieco, the blind gut. Monodia, a mourefull song
where one sings alone. Monodo, he that has but one continued tooth in his
mouth. Monogamia, a marrying of one wife and no more all their life time.
Monologia, a long tale of a little matter. Monologo, one that talks much about
nothing. Monomachia, a combat or fight between man and man, a single combat.
Monomaco, he that fights alone without aid. Monophagia, a living always
with one kind of meat. Monophago, he that eats but one kind of meat. Also
one that feeds alone. Monopolare, to engrosse into one hand, to forestall.
Monopoliere, an engrosser of any commodity into one man's hands that none may
sell and gain by but he. Monopolo, an engrossement of any merchandise into one
man's hands that no man may sell and gain by but he, or the place where such
monopolies are kept. Monoptoto, a word having but one case. Monosilaba, having
but one syllable. Monosino, as Mollosino. Monostico, that which consists of
one verse. Monotropo, of one fashion, always solitary, or unmarried.
Monsignore, my lord, a title only for prelates. Monstro, Monstruoso, Look
Mostro. Monta, a stallions covering of mares. Also a mounting or ascent. Also a
block to get upon horseback. Montagna, a mountain or hill. Montagnetta, a
little mountain or hill, a hillocke. Montagnaro, a man borne or dwelling on
the mountains. Monta in banco, a mountibanke. Monta in sella, a charge that
trumpetters use to sound to prepare and call men to take horse and get up.
Montanaria, an ascent full of mountains, hilly. Montanaro, hilly or
mountainous, as Montagnaro. Montanello, a kind of fine singing bird. Montano,
as Frenguello. Also a kind of eagle or faulcon. Also of or pertaining to the
mountains. Montare, to mount, to ascend, to climb up, get up, to rise up, to
flow up, to go up, to increase or grow dear, to heap up, to amount. Montar'
in banco, to play the mountibanke. Montar' in collera, to grow or become
angry. Montar la mosca, to take pepper in the nose, to be soon angry. Montar
il pane, the price of bread to rise. Montar' a cauallo, to mount on horseback.
Montar' in barca or naue, to take shipping, to take bote. Montar' in mare, to
lanch out to sea, to take shipping. Montar l'acqua, to flow as the tide does.
Montar' adosso, to leap upon, to fall upon. Montata, a pair of stairs, an
ascent, a mounting, an ascending, a heaping up. Montatore, a mounter, an
ascender, an engroser, a forestaller, a heaper. Montatura, a riding or mounting
beast, an ambling hackney, an ascent or mounting up. Monte, a hill, a mount, a
mountain, a heap, a lump, a huddle, a stock or full pair or bunch of
cards. Andar a monte, to swig or deal again. Monte di venere, the hill or
line of Venus in a man's hand. Montemari, impossibilities, gods cope, heaven and
earth, seas and mountains. Montiana, a kind of cheese-cake or tarte.
Monticello, a hillocke, a little hill, a little heap, a little mount.
Montiera, a kind of cap or hat having no brim behind, now worn in Italy.
Montiuago, a wandrer upon mountains. Montone, a ram, a mutton or tup: one of
the twelve signs in heaven. also a great hill or heap. Also a kind of sea
fish. Also a kind of coin in Italy, a cub. Montonile, mutton or sheepe-like,
faced like a sheep. Also a kind of fish. Montolino, any thing that is of
mutton. Montuare, to commend, to extol, to exalt, to raise, to advance, to
heap up. Montuoso, Montoso, hilly, mountainous. Monumento, a monument, tomb,
grave, or sepulcher. Monzicchio, a heap or huddle of any thing. Mora, stay,
delay, lingering, prolonging. Also a blackamore wench, a black-berie or
mulberie. Also a kind of game used in Italy, with casting of numbers and
casting of the fingers of the right hand. Moraglie, a devise to pinch a horse
about the nose to tame him when he is a shooing. Also any kind of stone walls.
Morale, moral, pertaining to manners. Moralita, morality, a moral sense.
Moraro, a blackeberrie tree, or a mulberie tree. Morato, black, or
black-berrie color. Moratoria, a staying, or a dispensation to stay. Morbare,
to infect with any contagion or disease. Morbezza, as Morbidezza, as Morbo.
Morbezzi, foolish, wanton, jesting toys or tricks. Morbidezza, smoothness,
wantonness, rankness, softnes, tenderness, fruitefulnesse. Morbidamente,
smoothly, wantonlie, ranklie, softly, tenderly fruitefully. Morbidire, disco,
dito, to make smooth, wanton, soft, or tender. Morbidito, made smooth, wanton,
soft, or tender. Morbido, smooth, soft, tender, wanton, fruitful, rank,
proud in growing. Morbisciatto, a wagge, a crafty ladde, a loute, a rascal,
a varlet. Morbo, a sickness, disease, contagion or evil. Morbo regio, a disease
called the yellow iaundise. Morboso, contagious, infectious, full of diseases.
Morca, a kind of fruit like an olive. Also a kind of stinking oil made of
them. Also a snuff of a candle. Also filth, tare, or rubbish. Morchia, as
Morca. Morchioso, snottie, sniuelie, filthy. Mordace, biting, nipping,
pinching, snipping, detracting, backbiting, tanting, satiricall, stinging,
sharp, be it with teeth or words. Mordacita, bitterness in tanting, in biting,
in detracting, sharpnes of words. Mordella, a whelke-flye, or blister-flye.
Mordente, mordant, or biting. Also the name of a color that painters use.
Mordere, mordo, mordei, morduto, or morso, to bite, to champ, to gnaw, to snip,
to pinch. Also to detract, to backbite, to grieve with words, to taunt.
Morduto, Morso, bitten, champed, gnawen, snipped, or pinched with the teeth.
Also detracted, backbitten, taunted, or grieved with words. Mordimento, a
biting, a champing, a gnawing, a snipping. Also a backbiting, a detracting or
taunting. Also a remorce, or compunction. Morditore, a biter, a champer. Also a
detractor, or backbiter. Morditura, a biting, a snipping, a pinching with
teeth. Also a backbiting. Moreci, as Marouelle. Moredale, Morredale, a close
stool. Morella, a fish called a menow, some take it for a cob or gudgeon.
Morena, the fish called a Lamprey. Morello, the color murrie, or dark red.
Also the name of a Sawyers tool. Morellotto, ruddie, red, flaming red, red
hot, high, or fiery colored. Moretto, a little blackamoore. Also the name of
a bird. Morettone, the name of a bird. Moresca, a kind of morice or antique
dance, after the moorish or ethiopian fashion. Moresco, a blackamoore. Also a
barbary horse. Morfea, has in mockery bin taken for a woman's privy parts.
Also in rogues language a man's mouth. Morfia, as Morfea. Morfino, a kind of
kite, or ravenous bird. Morgone, a didapper, a diuer, or arsefoote. Moria, a
murrian, a plague, an infection, a pestilence, a rot that commes among sheep.
Also used for folly or foolishnes, but it is a greek word. Moriano, as
Ombriano. Moribondo, that is ready to dye, dying. Morice, Morris, the disease
called the Hemorrhoides or piles. Moriente, dying, yielding up the ghost.
Morigerare, to obey, to do as one bids, to conform himself to another man's
will, to be, or teach to be dutiful. Morigerato, obeyed, done another man's
will, obedient, dutiful, mannerly, knowing his duty, well brought up, and
well nurtured. Morigiare, to bring up mannerly and ciuillie. Morione, a
murrion, a helm, a skull, a headpeece, a caske. Also a kind of stone. Also
the male Mandragora. Morire, Muoio, morij, morto, to dye. Morir di voglia, to
dye with longing. Morir di riso, paura, freddo, rabbia, or fame, to dye with
laughing, fear, cold, rage, madness, or hunger. Morise, a muzzle for a dog.
Mormillo, Mormira, a seafish, having diverse colors. Mormo, Mormora, as
Mormillo. Mormorare, to murmur, to grudge, to mutter, to grumble, to mumble, to
repine. Mormoramento, a murmuring, a grudging, a repining, a muttring, a
mumbling, a humming, or buzzing, a roaring. Mormorio, Mormoratione, as
Mormoramento. Also the noise of water running, or any such like thing. Also the
belching or rasping of the stomach, or any kind of rumbling in the guts.
Mormoreuole, murmuring, muttring, grudging, grumbling, repining. Also roaring
or making a noise as water does running among stones. Moro, a blackamoore. Also
a mulberie tree. Also a wart in a horse called an Auburie. Morocto, Morotto, a
stone in Egypt, wherewith linnen-drapers make their cloth white. Moroglie, as
Emoroide. Morologo, wayward, foolish, tipsie, tatling, babbling, full of wine.
Morona, as Murena. Morone, a mulberie tree. Also a mulberie. Also a kind of
sweet meat so called in Italy. Also a kind of fish much like flesh, that is
eaten in Lent. Moronella, a kind of meat like Cauiaro, made of the fish
Morone. Morosa, a love, a mistres, a paramour. Moroso, a lover, a paramour, an
amorous fellow. Morsaro, a bit-maker. Morse, as Moraglie. Also he did. Also
the great pincers that a smith does use to take the hot iron out of the fire
with. Morsecchiare, to morsel, to bite. Morse di muro, the utmost stones of a
wall that is not finished. Morselletto, a little morsel or bit. Morselli, a
kind of dainty paste meat used in Italy. Also a pair of pincers or
claspers that smithes use. Also morsels, or bits. Morsicare, to bite, to snip,
to pinch with teeth. Morsicatura, a biting, a pinching, a nipping. Morsicatura
delle reni, a disease in a horse, called the weakness of the back. Morsicello,
a little bit, or morsel. Morsico, a bite, a pinch, a nip. Morso, a bit, a
bridle, or a snaffle for a horse. Also a biting, a snip, or a pinch. Also
bitten, snipt, pinched, a check, a taunt, a rebuke, a morsel, a mouthfull.
Also a kind of fish. Morsodirana, the herb frogbit. Morsudiaboli, an herb
called the devils bit, or forebit. Morsugalline, chickweede, or henbit.
Morsura, a biting, a snipping, a nipping. Mortadelle, a kind of sliced meat
made of veale. Also a kind of meat of chiterlings, or of the vmbles of a
dear. Also a kind of sausages or puddings, or liuerings. Mortaio, Mortaro, a
mortar to stamp any thing in. Also a kind of ordinance called a mortar or a
chamber. Also used for a woman's priuities. Mortaiuolo, Mortaruolo, a little
mortar, a little chamber or potgunne. Also the black and blue mark of any
hurt, stripe, or bruise. Mortale, mortal, deadly, subject to death, that shall
perish. Mortal marca, the whole world, the worlds frame. Mortalita, mortality,
death, murraine, frailty. Morte, death it self. Mortella, Mortello, the
myrtle tree. Also as Vallonia. Mortelletto, a place or grove of myrtle trees.
Morte subitana, sudden death. Morticino, any dead carrion. Mortifero, deadly,
infectious, contagious, that causes or brings death. Mortigno, pale, wanne,
gastlie, a dead looking color. Mortina, a myrtle tree. Also a mistle. Mortise,
a morteise in wood. Morto, dead, slain, killed. Also a dead corse, a carcass.
Also a pullie in a ship called the dead man he. Morto agliado, killed or slain
with a sword. Mortoio, Mortorio, the obsequies, funerals, hearse, or burial.
Morzone, the fish, called a gudgeon. Mosa, a tree in India bearing a dainty
kind of fruit like an apple. Mosaico, a kind of curious stone work of
diverse colors, checkie work, so cunningly painted, that it seemed to be
embossed. Mosca, any kind of fly. Moscadello, Moscatello, the wine muscadine.
Moscardino, a kind of musk comfets: the name of a kind of grapes and pears:
a fish called in latin Osmilus, which some say is a kind of shell fish in form
like a boat, and swimmeth with his belly upward. Some think it is a kind of
cuttle or poor-cuttle-fish. Moscardo, a kind of bird. Also as Moscardino. Also
a musket hawk. Moscare, Muschiare, to sweeten, or perfume with musk.
Moscaruola, a net for cariers horses in Italy, as they travel to shake flies
away. Also a flap to beat flies away. Moscaruolo, a woorme breeding in a
horse, whereof there be eight kinds. Also as Moscardino. Moscato, sweetened or
perfumed with musk, musk, a pomander or grain of musk. Also a dapple-graie,
fleabitten, speckled horse. Also the wine muskadine. Moscata, a nutmegge.
Moscatini, certain grapes, pears and apricocks so called. Moscherino, a kind
of fly: the name of a bird: used also for pepper in the nose. Moschette,
little flies. Also fly bitings, or little spots about horses. Moschetti, a
kind of sparowes in India so little, as with feathers and all one is no bigger
then a little wal-nut, and yet wonderful fair to behold, it is written that
a whole nest full of them waieth but 24. grains. Moschetto, a musket. Also a
musket hawk. Moschettiere, a muskettier. Moschettone, a great horse-fly or
hornet. Moscio, benumd in such sort that one feels nothing, stiff with cold.
Moscione, a fly, a gnat, a horse-flie, a butter-flie. Mosco, musse. Moscolo, a
muskle of the body: also a top or gigge such as children play with. Moscoloso,
full of muskles. Moscone, any great fly, a horse fly. Moscoso, mossie. Mose,
a tree among the Indians which is thought to bear that fruit that Adam tasted
of, for cut the fruit which way you will and you shall find the figure of the
cross. Mossa, moved, stirred, iogged. Also a moving, a stirring, a starting,
a ^ogging, a motion. Also the start or first motion of any thing, the starting
place or start of any horse when he first takes his start to run a race.
Mossettine, little motions, ioggings, sturrings, moouings, wriglings, ierkes,
iumbling tricks. Mosso, moved, stirred, iogged, removed, motioned, wauered,
wagged, throbbed. Also moss growing upon trees. Mostacciata, a blow, a clap,
or box, or whirret on the mouth. Mostaccino, a little face, a little snout, a
little mostacho. Mostaccio, Mostazzo, a face, a snout, a mostacho. Also as
Mustacchio. Mostaccione, Mostazzone, a blow or whirret given on the face.
Mostacciuoli, a kind of sugar or ginger-cake, or simnell. Mostarda, mustard.
Mostardelle, a kind of meat boiled in mustarde. Mostardo, a musket. Mosto,
new, sweet, unrefined wine, must. Mostoso, sweet, unrefined, tasting of must
Mostra, Mostranza, a muster or mustring of soldiers, a facing of any garment, a
show, a view, a patron or sight of any thing. Also a watch or a dyall of the
sun. Mostrare, to show, to put to view, to declare. Also to muster soldiers.
Mostro, showed, put to view, or declared. Also a monster or any deformed
creature, or misshapen thing that exceeds, lacks or is disordred in natural
form, any thing done against the course of nature, a monstrous and incredible
thing, a marvelous sign, a strange sight. Mostruosita, monstruositie,
deformity, monstruousnes, exceeding the course of nature. Mostruoso,
Monstruoso, monstrous, deformed, strange, against the course of nature. Mota, a
mud, a mire or puddle, that is in the bottom of a pond or ditch, a mote about a
house or mire where eeles breed. Motacilla, a wagtaile. Motione, a motion, a
moving. Motiuo, a motive, that is mooueable, not abiding. Moto, a motion, a
moving, a gesture, a wagging, a motion or cause of stirring of any thing, a
passion of a man's mind. Motore, a moouer, a stirrer. Also taken for God
almighty. Motoso, muddie, durtie, boggie, myrie. Motteggiare, to frumpe to
quip, to scoff, to jest, to gibe. Motteggiatore, a frumper, giber or iester, a
quipper. Motteggiere, full of merry conceits, quippes, frumps and iestes.
Motteggioso, Motteggieuole, as Motteggiere. Mottetto, Mottino, a dittie, a
verse, a ^^gge, a short song. Also a quippe a frumpe, a scoff, a jest, a
witty saying. Motto, a word, a mot, a phrase, a saying a posie or brief in
any shield, ring, or emprese, a quip, a frump, a scoff, a jest, or witty
saying. Mottozzo, a long tale or discourse of good tidings, a tale of
reioicing. Motu proprio, of self motion and freewil. Mouenza, moving, motion,
or stirring. Mouere, muouo, mossi, mosso, or mouuto, to move, to stir, to
waver, to wag, to motion, to iog, to throb, to remove. also to provoke, to
entice, to allure, to cause, to stir up, to make, to trouble, to disturb.
Mouetizzo, moving, wavering, stirring, wagging. Mouimento, a moving, a
stirring, a wavering, a wagging. Mouuto, as Mosso. Mozza, a wench, a less, a
girl. Also a woman's geere or cunnie. Mozzare, to shorten, to curtall, to cut
off, to behead, to stumpe or maime. Mozzargo, as Sgramfo. Mozzatura, a
curtalling, a cutting off, a shortning, a stumping. Mozzenigo, Look Mocenigo.
Mozzi, snots, dots, or sniuels at the nose. Mozzo, shortened, curtald, cut off,
beheaded, stumped, maimed. Also a boie, a ladde, a wagge. Also the stock of a
wheel. Mozzoraso, a kind of course satin so called. Mucchiare, as Mocchiare.
Mucchio, as Mocchio. Mucchino, a snuff of a candle, a candles end. Muccia,
Mucia, a young cat or kitlin or pusse to play with, a fox tail to brush
withal. Dare lo muccie or mucie, to give a flap with a fox tail, to give a
bobbe. Mucciaccia, a wench, a girl, a less, a harlot, a strumpet, a flurt, a
minx, a trull, a gixie. Mucciare, to fly, to depart, to run away, to escape,
to shift or sneake away by craft. Mucciata, Muciata, a flap or bob with a fox
tail, an escape, a departing, a shifting, running or sneaking away.
Muccichino, a mucketter, a handkercher, a hand-napkin. Muccini, young cats,
kitlins or whelps. Mucidire, disco, dito, to droope, to faint, to fade, to
soften. Also to become mustie, pale, mouldie, hoarie or sinewed. Mucido, tender
or soft, withered, faded, drooping. Also filthy, hoarie, palled, mustie,
mouldie, sinewed. Mucilage, a kind of strange beast. Mucini, young cats,
kitlins or whelps. Mucronata cartilagine, the notable gristle that grows at
the lower end of the breast bone, called the triangular cartilage. Muda, a
change, a shift or suite of apparel. Also a mew, to mew a hawk in. Mudare, to
change, to shift, to alter. Also to mew as hawks and other foul are. Mudato,
Mutato, changed, shifted or altered. Also a mewd hawk. Muffa, mouldines or
mustines. Muffare, to grow mouldie or mustie. Mufiono, a kind of wild beast in
Sardinia, coated like a stag, and horned as a sheep, which makes the best
Cordouan that is. Muffo, Muffato, grown mouldie or mustie, sinewed. Muffola, a
kind of color that goldsmithes call colourish. Muffoso, Muffolente, as Muffo.
Muffire, fisco, fito, as Muffare. Muffri, a kind of beast like a shamoye or
wild goat, as Muffiono. Muganza, a kibe, a chilblaine coming upon ones heel
or hands through cold. Mugghia, bellowings, lowings, roarings, hideous cries,
gronings. Mugghiare, to low and bellow as a bull or cow does. Also to roar or
make a great noise. Also to groan. Mugghio, a lowing or bellowing. Also a
groaning or a roaring and great noise. Mugghire, ghisco, ghito, as Mugghiare.
Muggia, a fish that so loves his make that if he be taken, it will follow him
to the shore and there either be taken or pine away. Some take it for the
mullet. Muggiare, as Mugghiare. Muggine, a fish called a mullet. Muggire,
gisco, gito, as Mugghiare. Muggito, Mugghiato, as Mugghio. Mugile, a kind of
fish called a mullet. Mugio, the fish called a mullet. Mugliare, to shake
between two hands as one would play handie-dandie, to shake together. Mugnaio,
Mugnaro, a miller. Mugnere, as Mongere. Mugolare, to meaw as a cat. Mugolo, a
meawing of a cat. Muiare, to roar as the sea or fall of a water does. Muinare,
as Moinare. Muine, as Moine. Mula, a moyle or mule gotten of a horse and a
female ass. Mulacchia, Mulaccia, a daw, a rooke or a chough. Mulardo, a kind
of dainty fish, which some take for the mullet. Mulatiere, a driuer or keeper
of mules or moiles, as we say a carrier: for the carriers in Italy commonly
drive mules, and use them to carry as we use horses in England. Mulatieresco,
of or pertaining to mules or moiles. Mule, a fish taken for the mullet. Also a
disease in man and beast called kibes or mules or chilblaines. Also pantofles
or slippers. Muletto, a young mule or moile. Mulgere, mulgo, mulsi, mulgiuto,
as Molgere. Muliebre, womanish, effeminate, unconstant, wavering, slipperie, of
or pertaining to a woman. Muliebrita, womanlines, delicatenes. Mulinaio,
Mulinaro, a miller. Mulinamento, as Molinamento. Mulinare, as Molinare.
Mulinello, Mulinetto, as Molinello. Mulino, any kind of mill. Mullei, a kind of
shoe like the turkish shoes up to the middle of the legs that Kings and Princes
were wont to wear. Mullo, a barble fish. Mulo, a horse mule or moile. Also a
bastard. Also a kind of fish which some take for the barble fish. Mulomedico, a
horse-leach or mule-leach. Mulone, a great old moile or mule. Mulsa, the herb
Clarie. Also a drink of wine, honey and spices, as Metheglin. Multa, a
forfeiture, punishment, pain, chasticement, a penalty, a fine, an amercement.
Multi luster, of many years and ages. Mumia, Mummia, a drug made of dead men's
flesh called mummie. Some take it for the liquour that flows out of the Cedar
tree. Munacchia, a chough, a rooke or a daw. Munaio, a miller. Mungere, as
Mongere. Mungiuacche, as Mongiuacche. Mungitore, as Mongitore. Muniaca, the
fruit we call an Apricocke. Muniaco, an Apricocke tree. Municipali huomini,
base condicioned or private householders that are never called to any office or
authority. Municipale, privately belonging to the burges of one city.
Municipio, a city having her own and special officers, laws, and privileges.
Also freedenizon. Munifica, enriched, or endowed with many gifts.
Munisicentia, liberality, largess, bounty. Munifico, free, liberal,
bountiful, that yields fruit and commodity. Munire, nisco, nito, to munite,
to arm, to fence, to strengthen, to fortify, to repair. Munito, munited,
fenced, armed, fortified, strengthened, repaired. Munitione, munition, armor,
garrison, fence, fortification. Munitore, a prouider of munition or armor, a
fortifier. Munto, milched or drawn a teat or dug, dried up. Munusculo, a small
gift, a present. Muolino del' onghia, the paring of ones nails. Muouere, as
Mouere. Muouimento, as Mouimento. Muraglia, any kind of wall. Muraiuola, a kind
of small coin. Also an herb growing upon walls or snaile breeding in walls.
Murale, that pertaines to a wall. Vide Corona. Murare, to build or make up a
wall. Muratore, a builder or bricklayer, a mazon or maker of a wall. Murca, the
snuff of a candle or lamp. Murena, a kind of shell fish, the liquor whereof
make^h a purple color. Muria, a kind of medicament. Also a kind of salt meat
made of the fat of fishes. Murice, an engine of war with sharp points to
cast in the enemies way, called Caltraps. Also a kind of hard shell fish; of
the liquor whereof purple color is made. Muriccio, a poor mud wall.
Muricciolo, a slender thin or small wall, it is also used for a porche. Muro,
Mura, a wall, any kind of wall. Muro a secco, a dry wall. Muro in volta, a
wall made vault or arche-wise. Murone, a kind of conserve, or preserve, or
sweet meat. Murtella, the myrtle tree. Musa, a Muse, or a sweet song. Also
the mose tree having very broad leaves. Musaico, as Mosaico. Musare, to muse,
to think, to surmise. also to muzle, to muffle, to mock, to jest, to gape
idly about, to hold ones musle or snout in the air. Musaruola, a muffler, a
musler, a muzle, a musroll or ca^etzan for a horse. Musata, a mock, a jest, a
skoffe, a taunt. Also a musing. Muscata, a nutmeg. Muschetto, a hawke called a
Musket. Also as Moschetto. Muschiare, to perfume, or make sweet with musk.
Muschiero, Muschiaro, a perfumer or musk seller. Muschio, the sweet perfume
called musk. Musco, as Muschio, it is also green tree moss. Also a musk or
Ciuet cat. Muscolare, Muscoleare, as Muschiare. Muscolo, Muscoli, a muskle or
fleshie part of the body consisting of flesh, veins, sinnewes, and arteries,
being an isntrumental part of the body, serving for voluntary moving, being
a substance harder and endued with less sense then a sinew, as also softer and
endued with more sense then a ligature: it is also an engine of war, under
which the Romans were wont safely to approach to the walls of a town to fill
up the ditches. It is also used for a fish which continually swimmeth before
the whale, and serves as a guide unto him that he run not upon rocks.
Muscoloso, Musculoso, full of muskles, hard and stiff, with many muskles or
braunes of hard and compact flesh. Musco marino, sea moss, flauke, or herb
coral. Muscorini, musk grape flower. Muscoso, mossie, full of moss. Also
full of musk. Muse, Muses or Nymphs, properly the muses or goddesses of
learning, poesy and music. Also poetry, learning or study of good letters.
Museo, a study, a cabinet, a college, a schoole-house for learned men or of
learned men. Also taken for delightful. Museragno, a kind of mouse called a
shrew, deadly to other beasts if he bite them, and laming any body if he but
touch them, of which that curse came I beshrew thee. Museruola, as Musaruola.
Musette, a kind of dainty apple so called in Italy. Musetto, a little musle
or snout. Musiare, to work Mosaico work. Musiatore, a worker in Mosaico
work. Musica, the art of Music, it was used for study of humanity, and
namely poetry: hereof some make three kinds, first, with the voice, 2. with
the hand, 3. with blowing, or as some call it vocal, isntrumental, and
proportional. Also of musical instruments there be three kinds, one in
blowing, as the organs, or the flute, etc. 2. in strings or wyers as the Lute,
the Virginals, etc. the third, in striking or beating, as the drum, etc.
Musicale, Musicheuole, musical, according to music. Musicare, to play the
Musition. Musico, a musition, or singing man. Musillo, a little musle or snout.
Musimone, a beast like a sheep, but has hairie wool like a ram, engendered
of a goat and a ram. Musino, as Musillo. Muso, a musle, a snout, a face.
Also a spout. Muso di cane, a dogs snout. Muso del boccale, the snout of a
pot. Musoli, a kind of fish that swimmeth as a guide before the whale that he
run not upon rocks. Musone, a great musle, snout or face. Musorone, a
nickname for a foolish meacocke, a lumpish pouting fellow, that in good
company will not speak with others, but lout and pout. Mussare, to mumble or
speak between the teeth. Mussatore, a mumbler or speaker between the teeth.
Musse, mumblings in speech. Mussitare, as Mussare. Musso, soft speech or
silence. Mussolo, a kind of great oister. Also an Ass hoof. Also a
wyer-drawers tool. Mustacchio, a horses lower part of his head, which we call
the mosell. Mustaccio, Mustazzo, as Mostaccio. Mustaccione, as Mostaccione.
Mustalo, a wyer-drawers tool. Mustella, a Weasell. Also a Powte or Eele-powte.
Mustellino, a kind of color like a weasel. Muta a muta, by turns, one after
another. Also as Muda. Mutabile, mutable, inconstant, moveable, wavering,
changeable. Mutabilita, mutabilitie, inconstancy, waueringnes, uncertainty.
Mutade, panniers or paddes, such as Rippiers bring fish in. Mutamento, a
change, an alteration, a shifting, a remoouing, a transformation, a
translating, a disguising. Mutande, thin vnder-breeches, such as wrestlers
use for lightness. Mutare, to change, to translate, to turn, to disguise, to
shift, to alter, to remove, to transform. Also to make dombe, mute, still, or
silent. Also to mue a hawk, or any other foul. Mutatione, as Mutamento.
Muteggiare, to be dumb, or play the mute man. Mutezza, mutenes, dumnes,
silence. Muti, a kind of verses called blanke verses. Mutilare, to maime or
diminish in some limme or member, to cut. Mutilamento, a maiming, or maime in
some limme. Mutilato, maimed, imperfect in some limme, cut off. Mutinare, to
mutiny. Mutino, a mutiny. Mutire, tisco, tito, to make dumb or mute, or put
to silence. Muto, Mutolo, mute, dumb, speechless, silent, tonguelesse, quiet,
still, making no noise. Also a blanke verse. Mutuamente, mutually,
enterchangeably. Mutuare, to lend, to borrow, to take of another, and use as
his own. Mutulo, a stay cut out of stone or timber in building to bear up the
summer or other part, in masonrie they call it a corbell, in timber work a
bracket, or shouldring piece. Also a kind of shelfish that the Venetians call
Capparuole, or Cappe. Muzza, a baude or pander. Muzzaro, as the fish
Moscardino. Muzzo, a hee-baude, or applesquire. Also a cod or codfish. Also a
whiting mop.
N
NAbissare, to make a rumbling noise as water does at a downfall. Nacca, a
cradle, a child's rattle to play with. Naccare, bagpipes, dromslades, a childs
rattle. Also sarts. Also the shellfish which some call a nackre. Naccari,
tush, fie, no, gods, what? Nadir, the point directly opposite to the Zenith,
or the point underneath the Horizon, right and underneath our feet. Naffe,
Look Gnaffe. Naffiare, as Inaffiare. Nafissa, a woman taken to be the
protectresse or patroness of whores. Nafta, a kind of liquor like oil, or a
kind of chalkie clay, which having fire put to it will burn so that no water
can quench it: some call it Petroll. Nagene, the roots we call Turnips.
Naiade, elfes, nymphs or fairies, haunting rivers and fountains. Nalba, a
kind of herb. Nalda, a kind of garment used in Bocace his time. Namorato, as
Inamarato. Nanerelli, little dwarfes, pigmeyes, or ^wattles. Nanfa, sweet or
perfumed water, smelling of musk and orange leaves. Nanigio, lothsomnes,
horror, contempt. Nanigioso, loathsome, horrible, irksome. Nanino, Nanetto, a
little dwarf, or a pigmey. Nano, a dwarf, or dandiprat. Nanna, a word that
women use to still their children with, as we say lullabie. Also the name
Nanne. Some think it may be used for mournful songs, or alluring verses.
Nanti, Nanzi, before, sooner, rather, liefer, ear. Nantilo, a kind of fish.
Nanzi pasto, a repast before a meal, dishes that are first served in for
appetite sake. Napa, a bird like unto a partridge. Napee, flower nymphs.
Napello, the herb called wolfes bane. Napicciata, a salt stone, such as
pigeons feed on. Nappa, a table-cloth, a drinking-cloth, a napkin. Nappatello,
a little cup, mazor, goblet, or drinking dish. Nappe, labels hanging down,
ribands or tassels of a garland, hawks iesses, the varuels of a hawke. Nappo,
a cup, a mazor, a goblet or drinking dish, a godard. Narancia, the fruit
called an Orange. Narancio, an orange tree. Narcissino, a kind of precious
ointment made of white daffodillies. Narciso, the herb called white laus
tibi, or the flower called a white daffodillie. Narcotico, causing
astonishment, amazement, or wonderment. Nardo, the herb spikenard or spike.
Also a kind of precious ointment made of spikenard. Narica, a kind of little
fish which swimmeth very softly. Narici del naso, the nostrils. Also the nayres
of a hawke. Naridole, a shell fish, in latin Nerita. Narrabile, that may be
showed, told, or declared. Narrare, to show, to tell, to report, to declare, to
relate, to express, to discourse, to demonstrate, to speak, to say, to utter.
Narratione, a narration, a tale, a report, a relation, a declaration, a
discourse, a demonstration, a saying. Narratiua, as Narratione. Narratiuo, that
may be showed, told, reported, declared, related, uttered, expressed, said,
spoken, discoursed, or demonstrated. Nasaggine, a nosenes or quality of ones
nose. Nasale, a remedy or cover for the nose, of or pertaining to a nose.
Nasamonite, a stone of sanguine color, with little black veins in it. Nasare,
to smell, to sent, to nose. Nasamento, a traine-sent, a smelling, a sent.
Nascente, rising, growing, springing, beginning, new budding. Nascenza, a
growth, a growing. Also a swelling, an impostume. Also a birth, or nativity.
Nascere, nasco, nacqui, nato, or nasciuto, to be borne, but in herbs to grow,
to spring, to bud forth, to breed, to be engendered, to begin, to rise.
Nasciuto, Nato, borne, grown, sprung, budded, or sprouted, bread, engendered.
Nasche, nome di part o membro d'un cauallo. Nascimento, a birth, a growing, a
springing, a nativity. Nascita, as Nascimento, as Nassita. Nascondere, scondo,
scosi, scoso, or scosto, to hide, to conceal, to lurk. Nascoso, Nascosto,
hidden, concealed, lurked, secret. Nascondeuole, secret, close, solitary,
where one may hide himself. Nascondimento, a hiding, a lurking. Nascondigli,
Nascondaglie, lurking-holes, by-nookes, hiding-places, sluts corners. Nasea, a
discourse of noses. Nasello, a cod, or cod-fish. Also a whiting fish.
Nasipurgio, a kind of liquor to draw up into the nose to purge the head
withal. Nasito, the weed watercresses. Also wild mint. Nasitorto, as
Nasturcio. Naso, a nose. Also a beak. Nasone, a great nose. Naso adunco, a
beake-nose, a hawke-nose, a crooked nose. Naso amaccato, schiacciato, a flat,
or squeased nose. Naso acquilino, an eagles nose. Naso camuso, a flat nose like
a shooing ho^ne. Naso del boccale, the beak or spout of a pot. Napamento, a
reeling or winding up of ^lke. Naspare, to reele or wind up silk or ^arne.
Naspatrice, a reeler, or windresse ofthrid, silk or yarne. Naspo, a reele for
silk or yarne. Nassa, a we will, or bownet to take fish in. Some call it a haske
or w^ker pad. Nassio, a kind of marble stone. Nasso, an ewe tree. Also another
t^^ like a fur tree, which is venomous. Nassita, a birth, or birth time, or
breeding or falling of any cattle. Nastari, snares or bonds made of silk
eibones. Nasto, a kind of meat made of meal, oil, honey and spice. Also a
kind of pole, reed or canes, whereof in time past they made arrows and
darts. Nastro, any kind of silk ribond. Also a sign in heaven. Also the part
of the ring whereinto the stone is set, or a seal is graven. Nasturcio,
Nasturzo, the herb wild mint, or nose-smart. Also water cresses. Nasuto,
nosed, having a nose. Nata, a wenne, or flesh growing upon ones body. Also
borne. Natale, Christmas day, or the birth day of any body, or ones nativity
day. Also native or natural, or belonging to a man's birth. Natalitio, a birth
day, or day of nativity. Natare, to swim, to floate. Natatile, Natatoio,
that swimmeth or floateth as waterfowle does. Naticchia, as Saliscende.
Natiche, the buttocks, hanches, or bummes Naticuta, well buttockt, broad arst,
bumbasted about the bumme. Natio, natural, native, borne with one. Nationale,
national, pertaining to one nation. Natione, a nation, a country, a people
having their beginning in the cuntrie where they dwell. Natiuita, nativity or
birth. Natiuo, native or natural, used also for borne and bread in such a
place, or naturally engendered in a thing. Nato, borne, bread, having
beginning, descending of, brought forth, framed of nature, descended from.
Natrice, a water-snake. Also an herb, the root whereof stinketh like a
g^ate. Natta, a white spot or pearl in ones eye. Also a wenne. Also as
Cilecca. Nattico, a kind of salt so called. Natto, a kind of little fish.
Natura, the nature, quality, condition, manners, fashion, property, virtue,
strength, natural inclination, motion or constitution of a creature, which as
Seneca says is nothing but god or reason divine, sown in all the world, and
all the parts thereof. Also the privy members of man or beast. Also the privy
parts or quaint of a woman, that whereby a thing is properly in that kind that
it is. Natural, natural, of or according to nature, lawful. Also a man's
priuities. Also a base borne, or bastard. Naturalezza, as Naturalita.
Naturalita, nature, naturalitie, liberty, denisonship, franchise. Naturalone,
a plain homely man, or a well tooled man. Naturare, to enure, to accustom, to
naturalize. Nauale, pertaining to ships or sailing. Also a ship dock wherein
ships are built, vide Corona. Naue, any kind of ship, boat, or bark. Also
the i will of a church. Naufragare, to suffer shipwreck, to wrack. Naufragio,
shipwreck, wrack on the sea. Naufrago, sea-beaten, suffering shipwreck.
Nauicabile, that may be sailed, nauigable, where ships may pass. Nauicante, a
sailer or seaman, he that saileth. Nauicare, to sail or travel by sea.
Nauicatione, navigations or art of sailing. Nauicamento, a sailing or wandering
by sea. Nauicatore, a nauigator, a sailer, a seaman. Nauicchia, that part of a
mill wherein the grinding stones do turn. Nauicella, Nauetta, a little bark,
bote, ship or pinnace. Also a weauers shuttle. Also the incense pan of a
church. Also a kind of coin. Also the knee pan in a man's leg. also a bone
in a man's heel. Also a kind of simnell, cracknell or bun of bread. Nauigabile,
as Nauicabile. Nauigante, as Nauicante. Nauigare, as Nauicare. Nauigatione, as
Nauicatione. Nauigatore, as Naui^atore. Nauigiaro, a shipwright, a shipman.
Nauigio, Na^iglio, any kind of ship, boat or b^rke. Nauile, N^iuilio, any
kind of ship. Naulet, passage money or ferrie money. Na^sse, Nauone, the root
nauew. It is a k^s^ of rape. Nauo^ilio, a sea fish like a cuttle. Naus^a,
nausines, a desire to vomit, but no vomit, lothing or abhorring of things.
Nauta, a shipman, a sailer, a boatesman, a shipper, a mariner. Nautilio, a
kind of fish which at a pipe which is upon his back casts out much water, and
uses ce^taine broad fins he has both for wings ^o fly with, and as sails to
flote up and down the water, and his feet for oars, and his tail in stead
of a helm or rudder. Naxia, Nassia, a kind of white stone. Ne, without a
verb, neither, nor, also in, or in the: with a verb, sometimes it signifies
any, some, of it, of the same, thereof: sometimes it stands for us, to us, unto
us, from us: and other times it stands for thence, hence, from hence, from
thence, away. Also either, or so much as. Neade, a beast in Samos with so
strong a voice that when it roareth, it shakes the earth, whose bones are so
big that they are kept for a marvel. Nebbia, a cloud, an ouercasting of the
sky, a miste, a fogge, or any such deawie exhalation: it is properly a
thickning of exhalations, having in it plentiful force to engender water:
taken also for a multitude together. Also adversity or trouble or any thing
wherewith the knowledge of man's is hid and ouercast. Nebbiare, to be mistie
or foggie, or cloudie, to cloud, to ouercloude, to make cloudie or obscure.
Nebbiarella, Nebbietta, a little miste, fogge or cloud, a deawie exhalation,
thinner then a cloud. Nebbigenio, one engendered of a cloud, the c^ntaures are
so called. Nebbione, simple witted or shallow headed. Also a great must. Also
a rough, tempestuous, stormy miste or cloud. Nebbioso, mistie, foggie,
cloudie, full of clouds, boistrous, rough, stormy, tempestuous. Nebrite, a
kind of precious stone. Necessario, necessary, needful, inevitable.
E'necessario, it is needful, it is re^uisite, it must be. Also a privy, a
takes, a close-stoole. Necessita, necessity, need, urgent business.
Necessitare, to constrain, to force, to compel. Necessitoso, needy, poor,
lacking. Necessitudine, need, necessity, also kin or alliance, or a knot of
allia. Necia, a funeral ceremony at (...) ^raues of dead men. Necidalo, a
worm which in six^ weeks space does turn to a silk worm. Necromante, an
enchanter, a nigromant a coniurer of spirits* Necromantia, nigro mancie,
enchanting, divination by calling of spirits. Ned, neither, nor ^^sed in verse.
Neente, nothin^* as Niente. Nefando, wicked, execrable, heinous, mischievous,
horrible, not to be spoken of, not to be named, lewd. Nefand eria, wickedness,
mischieuousnes, execrablenes, horriblenes. Nefariamente, wickedly,
mischievously, lewdly, villanously. Nefario, cursed, wicked, full of
mischief, detestable, villainous. Nefro, a kind of eagle or faulkon. Negare,
to deny, to renounce, to refuse, to abjure, to say no. Negamento, a denial, a
refusal. Negatione, Negatura, as Negamento. Negatiuo, negative, denying.
Neghienza, as Negligentia. Neghittoso, idle, slothful, negligent, lazy,
retchles, lither. Negletto, despised, neglected, forgon, contemned, lightly
regarded, not set by. Negli, Nelli, in the. Negligente, negligent, careless,
retchlesse, not regarding. Negligentia, negligence, retc^ssenes, contempt, ill
regard. Negotiana, the herb Tobacco. Negotiare, to exercise, to negociate, to
deal, to occupy, to emploe, to be busied, to exercise merchandise, to occupy
a woman. Negotiante, a dealer, an exerciser, an occupier, a soliciter, ^
factor. Negotiatore, as Negotiante. Negotio, business, dealing, occupying, an
errand, affairs, matters, cumbersomnesse. Negotioso, busy, full of business,
much busied. Negotta, nothing, or any thing. Negrare, to darken, to black^, to
obscure, to deface, to blemish, to disable, to disparage ones credit. Negressi
conserve. Negretto, somewhat black, blackish, or swart. Negrezza, blacknes,
blackishnes, swartnesse. Negricante, blackish, brown, sable, swart. Negriccio,
blackish, black, sootie, sable, dark, obscure, dun, swart. Negrire, grisco,
grito, as Negrare. Negro, black, sable, dark, swart. Negromante, a nigromant,
an enchanter. Negromantia, nigromancie, enchanting. Nel, Nella, Nello, Nelle,
Ne', Nei, Nelli, Negli, in the. Nel far del giorno, by break of day. Nel
torno, about. Nel'un nel' altro, neither one nor the other. Nembo, a great
shower of rain, a sudden storm of rain or hail. Also a tempest of weather,
a dark tempestuous weather. Also a cloud or great blast of wind. Also a
cloud that Poets say the Painims gods were wont to descend in from heaven.
Nembo di vento, a gust, a berrie, a flawe or whoorr of winds. Nemboso,
stormy, tempestuous, cloudie, rainie. Nembrilla, a fish called an halibut.
Nemei, a sacred kind of games among the Grecians. Nemicamente, like a foe or an
enemy. Nemicare, to provoke to anger, to move one to be his enemy* or foe.
Nemicheuole, like an enemy or a foe. Nemicitia, enmity. Nemico, an enemy or
a foe, a foeman. Nemista, enmity. Nena, a nurce or foster mother. Nencio, a
fool, an idiot, a natural, a doult, a gull. Neo, a natural mark or mole, or
freckle upon the skin of any body. Neomenia* the time of the new moon.
Nepente, an herb which put into wine drives away sadness. Some take it for
buglosse. Nepeta, the herb mint, neppe, or catmint. Nepetella, Nepitella, as
Nepeta. Nephelide, small spots in the eyes. Nephrite, an ache in the raines of
the back. Also the stone or gravel in the raines. Nephritico, he that is
troubled with pains in the raines of the back. Nepitelli, the nipples of a
dug or teat. Nepote, a nephew, ones brothers child. Also the son or
daughters son, a grandchild. Nepoti, has been used for posterity,
offspring or succession. Nepotino, a little nephewe or a great grandchild,
whether it be by son or daughter. Neputo, the herb bush calamint or air
calamint. Nequitezza, as Nequitia. Nequitia, wickedness, treachery, baores,
lewdnes, unthriftiness, naughtines, ^ngratiousnes, negligence. Nequitoso,
wicked, bad, lewd, unthrift, ungracious naughty. Nerare, as Negrare. Nerbo,
as Neruo. Nerboso, as Neruoso. Nerbotuto, Nerbuto, as Neruoso. Nerbosita, as
Neruosita. Nereggiare, to grow or become black (...) ^^darke. Nereggiante,
blackish, drawing towa^ black, sad, sable, duskie. Nereide, sea nymphs. also
a kind of monstrous fish. Neretto, as Negretto. Nerezza, as Negrezza. Nericcio,
as Negriccio. Nero, black, dark, sable. Neronarie, cruel, Neronian
cruelties. Neruigno, as Neruoso. Neruo, Nerbo, a sinew. Also strength, force,
might or power. Also stoutnes or constancy of mind. Also the string of a
harp, of a lute or other instrument. Also used for the yard of a man, and in
leaves the nerve, sinews or veins. Neruo crinale, a sinew going from the head
down to the neck. Neruo di bue, a bulls pizell. Neruoso, Nerboso, having great
or many sinews, pithie or strongly made in body, neruie. Neruoruto, Neruuto,
as Neruoso. Neruosita, sinewenes, strength, toughnes, the having of sinews and
strength. Neruulo, Nescientemente, unwittingly, ignorantly, vnknowingly.
Nescientia, ignorance or want of knowledge. Nescio, a fool, an idiot, a
natural, a dolt. One that knows nothing, ignorant. Nescione, a great fool,
idiot, gull or natural. Nespola, the fruit we call a Medler or an open-arse.
also a kind of musical instrument without strings. Nespolo, a Medler tree.
Nessunamente, by no means, in no wise, at no hand. Nessuno, no one, no body,
not any one, not any. Nestare, to ingraffe. Nestatore, an ingraffer. Nesto, a
graffe, an impe, a set, a planting, a scien. Nettamente, neatly, cleanly,
purely, finely, handsomely, smugly. Nettadenti, a maker clean of teeth. Also a
tooth picker. Nettare, to cleanse, to polish, to make clean, to sweep, to
brush, to skoure. Nettare, a pleasant liquor fained to be the drink of the
gods called Nectar. Netta orecchie, an eare-picke. Nettarea, the herb
Elecampane. Nettareo, immortal, divine, sweet, pleasant, Nectar-like.
Nettezza, cleanlines, neatnes. Netto, neat, fine, clean, polished, smug,
smirke, handsome. Nettuto, clean, neat, fine, polished, as Netto. Neuare, to
snow. Neuegare, idem. Neue, snow. Neuicare, to snow. Neuigare, idem. Neuigare
al monte, to begin to have white hairs about the temples. Neuno, no one, no
body. Neuo, as Neo. Neuoso, snowie, full of snow. Neuola, as Nebbia. Also a
kind of simnell, wafer, cracknell or sugar bread. Neurico, one that has the
gout in the sinews. Neutrare, to be neutrall, to take neither part, to be
indifferent, to be between both. Neutralita, indifferency, neutrality.
Neutro, neuter, indifferent, between both, neither the one nor the other,
belonging to neither, neutrall. Nezza, a niece. Nezzina, a little niece, a man's
daughters daughter. Niaso, an eyase hawk. Nibbio, a kite or a puttock or a
buzzard or a glade. Also a kind of fish. Niccihia, a nocke, a corner.
Nicchiare, to lament, to grieve or fret inwardly, to dodge, to miche, to
grumble closely or show some sign of discontent, to stand thrumming of hats,
to speak doubtful words, to hang off and on, as if more money would make all
well. Nicchio, the shell of any shell fish, a nooke or corner. Also such little
cubboords in churches as they put images in or that images stand in. also a
bird in India so great that will take up an Elephant alive, and being aloft in
the air let him fall down and so kill him and then eat him, whose feathers
are said to be three score soote long. Nicchietti, little round pibble stones.
Nicciola, a small nut. Niccolo, a kind of pibble stone. Nicerobiano, a kind of
precious ointment. Nicosiana, the herb Tobacco. Nidare, to nuzzle, to nestle,
to build a nest. Nidaso, an eyase hawk taken out of the nest. Nidata, as
Nidiata. Nidetto, a little nest or roosting place. Nidiata, a nestfull, a
couie, a beauie, an airie, a brood, a sitting, etc. Nidificare, to build or
make a nest. Nidio, Nido, a nest or roost. Niegare, as Negare. Niego, a
denial, refusal. Also as Neo. Niello, a fool, a gull, a sot, a ninnie.
Niffolare, as Musare. Niffolo, as Muso, or as Ceffo. Nigella, the herb
Pepper-woort, narde or Coriander of Rome. Some take it for the herb Githe or
Bishops-woort or sweet savor, it is very good against rheumes. Niggo, as
Nibbio. Nigotta, as Niente. Nigredine, blackishnes, blacknes. Nigricante,
blackish, black, broune, sable. Nigrino, Nigrigno, blackish, dun. Nigromante,
as Negromante. Nigromantia, as Negromantia. Niffola, a muzzle or muffler.
Niente, nothing, any thing, naught, nothing at all, not any thing.
Nientedimanco, nevertheless, notwithstanding. Nientedimeno, as Nientedima^^o.
Nimfa, a nymphe whereof there be many sorts. Also a new married wife or bride.
also such ruff bands as are worn now a days. Also the hollownes or void
space in the nether lip. Also the cup of any flower by little and little gaping
and opening it self. Also among physicians a little piece of flesh rising up
in the midst of a woman's privy parts, which closes the mouth of the neck and
drives cold from it. Also young bees before they fly. Nimfadoro, Nimfodoro,
an effeminate, wanton, milke-sop, perfumed ladies-courting courtier. Nimfarsi,
to trim, to smug, to trixie, to deck or spruce himself up as a nimphe or as
one that would always court his mistress. Nimfeo, nimphe-like, wanton,
effeminate. Nimicare, as Nemicare, as Inimicare. Nimicheuole, as Nemicheuole.
Nimicitia, enmity, deadly feud, hatred, foedom. Nimico, an enemy or a foe, a
foeman. Nimieta, an overmuch quantity or excess, too much abundance.
Nimista, enmity or feud. Nimo, a fool, a gull, a ninnie, a meacocke. Nimpha,
Nimpharsi, as Nimfa. Nimphadoro, as Nimfadoro. Ninfadoro, as Nimfadoro. Ninna,
a foolish wanton wagging of the head. Fare la ninna, to play the wanton.
Nipote, a nephew. Nipotella, the herb burnet or Pimpernel. Nipotino, a little
nephew or ones sons child. Niquitia, iniquity, wickedness. Niquitoso, full
of iniquity, mischievous, or furious. Niquo, wicked, ungodly, as Iniquo.
Niso, a kind of Eagle, or the female of a sparrow hawke. Also a kind of fish.
Nisso, a star in the firmament called in latin Ingeniculum. Also the god of
childbearing. Also the birth of a child, or a childbearing. Nissunamente, as
Nessunamente. Nissuno, no one, none, no body, not any, not one. Nitido,
clean, neat, gay, trim, smugge, spruse, bright, shining. Nitorano, a
night-rauen, or night-crow. Nitrire, trisco, trito, to neigh as a horse does.
Nitrito, neighed as horses do. Also the neighing of a horse. Nitrimento, the
neighing of a horse. Nitro, nitre, a matter much like salt, of color white,
with holes in it, and spungie. take it and boil it and refine it, and it will
be borace that goldsmiths use to solder with. Some do abusiuely take it for
salt-peeter to make gunne-pouder with. Also used for a stone-salt, or salt
stone used in dove houses. Also the neighing of a horse. Nitroso, grettie, full
of salt-peeter. Nittalopia, a disease coming in the eyes. Nittare, to twinkle
with the eye, or wink for want of sleep. Nitticorace, a night-rauen. Also a
schreech-owle. Niuale, snowie, snowish. Niuello, a kind of fine singing bird.
Niueo, snowe-white color. Niunamente, as N^ssunamente. Niuno, no one, not one,
not any, no body. Nizzola, a little beast much like a weesell. Also a kind of
precious stone. Also an herb. No* no, not. Noale, any place, room, or thing
that contains choice and variety of things as Noah's ark did. general,
common, vulgar. Also Christmas day, or the birth day of any body. Nobile,
noble, excellent, famous, greatly known, a gentleman. Also a certain coin in
England, called a Noble. Nobilista, a professor of nobility, a herald.
Nobilitare, to ennoble, to make noble, to promote to dignity. Nobilita,
Nobilta, nobility, excellency, worthiness, noblenes of birth, a noble race,
estimation, dignity, renown. Nocca, the nocke of a bow. Also the knuckle of
ones fingers. Nocche, the knuckles of a man's hand. Nocchia, as Nocca. Also a
nut. Nocchio, a knot, a knob, or ruggednes of any wood. Also as Nocciolo.
Nocchioso, as Nocchiuio. Nocchiuto, knobbie, knottie, rugged as a crabsticke,
crabbed. Nocciola, Nocciuola, as Nocetta. Nocciolo, Nocciuolo, the stone of any
fruit, as peach or olive. Also a hazell nut tree. Also a kind of play that
children use, or else the nut to throw at Castelletto. Nocci, nut trees. Nocco,
a nut tree, a knuckle bone, the nock of a bow, a gull, a sot, a fool, a
ninnie. Noce, any kind of nutte. Noce moscata, a nutmeg. Noce della balestra,
the nutte of a crossebow. Noce del collo, the nape of the head. Noce d'India,
an Indian nut. Nocepina, a pineapple. Noce del ginocchio, the pan of ones
knee. Noce metello, a kind of Indian nut. Noce vomico, a kind of Indian nut.
Nocetta, Nocella, any kind of small or hasell nut. Nocere, Nuoco, nocqui,
nociuto, to hurt, to annoy, to damnifie, to harm, to offend, to endomage, to
hinder. Nociuto, hurted, annoyed, damnifyed, harmed, offended, endomaged,
hindered. Nocente, guilty, witting, knowing, nocent, hurting, dangerous,
noisome, harmefull, that has done a trespass or injury. Noceuole, hurtful,
noisome, dangerous, harmefull, that may hurt or do harm. Nocimento, as
Nocumento. Nociuo, as Noceuole. Nocumento, hurt, damage, harm, wrong,
hinderance. Nodare, to knotte, to knit, to tie with knottes. Noddo, a noddie, a
fool, a patch, a gull, a ninnie. Nodia, an herb that curriers use called
mularie. Nodi di salomone, love knottes, or love entanglings. Nodificare, to
make knots, or fill with knots. Nodo, a knot or a knob, a knurre. Also a joint.
Also an intricate matter. Nodo celeste, or Celeste nodo, the sign Pisces. Also
those two places in the which the circle of the moons motion, or of any other
planet out of the ecliptike, used also for the knuckles or turning ioints in
the backbone or chine. Nodoso, knottie, knobbie, crabbed, surly, hard, tough,
full of knots or knurres. Nodoroso, Noderoso, as Nodoso. Nodrigare, as Nodrire.
Nodrire, nodrisco, nodrito, to nourish, to foster, to find, to feed, to bring
up. Nodrimento, Nodritura, nourishment, food, finding, sustenance,
maintenance. Nodritore, a nourisher, a fosterer, a finder, a feeder, a
sustainer. Noema, a sentence, when one thing is meant and another spoken. Nohier
l'altro, the day before yesterday, the other day. Noi, we, us. Noi altri, we
others. Noi ce lo, we our selves, it, or the same. Noi ce ne, we our selves
thereof. Noi stessi, or medesimi, we our selves. Noia, annoiance, annoy, hurt,
harm, trouble. Noiare, to annoy, to harm, to trouble. Noioso, Noicuole,
noyous, noisome, tedious, troublesome. Nol, for non il, not it, not the, not
him. Nol^re, to hire any moving thing, as a horse, or as a ship. Noleggiare,
idem. Nolatore, a hyrer, a hackney man. Noleggiante, idem. Nolesino, idem. Noli
me tangere, a kind of mercury, the seed whereof as one touches does skip
away. Also a kind of disease in the nose. Look Polipo. Nolla, for Non la.
Nollo, for Non lo. Nolo, the hire of any moving thing, as of horses, ships, or
boats. Also the passage money, or freight of a ship. Nomarca, he that has the
pre-eminence in the administration of laws as a chief officer. Nomare, to
name, to ecclip, to hight, to ming. Nomatamente, namely, by name. Nome, a name,
a nomination, a title, an honor, a calling, a noune. Also but, only, except,
saving. Also certain painful sores, which by creeping on do eat up and
consume the body. Nomenclatore, he that knows the names of things and
persons, and calls them thereby. Nomerare, to number, to count, to tell.
Nominaglio, an officer or bedell to call or register men's names. Nominanza, a
name or naming or denomination, a mentioning. Nominare, to name, to eclip, to
hight, to ming, to appoint, to mention, to nominate. Nominatamente, namely,
especially, particularly, expressly. Nominatiuo, the nominative or right case.
Nominato, a name or naming, named. Nominatore, a namer or giver of names. Non,
no, not, between two verber, but. Nona, noone, noonetide. Also an hour to go
to service after dinner. Non anco, ancora, not yet, not as yet. Non che, not
only, much-lesse. None, the nones of every month, because from that day
nine are counted to the Ides, they are the first days after the calends, that
is to say after the first day of the month, in March, May, June and October
there be six, but in all the other months but fowre-looke Fare le none. Non
hora, not now, not at this time. Non may, never, at no time. Non non, no no, no
indeed. Non perdio, no by God. Non couelle, fables or tales of no worth, or
consequence, matters of nothing. Non importa, no force, it is no matter, it
skils not. Non per nulla, no by no means, at no hand. Non prima, no sooner.
Non si tosto, no sooner. Non posso non, I can not but, I can not ch^se but. Non
punto, no whit, no jot. Non pero di meno, notwithstanding yet, nevertheless.
Non pure, not only, much less. Non instante, notwithstanding, nevertheless.
Non solo, not only. Nondimeno, Nondimanco, nevertheless, notwithstanding,
yet. Nonanta, ninety, fowerscore and ten. Nonantesimo, the nintieth in order.
Noncupare, to pronounce, to calby name, to rehearse, to make mention by word of
mouth. Noncupatione, a pronouncing, a reciting, a declaration of a will by word
of mouth. Nonio, the name of a color. Non meno, no less. Non meno che, no
less then. Nonna, a grandmother, a beldame. Nonne, but that, but only,
except. Nonno, a grandsire, a grandfather. Non nulla, a matter of nothing,
naught, nothing, naught at all. Nono, the ninth in number. Nonoplo, nine-fold,
nine double. Nonupo, nine-times double, a payment used in Naples for some
forfaitures. Nora, Nuora, a man's sons wife, a daughter in law. Norma, a rule, a
level, a line, a direction, a trace, a form, a fashion, a president. Normare,
to follow rule and direction, form, fashion, or trace. Normatamente, according
to rule, line, and square, after the manner, custom and form. Normeuole, that
will be ruled, governed, directed, formed, or fashioned. Nosco, with us, in our
company. Nosella, as Nocetta. Also the kernels that breed between the skin
and the flesh. Nosellaro, Nosello, a hazell nut tree. Nostrale, of ours, of our
country or kind. Nostralmente, according to us, or our fashion. Nostrano, as
Nostrale. Nostro, our, ours. Nota, a note, a mark, a sign, a blot, a blemish,
a token, a touch of infamy, a notice, an observation, a warning, a
forewarning, a note of music. Notabile, notable, or worthy to be marked and
noted. Notabilita, notablenes. Notamento, a noting, a marking, an observing, an
aduisement. Notare, to note, to mark, to observe, to discern, to advertise,
to blemish, to touch, to reprove, to twit, to rebuke, to accuse, to call, to
term, to defame. Notato, noted, marked, advertised, observed, discerned,
blemished, touched, reproved, twitted, rebuked, accused, defamed. Notaro,
Notaio, a notarie, a scriuener. Notatione, a notation, a marking, a noting, an
observing, a consideration. Notatore, a noter, a marker, an obseruer. Notia, a
precious stone falling down with showers. Notificare, to notify, to make
known, to give notice. Notificatione, a notification or publishing.
Notificatore, a proclaimer, a crier, a publisher. Notione, knowledge,
understanding, acquaintance, the examination of a cause in judgment. Notitia,
notice, knowledge, advertisement, understanding, acquaintance. Noto, noted,
known, marked, famous, apparent, acquainted, discerned, notable, observed.
Also the south or southern wind. Notomia, as Anatomia. Notomista, as
Anatomista. Notomizzare, as Anatomizzare. Notorio, notorious known, marked.
Notricare, as Nodrire. Nottare, to wax night. Nottata, a nights work. Notte,
night. Also quicksilver, according to alchimists phrases. Notteggiare, to
frequent or do night-workes, to wax night. Nottola, a bird flying in the
dark, a bat or a rear mouse. Also a schrecke owl. Notturnale, nocturnally,
nightly. Notturno, nocturnall, nightlie. Notulani, a kind of dainty bird.
Noua, new, fresh, a novelty, a new report. Nouamente, newly, freshly.
Nouanta, ninety. Nouantina, a number of 90. Nouastro, newish, modern.
Nouatione, an innovation, an alteration. Noue, nine. Also news, novelties.
Nouecento, nine hundredth. Nouella, a tale, a novel, a novelty, a discourse, a
news, a message. Nouellante, a news teller, a reporter of tales or fables.
Nouellare, to tell or report news, fables, tales or nouels* Nouellatore, a
teller of tales or nouels. Nouellette, pretty news, or newfangles, or tales
or fables. Nouelliero, Nouellista, as Nouellante. Nouello, new, fresh, of late.
Nouelluzze, foolish, idle, or childish fables, toys, tales, bables, trifles,
new-fangles. Nouembre, the month of November. Noue mill, nine thousand.
Nouendiale, a solemnity or sacrificing at burials used nine days after the
party was dead. Also of nine days space or continuance. Nouerare, to number,
to tell, to count. Nouero, a number. Nouerca, a mother in law, a stepdame.
Nouicello, a turnecote, runnegate, or nouice. Nouilunio, the time of the new
moon, the new moon. Nouina, a stance of verses consisting of nine. Nouita,
novelty, news, or alteration, strangenes, newnes. Nouitiato, the state and
function of a nouice. Also entered or past a nouice. Also a place for nouices
and scholars to be brought up in. Nouitio, a young nouice, a freshman. Nouizza,
a bride, a spouse, a new-maried wife, a nouice. Nouizzo, as Nouitio. Nouo, new,
rare, strange, fresh, uncouth, not seen before, sudden. Nozze, nuptials,
weddings, marriages. Nube, as Nebbia. Nubigenio, as Nebbigenio. Nubilare, as
Nebbiare. Nubilo, Nubiloso, as Nebbioso. Nuca, the nape of the head. Nucca, as
Nocca. Nudare, to discover, to make bare or naked, to explain, to strip naked,
to spoil, to leave succourlesse, to disclose, to make void. Also to make
clear, plain or evident, to uncover, to reveal. Nudezza, nakedness,
barrennes, poverty, barenes. Nudita, as Nudezza. Nudo, bare, naked,
discovered, uncovered, destitute of, poor. Also plain, clear, evident,
without fraud, guile or glosing, made void, revealed, uncovered. Nudrire,
nudrisco, nudrito, as Nodrire. Nudrimento, as Nodrimento. Nudrice, Nutrice, a
nurce, a nourisher. Nudritiuo, nourishing, nutritive. Nudritore, a he nource, a
nourisher. Nudritura, nourishment, nourture, food. Nugola, a cloud or
ouercasting of the sky. Nugolare, as Nebbiare. Nugoloso, as Nebbioso. Nugolo,
a cloud. Nulla, nothing, naught, ought, any thing. Nulladimanco, nevertheless,
yet, notwithstanding. Nulladimeno, as Nulladimanco. Nullamente, by no means,
in no wise, at no hand. Nullare, to disanull, to frustrate, to make void, and
of no effect. Nullita, a disanulling, a nullitie, of no effect, nothing,
annihilation. Nullo, no one, not any, any, some, not any one, vain, blanke, of
no force. Numachia, a fight or combat by sea. Nume, the power, will, majesty,
might, deity, majesty or will of God. Sometime a God, a deity. Also a
sovereign or divine power and majesty. Also power or authority. Also an
oracle or judgment. Numella, a tumbrell wherein malefactors were punished, or a
kind of pillorie or stocks. Numerabile, that may be numbered, numerable, that
may be told. Numerale, as Numerabile, pertaining to number. Numerate, to
number, to tell, to count, to sum, to reckon in order. Numerario, as
Numerale. Numeratione, a numbering, a sum, a numeration. Numeratore, a
numbrer, a teller, a counter. Numero, a number, a count, a sum, a quantity.
Also order, due time and proportion. Also measure and order in syllables or
verses. Also a true verse. Numerosita, a number, a numeration. Numeroso,
numerous, of a great sum. Also in great number. Also framed in measure or
number of feet or going in due proportion of syllables. Numidino, a kind of
marble stone. Numisma, a kind of coin of old times. Nun, used for In vno, in
one. Nuntiare, to show or bring tidings, to report, to tell, to signify.
Nuncupare, as Noncupare. Nuncupatione, as Noncupatione. Nuntiata, the
annuntiation or our Lady day in lent. as Nuntiatione. Nuntiatione, a showing or
bringing of tidings, a report, a declaration. Nuntiato, the office of a legate
or ambassador. Nuntiatore, a shewer or bringer of tidings Nuntio, Nuncio, an
ambassador or bringer of tidings or of news. Nuocere, as Nocere. Nuocimento,
as Nocumento. Nuociuo, as Nociuo. Nuoceuole, as Noceuole. Nuolare, as Nolare*
Nuolatore, as Nolatore. Nuolo, as Nolo. Nuora, a daughter in law, a man's sons
wife. Nuota, a wave as of dammaske or chamlot. Nuotare, to swim, to wave, to
flote. Nuotatore, a swimmer, a waver, a floater Nuoto, swimming, a wauing, a
floating. Nuoua, a new, of late. Also a new report, a tidings, news. Nuoue,
the number of nine, 9. Also news. Nuouita, nouelty, newnes. Nuouo, new, of
late. Also a new report, a tidings, news, simple, strange. Nuro, a bird in
Samatra like a poppingiay, but of fairer color, and speaks more plain.
Nutrire, nutrisco, nutrito, as Nodrire. Nutrimento, as Nodrimento. Nutritiuo,
nutritive, nourishing. Nutrice, a nource, a foster-mother. Nutritore, a
nourisher. Nutritura, nourishment, sustenance, food, feeding, nurture.
Nutricare, as Nodrire. Nuuilare, as Nebbiare. Nuuiletta, as Nebbiarella.
Nuuola, Nuuolo, a cloud, a fogge, a miste. Nuuole, a kind of simnell, cracknel
or biscuit bread. Nuuolare, as Nebbiare. Nuuoloso, as Nebbioso. Nuuolosita,
cloudines, mistines, fogginesse.
O
O, One of the five vowels. O. an aduerbe of exception, either, only, or. the
sign of the vocative case oh, an interiection of grief, of derision, of
admiration, of imprecation, and of reproouing, as oh, alas, aie me, good lord,
oh that, tush, figh, away, and such. Obbrigare, Obrigare, as Obligare. Obbrigo,
Obrigo, as Obligo. Obbrobriare, as Obrobriare. Obbrorio, as Obrorio.
Obbrobrioso, as Obrobrioso. Obediente, obedient, mild, meek, pleasant,
obeying. Obedienza, Obedientia, obedience, humblenes, obeisance. Obedire,
disco, dito, to obey, to please, to yield unto, to do according. Obelisco, a
great square stone, broad beneath, and growing smaller and smaller toward
the top, of a great height, there were diverse of them made in Rome. Obiata, are
properly thin wafers, or sugar-bread. Obiettione, an objection. Also a
reproching or casting in ones teeth, a laying to ones charge. Obietto, an
object, a thing before a man's eyes and may be seen. Also the laying or setting
of a thing before ones eyes or against one, a shadow or overthwart casting.
Oblare, to offer a sacrifice or oblation. Oblatione, a sacrifice, an oblation,
an offering, an aid. Oblianza, forgetfulness, oblivion, dulnes. Obliare, to
forget. Oblico, Oblicare, as Obliquo. Obligare, to bind, to tie, or enter into
bands. Obligatione, an obligation, a bond. Obligo, a duty, a bond, an
obligation. Oblio, forgetfulness, oblivion, dulnes. Oblioso, forgetful,
obliuious, dull. Obliquare, to crook, to make crooked, a wry, bending or
trauers. Obliqua sphera, that place of the world where the inhabitants have the
equinoctial cutting their Horizon, not plumb down, but sidelong. Obliquita,
obliquitie, crookednes, wrynesse, thwartnes. Obliquo, crooked, wry, thwart,
bending, oblique, trauers, sidelong. Oblire, blisco, blito, as Obliare.
Obliterare, as Obliare. Obliuione, oblivion, forgetfulness. Obliuioso,
forgetful, unmindful. Obnosso, that has deserved to be punished, guilty,
faulty. Also dishonest, base, easy to be hurt. Also sickly, or diseased.
Obnubilare, to make dark with clouds, to ouercloude, to make heavy and sad
in countenance. Obolo, a little weight of half a scruple. Also a small coin
about a penny farthing sterlin. Obrobriare, to shame, to reproach, to slander,
to rebuke, to twit or cast in ones teeth, to taunt, to check, to revile.
Obrobrio, shame, reproach, rebuke, or slander, a reproching in words, a
rebukefull speaking, an vpbraiding or casting in ones teeth, an injury, a
check, a reuiling. Obrobrioso, shameful, reproachful, slanderous, injurious,
reuiling, taunting. Obsiana, a kind of bright stone that will change his
color. Obsidiano, that is pure black, or sable. Also a kind of black glass.
Obuia, coming toward, or meeting, withstanding. Obuiare, to go against, to
meet one in the way, to withstand. Oca, a goose, or a gander. Oca marina, a
sea-cob, or sea-gull. Ocagionare, as Occasionare. Ocagione, as Occasion.
Ocarella, a gosline, a young goose, a green goose. Occare, to break clods of
earth, to harrowe. Occatore, a breaker of clods of earth, a harrower. Occatura,
a breaking of earth, a harrowing. Occasionare, Ocasionare, to occasion, to
cause, to happen, to befall. Occasion, Ocasione, occasion, season, or
opportunity of time, meet, fit and convenient time to do. Also a cause, a hap,
or befalling. Occaso, Ocaso, the setting or going down of the sun, the west
part. Also death, fall, ruin, or decay of man or beast. Occastro, a wild
goose. Occhiate, the hollow or compass of the eyes. Also the eyes. Occhialaro,
a maker of spectacles. Occhiali, spectacles to look with, as Occhiara.
Occhiara, the fish called a Seabreame, some think it to be a Perch, others
take it for the fish Sgramso. Also the dimnes of sight. Occhiare, to eye, to
prye, to mark, to wink, to toote. Occhiata, a glance, a cast or look with
the eyes, a wanton winking. Also as Occhiara. Occhiatello, as Sgramfo.
Occhiatina, a little glance, cast, or look with the eyes, a winking.
Occhietti, small or little eyes, or oylet holes, a kind of sugar or ginger
bread. Occhio, an eye. Occhio bouino, a bird called an oxeye. Occhio di
ciuetta, an owls eye, a piece of gold, a red ruddock. Occhio della vite, the
first buds or burgen of the vine. Occhio di boue, the herb called oxeeye,
maywood, or stinking cammomill. Occhio del tetto, a lover of a house or hall.
Occhio di gallo, a kind of tack or tenter hook. Occhij liuidi, blew eyes,
blubbred eyes. Occhio di gatta, a kind of precious stone. Occhiolino, a little
eye, an oylet hole. Also the name of a goldsmiths tool. Occhiuto, eyed, that
has eyes as a peacocks tail, or as Argus had. It is also taken for one that
is watchful, vigilant or wary. Occidentale, westerly, of the West, of the
west part. Occidente, the sunne-set, the west part of the world, also the west
wind. Also declining, decaying, falling, going down, or drawing to an end.
Also quicksilver, according to Alchimists secret phrases. Occidere, cido,
cisi, ciso, to kill, to slay, or wound to death, to murder. Also to torment,
or molest grievously, to cause to perish, or bring to destruction. Occiditore,
a killer, a slayer, a queller, a wounder, a murderer. Occipute, the hinder
part of the head, the nape of the neck, the noddle, the third bone of the head
ending at the labdal suture, disioyned in the foundation of the head from osso
sphenoido by the sixth suture, ouerthwartly chancing. Occiso, killed, slain,
wounded, or murdered to death, utterly undone. Occisione, a killing, a
slaying, a murdering, a quelling, or slaughter of men and beast. Occorenza, an
occurrence, a chance, a hap, or an accident. Occorenze, occurrences, chances,
haps, accidents. Occorrere, corro, corsi, corso, to happen, to chance, to
ocurre, to come to pass, to be^ide, to befall, also to remember, to come to
mind, to meet with, to come in place. Occorso, happned, chanced, occurred,
come to pass, befallen, remembered. Also an encounter, a meeting, an accident,
come to mind. Occultare, to hide, to close, to conceal, to keep secret, to
lurk, to cover, to hide clean that nothing be seen. Occulto, Occultato, in
hugger mugger, hid, privy, that is not known, very secret, concealed, close.
Occupare, Ocupare, to occupy, to possess, to be seized of, to busy, to use.
Also to get and take before another man, to usurp from another, to hold one
busied and occupied. Occupato, Ocupato, occupied, possessed, seized of, busied,
used, employed, let in business, entangled. Also won, gotten, and usurped.
Occupatione, Ocupatione, occupation, possession, seizure, necessary business,
the holding, possessing, or being seized of a place. Also a taking of a thing
before as it were by way of prevention. Occupatore, Ocupatore, an occupier, a
possessour, a busier, an vser, a seyser, an usurper or possessour of another
man's right or due. Occeano, Oceano, the sea, the ocean, the maine deep that
compasses the whole world. Ocimo, the herb called garden basiill, basil
royal, or basil gentle. Ocio, as Otio. Ocioso, as Otioso. Ocra, Ocria, oker
that painters use. Some take it for another kind of black stone. Oculare, as
Occhiare. Also oculare or pertaining to the eyes. Also an eye witness. Ocularia,
the herb eie-bright. Oculatella, as Sgrampho, a crampe fish. Oculato, full of
eyes or holes, quick of sight, having eyes, that is circumspect, quick-seeing.
Oculato testimonio, an eye witness, an assured testimony. Oculista, an oculist,
one that professes to know or cure the sores in eyes. Oculo, an eye, a sight,
a look. Used also for a young bud of a tree beginning to spread. Od, either,
or, or else, used before vowels. Oda, a kind of verse or song, called an ode.
Also let him hear. Ode, songs called odes. Also he hears. Odeo, a place like
a theater to represent plays in. Odema, or Oedema, a moist and waterish
swelling, thin and without grief consisting of a cold intemperature and
flegmatike matter, it is easily pressed down with the finger, and leaves a
dent and hollownes, the member so affected retaining a white color. Odiare, to
hate, to have in abomination, to grudge, to spite, to repine at one, to bedre
ill will unto. Odiaria, a cotidian ague. Odiatore, a hater, a grudger, a bearer
of ill will, a spiter or repiner at one. Odio, hatred, hate, rancor, ill will,
grudge, displeasure, hateful importunity, tediousnes. Odioso, hateful,
odious, that is hated, displeasant, hurtful, tedious, yrkesome. Odire, odo,
udij, odito, to hear, to listen, to harken. Odito, hard, listened, harkned.
Also the sense of hearing. Odontoide, a round and long process, in fashion
like a tooth, rising from the middle of the second turning joint of the neck.
Odorare, to odore, to give a smell, to perfume, to smell, to sent, to savor,
to yield a sent or savor. Also to perceive or understand or smell out a matter.
Odorato, odored, perfumed, or given a sent unto, smelt, sented, sauoured,
yielded a smell, sent, or savor, sweet, sauourie, smelling. also the sense of
smell, or smelling. Odoramento, a smelling, a senting, a savoring, an odor.
Odore, an odor, a sent, a smell, a savor. Also perceiving, senting, smelling.
Also doubt, suspicion, an inkling or feeling of a thing. Odorifero, as Odoroso.
Odoroso, sauorie, odoriferous, smelling, senting, bringing spices and sweet
savoring things. Oeconomia, the guiding and ordring of things pertaining to
household. Oeconomico, he that does order and govern a house. Oeconomo, he
which has the handling or governance of the goods of any honest or good house,
a housekeeper or master of a house. Offa, a kind of tarte, pudding pie, or
bag-pudding. Also a morsel, or gobbet of flesh or paste. Offellaro, a maker of
wafers or biscuit bread. Offelle, a kind of wafers or biscuit bread. Offendere,
fendo, fesi, feso, to offend, to trespass, to wrong, to displease, to hurt, to
do amiss, to be loathsome unto, not to away with, to discontent. Offendeuole,
offensive, loathsome unto one, that does offend. Offenditore, Offensore, an
offender, a trespasser, wronger, displeaser or hurter. Offensione, Offesa, an
offense, a crime, a trespass, a displeasure, a hurt, a harm, a loss.
Offensiuo, offensive, hurtful, unpleasing. Offenduto, Offeso, offended,
trespassed, wronged, hurt, annoied, discontented. Offerire, fero, fersi, ferto,
to offer, to profer, to present. Offerto, offered, proffered. Offerta, an offer,
an offering, a proffer. Offertorio, an offertory, an offering place. Ofiasi, a
kind of sore in childrens heads growing like a tetter, and causing the hair
to fall off here and there. Officiale, Officiario, an official, an officer,
according to office, a magistrate. Officiare, to say service in a church, to
give an office unto, to execute an office. Officiato, that has an office,
served with due offices. Officiata chiesa, a church well officed, id est, well
served, or duly served. Officio, an office, a duty, a charge, a magistrate, a
degree, a place of office, the service in the church. Also duty of behavior
in honesty and reason, a thing that ought to be done, a benefit, a good
turn. Officiosita, officiousnes, seruiceablenes, friendlines. Officioso,
officious, dutiful, friendly, serviceable, full of good offices. Officiuolo,
a little prayer or service book Offilare, to refine, to polish, to neatifie,
to cleanse, to smugge, to purify. Offita, a kind of stone to build withal.
Offrire, offro, offrij, offerto, as Offerire Oftalmia, an inflammation of the
uttermost skin of the eyes proceeding of sharp humors. Offuscare, to darken,
to obscure, to blind, to dazzle, to eclipse, to shadow, to dim. Offuscamento, a
darkning, an obscuring, a blinding, a dazeling, a dimming. Offuscatione, as
Offuscamento. Oggettare, to object or cast against one. Oggettione, an
objection. Oggetto, an object. The thing whose quality moves the senses to
their natural working. Oghetto, a march that drummers and trumpetters sound,
called to the watch, to the round or sentinel. Ogliara, an oil glass.
Ogliare, to oil, to dress with oil. Ogliaro, Ogliaruolo, an oil seller, or
maker of oils. Oggi, to day, this day. Oggidi, now a days, this time, this
day. Oglio, any kind of oil. Oglio santo, Look Olio santo. Oglio di
rauazzone, rape oil. Oglio di vezzo, a kind of rosin or turpentine. Oglio
d'oliue, oil of olyues. Oglio rosato, oil of roses. Oglioso, oily, fattie,
soft, full of oil, glibbie. Ognella, a purple fish. Ogni, each, every, all,
every one. Ogni santi, Tutti santi, all saints day, all-hallowes,
all-hallandtide. Ogni vno, each one, every body, all. Ogni volta, every time,
at all times, always. Ogni volta che, whenever that, each time as, every time
that. Ogni hora, at all times, at all hours, every hour. Ogni di, daily,
every day, each day. Oh, a voice of grief, alas, oh, aie me. Oh dio, oh that,
would to God. Oh dio che, oh God that, would to God that. Oh che, oh that,
would to God. Ohime, alas, aie me, welladay, oh. Ohibo, fie, fie upon it,
fough. Oi, alas, woe is me, aie me, oh, ah. Oia, a fish called a sea-breame.
Oimare, to wail, to complain, cry out alas or well-aday. Oime, Oimene, as
Ohime. Oissa, the cry of mariners heauing, hoisting or waying anchor. Oissare,
to cry as mariners do hoisting heauing or waying anchor. Ol, or the, either
the. Oladiga, a fish called a roche. Olaro, a potter, a pot-maker. Oldano, a
kind of perfuming drug, called Oldanum. Oleandro, a daffadowndilly. Also a
rose baie-tree, or rose-tree. Oleare, to smell, sent, or savor. Oleario, a
place where oil is made, kept or sold. Also an oyleman. Oleastro, a wild
olive tree. Also olive color. Oleba, a kind of owl. Olere, olo, olei, oluto,
to smell, to sent, or savor of, to have a savor, to stink, to have a smell.
Oluto, smelt, sauoured, or sented of. Olezzare, to smell, sent, or savor.
Olfare, Olfacere, as Olezzare. Oliara, an oil glass. Oliare, to oil. Oliaro,
Oliaruolo, a maker or seller of oils. Olibano, a kind of sweet gum so
called. Olidoro, a kind of brick. Oligarchia, a state or common wealth where a
few have all the authority. Olimpia, the space of fifty months, or four
years, allowing 30. days to a month. Olimpici giuochi, the Olimpike games
among the Grecians instituted by Hercules in the honor of Jupiter, they were
celebrated every fiftieth month, and the exercises were five, that is to say,
whurle bats, which is a kind of weapon with a plummet of lead at the end, the
second running: the third leaping: the fourth a kind of quoit or heavy stone
to cast in the air: the fifth wrestling. Olimpo, is sometimes taken for
seven. Olio, all manner of oil. Olio santo, holy oil. Also taken for the
last gasp, needing the last unction. Oliosita, oylienes, fatnes. Olira, a
kind of ghinnie wheat. Olire, olo, olij, olito, as olezzare. Oliua, Olive, an
olive. Oliua perpetua, gold according to the alchimists phrase. Oliuaccie,
filthy wild olyues. Oliuastro, Oliuato, of an olive color or swart,
forswonke, forswat. Also a wild olive tree. Oliuella, the priuet or prime-print
bush. Oliuelle, Oliuette, small, little olives. Oliuetto, a grove of olive
trees. Oliuo, an olive tree. Olla, a pipken, a possenet, a pot. Used also
instead of Ola, either the, or the. Ollaio, Ollaro, a pot-maker, a potter.
Olmo, an elm tree. Olocausto, burned sacrifice. Oloconite, the herb Moli.
Olocrisio, the herb Semper vinum. Olorare, to smell, to savor, to sent.
Olore, a smell, a savor, a sent, an air. Oloscheno, a kind of bull rush.
Olotiri, a kind of shell fish. Oltra, beyond, besides, more, moreover,
further, forwards. Also, except, save, saving. Oltracotanza, presumption,
ouerweening, selfeloue. Oltracio, Oltradicio, moreover, besides that,
furthermore. Oltra modo or misura, beyond measure. Oltrafino, superfine.
Oltraggiare, to wrong, to injury, to outrage, to misuse. Oltraggiatore, a
wronger, a misuser, an iniurier, an outrager. Oltraggio, wrong, abuse, outrage,
injury. Oltraggioso, wrongful, injurious, outrageous, cruel. Oltra
marauiglioso, most marvelous. Oltra marino, of beyond the seas. Oltra
mirabile, most wonderful. Oltra mini, a kind of fish. Oltrandare, to go
beyond, to outgo. Oltranza, might and maine. Look A tutta oltranza. Oltrare,
as Allontanare. Oltrarno, beyond the river Arnus. Oltre, Look Oltra.
Oltrepassare, to go beyond, to outgo, to passover. Omai, now, at last, at
length. Omaso the thick and fattie part of the belly or paunch. Some take it
for a full gut. Ombe, well, go to, on, how now? Ombilico, the navel of any
creature. Also the middle of any thing. Also a bosse or bullion such as are set
upon great books: the center of any thing. Also a kind of shell fish. Ombra, a
shade, a shadow, a ghost, a sprit or larue. Also an inckling or least cause of
suspicion. Ombragione, a shading or shadowing. Ombrare, to shade, to shadow, to
yield a shadow. Also to starte at any thing for fear as horses do.
Ombratile, one that lives in the shadow. Ombreggiare, as Ombrare. Ombreggiante,
shadowing, casting a shadow, shading. Ombrella, a fan, a canopie. also a
testern or cloth of state for a prince. also a kind of round fan or shadowing
that they use to ride with in summer in Italy, a little shade. Also a bonegrace
for a woman. Also the husk or cod of any seed or corn. also a broad spreding
bunch, as of fenell, nill or elder bloomes. Ombretta, a little small, airie,
cool shadow or shade. Ombria, as Ombra. Also a thunderbolt-stone. Ombriana, a
fish called an halibut. Ombriano, a horse that goes with his head low as it
were looking to the ground and on his shadow. Ombrini, the fish in latin
called Sciadeus. Ombrizzo, the water, wave or shadow of damask or chamlot.
Ombroso, Ombrio, shadie, shadowie. Also suspicious, fearful or doubtful. Also
starting as a horse does. Ombuto, a tunnell. Omei, weladaies, griefs, lays,
complaints. Omenaggio, waging law. Also the top of a tower. Omene, Omen, the
luck or fortune of something to come, gathered either of something spoken or
done, a forespeaking, good or ill fortune, luck or chance or foreboding.
Omento, a fat pannicle, caul, sewet, rim or covering which being inserted with
many veins springing in branches from Vena porta represents the form of a
net. Properly the caul or sewet, rim or kell wherein the bowels are lapt. Also
the rind or thin skin inwrapping the brain called Pia matre or Matre pia.
Omero, as Homero. Omeschita, as Meschita. Omesso, forborne, left off, ceased,
omitted, neglected, past over. Omettere, metto, misi, messo, to forbear, to
leave, to cease, to omit, to neglect, to let go, to pass over. Ominoso,
Omenoso, ominous, luckie or unlucky, that portendeth good or ill luck.
Omicida, as Homicida. Omicidio, as Homicidio. Omine, as Omene. Ommettere,
Ommesso, as Omettere. Omninamente, altogether, every way, wholly. Also by no
means, at no hand. Omofagi, they which eat raw flesh. Omologia, a congruence,
proportion or agreeablenes. Omonimo, specie di costruttione. Omphacino, sour,
sharp, tarte, green, unripe. Onagra, the herb asse-hoofe. Onagro, a wild
ass. Also a kind of warlike engine in fashion like a scorpion. Oncare, to
roar or cry as a bear does. Oncia, the weight of an ounce. Onciare, to weigh
by ounces. Oncinare, to hook or to drag. Oncinatore, a hooker or a dragger.
Oncino, a hook, a claspe, a dragging iron. Oncinelli, as Vncinelli. Onco, some
part or piece of a cart. Onda, a wave, a surge or billow in the water. Onde,
waves, billows or surges of the sea. Also whence, from whence, whereby,
whereupon, therefore. It has also been taken for the shells of any shell fish.
Ondeggiare, to wave, to wagge as the waves in the sea, to floate, to dangle.
Ondeggiante, wagging, wauing, billowing, dangling, floating. Also wauie in
armorie. Ondeggiamento, a wauing, a wagging, a billowing, a floating, a
dangling. Ondoso, as Ondeggiante. Ondungue, whence soever. Onero, a charge, a
weight, a burden, a heavy load. Onerare, to load, to burden, to charge.
Onerario, a ship or lighter or hulke that serves only for burden.
Onerocritica, an interpretation of dreams. Onesta, Onestare, Look Honesta.
Ongaro, an vngarian kind of coin or crown. Onfadillo, a kind of herb.
Ongere, as Vngere. Onger i stiuali, to grease ones boots, id est, to flatter
or cog with, to faune upon one. Onghia, as Vnghia. Onghiadicauallo, Look
Vnghia. Onghioso, having nails or hoofed. Ongita, ^ile of Iumper. Ongiuto,
Onto, ointed, anointed, greased, tallowed. Onguentaro, a maker of ointments or
salues, used also for a leach or Apothecarie. Onguento, an ointment, a salve.
Onice, an Onix or cornalin stone, which resembles the color of a man's nail.
Also a kind of marble, whereof they were wont to make cups. Onicchio, as
Onice. Onichino, made of the Onix or cornalin stone or like unto it. Also a
kind of thin bombasin stuff or burato. Onigena, a kind of cuttle fish or
pourecontrell. Onire, onisco, onito, to shame or reproach. It is an old Tuscan
word used in Cento nouelle antiche, and from, or the French is taken the word
Honey about the garter of England. Onito, shamed or reproched. Onisco, a worm
which bends like a bow when he goes. Of some called a hundred foot or a
lope. Onite, a kind of orgament. Onnipatente, which bears and suffers all
things. Also father or mother of all things. Onnipotente, omnipotent,
almighty. Onnipotentia, omnipotency, almightines. Onnitenente, all holding,
containing all things. Onniualente, which is worth all things. Onniuolente,
that wills and desires al things, all-willing. Onniuoro, all-deuouring, that
deuoureth all. Onobricho, an herb growing by the sides of wels. Onocardio, a
kind of tassels. Onoclea, the herb Alkanet. Onocentauro, a beast whose upper
part resembles a man, and the neither part an ass. Onocrotalo, a certain
ravenous bird like a swan, with a gorge beneath his mouth, wherein he
swalloweth his meat very greedily, and afterward does chaw it again, and
brayeth very loud like an ass. Onogiro, a rough and sharp herb good and
wholesome against poison. Onomantia, a kind of divination and soothsaying by
names. Onomante, a soothsayer or diuiner by names. Onomatopeia, a figure
whereby a word is made by a certain sound, the faining of a name. Onone,
Restharrow, Cammock, or Pettiwhin. Onorico, a kind of devilish character used
by nigromants. Onorogano, the issue or running of the seed in sleep. Onosma, a
kind of herb. Onoterra, a kind of herb. Also as Onagra. Onta, spite, reproach,
disgrace, injury, wrong. Also shame. Ontare, to grease or oint, to anoint.
Ontione, unction, anointing. Onto, anointed, nointed, greased, tallowed. Also
butter, or any kind of fat. Ontoso, shameful, spiteful, reproachful. Also
greasy, fat, buttrie, full of ointments. Onto sottile, butter. Ontura, as
Ontione. Onustare, to charge, to load, to burden. Onusto, charged, laden,
burdened. Onza, an ounce weight. Also a beast called an ounce or cat of
mountain. Onzare, to weigh by ounces. Opaco, shadie, shadowed, dark, duskie,
gloomie, black, thick, bushie with trees. Opacita, shadines, duskishnes,
gloomines, blacknes, thicknes of boughs, vmbrage. Opalo, a diverse colored
precious stone called an Opale, wherein appears the fiery brightness of the
Carbuncle, the shining purple color of the Amethist, the green luster of the
Emeralde, all shining together with an incredible mixture. It is also called a
Pedero. Opefice, a worke-man, a crafts-man. Openione, an opinion, a thought, a
conceit, a surmise, an imagination, an uncertain judgment, a supposing or
weeuing. Also fame, esteem or reputation. Opera, a work, a labor, a deed, a
doing a piece of work, an action, a travel, an industry, a pain, a
diligence, a workmanship. Also means or aid. Operare, to work, to labor,
to make, to do, to actt. Operaio, Operario, a workman, a labourer, a worker,
an actor, a craftsman. Operante, a worke-man, a worker. Also working, acting or
doing. Operatione, an operation, a laboring, a doing. Operatore, a worker, a
labourer. Operetta, Operina, a little piece of work, a pretty labor.
Operosita, great pain or travel or working. Operoso, full of work, working,
diligent or painful in laboring, toilesome or laborious. Operto, opened, set
open. Opertura, an ouerture or opening. Ophiasi, a kind of sore in the head,
namely in children, causing the hair to fall here and there, fretting the skin
off. Ophiusa, an herb whereof who so tastes is much frighted with spirits
and devils. Ophtalmia, an inflammation of the uttermost skin of the eye called
in latin Adnata, proceeding either of the fulness of the body, or of the sharp
choleric humor, or of gross humors and windines puffing up the place.
Opifice, as Operario. Opificio, work, worke-manship, labor. Opilare, to stop
with obstruction, to shut up. Opilatione, an opilation, a stopping, a binding
or obstruction of the liver or other chief entrails. Opimamente, fatly,
grossly, plentifully, richly, at ease. Opimita, abundance, plenty. Opimo,
fat, gross, in good plight, plentiful, well furnished, rich, royal,
princely. Opinare, to muse, to surmise, to think, to suppose, to imagine.
Opinante, musing, surmising, thinking, supposing, imagining. Opinatiuo, as
Opiniastro. Opiniastro, Opiniatiuo, opinatiue, stifnecked, stubburne,
conceited, humorous, fantastical, headstrong. Opiniatamente, opinatiuely,
stubburnly, humorously stifneckedly. Opinione, as Openione. Opinioso, as
Opiniastro. Opistotono, a cricke in the neck, or a disease that lets one to
turn his neck. Opopanace, an herb called Panax or the liquor thereof.
Oppiare, as Alloppiare. Oppio, Opio, Poppie. Also the juice of Poppie. Opporre,
Opponere, pongo, posi, posto, to oppose, to contend, to lay against, to revile,
to object. Opportunamente, fitly, needfully, opportunelie, commodiously, in
good time, in due, fit or good time, conveniently. Opportunita, opportunity,
fitnes, commodity, good occasion, conueniencie of time and place. Opportuno,
fit, needful, oportune, commodious, meet for the purpose, convenient, very
good and convenient for. Oppositione, an opposition, a contrariety, a contrary
setting. Opposito, opposite, contrary, against, set, put or placed against.
Oppositore, an oppositor, an opponent. Opposto, opposed, laid against,
contended, resisted, opposite, contrary, against, objected. Oppressare, as
Opprimere. Oppressione, oppression, greeuance, suppression, a violating,
extortion or violence. Oppresso, oppressed, grieved, suppressed, violated,
violently wronged, holden and kept under, ouerlaide, ouercharged. Oppressore,
an oppresser, a suppressor, an extortioner. Opprimere, primo, primei, presso,
to oppress, to grieve, to suppress, to press, to wiegh down, to repress.
Oppugnare, to oppugn, to resist, to withstand, to assault, to batter, to lay
siege unto, to fight against, to endeavor to hurt, to labor might and maine
against one. Oppugnatione, an oppugnation, a withstanding, a resistance, an
assiege or an assault against a town or fortress. Oppugnatore, a withstander,
a resister, an opposer, he that seeks the hurt of another, a wrong doer, a
besieger of any place. Opra, as Opera. Oprare, as Operare. Opraio, Opraro, as
Operaio. Opretta, Oprina, as Operetta. Oprire, to open, to set open.
Opropriare, as Obrobriare. Oproprio, as Obrobrio. Oproprioso, as Obrobrioso.
Optica, the science whereby the reason of sight is known. Optico, pertaining
to sight, skillful in sight. Opulente, rich, abundant, plentious, wealthy.
Opulentia, riches, plenty, wealth, abundance. Opuscula, a little work or
labor. Or', as Ora. Ora, now, at this instant, by and by, presently,
sometimes, at times. Also the air, a fresh cool wind, a sweet gale, a
pleasant blast. Also an hour, or space of an hour. Orade, a kind of fish
called a guilt head. Oramai, now, at last, at length, more then time. Oracolo,
Oraculo, an oracle, or prophecy, a sentence, a counsel, or answer given by
God. Also a worthy and notable saying or judgment. Oradiga, a kind of roche
fish. Orafo, Orefice, a goldsmith. Orare, to make an oration or sermon, to
speak as an orator, to plead, or to preach. Also to pray, to desire, to
entreat, to beseech. Also to guild or garnish with gold. Oraria, a small bark
to sail near the shore, a shore ship. Orata, a fish called a guilthead. Also
the herb stone-ferne, or finger-ferne. Oratione, an oration, a prayer, an
oraison. Also speech, talk, utterance, or words, a style, a communication,
eloquence. Orato, made an oration or sermon, spoken as an orator, pleaded or
preached, praid, desired, entreated, besought. Also guilt, or adorned with
gold. Oratoio, Oratorio, an oratorie place, a place dedicated only to prayers.
Also a pulpit, a chapel. Also pertaining to an orator or ambassador.
Oratore, an orator, an ambassador, an advocate, a pleader, a beades-man, a
spokes-man, a suitor, a speaker, an attorney, a prayer, an intreater, he that
can make a speech wisely, aptly, and eloquently. Oratoria, Oratorie. Also
Rhetoric. Orbacche, Orbachelle, berries of any tree, namely of bays or
juniper. Orbare, to blind, to deprive or reaue of sight, goods, children, or
kindred. Orbauillano, a mock-begger, or blind beggar. Also a kind of bright
changeable color. Orb, well, go to, now, on, away, how now? Orbesina, a bird
called a great titmouse, or oxeye. Orb, a circle or round compass, the world,
a continual course or succession of things, an orb, or a sphere. Also a
region or country. Also a fish called a lump, a paddle, or a sea-owle.
Orbezza, Orbita, blindness, privation, want, widowhood, orphanisme. Orbiculare,
in a round fashion, round like a circle or compass. Also the herb sow-bread,
or swine-bread. Orbita, the rut or way that a cart makes. Also want of sight,
or any thing else. Orbo, blind, sightlesse, deprived, wanting sight or any
thing else, one bereft, succourlesse, and forsaken. Orbo budello, Look Cieco,
or Intestino. Orca, a great sea fish or monster, which is an enemy to the
whale. Also a kind of precious stone. Orcadi, mountain nymphs. Orcana, a
hard round fish which is nothing but head, in latin Orcynus. Orcare, to braie
as an ass. Orcaste, a precious stone, good against the falling sickness.
Orcellare, to orchall or lay silk in steep in orchall, to die with orchall.
Orcello, orchall, an herb to die purple withal. Orchessa, a she monster of
the sea. Orchestra, a theater or scaffolde where musitions and singers sit, a
chief place in a theater. Sometimes used for a kind of winding stairs. also a
place between the stage and the common seats of a theater. Orchetta, a kind
of crabfish or creuisefish. Orchio, Orcio, a pitcher or pot for water, a jar
for oil, a little melting pot, a measure for liquid things. Orchi, the herb
ragwoort, gandergoose, or dogs-stones, having a root like to a little
codstone. Orciolo, Orciuolo, a little pot, a judge, a cruze, a pitcher, a
melting pot. Orcioletto, Orciolino, as Orciolo. Orciolaio, Orciolaro, a pot,
cruze, pitcher or judge maker, a potter. Orco, as Orca, a sea monster. Also the
darkness or pitchines in hell. Orda, a crewe, a troop, a company, a confused
mass. Ordegno, Ordigno, any tool or implement, or mechanical instrument.
Ariosto has used it for a caliuer, gunne, or harquebuse. Ordimento, as
Orditura. Ordinali, a kind of mushrooms or toadestooles so called.
Ordinamento, as Ordinanza. Ordinanza, order, method, ordinance, iniunction,
form, rule, an institution. Also the name of a march, sounded in time of war
by trompetters, an array, or marshalling in order. Ordinanza di soldati, a rank
or marshaling of soldiers. Ordinare, to order, to dispose, to ordain or set
in order, to make ready, to prepare, to manage, to marshall, to determine, to
appoint, to direct, to will, to command, to range, or set in array, to inioyne.
Ordinario, ordinary, wherein order is observed, common, usual, accustomed.
Also a carier of letters, a post, an ordinary messenger. Also a privy, close
stool, or iakes. Also an ordinary place where gentlemen meet to take their
commons. Also a kind of Commissarie or Chanceller in Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction. Ordinatione, an order, an institution, ordinance, disposing,
appointing, government, or administration. Ordine, Ordinatione, an order, a
method, a rule, a rank, a form, a degree, a range, a ray, a fyle as
soldiers now of late march in, a course, a circle, the estate of men
concerning fortune and goods, men of one estate order or degree. Also the
dignity of men of one state or calling, as Aldermen and such like. Ordini,
orders, methods, rules, ranks, forms, degrees, ranges, rays, files, circles.
Also the states of people in a common wealth, as the clergy, the nobles, the
gentlemen, and the commons. Ordire, disco, dito, to warpe or lay as weauers do
their webbs before it be wouen, to contriue, to complotte, to forecast, to
devise, to plot, to lay a work. Ordito, warped, or laid as weauers do their
webs, contrived, complotted, forecast, devised. Orditore, a warper, a weauer, a
contriuer, a complotter, a deviser. Orditura, Ordimento, a warping, a weauing,
a devise, a complotting, a contriuing. Oreadi, Nymphs which dwell in
mountains. Orecchia, an ear of any creature. Orecchia di topo, a kind of
herb, or cod called mouse-eare. Orecchiara, idem. Orecchiare, to set or prick
up ones ears, to listen or harken attentively. Orecchini, pendants, or jewels
to hang at ones ears, little ears. Also night-caps. Orecchione, that part of
a bulwark which is called by some the pome, guard, or shoulder. Orecchiuto,
having ears, eared. Orefice, Orefo, a goldsmith. Oreficina, a goldsmiths
workehouse, or else the goldsmiths trade. Oreolo, a makrell fish. Oressi, a
good stomach to meat, or greedines to eat. Oresta, a skreeke or nynemurther.
Orezza, Orezzo, a shadie place, a pleasant gale, where no sun comes.
Orezzare, as Ombrare. Also to blow a fresh cool sweet wind. Orfanelli, young
little Orphans, or fatherless children. Orfanita, Orphanisme. Orfano, an
orphan, a fatherless child. Also a precious stone that glisters in the dark.
Orfo, a goldsmith. Also a kind of sea fish with great eyes and teeth like a
saw. Organaro, an organ-maker. Organale, Organico, organall, isntrumental.
Organico, organicall, of or belonging to instruments. Organista, an organist, a
plaier on organs. Organo, an organ, an instrument to make or do any manner of
thing withal, al manner of instruments. Also an instrument or tool to meat land
with, an ordinance or engine of war. Also any pipe of conueyance, a conduit.
Also a fish called in latin Orcynus. Organetti, little slender organs or
pipes. Organizzato, well proportioned, organized. Orgia, a pace or step, or
six foot, or four cubits. It is a greek measure. Orgiata, a kind of
furmentie made of barley. Orgio, barlye. Orgoglio, pride, disdain, haughtines.
Orgogliofo, proud, disdainefull, haughty. Oricalco, latten or copper metal.
Also taken for a trumpet. Oricanio, Oricanno, a casting bottle to cast sweet
water with. Orice, as Orige. Oricello, as Orcello. Orientale, Oriental, borne
in the East, orient, bright, as Orient. Orient, glistring, bright, shining,
sparkling, fiery, orient, the east part of the world. Also the east wind.
Also gold according to the Alchimists phrase. Oriete, a kind of black stone.
Orificio, the mouth, brimme, or orifice of any thing. Origano, the herb
Origan, or wild marierome. Orige, a wild beast, a kind of wild beast like a
goat, with a great horn, and his hairs contrary to others. Originale, an
original or beginning, original, that which one has from his birth.
Originare, originally, from the beginning. Also to fetch his beginning or
original from. Originario, originarie, that has a thing from the beginning,
or that is borne in a place natural. Originatione, the original of a word,
according to his proper and natural deriuation, an etymology, a rising or
beginning. Origin, a beginning, a ground or offspring of any thing or person,
a pedigree, a birth, a stock, kin or kindred, an original, a fountain, a
welspring or head. Origliare, to whisper closely to ones ears, to listen or
lend ones ears attentively, to be an eauesdropper, to sneake or lurk about
for news, to prick up ones ears. Origliere, a pillowbeere. Origlione, an
eauesdropper, a listner, a whisperer, a sneaker, a lurking knave. Origo, as
Origano. Orimpele, painters gold. Orina, urine, piss, or man's water. Orinale,
an vrinall, or chamberpot. Orinare, to urine, to piss, to stale, to make
water. Orinda, a kind of bread or cake made with honey and pepper, and of
orindo meal. Orindo, a kind of corn growing in Egypt. Orione, the name of a
star in the sky, called Oryon. Oriuolo, Oriolo, an howre-glasse. Also a
Sunne-dyall. Also a bird called a witwall. Oripelargo, a kind of white eagle,
flat and thin of the color of iron. Orite, a kind of precious stone, whereof
there be three kinds, one black and round, another green with white spots,
the third yellowish. Orizonte, the Horizon, a circle dividing the half of the
sphere or firmament, the seen half from the unseen half. Orlare, to welt
or hemme any linen or garment, to brimme. Orlatrice, a seame-stresse, a
welter, a hemmer. Orletto, a little welt, hem, or brim. Orliccio, the utmost
crust, hem, welt, brimme, or paring of any thing. Orlo, a brim, a welt, a hem,
a bank. Also a skirt, an edge. Orma, a tracke, a footing, a trace, a stepping,
a footestep, a rule or direction, the view of a hare or prick of a dear.
Ormare, to tracke, to foot, to trace, to rule, to direct. Ormesia, a kind of
red stone. Ormesino, Ormisino, sarcenet, taffeta sarcenet. Ormini, a kind of
herb, called sage of Rome, clarie. Also spurge. Orna, a pitcher, a pot or
pipkin, a possenet. Ornando, to be decked, garnished, adorned, or beautified.
Ornare, to adorn, to dight, to deck, to beautify, to set forth, to trim, to
garnish, to dress, to furnish, to apparel, to make ready, to make saire, to
prepare, or make meet, to embelish, to set forth with commendations.
Ornamento, Ornatura, an ornament, a decking, a beautifying, a trimming, a
garnishing. Also honor, dignity, promotion, praise or commendation, and
setting forth, a gracing or embellishing of any thing. Ornatamente, honestly,
comely, graciously, gorgeously, gaiely, elegantly, rhetorically, with all
ornaments. Ornatura, as Ornamento. Ornatuzzo, nice, fine, smugge, spruce,
superfine. Ornitogalo, a kind of herb. Orno, a wild ash tree or quicken
tree with broad leaves. Also a kind of measure of liquid things. Oro, the
precious metal gold. Orobace, the flower called the pionie. Orobanche, an
herb which round about where it grows kills all manner of pulse, whereof
if a cow does eat she presently runs to a bull. Orobe, kind of
strangle-tare, choke-fitch, or choke-weede. Also a kind of pulse corn. Also
the flower called pionie. Also a kind of frankincense. Also a kind of
grasse-greene color. Orobia, a kind of frankincense in little grains.
Orobite, the herb Carneole, or sage aquatique. Orocantarino, a kind of false
gold to gild withal that painters use. Orochino, Orecchino. Oromeno, a kind
of stone. Oromusico, a kind of gold which painters use to paint withal.
Oropendulo, as Galengola. Oropimento, as Orpello. Orosita, fattines, pituitie,
or slimines. Orpellare, to gild with painters gold or orpine, to set on a
fair show. Orpellatura, a gilding with painters gold or orpine. Orpello,
Orpimento, base painters gold or orpine. Orpho, a sea fish which always
keeps by the shore, and has great eyes and teeth like a saw. Orpimento, as
Orpello. Orsa, a she bear. Also a sign in heaven. Orsacchio, a bear whelpe.
Orsetta, a kind of sea crab. Also a lockfish. Orsetto, Orsino, a young bear
whelpe. Orso, a bear. Orsu, Orsuso, go to, on, away, to it, well, enough, now,
up, lustily. Orsumo, Orsusomo, go to, now, on, away, forward, lustily. Orsuno,
no, not now, I bid you no. Orsu col nome di Dio, well, go to, on, away in the
name of god. Ortaggij, all manner of gardning herbs or fruits of gardens.
Ortense, of or pertaining to a garden. Ortica, the herb we call a nettle. Also
a kind of fish which pricketh as a nettle, and as soon as he is touched
changes his color. Orticare, to sting or to nettle. Ortice, a quail.
Orticello, a little pretty garden. Ortichetto, a desert place where nothing
but nettles grow. Ortichino, a kind of cloth we call calico or nettle cloth,
or the roots to make it. Ortigia, a kind of fish. Look Ortica. Ortio, a foot
of a verse of five syllables. Ortigometra, the captain or leader among
quails. Orto, a garden, an orchard. Also a springing, a rising, or beginning,
the rising of the sun, the first appearing of the heavenly bodies in our
hemisphere, the east part of the world. Also birth or nativity, an appearing
or growing up. Ortodoro, a greek measure of ten inches. Ortodossia, the right
opinion or faith. Ortodosso, he that has a true and good opinion, faith or
belief. Ortographia, the art of orthographie, or of true writing. Also a plot
of building drawn out with the figure and order of the whole work. Ortogonio,
a right corner, equal on both sides, even cornered, having right or even
corners. Ortografo, Ortographista, an ortographer, or teacher or professor of
orthographie. Ortolano, a gardner, an orchard keeper. Also a kind of dainty
bird in Italy, some take it to be the linne^. Ortoponea, such a straightnes
of breath by stopping of the lights, that one cannot breath but holding his
neck upright Ortoponeico, he that has the pipes of his lights so stopped as he
cannot breath but holding up his neck. Orza, the name of a sail and of a rope
in a ship. Orzare, to sail with half the sails. Also to trend as a ship
does. also to hul at sea. Orzata, as Orgiata. Orzo, as Orgio. Orzuolo, an
infirmity that comes into ones eyes, called in latin Grithe. Osanna, save now
I pray thee: the Jews called so the willow branches which they bare in their
hands at the feast of tabernacles. Osannare, to sing or cry praises unto God.
Osare, to dare, to hazard, to ieopard. Osattini, little buskins or thin
boots. Oscedine, an impediment which will not suffer a man to stay from
gaping and yawning often. Also a kind of sore in a child's mouth. Oscenita,
villainy in acts or words, ^ihaudrie, filthiness, uncleanness, baudines, baudrie.
Osceno, dishonest, unseemly, uncivil, unclean, filthy, bandie, obscenous,
fouie, wanton, unchaste, dishonest, ribaudrie. Also unlucky. Oscino, a bird
that by his voice signifies somewhat to happen or come to pass. Oscitantia,
negligence, sluggishnes. Oscurare, to obscure, to darken, to dim, to make dark
or dim, to cloak, to hide, to keep in silence or from the knowledge of men, to
conceal. Also to make of no fame or reputation. Oscuratione, an obscuring, a
darkening, a hiding, a dimnes, a dimming. Oscurita, an obscurity or darkness,
dimnes. Also difficulty or hardness, weakness, vnnoblenes or baseness of birth or
place. Oscuro, obscure, dark, unknown, mirke, dim, black, not shining,
mistie, hard to find, hidden, secret, diffuse, close and secret, hard to be
understood, of no gentle blood, of base and low parentage. Oscuretto, somewhat
dark, obscure, secret, dim, mistie or hidden. Oscurezza, as Oscurita.
Osiacanta, a kind of tree in Egypt. Osibafo, a certain measure used in Greece.
Osigonio, even or equally cornered. Osmonda, waterferne, Osmund or the
water-man. Osnilo, a kind of fish* Oso, dared, daring, bold, hazardous,
aduenturous. Osofago, Osophago, the mouth of the stomach. Osolare, to spy, to
pry, to peer, to peep, to toote, to look narrowly. Osolamento, a spying, a
prying, a peering, a peeping, a tooting. Ospitale, an hospital or a spittle.
Ospitalita, hospitality, good housekeeping, cheer and good intertainment.
Ospite, a ghest. Also an inne-keeper or host. Ossa, any kind of bones. Ossame,
all manner of bones, bone-worke. Ossamento, all the bones together. Also a
setting of bones. Ossare, to set bones that be out of joint. Ossatura, the
whole order of the bones in any body. Ossecrare, to beseech heartily, to pray or
desire for Gods sake. Ossecrando, to be entreated or desired, or that may be
entreated. Ossecratione, a special desire, a desire for Gods sake. Ossequente,
as Ossequioso. Ossequentia, obedience, obeisance. Ossequie, dutifulnes,
attendance, waiting, pliantnes, humble service, obedience. Ossequioso,
Ossequente, serviceable, ready at hand, always attending, obsequious, pliant,
obedient. Osseruabile, that may or ought to be observed, regarded or respected,
meet to be observed, worthy to be had in reverence. Osseruando, worshipful,
to be regarded, respected, kept or reverenced. Osseruandissimo, right
worshipful or worthy of regard and respect. Osseruantina, an obedient
obseruer, a keeper of all behestes, a heedfull marker. Osseruanza, observance,
regard, respect, reverence, honor, good behavior. Also observing or custom, a
duty, an awe. Osseruante, observing, respecting, regarding, keeping,
reuerencing, one that observes and reuerenceth, dutiful unto one, one espying
all occasions to do one pleasure. Osseruare, to observe, to awaite both with
eyes and mind, to be ready at, to consider, to mark, to advise well, to
watch, to epsy, to take good heed. Also to have in reverence, to honor, to
worship, to esteem, to respect, to regard, to love and savor with a reverent
and awefull love. Osseruatione, as Osseruanza, observation, observing, marking,
awaite, good heed, aduisement or regard. Osseruatore, an obseruer, a keeper, a
regarder, a reuerencer, a dutiful aduiser. Ossetto, Ossicello, a little
gristle bone. Ossia, a sharp disease whereof a man dies or recouereth
quickly. Ossidione, a besieging or siege of a town or fort. Ossidionale, Vide
Corona, pertaining to a siege. Ossifraga, a kind of furious beast. Also a kind
of hawk or eagle called a bonebreaker; because that with her beak she
breaks great bones. Ossimathia, a learning when one is old. Ossimathe, one
that learneth or goes to school in his old age or never learnte before.
Ossimoto, a sentence spoken with such affectation of wit and gravity that it
seems foolish. Osso, any kind of bone. Also the stone of any fruit as Olives,
Dates, etc. Osso basillare, as Osso cuneale. Osso cossendico, the middle part
of Ilio osso, which is straighter and thicker, and outwardly engraven with a
large and deep cave. Osso cuneale, the cuneall bone, which being as it were a
ground or foundation to the brain, is thrust in like a wedge between the
bones of the head and the upper iaw. Osso ilio, Vide Ilio. Osso malo, the
cheek bone, which being in diverse places spongious, contains also in it
self a very large cauitie, tenderly walled on each side with thin scaly
bones, for lightness so ordained of nature. Osso pube, the second part of Osso
ilio, which being not so broad as the former is throwed on each side with a
large and ample hole. Osso sacro, the great bone whereupon the ridge bone
rests. Osso sphenoido, as Osso cuneale. Ossolare, to pick out the bones of
any thing. Ossoli, bobbins to wind silk upon, keeles or nine pins as they use
to play at with a bowl. Also knuckles, or knucklebones. Ossolieri, the
strings wherewith the slops are tied up or shirt strings. Ossolini, little
small gristly bones. Ossoso, bonie, full of bones. Ossuario, a charnell house,
a shrine or place where bones are kept. Ossuto, as Ossoso. Osta, the name of a
roape in a ship. Ostacolo, an obstacle, a hinderance, an opposition, an
impediment, a let. Ostaggio, an hostage, a pledge, a paunt. Ostante,
withstanding, resisting, opposing, against, hindering, letting. Ostare, to
withstand, to resist, to oppose, to let, to hinder, to stand against or
between, to be in the way. Ostata, a kind of smooth stuff called woosted.
Ostatione, as Ostacolo. Ostatrice, a Midwife. Oste, an host, an inkeeper. Also
aguest being of the masculine gender. Also a camp or an host of men being of
the feminine gender. Ostea, a kind of stuff called woosted. Ostello, an
hostell, a mansion, a mansion house. Osteleria, as Osteria. Osteliero, an
hostler, an host, an inkeeper. Ostendere, tendo, tesi, teso, to show, to tell,
to declare, to point at, to pronounce, to proclaim. Ostentare, to boast, to
brag, to vaunt, to cr^k^, to show a thing for vaineglorie. Ostentatione, an
ostentation, a bragging, a vaunting, a boasting showing forth vainglory.
Ostentatore, a bragger, a vaunter, a brauer, a vaineglorious braggard. Ostenti,
foretokens or prodigies, all things coming against nature, or otherwise then
nature gives, monsters, wonders, strange things happening seldom, betokening
something to come. Ostentoso, that which makes or causes a monster or strange
sight. Osteria, an hostrie, a Tavern, an Inn, a victualling house. Ostia, the
host, a wafer-cake made for an host, a sacrifice. Also an entry or mouth of
a great river where it falls into the sea. Ostiario, a dore-keeper, a porter.
Also one that keeps the ostias in a church. Ostica, Ostiga, an oyster.
Ostigine, Ostiga, a kind of scab in sheep, lambs, goats, or kids, about their
mouths and lips, being deadly to them whilst they are sucklings. Ostinarsi,
to be obstinate, stubborn, stifnecked, or wilful, to take a resolute constant
resolution or determination, to persist in one sentence or purpose. Ostinato,
obstinate, stubborn, stifnecked, opinatiue, constant, invincible, fixed,
firmly, firm, certainly determined. Ostinatione, obstinacy, wilfulnes,
stubbornes, stifneckednes, self-will, constancy, stifnes in opinion.
Ostipante, a medicine that stops and shuts the mouths of the vessels of
the body, not suffering any thing to pass by euaporation or emptying.
Ostipare, to stop holes or chinkes. Also to lay the head aside upon ones
shoulder as one were musing. Ostracismo, a kind of banishment of the best men
in Athens, and was used not so much for punishment of any offense, but to
abate the immoderate power of noble men: it was for ten years space, and was
done by delivering of certain shells with the names of the condemned persons
written in them. Ostracia, or Ostracite, constancy, stifnes in opinion, or a
precious stone brittle like a shell, and somewhat like the Agathe. Ostreca,
Ostrega, an oyster. Ostregaro, an oyster seller, or dregger of oysters.
Ostrica, Ostriga, an oyster. Ostrigaro, as Ostregaro. Ostro, grain to dye
scarlet with. Also scarlet or stamell it self. Also the south wind, but
properly the liquor, juice and color of the fish, whereof is made the color
of purple, as violet, or scarlet. Ostrocismo, as Ostracismo. Ostrogarbino, a
southwest wind. Ostrosirocco, south and by west. Ostruso, hid, hard to find.
Ostruttione, an obstruction, or stopping. Ostrutto, stopped, shut up, very hard
to attain unto. Oti, the name of a bird. Otio, idleness, rest, leisure, time,
conucniencie of tim^, drousines, sl^th, vacation from business or labor, ease,
peace, quietness, vacant time from study or business, a light exercising of the
mind and body. Otioso, idle, drousie, sluggish, lazy, lither, sure,
careless, quiet, restfull, at ease, at rest, without trouble or business, at
leisure, unoccupied. Otonna, a kind of herb. Otorno, as Oresta. Otriare, to
grant, or yield unto. Otro, a jar, or borracho of leather to carry wine in,
an earthen pot. Otroiare, as Otriare. Otrabile, that may be, or is to be
desired or wished for. Ottacatotta, by and by, even now, at this instant.
Ottagonale, having eight angles, eight cornered. Ottalmia, an inflammation of
the uttermost skin of the eyes. Ottalmo, a kind of blue precious stone.
Ottangolo, eight cornered. Ottanta, the number of eighty, or sour skore.
Ottantesimo, the eightieth in order. Ottare, to wish, to desire and pray, to
covet, to have leauer or rather. Ottatiuo, the wishing or optatiue mood.
Ottato, wished, coucted, desired, or longed for. Ottauario, pertaining to the
number of eight. Ottauo, the eight in order, an eight in music. Ottenebrare,
to darken, to obscure, to ouercloude. Ottenebre, dark, obscure, ouerclouded.
Ottenere, tengo, tenni, tenuto, to obtain, to get, to acquire, to atchieue.
Ottenitore, an obtainer, a getter, an atchieuer, an acquirer. Ottentatore, an
attempter, an assayer. Ottestare, humbly to beseech, to desire for gods sake,
or for the love of any dear thing. Ottestatione, an humble desiring, a taking
of God or some other thing to witness for a thing. Ottica, the science whereby
the reason of sight is known. Ottici, Ottico, pertaining to the sight. Ottici
nerui, the sinews which bring the virtue of seeing unto the eyes. Ottimati,
the chief persons among the people, by whom the rest be governed in a common
weal, noblemen, aldermen, or such great and principal men in any state.
Ottimato, excellent, chief, high, of the chief magistrate, an Alderman. Also
the estate or condition of head men of a town or country. Ottimo, excellent,
exquisit, or perfect good, best of all, very good or best, right good and
honest, most blessed. Otto, the number of eight, an eight upon the cards, used
also for Ottone. Ottobre, the month of October. Otto cento, eight hundredth.
Otto mila, eight thousand. Otto volte, eight times. Ottofero, a kind of
chariot with eight wheels. Ottonaio, Ottonaro, a worker in brass or copper, a
brasier. Ottonario, of eight, consisting of eight. Ottone, brass, latten, or
copper. Otturare, to stop, to shut up, to close up. Ottusare, to make dull,
dim, blunt, heavy or sluggish. Ottuso, dull, heavy, leadenwitted, sluggish,
blunt, dim, without spirit, weakened or decayed, in mathematikes it is the
property of an angle or corner, namely such a one as is bigger then a right
angle. Oua, eggs. Ouadelle, the seeds of silk worms, the hard row or eggs
or spawnes of fishes. Ouale, like an egg, ouall, more long then round, vide
Corona. Oua maritate, eggs in moon shine. Oua di pesce, the fry or spaune of
fishes. Ouatione, the season of laying of eggs Also a captains triumph or
victory. Ouato, as Ouale. Oue, whence, whereas, whither, when. Oueche,
whereas. Over, Ouero, or else, or, either. Oueramente, or else, either, or.
Oueriere, a workman, a worker. Ouiatura, as Ostacolo. Ouile, a sheepefold or
sheepecote, or poun, a sheep pen. Ouo, an egg. Ouo fresco, a new-laide egg.
Oura, as Opera. Ourare, as Operare. Ouriere, a worker or workman. Ouuiare, as
Ostare. Also to meet with one. Ouuiatione, as Ostacolo. Also a meeting.
Ouuiatore, a resister, a withstander. Also a meeter. Ouunque, wheresoever,
whethersoeuer. Ouunque che, wheresoever that, whethersoeuer that. Ozena, a
disease in the nose causing a stinking savor. Also a fish so called of his
strong and rank savor. Oxipori, a kind of piercing or penetrating medicine.
P
PAcchia, greedines or gluttony in eating, gormandizing, lauishnes, riot.
Pacchiare, to gorma^dize it, to riot, waste or lavish in feeding. Pacchiatore,
Pacchierotto, as Pacchione. Pacchione, a glutton, an epicure, a gormande, one
that makes his belly his god, an ale knight, a quaffer, a lavish, riotous,
wasting, lover of belly cheer. Pace, peace, rest, quietness, agreement,
accord, atonement, liberty. Also pardon and forgiveness, savor, permission or
leave. Also a voice commanding silence. Con vostra pace. Con pace vostra, Con
lice^tia, with your favor, by your good leave, saving your displeasure. Pace di
marcone, a peace, that concludes with an occupying. Paciente, as Patiente.
Pacientia, as Patientia. Pacificare, to appease, to pacify, to assuage, to
still, to quiet, to make peace. Pacificatione, a pacification, an appeasing, a
peacemaking, a quieting. Pacifico, peaceable, quiet, still, that makes or
treats of peace. Paciozza, a good feeding, nunchons, or meals meat, a
repast, a bait. Also a truce, or well meaning peace or agreement. Padella, a
frying pan. Padellata, a pan full of any thing. Padellina, Padelletta, a little
frying pan. Padiglione, a pauilion or tent for a field. Also a canapie or
sparuier for a bed. Padire, disco, dito, to digest, to brook ones meat, to
put over as a hawk does her feeding. Padimento, a digestion, brooking, or
putting over. Padre, a father, a sire. Padre di famiglia, a household father.
Padre e figliuolo, the name of an herb Padreggiare, as Patrizzare. Padregno, a
father in law. Padri, fathers, elders, forefathers, ancients, our ancestors.
Also the grave senators, aldermen, or borrough masters of a city or state,
governors, grave men. Padriciuoli, little fathers. Padrino, a judge or
stickler in any controversy. Also a god father. Padrocinio, patronage or
protection, safeguard, defense, maintenance, refuge in trouble of suite,
supportation, bearing out. Padrona, a mistres, a dame, an owner, a patroness,
a defendres. Padronare, as Padroneggiare. Padronato, the act of patronage or
protection, a patronage. Padrone, a master, a patron, a sir, an owner, a lord,
a possessour. Also an advocate, a proctor, a counselor, or one that speaks
for him that is accused, an attorney, a spokesman, he that in trouble or peril
defends. Also he that manumisseth and makes free a servant or bondsman.
Padrone di casa, the lord, the possessour, the master, the owner, or goodman of
the house. Padrone del tutto, lord, master, or owner of all. Padrone di naue,
the master or owner of a ship. Padroneggiare, to patronize, to protect. Also to
play the master, to defend them that be poor and falsely accused, to uphold,
to support, to bear out, to maintain ones right or quarrel, to back one.
Padronimico, derived of the fathers or ancestors name. Padule, a fennie
ground, a mere, a marrish soil, a moore. Paduloso, fennie, marrish, boggie.
Paesano, a countriman, a peasant, a clown, a swain, a hind. Also a man of
the same country. Paese, a country, a region, a province. Also the country.
Paffuto, pampred, well fed, in good liking, fattie fed, crammed. Paga, a pay,
wages, or hire for soldiers. Pagamento, a payment. Paga morta, a dead pay.
Paganalia, the wakes or ploughmans feasts, country hollie-daies, as weeks of
ploughmen, or sheepeshearing. Paganelle, a kind of fish. Paganesimo, as
Pagania. Also the profession of paganes or heathens, paganism. Pagania, the
country of painims, pagans, or heathens. Also paganism or heathenisme.
Paganina, a kind of dance used in Italy. Pagano, a pagan, a painim, an
infidel, a heathen. Pagare, to pay, to content, to satisfy, to please, to
apa^e, to reward. Pagare lo scotto, to pay the shot or reckoning. Pagare
contanti, to pay ready money, or to pay down right. Pagare la buona mano, to
pay or give a new years gift, or a drinking penny. Pagare la mancia, idem.
Pagare di posta, to pay at inposte or post as our gamesters use. Pagare di
moneta morta, to pay with words. Pagato, paid, contented, satisfied,
rewarded, pleased. Pagatore, a pai-maister, a paier, a p^rcer, a steward, a
treasurer. Paggio, a page or young squire, a benchman. Paggietto, a young page,
squire, or benchman. Pagina, a page or side of a leaf in a book. Also taken
for a writing. Paglia, straw, also hawme or litter. Pagliaccia, filthy broken
straw or litter, a pallet or straw-bed. Pagliaio, Pagliaro, a ricke or stacke
of straw. Also a straw-bed. Pagliarella, a small cottage made of straw, serne
or such like stuff. Pagliaresco, made of straw, strawish, as commonly our
mudwals be. Pagliariccio, a pallet of straw, a strawbed. Also old broken straw
or litter. Pagliato, pallet, pale or straw color. Pagliccio, of a straw
color. Also as Mondezza. Pagliola, Pagliuola, the lying in childebed of a
woman. Also the dewe-lap of a bull or ox. Pagliuola della testa, as Farfa.
Pagliuolare, to lie in childebed, to be brought a bed. Pagliuolata, laid in
childe-bed, a woman lying in childebed. Pagliucche, straw, haume, stubble or
litter, or chafe. Pagnosa, a kind of wide long garment. Pagnotta, a kind of
meat like a panado, or sops. Also whusht, close, squatting down. Pagnottina,
a little dainty panado. Pago, paid, pleased, apaid, contented, satisfied.
Also punished. Also a country town or village. Also a pay or paiement.
Pagolino, a bird like a sparrowe with a blew neck. Pagonaccio, a purple
color or french russet. Pagona, a pea-hen. Pagone, a pea-cocke. Pagoneggiare,
as Pauoneggiare. Pagro, a fresh water fish called in latin Pagrus. as Paguro.
Pagurino, as Paguro. Paguro, a kind of creuis or crafish called a grit, a
grampell, or a punger. Paia, couples, paires, braces, castes, yokes. Also that
it may seem. Paiara, Paiarina, Paiarona, a kind of home-spoone linen cloth.
Paiarizzo, a bird called a yellowe hammer. Paidimento, as Padimento. Paidire,
as Padire. Painelle, as Panie. Paio, a pair, a couple, a brace, a cast. Also I
seem or appear. Paipo, a bird with a forket tail. Paisare, to range or seek
lurkingly for pray as a hawk does. Paiuola, as Pagliuola. Also a bucket, a
paile, a kettle or a flat brazen pan. Paiuolare, as Pagliuolare. Paiuolata, as
Pagliuolata. Paiuolaro, a brazier, a tinkar, a bucket-maker. Paiuolo, a
scullion in a kitchen, a scourer of pans. Also a friar of meats in a pan.
Paiula, as Paiuola. Pala, a fan, a winnow, a spade, a shoouell, a skoope, a
peele to put bread in an oven with. Paladare, to winnow corn. Paladelle, a
kind of sticks or sprigs to catch quails. Paladinesco, like a man at arms.
Paladino, a valiant man at arms, an errant knight, a warrier. Paladore, a
winnower of corn. Palafreniere, a horse-keeper, an hostler, a horse-courser, a
horse-boy, a lackie. Palafreno, a palfrey, a horse. Palagio, as Palazzo.
Palagietto, a little palace. Palamaglio, a stick with a mallet at one end to
play at a wooden ball with. Also the name of such a game. Palamagliare, to play
at Palamaglio. Palamagliere, a player at Palamaglio. Palamaro, as Palamagliere.
Also a fishing line. Palamento, any kind of fence or hedge made of poles or
stakes, a railing about, a deck or hatches of a ship. Palamite, a fish called
a tunnie before it be a year old, a summer whiting. Palandaria, a kind of
hulke or ship. Palandra, a long Turkish garment, a horse-mans cote, a riding
garment. Palandrana, as Palandra. Palandrina, a common queen, a harlot, a
strumpet, a gill. Palanga, a lever, a cowle-staffe. Also as Palandra. Also a
rolling piece of timber to lanche out ships from the docke or to remove timber
with. Palangario, an ale-stand-bearer, a porter that carries burdens with
slings. Palange, slings to carry burdens with between two, as brewers use.
Palangra, the lap, skirts or quarters of a cote. Palara, a thrush or
field-fare. Palare, to cast with a shoouell, spade or scoope. Also to garnish
with stakes or with thick square lathes, to set up vines or hops with stakes,
to pale, to hedge in or underprop with stakes. Palascermo, as Paliscermo.
Palata, a shoouell, spade or scoopefull. Also a staking, empaling or
underpropping or vndersetting with stakes as vines and hops be. Palatara, as
Paretara. Palatari, a disease in a horse. Palatina, the impostumation or
swelling of the palet. Palatino, as Paladino. Also a county palatine. Also of
or belonging to a princes court or to a palace. Palato della bocca, the pallat,
vuola or upper roof of the mouth. Palatore, a caster with a shoouell, spade or
scoope. Palatura, as Paretara. Palazzo, a palace, a court, an emperors, Kings
or Princes court. also a Guild-hal, a seat of justice, a sessions house.
Palazzo di consiglio, a palace where the Parliament or council is kept.
Palazzo reale, a Kings palace, mansion or court, a royal palace or house.
Palcare, to seele or to floor, or make into stages or skaffolds. Palchetto, a
little sollar, floor, loft, tarras, stage or skaffold. Palco, an Elephants
trunk. Also a stage, a floor, a skaffold, a sollar or seeling. Palcone, a
great sollar, floor, loft, tarras, stage or skaffold. Palcora, the plural of
Palco. Pale, those parts of the back which stand out on the right and left
side. Pale del molino, the boordes of the mill-wheele which the water turns
about. Palegro, a beer to carry dead folks on to be buried. Paleneza, a kind
of little fish. Palengaro, a devise or basket made of osiers to catch fish
with. Paleo, a top or gigge that children use to play with. Also an Elephants
truncke or snout. Palesare, to reveal, to publish, to manifest, to bewraie.
Palesatore, a reuealer, a publisher. Palese, public, apparent, manifest,
open, in view. Palesta, a Greek measure of four inches or four handfuls.
Palestra, a wrestling or a wrestling place. Also the game or seat of wrestling,
barriers or other feats of bodily actiuitie, any thing or any place wherein a
man does chiefly exercise himself. Palestrade, iron hooks that be made fast
in walls. Palestrico, pertaining to wrestling, of wrestling or thereto
belonging. Also one that teaches or uses wrestling. Paletica, something about
a plough. Paletta, any kind of fire shoouell, slice, trowell, scoope or
batledar to play at tenis with. Paletta da fuoco, a fire-shoouell or slice.
Paletta di muratore, a trowell. Paletta di spetiale, a lingell, a spoone, a
tenon, a spattle or slice as Apothecaries use. Palettaro, a shoouell or slice
maker. Pali, poles, stakes, piles, staves, perches, long rods. Paliare, to
cloak, to mantle, to cover, to shade, to hide, to shroude. Paliatiua, that may
be mantled, shaded or hid or cloked. Palido, Palidezza, Palidire, etc. as
Pallido, etc. Palificare, to make a foundation under water of piles, stakes,
poles or timber. Palificamento, Palificatione, Palificata, a foundation of
piles under water. Pa^lli, as Paliscelli. Palimbacchio, a foot consisting of
one long and two short syllables. Palingenesia, regeneration, new birth or
second nativity. Palinodia, a recantation or unsaying of that has been spoken
or written, a contrary song. Palio, a cloak, a roabe, a mantle, a long
garment, a cover, a vesture. also the prize, game or goal of any running,
race, wrestling, leaping or iusting. Also a race or running course for horses.
Also a horse cloth. Also a paul or hearse-cloth. also a shroud or shelter, as
Pallio. Palio funebre, a paul or hearse-cloth. Paliscalmo, a kind of small
ship, pinace, boat, barge, gallie or foist, such as sea men triumph in.
Paliscelmo, Palischermo, as Paliscalmo. Paliscermo, as Paliscalmo. Paliscelli,
Paliselli, small sticks as chandlers use to make candles with. Paliuro, ram of
Libia, Christ's thorn, white thorn, sea rush or hollie tree. Palla, any kind
of ball, bullet or boule. Palla da giuocare, a tenis ball. Palla d'arteglieria,
a bullet for cannon. Palla del cielo, a thunder boult. Palla muschiata, a musk
ball or Pomander. Palladelli, poles or staves for vines or hops to grow and
twind upon. Palletta, a little ball or bullet. Also a bird so called. Palliare,
to enmantle, to cloak, to enrobe, to shroude. Pallidetto, somewhat pale, wanne,
whitish, sallow colored, or bleake. Pallidezza, palenes, wanness, sallownes,
bleakenes. Pallidire, disco, dito, to be, to make or grow pale, wanne, sallow,
bleake, or whitish as it were through fear, or sickness. Pallidiccio, palish,
wannish, sallowish, bleakish, fearful. Pallidita, as Pallidezza. Palliferio,
a tree in India, the wood whereof is as hard as iron, which no water can rot.
Pallio, a mantle, cloak, robe, or other long garment as the knights of the
garter wear. Also a cope or a surplis. Pallone, a ballone, a footeball, or any
kind of great bullet. Palloniero, a ballonier, a footeball maker. Pallore, as
Pallidezza. Pallotta, a bullet or round ball. Pallottare, as Ballottare, but
properly among riders when the horse does stand advancing himself attending
the hand of the horseman or rider to turn on either side. Pallottola, as
Balla, or Palla. Also a bottom of thread. Pallottole, the kernels or wartles
that breed between the flesh and the skin, about the neck or groine.
Palluzzare, to toss and dandle as a ball. Palma, the palm of an hand when it
is wide open, the hand it self. Also the space between the wrist of the hand
and the first joint of the fingers. Also a measure of an hand breadth. Also a
tree called a palm or date tree. Also a victory, or the price, goal, glory,
honor, best, sign or reward of a victory or triumph in any kind of action.
Also the broader part of an oar. Palma christi, the herb Satirion. Palmare,
to measure by the spannes, or hand-breadths, to gripe with the palm of the
hand. Also to sleeke or stroke, or make smooth with ones hand, to crown with
palm. Palmata, a handful, a spanne in measure, a hands-breadth. Also a box, a
clap, a blow or whirret given with the hand flatlin, a souse on the ear.
Palmatoia, a cane, a reed, a palmers staff, a walking-staffe. Palmeggiare, to
stroke with the palm of the hands, to clap softly. Palmento, a press to
press grapes, a wine-fat. Palmite della vite, as Pampano. Palmetto, a grove of
palm trees. Also a little spanne, or hands-breadth. Palmipede, whole footed,
that has a plain and flat foot. Some have used it for splaie-footed.
Palmito, a grove of Palm trees. Palmo, a handful, a spanne, or hands-breadth,
a shaftman. Palmula, the broader part of the ribs. Palo, a pole, a stake, a
pile, a post, a staff, a perch, a bar, a crow of iron. Also a kind of
dog-fish. Palo di ferro, an iron bar, leauer, or rostle, or crow of iron.
Palomba, Palombo, a stock-doue, a ring-doue, a woodculuer, or cowshot.
Palombara, a doue-house, a pigeon-house. Palombino, a doue-colour, a ring-doue
color. Palpabile, palpable, that may be felt, touched, or handled. Palpare, to
feel, to groape, to feel and handle gently, to stroke and touch softly, used
also to flatter, to cog, to foist, and to deceive with fair words. Palpebre,
the eye lids. Also the hairs that grow on the eye lids. Palpegone, gropingly,
fumblingly, sneakingly as men grope in the dark, by guisse, hab or nab.
Palpetante, as Palpitante. Palpetare, as Palpitare. Palpicone, as Palpegone.
Palpitante, panting, beating, throbbing, moving, boading. Palpitare, to pant,
beat, or throb as ones heart does being weary, out of breath, to move, to
dance, to stir as ones brain does sometimes. Palpitatione, a panting, or
moving or throbbing, a beating often, a quick moving as the heart when it
throbs. Palpitio, as Palpitatione. Paltono, a varlet, a knave, a rascal.
Paltrocca, a pussell, a pugge, a paltry wench, a driggle-draggle, a slut, a
whore, a flurt, a strumpet, a gixie, a minxe. Palsero, a thumb of a hand. Also
an inch. Paltoniere, a farmer of any living or lands. Also taken for a carier
or drouer. Paltrufalo, a kind of fruit of a water-weede. Paludamento, a
coate-armour, a horsemans cote, a heralds cote of arms, a chief captains
rich garment, a triumphant robe, or imperial mantell. Paludare, to grow
fennie, marrish, or moorish. Palude, a fennie or marrish ground, a meare, a
moore. Paludoso, fennie, marrish, moorish, watrie, full of bogs. Paluscelli, as
Paliscelli. Also a roape-makers tool. Palustro, as Paludoso. Paluesana, as
Paluese. Paluese, a kind of old fashioned target, shield, or buckler, called a
Palueise. Pambasilia, a perfect kingdom or dominion, a kingdom where one has
all in his own power. Pambere, bread and drink together, taken also for a
nunchions or beuer, or drinking in an afternoon. Pampalo, a fish called in
latin Pompilius. Pampanare, to cut off superfluous leaves, branches, or sprigs
of vines that the sun may come to the grapes to ripen them. Also to budde, to
sprout, or spring with buds or blossoms. Pampani, buds, sprouts, or leaves or
branches of vines, called the tendrels that spring the first year of the vine,
and bears leaves only and no grapes. Pampanoso, full of leaves, sprigs,
branches or buds. Pampapato, a kind of simnell or cracknell bread. Pamphago,
the name of a dog as one would say a rauener, an eate-all. Pampinare, as
Pampanare. Pampinatione, a cutting and pulling off superfluous and needeles
leaves and branches from vines. Pampini, as Pampani. Pampinoso, as Pampanoso.
Panace, the herb Al-heale, or wound-woort. Some take it for Tobacco. Some for
Costemarie. Some for Angelica: and some for Scabwoort or horseheele. Panachea,
as Panace. Panada, a kind of meat called a Panado. Panadella, Panadina, a
little mess of Panad. Panadelli, a kind of torch, taper, or link. Panae,
has been used by Dante for lime-twigs. Panaia, a hand-basket, a bread-basket.
Also a belly or a panch. Panara, a kind of simnell bread. Also a binne or
basket for bread, a bakers basket. Panareco, that contains all virtue.
Panariccio, a fellon, a whitblowe, that comes on ones fingers tops. Panaro, as
Panara. Panaruola, a little binne, a basket for bread. Panata, as Panada.
Panatella, Panatina, as Panadella. Panateria, a pantrie or bread-stall.
Panathenee, a kind of games and solemnities used by the Athenians. Panatiere, a
baker. also a panter. Panca, a bench, a stool, a form, a seat, a settle.
Pancali, benches, stools, forms, seats, settles. Pancetta, a breast of porke.
Also a bald-rib of porke. Panche, brogues or such shoes as Irish men wear.
Panchetta, a little form, stool, bench, seat or settle. Pancia, a paunch or
belly. Panciano, as Pancione. Panciare, to paunch any beast, to vnbowell.
Panciata, a paunch or belly full. Panciatura, the paunching of any creature.
Panciera, a piece of armor to arm the belly, a belly piece. Pancietta, a
little belly or paunch. Panciolle, Look Apanciolle, or stare a panciolle.
Pancione, a big belly, a paunch, a gulch or gorbelly. Panciuto, that has a
big paunch or belly, gorbellied. Pencratio, a kind of onion or garlic
growing by the water. Also a wrestling or exercise in all feats of actiuitie.
Pancratisti, certain wrestlers or contenders with hand and feet, expert in
actiuitie. Pancrea, a kernel under the ventricle, to defend it from receiving
hurt. In a hog it is called the sweet bread. Pancreo, a part of the body in
the nether rimme of the caul between the liver and the stomach. Pancresto,
a medicine serving for all diseases, a salve for every sore. Pancro, a kind of
many colored precious stone. Pancucco, a kind of fruit that oaks bring forth
like the gals. Panda, the gods of peace. Pandere, pando, pandei, panduto, to
spread, to open, to set abroad, to iette out. Pandette, books of diverse
arguments treating of all matters, a volume of the civil law called Digestes.
Pandiculare giorno, all Saints day, wherein they did sacrifice to all the gods
in common. Pandiculatione, a gaping, a reaching or stretching out of the body
that so the vapors may be blown and puffed down. Pandolo, a kind of
boyes-plaie used in Italy. Pandora, Pandura, a musical instrument with three
strings, a kit, a croude, a rebecke. Also signifying all gifts. Pane, all
manner of bread. Also any kind of loaf or manchet. Pane azimo, unleavened
bread. Pane biscotto, biscuit bread, shipbread. Pane bollito, a caudle,
honie-sops, or a Panado. Pane buffetto, manch^t bread or roll. Pane cornuto,
course crustie bread. Pane di zuccaro, a sugar loaf. Pane di formentada,
bread made of wheat. Pane di cernita, manchet bread, cho^^ bread, ranged
bread. Pane di semola, bread made of branne, chafe bread. Pane di sembolelli,
vnranged or chafe bread. Pane di rauisciuolo, rye or typhe bread. Pane di
segala, rye bread. Pane di tritello, rye or typhe bread. Pane ficato, a kind
of bread so called. Pane fiesco, new bread. Pane grosso* great course bread.
Pane gramolato, ranged bread or kneaded bread. Pane leuato, leauened bread.
Pane muffato, mouldie or mustie bread. Pane pagato, simnell bread. Pane unto,
bread and butter, a toste and butter. Panedra, a bird that feeds upon fishes.
Panegirico, that contains commendations and praise. Also a licentious and
lascivious kind of speaking or oration in the praise and commendations of
kings, wherein men do join many lies with flattery. Panegli, flying squibs
made of gunpowder. Panellare, to charm, to bewitch, to enchant. Panello, a
charm, an enchantment. Also a riding cloth or horse cloth, a little cloth, a
clout. Panereccio, a great swelling, blane or sore, but properly as Panariccio.
Panerello, a little wicker basket. Paneto, a kind of precious stone which
helps women in their travel, having it about them. Panetaio, as Panetiere.
Panetaria, a place where bread is sold. Also a woman baker. Panetera, a woman
baker or pantler. Panetiere, a baker or a pantler. Panetto, an ingot or lump
of any metal new cast. Pangio, a devout and most religious man. Pani, broad
and flat impostumations. Pania, any slimie, gluish, or clammie matter. Also
slime or birdlime. Also a lime twigge, or luske, or a rispe. Paniare, to lime
twigs. Also to entangle, to clam. Panicello, as Pannetto. Panicio, a grain
like millet, panike, otemeale. Also that which men use in stead of bread.
Panico, a grain like unto mill, with a knop full of corn, some red, some
black or white, called panike. Also a sudden fear wherewith one is
distraught, and put besides his wit, coming without known cause. Panicone, a
great feeder, a cormorant, a gourmand, a gullie-gut, a gorbellie. Panicula, a
long round thing hanging down of diverse herbs and trees like a cats-taile,
as in nut trees and others, called red plum or cats-taile. Also any thing that
grows round and long. Panieraro, a panier or basket maker. Paniere, a panier,
a basket, a dosser. Panioni, lime twigs or sprigs to catch foul with, called
lushes or rispes. Panizza, a kind of meat made of grated bread. Panizzo as
Panico. Pannaccio, filthy course cloth, rugge or frize, homespun cloth.
Pannadi latte, a kind of clouted cream, trifle or fool. Pannaiuolo, a draper
or a clothier. Pannareccia, a whitlowe or fellon, a disease coming on the
finger an vncom. Pannetto, a little cloth, ragge or clout, a napkin, a
handkercher, a towell, a rubber, a kercher. Panni, all manner of clothes,
garments, raiments, or apparel, be it woollen or linen. Pannicelli, Pannelli,
as Pannetto. Also filmes or thin skin-lets. Pannicola carnosa, as Pannicula.
Pannicoli, little rags, clouts or clothes. also any thin skin about a man's
body. Pannicula carnosa, a pannicle or fleshie membrane or skin that lies
next under the fat of the outward parts, and is the fourth covering that
wrappeth all the body over. Panni lini, any linen clothes. Panni lini di
gamba, linen hose or stockings. Panni di razza, cloth of arraz, tapestry
cloth. Pannine, all manner of woollen clothes or the trade of woollen clothes.
Panni vendoli, such as sell old clothes, frippers, brokers. Pannito, a frock
or cassocke. Pannizzuola, a tool that stone cutters use. Panno, any kind of
cloth. Also a tent for a wound. Also a mark which a man has by nature. Panno
accottonato, cottoned, or freezed cloth. Panno alto, broad cloth. Panno basso,
narrow cloth, as carzies. Panno collo, a neck-cloth. Panno del occhio, a
disease in the eye, as we say a pin and a web. Panno lana, woollen cloth. Panna
lino, linen cloth. Panno di seta, any cloth made of silk. Pannocchia, a cunt
botch, a winchester goose, an impostume about the privy members, a boil, a
blane, a pocke, a plague sore, a knob, a bunch or wenne of flesh. Also a
stalk, a stem, or an ear of milet, panike, or Indian wheat. Pannoro, a kind
of measure in Italy. Pannosita, a dimnes over ones eyes. Pannoso, woollie, full
of clothes, clothed with cloth. Also covered with a rine or slimie skin. Pano,
reeling, round, closely round, the round lying of a snake or of a worm. Also
a weauers roll. Also touchwood, or a spungie swelling on trees like a
mushrume. Also knobs, kernels, or corns growing behind many men's ears, or
other parts. Also a hot swelling or inflammation of blood. Pan pentito, bread
of repentance, contitinuall repentance. Pan porcino, an herb good for women in
labor to hasten their delivery called sowbread. Pansebasto, a precious stone
which takes away barrennes. Panselono, the full moon. Patalena, a kind of
fish that sticks upon the outside of ships, called a barnakle: some take it
for another kind of shell fish. Pantano, mudde, mire, dirt, a bogge.
Pantanoso, muddie, mierie, durtie, boggie. Pantegana, a great rat. Pantero, a
precious stone, having many colors. Panthera, a beast called a panther or a
leoparde. Also a net or haie to catch conie^ with. Also a kind of fowling net.
Also a kind of many colored stone. Pantice, a flux of the belly. Also a
great fat paunch or gorbelly. Pantide, a stone of some called Graida, for they
say it brings forth young ones every three months. Pantiera, a kind of
tra^ell or fowling net. Pantofole, slippers, pantofles, chopines. Pantonimo, a
player, a dizzard or common iester, that moving his body, and using filthy
gesture can counterfeit the manners and gestures of any man. Also a kind of
poem. Panurgia, craftines, deceit, guile, subtilty. Panurgo, a sly,
deceitful, crafty old fox, a crafty knave. Panza, as Pancia. Panzane, Look
Dare panzane. Panzare, as Panciare. Panzata, as Panciata. Panzette, as
Pancette. Panziera, as Panciera. Panzone, as Pancione. Paolino, as Pagolino.
Paonaccio, Paonazzo, as Pauonazzo Paone, a pea-cocke. Paoneggiante, as
Pauonegiante. Paoneggiare, as Pauonegiare. Papa, a Pope, a bishop of Rome.
Papabile, able to be Pope. Papadindi, dad or father give me some money, as
children use to say. Papafico, a kind of frock or gabardine to ride in.
Papagallo, a parrat, a popping iay or Parochito. Also a wonderful cock: for
Pape in latin is admirable, and Gallo is a cock, a cock of the game. Also as
Merluzzo. Papali, a kind of pear so called in Italy. Paparello, Paparino, as
Paparo. Paparo, a gosling or young goose. Papasso, a Pope or bishop among the
infidels. Papato, the papacy or Popedom. Also a kind of simnell bread.
Papauerale, wild poppie, which being subject to falling off does soon loose
his flower, some call it corne-rose. Papauero, poppie or chestoule. Pape, a
word of admiration, as Gods! oh! alas! aie me! Papero, Paparello, a young
goose or goslin. Papesimo, the Popedom or papacy, or popery or popish
religion. Papiglione, a butterfly. Papiro, a kind of great rush in Egypt
growing in fens or moorish grounds whereof they were wont to make great leaves
to write on, and whereof the first paper was made, and of that came our word
paper^ Papiro della candela, the snuff or week of a candle. Papironco, Look
Lucegnolo. Papisti, the papists or catholics. Pappa, pap for children. Also
the first word children use, as with us dad or daddie or bab. Also a nurce
father or foster father. Pappafico, a dainty bird in Italy feeding on figs
called a gnatsnapper. Pappagallesca lingua, the parrats language, as we say
pedlers french, gibbrish or the fustian tongue. Pappardelle, a kind of meat used
in Italy like steakes of veale roasted or baked in a dripping pan under the roast
meat, the dripping or basting of which gives it a very dainty taste.
Pappare, to feed with pap, to pap, to suck. Also as Pacchiare. Also to call
dad as children do when they learn to speak. Also to eat small and chewed
meat as nurces give children. Papparotta, Papparoto, as Pappa. Pappatore, a
feeder on pap. Also as Pacchione. Pappatura, any kind of pap or feeding with
pap. Also as Pacchia. Pappe, teates, dugs, vdders, pappes, as Pape. Pappo, a
word used by children, as dad or dadie or bab. Also the soft down of flowers
that the wind blows about as thistle down or the mossines and cotton that
grows on some herbs. Also the herb called Groundswell. Pappolata, as
Fagiolata. Papponare, as Pacchiare. Pappone, as Pacchione. Papula, a botch, a
boil, a pocke, a blane, a sore or impostume in the privy parts. Also a
blister, a push, a whelke or any swelling or inflammation which rises on the
skin with itch. Papuzzana, a worm called a weenell. Par, a pair, a couple, a
cast, a brace, a yoke. Also for Pare, it seems. Par, pari, alike, even, just,
match, equal, semblable, iump. Pario dispari, even or ods. Parpari, all alike,
all even. Also a kind of play called even and odd. Para, Paia, paires,
couples, casies, braces, yokes. Parabasi, transgression, as it were speaking
something besides the argument. Parabola, a parable, a similitude or comparison,
a resemblance. Also a certain crooked line coming of the cutting of a cone or
cilinder. Parabolano, a parable speaker. Also a mountibanke, a pratler, a
babbler, a chatter, a prater. Parabolare, to speak parables, to chat, prate or
tattle by way of similitudes and parables. Paracentesi, a pricking as it were
or cutting of the skin with a lancet or a fleam or any other sharp pointed
instrument to draw water from them that have the dropsy. Paracenterio, an
instrument wherewith such a cure is done. Parachinanca, as Parasinanca.
Paracimeno. Paracismo, as Parocismo. Paraclesi, a comforting or exhortation.
Paraclito, a man defamed or ill reported of, that has an ill name.
Paracnastico, a kind of continual hot and burning fever wherein the heat
when it is at the greatest by little and little diminishes and cease.
Paracnemio, the uttermost bone in the shanke of the leg. Paracoculo, a strange
plant or thistle called the apple of Peru, the thornie or prickly apple.
Paracope, alienation of the mind. Paracore, a defense for the heart, a cordial,
a goose giblets or such cooks vailes. Paracucchino, a flurt, a jot, a pins
head, a strawes head Also as Pancucco. Paracuore, as Paracore. Paradelo, the
great daizie with the knob in the midst. Paradimma, Paradigma, an example of
some ones fact or saying. Paradisare, to emparadize. Paradiseo, a bird
breeding in paradise having very costly feathers. Paradiso, paradise. Also a
garden of pleasure or orchard of delight. Paradossale, paradoxicall, contrary
to the common opinion. Paradosso, a marvelous, wonderful and strange thing to
hear, and is contrary to the common received opinion, a paradoxe, an old
opinion maintained by some one man or some few sectaries. Parafimosi, some part
of a man's priuities. Parafo, a paraffe, a paragraffe, whatsoever is contained
in one sentence. Parafuoco, a skreene to ward one from the fire. Paragalli,
the name of a roape in a ship. Paraggi, the knuckles or turning ioints of the
chine or back bone. Paraggio, equality, comparison, a match. Also a
preparation, an ornament or setting forth. Paragoge, a figure when a letter or
syllable is added to the order of a word. Paragonanza, a comparison, an
equality, a matching. Paragonare, to compare, to equal, to confer together.
Paragone, a paragon, a match, an equal, a proof, a trial, an experience, an
equality, a comparison. Also a conferring together, a touch stone to try gold
or good from bad. Also a like as good as one brings. Paragrafa, a mark in a
margent. Paragrafo, a paragraffe, a paraffe, a pilcrow, whatsoever is contained
in one sentence. Paralelli, Paralello, as Parallelli. Paralesia, the sickness
which we call palsy. Paraliopesi, a prevention, an anticipation. Paralipomene,
left out, not spoken or written of. Paraliscia, as Paralesia. Paralisi, a
resolution of the sinews, a depriving of feeling and moving, or of both in
any part of the body. Paralisis, an herb with a golden flower, and is the
first sign of spring time, the primrose or cowslip. Paralisi herba, the
primrose, cowslip or oxelip. Paralitico, one that is sick of the palsy.
Parallassi, the difference between the true and apparent place of a planet or
comet, by reason that we behold it not from the center, but from the
superficies of the earth. Parallella sphera, that place of the world where the
inhabitants have the equinoctial, and the Tropikes parallel to their horizon,
as they have who dwell under the north or south poole. Parallelli, the circles
and lines in the sphere of the world drawn from the east to the west having
one of the poles for their center, and in every part equally distant one from
another. Parallello, every where alike distant, as lines drawn in childrens
copy books to write by. Paralo, a kind of ship at Athens wherein certain
went to Delos every year in the name of all the rest to sacrifice to Apollo,
and they which went in that ship were called Parali. Paralogismo, a deceitful
conclusion or captious reasoning and arguing. Paramento, a preparation, a
setting forth, a trimming, a garnishing, a dighting. Paramese, the fifth string
or next to the middlemost. Also B. fa. b. mi. Paramosche, a fan of feathers to
keep away flies with. Parandra, a beast or bird of many colors. Paranesi,
an admonition or a precept, an exhortation, namely such a one as ought not to
be gainsaied. Paranetico, containing such precepts and instructions. Parango, a
span measure or shaftsman as drapers call it in London. Parangonare, as
Paragonare. Parangone, as Paragone. Paranunpha, he or she that is joined with
the bride or bridegroom to make him or her ready, to see that all things may
be well, an ouerlooker of a marriage or wedding. It is now a days used in
many parts of Italy for a marriage maker. Also an effeminate, nice, milkesop,
puling fellow. Para^^te, a kind of Amethist stone. Parapecchio, one of the
bones in the arm called also Badio. Parapetto, a cuirace, a breast plate, a
sense for the breast or heart. Also a parapet or wall breast high. Also the
upper part of the wall which shadoweth the soldiers from the sight and
annoyances of the enemy. Paraph^rna, or Parapharnalia, al things that the
woman brings to her husband beside her dowry called in latin Peculium. It
is a word used in the civil law. Paraphrasi, a paraphrase, an exposition of
one self thing by other words. Paraphrastico, paraphrasticall, a larger
exposition of any thing. Paraphrasto, he that interprets the sentences of an
author plainly. Paraphrosina, a kind of frenzy. Parare, to adorn, to dight,
to deck, to beautify, to set forth, to trim, to prepare, to furnish, to
garnish, to provide, to dress, to mend, to order, to make ready, to set in a
readiness. Also to ward or defend a blow, to cover, to shield, to shelter, to
shroud, to repair. Also to teach a horse to stop and stay orderly. It is also
taken for the stop in the action of horsemanship. Para been, he stops well.
Parato, adorned, dight, decked, beautified, set forth, trimmed, prepared,
garnished, provided, dressed, mended, ordered, made ready, set in a readiness.
Also warded or defended a blow, covered, shielded, sheltred, shrouded,
repaired. Also ready, quick, nimble, prompt, ready with good meditation,
advised. Parasanga, a Persian measure used much by Xenophon in describing
marches, containing 30. stadios, and is about three miles and three quarters of
ours. Parasi, a kind of disease in the eyes. Parasinanca, a kind of squinsie
or swelling in the outward muscles or fleshie parts of the jaws with a rednes,
being a disease ordinarily happening to hogs: some call it in men the mumps or
outward swelling of the throat. Parasismo, Paracismo, Parasimo, a grudge, fit,
accession, or remaining of a disease. Parasitare, to play the parasite, to
scoth one up in all things, to hold one up with yea and nay, to faune and
flatter, to cogge and foist with one for a meals meat. Parasito, a
smell-feast, a flatterer, a parasite, a trencherd or belly friend, one that
says and does all things to please the humor of another, and agrees unto
him in all things to have his repast scotfree. Parastasi, assistance or proof
by witness. Parastatiche, the spindle-bone in the shanke. Also two kernels full
of seed in man's body at the end of the bladder, receiving the seed from
other vessels. Parastrate, the spindle-bone in the shanke. Also two kernels
full of seed, which in a man do grow at the end or neck of the bladder, and
serve to receive the seed brought thither by vasa deferentia. Parata, a ward,
a defense, a shroud, a shelter, a preparing. Parathesi, apposition. Paratilmo,
a kind of punishment by drawing out of hairs out of the secret parts of the
body of poor men taken in adultery. Parauanghi, country laborers or
ploughmen. Parauento, a fan or any thing else to defend one from the wind.
Parche, the fates of man's life, Poets feign them to be three. Parcere, to
spare, forgive, or pardon, to forbear, or abstain. Parcimonia, as Parcita.
Parcimonioso, as Parco. Parcita, niggardnes, thriftines, frugalitie, sparing,
scarcenes, sparingnes, good husbandry. Parco, sparing, saving, frugall, scarce
in expenses, hard, niggard, near, miserly, loath to, little desirous of. Also a
miser, a churl, a snudge, a pinchpennie, a pennie-father. Also a park for
dear, an empaled piece of ground. Pardai, a kind of flat bottom boat.
Pardalianche, an herb called libards bane. Pardalio, a kind of sweet
ointment. Also a kind of precious stone speckled like a panther. Pardalo, a
bird called a plouer. Pardello, a fish called a menowe. Pardiglio, a dark
spotted gray color of a horse. Pardo, a dear or sandie-colour. Also the
color of a horse. Also a Leopard. Pardolo, a kind of boyes-play so called.
Also a bird that seems to be a plouer. It is of a dunne color, and flies in
flocks. Pare, equal, alike, even, just, matching. Also it seems, it
appears. Pareaso, Pareasi, a serpent, having to the greatness and length of
his body but a small head, yet such a wide mouth that he is able to swallow
down a sparow or a pigeon whole: he makes a furrow on the ground as he
creeps with his tail. Parechij, many, sundry, diverse, manifold, some,
more. Parecchiare, to prepare, to set forth, to make ready, to dress, to
dight. Parecchio, a preparation, a setting forth, a making ready, a dighting.
Pareggiare, as Paragonare. Pareggio, as Paragone. Pareglia, as Paragone.
Parelio, any thing bright like the sun. Parencephali, the hinder part of the
brain. Parencima, the substance of the liver, spleen and lights, so called
because it is supposed that they are congealed of much thick and feculent
blood. Parentado, a marriage, or matching, or allying together of houses, an
assembly of kinsmen, a kindred, an aliance, a parentage, an affinity, a
consanguinitie, a kin, a family, a stock, a house, a name, a blood of a name
or kindred, an ancestrie, a pedigree. Parentare, to allye or join in marriage,
to become kin, or kinsmen. Parentato, allied, or matched in marriage. Also as
Parentado. Parente, a kinsman, an allye, one joined in alliance: it may also be
used for the father and mother that begat and bare us, a parent, an ancient
el^er. Also the maker and creator, or that breeds and brings forth.
Parentela, as Parentado. Parentesi, a parenthesis or interposition of words
within a sentence, a clause comprehended within another sentence, which may be
left out, and yet the sense perfect. Parentezza, as Parentado. Parenticida, he
that murthereth his father, mother, kinsfolk, or dear friend. Parentorio, as
Paremptorio. Parere, an opinion, a will, a conceit, a thought, a mind, a
voice, a seeming. Parere, Paio, Parsi, Parso, or Paruto, to seem, to appear,
to think, to suppose, to show himself, to have an opinion or conceit.
Parergo, something put to, being nothing of the matter, all that is besides the
principal purpose that one has in hand. Paresi, negligence, slacknes, a
decaying or weakening of the strength of body or mind. Paretara, Paretaria,
the herb called Pellitorie of the wall, or binde-weede, or with-binde.
Parete, any kind of wall or partition in a house. Pareuole, seemly,
appearing, apparent, making a good show, sightly, that makes a fair show,
handsome, likely, in good plight. Pargoleggiare, to waver, to play the child,
to be quaint, pretty or trixie. Pargoletta, Pargolo, quaint, pretty, ^umble,
dainty, trixie, tender, small, little. Pari, paires, couples, braces, casts,
yokes, equal, alike, resembling, even, matches. Pari del regno, the peers of
the kingdom, the states, or great men, or princes of a state. Pari di francia,
the peers of France. Pari dispari, even and odd, a kind of play so called.
Paricida, a murderer of his father, mother, or any of his near kindred. Also
he that kills his equal, or he that wittinglie or willingly had slain a
free man, any heinous murderer. Parietaria, an herb called pellitorie of the
wall. Pariete, as Parete. Parigioli, a kind of mushroms or toadestooles.
Pariglia, Pariglio, as Paragone. Parigliare, as Paragonare. Parilita,
equality, likeness, euennes, similitude, resemblance. Parimente, alike,
equally, even, likewise, also, moreover, besides, together, naturally,
semblably, as well as, in like manner or sort. Pario, a kind of stone or
marble. Parisola, an oxeye, or great titmouse. Paristhimia, two spongious
kernels in the jaws containing great abundance of humiditie, which serves to
moisten the rough artery, the stomach, and all the parts in the mouth.
Parita, equality, as Parilita. Paritello, a thin wall of reeds, or rods.
Paritonio, a kind of color that painters use. Parmegiano, a man borne in
Parma. Also Parmesan cheese, cheese made about Parma. Parlamentare, to parley or
speak together of grave matters. Parlamento, a Parliament, a parlie, a
speaking, a speech. Also a Parliament, or assembly of the states of a
kingdom. Parlante, speaking, discoursing, reasoning, talking. Parlantina, as
Ciaramella, a talking or tatling woman. Parlare, to speak, to talk, to
reason, to discourse. Also speech, talk, or discourse. Parlare alla muta, to
speak by signs and nods. Parlare co cenni, to speak by signs, or beckning.
Parlasia, the palsy. Parlatoio, a room in a house called a parlour.
Parlatore, a speaker, a discourser, a talker. Parlatura, a speech or speaking.
Parletico, sick of the palsy. Also the palsy. Parliere, a speaker. Parma, a
kind of shield or target that footmen were wont to use in wars. Parmola, a
part of the plough so called. Parnocchie, a fish called shrimps or praunes.
Paro, a pair, a couple, a brace, a cast. Also equal, like, match, even.
Parochetto, Parochito, a kind of Parrats, called a Parokito. Parocchia, a
parish. Parochiale, a parishioner, pertaining to a parish. Parochiano, a
parishioner. Also a parish priest. Parocismo, a fit, a stowre, a grudge, or an
assault of an ague, the coming again of an ague. Paro^o, as Parochiano.
Paroffia, as Parocchia. Parodia, a turning of a verse by altering some words.
Paroffiale, as Parochiale. Paroffiano, as Parochiano. Parogli, a disease in the
teeth. Parola, a word, a motto, the word, a speech or talk. Also a promise or
assurance. Paroli^e, little sweet pleasing words. Parolo, a Tinkar. Parolozza,
a gross unseemly word. Paroluzze, foolish words, tittle lattle words, the
least words. Paronichia, as Panariccio. Also an herb growing in rocks good to
heal felons in fingers. Parosolina, a titmouse. Parossola, a titmouse. Paroti,
an impostume or sore that comes of matter distilled from the head into the
burres or kernels of the ears. Parotide, the two arteries, or the right and
left side near the throat, and going upward above the ears. Parpaglione, a
kind of many colored butterflye, or the color thereof. Parpagliuola, a
coin worth three pence sterling. Parpegliola, a butterflye, a ladie-bird.
Parruzza, a titmouse. Parsimonia, parcimonie, sparing, husbandry, as Parcita.
Parsimoniare, to spare, to be thriftie, and play the good husband.
Parsimonioso, sparing, thriftie, parcimonious, pinching, frugall, as Parco.
Parso, Paruto, seemed, appeared, thought, surmised, supposed, imagined.
Partanza, a departure or going away. Partatamente, severally, apart, by it
self. Part, a part, a portion, a share, a side, a limme, a joint. Also an
office, a function, a charge, a duty. Also a way, a coaste, a turn, or
course. Also a party, a faction, a sect or side. Also partly, in some sort, or
in part. Part che, whilst that, partly that. Partecipe, a participant, a
partaker, a partner, a sharer, a confederate, an adherent, an accessorie, a
companion, a complice, a copartner, one that takes part, and runs the same
fortune good or bad. Partecipante, partaking, participating, communicating,
adhering, confederating. Partecipare, to participate, to partake, to
communicate, to take part with, or be partaker. Partecipatione, a partaking, a
partnership, a communication. Partefice, as Partecipe. Partegiana, a partesan,
a iauelin. Partegiano, a partner, a copartner, a sharer, a partial man.
Parteggiamento, a deuidence, a sharing, a taking part with any faction.
Partegg^are, to share, to divide, to be factious, or take part with. Partenere,
tengo, tenni, tenuto, to appertain, to belong unto. Partenimento, a pertaining
or a belonging. Also a purtenance. Partenente, pertaining or belonging unto.
Partenza, a departure or going away. Partesana, as Partegiana. Parti
vergognose, the privy parts of man or woman. Parthenia, virginity. Parthenio,
the son of a maid unmarried, or of one supposed to be a maid when she was
married. Also the herb feather-fewe, saint Peter's woort, white woort, or
motherwoort. Parti, parts, factions, sects, sides. Also, seems it to thee?
the plural of Part. Partiale, partial, factious. Partialita, partiality,
factiousnes. Particelle, little particles in speech, as mi, ti, si, ci, vi, ne,
and such. Particella, a parcel, a particle, a little portion or part or
member, the least share. Participiale, that sounds like a participle.
Participio, a participle. Particola, as Particella. Particolare, to
particularize, to share, to divide, to sever, to distinguish. Also particular,
several, or distinct. Particolarita, a particularity, a distintion
Particulare, as Particolare. Particularita, as Particolarita. Partigiano, as
Partegiano. Partigione, a partition, a diuidence, a separation, a share, a
part. Partimento, a diuidence, a part, a share, a dividing, a parting, a
division, a distinguishing, a compartement, a partition, a sorting. Partire,
Parto, Partito, to depart, to be gone, to go away. Also to divide, to share,
to sunder, to part. Partita, a departure, a going away. Also a diuidence, a
division, a sharing. Also a set or match at any game or play. Also a parcel,
part or share of any reckoning or accounts. Partitamente, severally, by piece
meal, every part by it self. Partito, departed, gone, gone away. Also
divided, shared, sundred, parted. Also a course, a match, an order, a
resolution, an offer or entertainment for any servant. Partitione, as
Partigione. Partitoie, a kind of peach so called in Italy. Partitore, a
deuider, a sharer. Partitori, the names of certain principal forefeathers in
a hawk. Parti vergognose, the priuities or privy parts of man or beast.
Parto, a birth or deliverance of a child, the fruit of any man's invention,
whatsoever any man or woman brings forth, a laying, a whelping, a litter, a
layrie, a farrowing, a caluing, a hatching, a kitling, a filling, etc..
Partoggio, a horse litter or chair to carry people in. Also a bear to carry
dead folks. Partorire, risco, rito, to bring forth or be delivered of
children, or young. Also to lay, to whelpe, to farrow, to calue, to hatch, to
kitten as cats, to fillie. Also to get, to produce, to breed, to engender any
fruit or labor, whether of the body or mind. Partorito, brought forth, or
delivered of a child, laid, whelpt, farrowed, calued hatched, kittend,
fillied, produced, bred, gotten, engendered any fruit or labor of body or
mind. Parturire, as Partorire. Parucca, a periwigge or a gregorian. Parue, it
seemed, or did seem, it appeared. Paruenza, appearance, resemblance, seemlines.
Also as Picciolezza. Parula, as Parussola. Paruo, Paruolo, a titte-mouse. Also
a little one, a babe, a young one. Paruoletto, little, small, pretty, handsome.
Parussola, an oxe-eie or great titmouse. Paruta, a seeming to the eye. Paruto,
seemed, appeared, goodly in view, seemly, comely, fair in show, worth the
appearing, proper, beautiful to see unto, of good presence. Pascale, pascall,
pertaining to easter day or the pascall. Paschi, as Pascoli. Pascere, pasco,
pascci, pasciuto, to feed, to nourish, to eat, to graze, to pasture. Also to
give meat unto, to bring up, to maintain. Also to take nourishment or receive
food. Pasciuto, fed, full fed, nourished, eaten, grazed, pastured, given meat
unto, brought up, maintained. Also taken nourishment or received food.
Pasciona, a good feeding, a noonchions, a panch full. Pasciozza, as Pasciona.
Pasciozzare, to feed merrily, to make good cheer. Pascibietole, a fool, a
ninnie, a gull, a patch. Pasco, Pascolo, a pasture. Also food, meat, fodder,
or feeding for cattle. Pascolare, to pasture, to feed, to graze, or foder as
cattle does, to go to grass. Pascolatore, a letter out of pastures.
Pascoloso, full of pasture grounds. Also serving for pasture, good for grazing.
Pascuone, a horse stealer, or cattle stealer. Pasone, a kind of cornish chough
with red feet. Pasqua, the holy time of easter. Pasqua di maggio,
whitsontide. Pasqua di resuressi, easter day. Pasquare, to keep easter. Also
to feast and make good cheer, to leave fasting. Pasquinare, to make or write
railing libels, or satiricall inuectiues. Pasquinate, railing libels, rimes,
satiricall inuectiues or such detracting stuff. Pasquino, a statue in Rome on
whom all libels, railings, detractions, and satiricall inuectiues are fathered.
Passa, dried, withered, faded, drooped, as Vua passa, dried raisins. Also it
passes Passa caualli, a barge or ship to carry and transport horses. Passa
dieaei, a game at dice called passage or above ten. Passadore, a kind of
darte, shaft, or such shooting weapons. Also a squib or petard of wild fire.
Passaggiere, a passenger, a waie-faring man. Passaggio, a passage, a foord, a
cut over any water. Also custom or tole for passage. Passamano, any kind of
lace. Also bordring or garding for garments. Passamano d'accia, statute lace,
crewell lace. Passamano di seta, any kind of silk lace. Passamano di oro,
gold lace. Passamanini, little or small laces or twists. Passamantare, to lace,
or set or border a garment with lace. Passamantaro, a silke-weauer, a
lace-weauer. Passamento, as Passaggio. Passamezzo, a passameasure in dancing a
cinquepace. Passamorto, ^ ferrie man. Passante, passant, passing, transitory,
momentarie. Passare, to pass over, to over slip, to pass, to exceed, to
surpass, to go beyond, to decease, to transport over. Also a kind of flat
fish as a flounder or plaise. Also a sparrow bird. Passato, past, ouer-slipt,
exceeded, surpassed, gone beyond, deceased, transported over. Passata, a
passado, a word in fencing. Passati, the deceased, the forepassed, our
forefathers or predecessors. Passato domani, to morrow next, the next day after
to morrow. Passare a guazzo, to wade over, to foord over any water. Passare a
nuoto, to swim over. Passare alcuno, to exceed some body. Passare di questa
vita, to die, to go out of this life. Passare i termini, to go beyond the
bounds or limits. Passare il tempo, to pass the time. Passaporto, a
ferrie-man. Also a passeport. Passatempo, a pastime, a solace, a sport.
Passauola^te, a kind of great ordinance or artillery. Also a kind of shaft or
flight. Passeggiare, to walk or pace it for pleasure. Passeggiamento, a
solacing walk, a walk or allie of pleasure. Passeggiata, a walk or walking.
Passeggiatoio, a walking place, an allie. Passeggiatore, a walker for solace.
Passera, a bird called a sparrow, a fish called a turbut, a brut or bret. Also
the fish called a plaise, or a flounder. Some take it for the Sole-fish.
Passeragazzera, as Regestola. Passere, Passare, as Passera. Passerini, young
sparowes. Passerini occhij, little sparow eyes. Passernici, a kind of white
stones found in Italy. Passerelle, little plaise, or flounders. Also dride
fish called poor John. Passerotto, a cock-sparow. Passetti, little steps or
paces, little bosses, or buttons of gold or silver. Passi, paces, steps,
footings, streds. Passibile, passibile, full of passion, or trouble. Passina,
Passino, a space or measure containing about three yards english measure.
Passin, Passino, leisurely, fair and softly, soft pacing. Passio, used for the
passion of Christ. Passionare, to appassionate, to distemper, to perturbe, to
grieve, to vex. Passionato, passionate, distempred, grieved, vexed, earnest,
perturbed in mind. Also given to some humor or passion. Passione, passion,
grief, or perturbation of mind, trouble. Also a passion, an accident, or
symptom, concurring with some disease offending the body, and bringing it out
of temper, being an enemy to the natural constitution of the body, whether
any thing happen against the course of nature to the part affected, or be
wanting, which naturally accustomed to resort thither. Passiuita,
licentiousnes, variablenes. Passiuo, passive, passiuely, importing passion,
that which signifies or causes passion, trouble or grief. Also inconstant,
changeable, fickle. Passo, a step, a foot, a footing, a pace in going, a
stredding, the measure of two foot and a half. Also a passage, a foorde, a
ferrie, a place to which a man may pass or come, a place of any book aleaged,
a common place. Also withered or sere. Also the pacing of a horse. Passo
geometrico, a pace or faddome of five foot, and by this pace are miles
measured. Passo a passo, step by step, foot by foot, fair and softly. Passo
d' asino, the herb all-hose, or horse-hoofe. Passolare, to wither or dry in
the sun, as they do prunes or raisins. Passola vua, dride grapes or raisins.
Passole, dride, baked, or withered fruits. Passa mezzo, a passameasure, or a
cinquepace. Pasta, any thing or paste that is kneaded, all manner of paste or
dow. Also a bait for fishes or pigeons, all manner of marchpane, or mazapane.
Pasta d'ambro, paste or pomander of amber. Pasta di genoua, paste of genoua.
Pastadelle, as Pastelli. Pasta regia, a confection or sweet paste ordained of
our physicians for diseases of the breast, and against leanenes. Pastare, to
paste together, to make dow, or kneade together, to impaste, to be-paste.
Pasteggiare, to banquet, to feast, to make good cheer. Pasteggiamenti,
banquetings, feastings, good cheer. Pasteggiatori, banketers, feasters,
epicures, such as make their belly their god. Pastegli, fine quelquechoses, or
dainty paste meats or tartes or marchpanes, or chewet pyes. Also plasters,
or be-plaistrings. Pastelli, as Pastegli. Pastello, woad to dye blue withal.
Pasticciami, all manner of paste meats, and pie meats. Pasticciare, as
Pasteggiare. Pasticciatori, as Pasteggiatori. Pasticcietti, doucets, chewets,
little pyes. Pasticciere, Pasticciaro, a cook, or pastie-maker. Pasticcini, as
Pasticcietti. Pasticcio, any manner of pastie or pie. Pastinaca, the parsenep
root, a fish called a raie* also a forke fish, or a puffin: sometimes taken for
a man's privy member. Also as Fagiolata. Pastinaca muranese, a dildoe of
glass. Pastinare, to graffe, to plant, to set, to insert. Pastingoli, a kind
of pastemeate like our tartes and florentins. Pastizzaio, a pastie, or
pyemaker. Pastizzare, as Pasteggiare. Pastizziere, as Pastizzaio. Pastizzo, as
Pasticcio. Pastone, as Pacchione. Also a kind of plaster for a horse. Pasto,
food, pasturing, maintenance, pasture, meat, feeding, a bait, a meals
meat, a dinner, or a supper. Also idle words, vain entertainment, or court
holly water. Also a pasture. Also hawks meat. Pastocchia, Pastocchiata, as
Fagiolata. Pastoia, Pastora, pasterns for horses, a tumbrell, a stock, a
pillorie, a clog, a yoke, or fetters, or shackles to tie men by the neck or
feet, or to set on the noses of unruly horses, called barnacles. Pastoiare,
to fetter, to clog, to shackle, to pastern, to give. Pastophori, certain
sacred priests in Egypt, and more honorable then the others. Pastora, as
Pastoia. Also a shepherdess, a woman keeping cattle. Pastorale, pastoral,
rural, pertaining to swains or shepherds, a pastoral comedy treating of
shepherds, swains, and rural people. Also a verge, a cross carried before a
prelate. Also a man's privy member. Pastore, a shepherd, a keeper of cattle, a
heards-man, a neates-man, a swain, a grasier, a drouer, a flock-keeper, a
heard-grome. Also a pastor, a feeder, a preacher. Pastorella, a shepherdess,
a young pretty country w^nch keeping sheep. Pastoressa, a shepherdess.
Pastoritia, the art or trade of shepherds. Pastricciano, a nickname for a
foolish conceited fellow. Pastriccione, Look Pacchione, or Lumacone. Pastume,
any kind of fine paste meat. Pastura, as Pascolo, or Pasto. Pasturaggio, as
Pascolo. Pasturare, as Pascolare. Pataccia, Patassa, a kind of hulke, flat
boat, or patache. Also a kind of coin. Patago, a kind of sickness leaving
spots or as we say gods marks or tokens in the dead, the plague. Patarino, a
base mechanical fellow, a porter or day labourer. Patascia, a kind of great
ship of burden so called. Patassio, a tit-mouse. Patecchi, chopinos or high
shoes for women. Also stilts. Patella, as Padella. Also a fish called in latin
Lapas, or else Partella. Also the whirle bone of the knee. Patena, a dish, a
platter, a charger a wooden traie, a treene dish. Patente, a patent, a charter,
a privilege, Also open, discovered, appearing, manifest, wide, subject unto, in
danger. Patera, a kind of sacrificing cup, boule or chalice. Paterina, a queen
or a drab. Paternale, fatherly, pertaining to a father. Paternita, fatherhood,
paternitie. Paterno, fatherly, of or like a father, or belonging to a father.
Pater nostri, Pater nosters. Also beads. Also round beads of iron in the
mouth of a bit. Pater nostro della Bertuccia. Look Dire il pater nostro della
Bertuccia. Pathetico, patheticall, forcible, perswasiue, moving affection.
Patibile, tolerable, that may be suffered, easy to be suffered. Patibolo, a
gibbet or little pair of gallows. Patico, a kind of aloes or drug. Patiente,
pacient, suffering, abiding, enduring, bearing. Also a pacient, a suffrer, one
that can suffer, endure, abide, away with, sustain, tolerate, or bear.
Patienza, Patientia, patience, suffrance, endurance, forbearing, constancy in
abiding evil, aptnes to suffer or abide. Also subjection and obedience. Also a
kind of habit or frocke made of course hair cloth, that gallie slaves are
made to wear, or else certain religious men wear. Patimento, a suffering, an
enduring, a forbearing. Patire, pato, patito, to suffer, to abide, to endure,
to bear, to sustain. Patito, suffered, abided, endured, borne. Patitore, a
suffrer, an endurer. Patir vna disgratia, to suffer or pocket up an injury.
Patrasso, a self conceited chiefeman. Patregno, a father in law, a step
father. Patria, a man's own country or natural soil where he was borne, the
city, village, or town wherein any man is born: taken sometimes for a whole
region or country. Patriale, according to ones own country, pertaining to
ones natural country. Patriarca, a patriarch, or chief father. Patriarcato,
the dignity, place, or function of a patriarch or chief bishop. Patriare, to
patriate, to endenize, or enfranchise into a country. Patricida, a murderer
of his own father or near friend and cousin. Patricidio, the murdering of
ones own father or friend. Patricii, those which in Rome were descended and
came of the race and stock of senators, whose fathers and ancestors bare
that office, the sons of senators. Patricio, of, or belonging to the state
of senators, a patrician, descended of noble race, or one that descends
lineally of senators. Patrimo, that has the father alive, or borne of the
same father. Poets say that Minerua was called Patrima, because she was borne
of her father alone. Patrimoniale, patrimoniall, inheritable, of, or belonging
to inheritance. Patrimonio, a patrimony, a birthright, a liue-lode or
inheritance, the goods or lands that a father does leave to his children after
his death. Patrigno, as Patregno. Patrio, as Paterno. Also of ones country.
Also peculiar, or naturally incident to some one place or country. Patriotto,
Patriotta, a man's countriman borne in the selfsame country. Patrizzare, to
resemble ones father, to imitate his father, to do as his father did, to be the
fathers own child in conditions. Patritio, as Patricio. Patrocinio, as
Padrocinio. Patrona, as Padrona. Patronare, as Padroneggiare. Patronaggio, as
Padrocinio. Patron, as Padrone. Patron del tutto, a master or owner of al.
Patron di casa, an owner, a master or landlord of an house. Patron di naue, a
master or owner of a ship. Patroneggiare, as Padroneggiare. Patronimico, just
of the fathers conditions, or derived of the fathers name. Patrono, an attorney
or counselor at the law. Patta, accordes, agreements, covenants, conditions,
bargains, contracts, treaties. Pattaccia, as Pataccia. Pattacchiare, to
besmeare, to bedaube, to beblurre, to bespot, to sullie, to slauer, to grease.
Pattacchione, a slouenly, filthy, greasy slauering fellow, a gore-bellied
gulch. Pattare, as Patteggiare. Pattarina, as Patarino Patteggiamenti, as
Patta. Patteggiare, to covenant, to condition, to bargain, to agree, to cope,
to indent, to promise, to capitulate, to vow, to make a contract.
Patteggiatore, a bargainer, a couenanter, a conditioner, a promiser, a contract
maker. Patteggioso, that may be conditioned, agreed, or bargained for. Patti,
as Patta. Pattico, a kind of aloes so called of the apothecaries. Patti
epagati, when all parties be pleased, and al is even, and nothing but good will
remaining. Pattiggiare, as Patteggiare. Pattitio, done, or to be done upon
covenant, condition, or agreement. Patto, a bargain, a covenant, a condition,
an agreement, an accord, a coping, a treaty, a contract. Pattoire, pattoisco,
pattoito, as Patteggiare. Pattoito, Pattuito, couenanted, conditioned,
bargained, agreed upon, affianced. Pattuire, isco, ito, as Patteggiare. Pauana,
a dance called a pauine. Pauegliatta, a kind of butter-flie, a lady bird.
Pauentare, as Spauentare. Pauento, as Spauento. Pauentoso, as Spauentoso.
Pauerazzo, a kind of butterfly. Pauerine, an herb so called. Also a kind of
butterfly. Pauero della lucerna, the match, week, snuff, or cotton of a
lantern or candl^ Pauese, Pauesce, a kind of target or shield called a
palueise. Pauido, as Spauentoso, fearful, timorous, quaking, skittish,
starting, aweful. Pauiera, a kind of wood to make chaires with. Pauiglioli, a
b^tter-flie, a lady bird. Pauiglione, as Padiglione. Also a butterfly or
lady bird. Pauimento, a pauement. Also a terrace or walking place. Pauirazze,
bushes, brakes, brambles, briars or thorns. Also bon-fiers or great lights.
Pauonacchio, a kind of purple, puke or French russet color. Pauonaccio cupo, a
deep dark purple or puke color. Pauonaccio di grana, a purple in grain.
Pauoncino, a young peacocke or peachicken. Pauona, a peahen. Pauone, a
peacocke. Pauoneggiare, to brave it, to court it, to peacockise it, to
wantonize it, to iet up and down fondly gazing upon himself as a peacocke
does. Pauoneggiante, brauing, courting, fondly courting of himself.
Pauoneggiatore, a fond, wanton fellow that will court and gaze upon himself.
Pauonessa, a peahen. Pauonino, a young peacocke or peachicken. Pauonio, a kind
of stone which drunk with a little sweat provoke love and liking of him
that gave it. Pauonzino, a lapwing, a peachicken. Pauore, fear, dread,
terror, fright, mistrust, diffidence. Paura, as Pauore. Paurire, paurisco,
rito, as Spauentare. Paurito, feared, daunted or made afeard. Pauroso, as
Spauentoso. Pausa, a pause, a rest, a stop, a leisure, a tarriance, a repose, a
stay, a delay or demur in law. Pausare, to pause, to rest, to stay, to
repose, to stop. Pazzacchione, a gross, great, slouenly, lubbardly, fool,
gull or noddie. Pazzacone, as Pazzacchione. Pazzarello, a little foolish, fond,
mad, rash fellow. Pazzarone, as Pazzacchione. Pazzeda, a chirning fat to make
butter. Pazzeggiare, to play the fool or mad man, to dote, to rave. Pazzesco,
foolish, fond, rash, doting. Pazzia, folly, fondnes, madness, rashness, doting.
Pazzire, pazzisco, pazzito, as Impazzire. Pazzito, as Impazzito. Pazziuola, a
foolish woman, a silly fool, a foolish trick. Pazzo, foolish, fond, mad,
rash, doting, rauing or simple. Also a fool, a gull, an idiot, a mad man, a
natural. Pe, Piede, a foot, a measure of twelve inches. Pe', Per, Look Per.
Peani, hymns or songs of praises made and sung to Apollo at such time as any
plague or pestilence raged, and also after the obtaining of some victory or
triumph. Peantide, a kind of precious stone of the color of frozen water.
Pecca, as Peccato. Peccante, offending, sinning. Peccare, to sin, to
trespass, to offend, to commit a fault, to fail in something, to do amiss,
not to do what we ought, to swerve from the law. Peccato, a sin, a fault, an
offense, a crime, a trespass. E' peccato, it is a sin, as we say it is
pity. e peccato che la virtu non viene stimata, it is pity that virtue is
not regarded. Peccato, sinned, offended, trespassed, committed a fault.
Peccatore, a sinner, an offender, a trespasser. Peccatrice, a woman sinner or
offender. Pecchia, the Be that makes honey. Pecchiare, to sting as a Be does.
Pecchietto, a robin-red-breast. Pecchione, an humble Be or a drone. Also a
gull or a noddie. Peccia, a kind of tree. Piece, pitch or tar. Piece nauale, a
kind of pitch or tar to pitch ships with. Peciare, to be pitch or tar. Pecilia,
a fish that chirpeth like a thrush. Pecolo, the stalk of any fruit, the nipple
of a dug. Pecora, any kind of sheep or mutton. Peco^^ggine, sheepishnes,
foolishnes or simplicity of wit. Pecoraio, Pecoraro, a sheapheard, a keeper of
sheep. Pecorella, a little young sheep, a lamb. Pecoreccio, a sheepe-cote or
sheep-pen or fould. Pecori^^io, sheepish, of or pertaining to sheep. Pecorile,
as Pecoreccio. Also sheepish. Pecorina, a young little sheep or lamb. Also
parchment, vellam or sheeps skin. Pecorino, of or pertaining to sheep, a pen
or fold for sheep. Also sheep cheese. Pecorone, a simple man, a gross
simple gull, a beastly fellow. Pecoroso, full of sheep, having many sheep.
Pectide, a musical instrument like a psalterie. Peculiare, peculiar, proper,
special, particular, pertaining to some one. Peculio, Pecuglio, the profit
that comes of sheep or wool, of grazing and of cattle. Also our own proper
goods gotten by our labor and industry, as substance or wealth or riches,
whether it be in money or cattle. Pecunia, money or coin or payment.
Pecuniaria, of or pertaining to money. Pecunioso, monied, rich, full of money.
Also gainefull, profitable and yielding money. Pedagiere, a footeman. Pedagio,
the tole that footmen pay at any passage. Pedagogaggine, as Pedantaggine.
Pedagogheria, as Pedantaggine. Pedagogo, a schoolmasters that teaches the
principles of learning, a teacher or trainer up of young children, a tutor or
one that has the charge to teach or bring up children. Pedale, the stock or
root of a tree, a base, ground or foundation, a foote-stall, a man's stock,
wealth or substance, a sock or a thin pumpe. Also a stake or forke whereby a
vine, hops or other like thing is sustained and borne up, a prop, a stay. Also
of a foot, measure or space. Pedali di lino, woollen or linen sockes for ones
feet. Pedantaggine, pedantisme, idiotisme, grossenes or foolishnes,
selfe-conceite. Look Pedantesco. Pedante, a pedante or a schoolmasters, as
Pedagogo. Pedanteria, as Pedantaggine. Pedantesco, pedanticall, foolishly
affected, as one that would feign seem wise and learned, and is but a fool
and an ignorant self conceited gull. Pedare, to foot it, to tracke, to trace,
to tread or trample with ones feet. Pedarij, a word much used in ancient Roman
histories. Senators of Rome so called because they did not utter their opinion
in words, but went to the part and side of them whose opinion they did allow,
as in dividing the parliament house. Some writers suppose that all the
Senators who were not of the number of them that were called Curules were
named Pedarij, because they always went on foot to the Senate House. Others
have taken them to be certain young Roman gentlemen coming into the Senate,
but not admitted to speak, or to be of the number of Senators. Pedata, a
track, a tracing, a footing, a footestep, the print of a foot, a rule, the
prick of a hare, or view of a dear. Pede, Piede, a foot, a measure of twelve
inches. Pedema, a kind of dance, wherein they lifted their feet very hye
backward. Pedena, a weauers tool about a loome. Pederastia, a vicious,
unnatural, and dishonest loving of children, buggerie. Pederasto, a vicious,
unnatural lover of boys, a buggerer. Pederetti, of some called Gemma di
venere, a kind of stone, good against poison and drunkenness. Pedero, a
precious stone called an Opale, vide Opalo. Pedestallo, a foote-stall, a
foote-pace. Pedestre, of or pertaining to footemanship. Also a footeman, or one
that goes and serves on foot. Pedeculo, a small stalk of any fruit. Also a
nipple of a dug. Pedetaro, one that farteth often. Pedia, instruction or
teaching of children, or bringing up in good arts and honest trades.
Pedicello, a little worm or ring-worme breeding between the flesh and skin.
Pedicino, as Pedeculo. Also a little foot. Pedicino del' otre, a little foot
of a jar, a pot or kan for wine or oil* Pedicone, a buggrer, an ingler of
boys. Pediculare herba, staues-acre, red-rattle or licebane, rattlegrasse, or
lousewort. Pediculare, the lousie disease, that is when the body is pestred
and full of lice and nits. Pedicularia, as Pediculare herba. Pediculo, a kind
of fish called the Dolphins parasite, for he always waits on him. Pedignoni,
kibes upon men's heels, or chilblanes. Pedina, a pawn at chesse. Pedio, the
plant or middle part of the foot from the first joint of the toes to the
instep, being answerable to the back of the hand. Pedo, a shepherds hook,
forke, or sheepehooke. Pedocchiare, to louze, or pick lice. Pedocchio, a louse.
Also a disease in a horse about the crupper. Pedocchio marino, a kind of
little shell fish. Pedocchioso, lousy, or full of life. Pedomante, a kind of
prophet, or soothsayer. Pedomantia, a kind of divination, or soothsaying.
Pedona, a pawn at chesse. Pedone, a footeman. Pedoro, a precious stone or
gemme in whitenes next to the pearl or margarite. Pedota, a pilote or guide by
sea. Pedotta, Pedottina, a kind of fishers boat, or whirrie. Pedotto, a guide
or direction. Also a sea mark, or guiding-marke for travelers. Pedrello, an
ignorant gull, an ouerweening ass. Pedrinale, a kind of gunne called a
Petrinall. Pedrolina, a strumpet, a harlot, a trull, a minion, a flurt, a minx.
Peduccij, all manner of feet or petitoes dressed to be eaten, as calves,
sheep, neates, or hogs feet, or pigs petitoes. Peduccio, the base, foot, or
foundation of any thing. Look Far peduccio. Pedule, a foot, a footeman. Also
a sock, or thin pumpe. Pegame, a basting ladle, to baste roast meat. Pegaso, a
winged horse. Also a sign of stars. Pegeria, pledge, suretiship, bail, or
maineprise. Peggio, worst, worse, more ill, the worst, more wicked, far
worse. Peggiorare, to grow or make worse and worse, to empaire, to become more
ill and wicked. Peggioramento, an empairing, a growing from bad to worse.
Peggiore, worse, more ill, more bad, more wicked. Pegiare, to pledge, to be
surety for. Peglia, the outward pricking husk of a chestnut. It has also bin
used for Pelle. Peglio, the hairs above the eye lids. Pegnare, to pawn, to
engage, to pledge, to lay a wager, to bet in gaming, to lay a gage, to morgage,
to take a stresse, or distress, to distraine for rent. Also to be surety for,
to bail one. Pegno, a pawn, a gage, a pledge, a wager, a gage or pledge
whereupon some thing is lent. Also a thing strained for rent, a distress, or
stresse. Also a paune or stake or bet of such as contend in game. Also a wager,
a token, a morgage, an assurance, a bail, a sure sign, or testimony.
Pegnora, as Pignora. Pegnorare, as Pignorare. Pegnoratiuo, as Pignoratiuo.
Pegola, pitch or tar. Also an infectious wh^re. Pegolare, to bepitch or
tar. Pegritia, Pegro, as Pigritia, and Pigro. Pel, Per il, by the, through
the, for the. Pelacane, a dog-fleaer, a base fellow. Pelagia, a fish called a
purple. Pelagione, as Pelaruola. Pelagigi, of the se^, or that lives in the
sea. Pelago, the maine deep, the ocean sea, the sea, the huge, deep, or maine
sea, the bottom of the sea. Pelaia, as Pelaruola, as Pelarella. Pela mantelli,
a dresser of old woollen clothes or clokes. Also a filcher of clokes. Pelame, a
fish called a summer whiting, or a tunnie before it be a year old. Pelamide,
as Palamito. Pelanda, as Palandra. Pelare, to pull, or pluck as they do the
feathers of foul, to sc^ld as a hog, to vnskin, to singe, to pull off the
hair or skin of any thing. Also to gall the skin off. Also by a metaphor, to
pill, to pare, to spoil, to pull or take from any man by hook or crook.
Pelato, pulled, plucked the feathers off, skalded or singed as a hog, vnskinned,
pulled off the hair or skin, galled, pilled, pared, or prouled. Pelarella, a
disease which makes the hairs or the skin to go off. Also a plaster to
pluck off the skin. Pelargo, a Storke. Pelaruola, as Pelarella. Pelatina, as
Pelarella. Pelatura, a singing, a pilling, a pulling, a skalding of foul, or
any thing else. Pelare galline, to pull or pluck a hen. Pelare porci, to skald
or singe hogs. Pelare qualcuno, to pill or poll some body. Pelare la borsa, to
rob or empty ones purse. Pelatoio, as Scorticatoio. Peleggio, as Pelaghetto, a
little way, or walk. Pelegrinaggio, as Pellegrinaggio. Pelegrinante, as
Pellegrino. Pelegrinare, as Pellegrinare. Pelegrinatione, as Pellegrinatione.
Pelegrino, as Pellegrino. Pelera, as Pelarella. Pelicano, a bird called a
Pelican: some take it for a shoueler having a broad bill. Also a fish called
a pellicane. Also a tool or snap, or dog to pull out teeth with. Also a
kind of limbecke or serpentine. Pella, Per la, for the, by the, through the.
Pellacia, fair speech to deceive. Pellami, all manner of fell or skins.
Pellare, to vnskin. Also to paunch or vnbowell one. Pelle, any kind of skin or
furre. Also for the, through the, by the. Pelle di camoccia, a shamoyes skin.
Pelle di vacca, a cowes hyde, an ox hyde. Pelle di zebellini, a Sables skin.
Pellegate, little sinews that go through the fleshie parts of any body.
Pellegrinaggio, a pilgrimage, or peregrination, a wandering into some far and
strange country. Pellegrinante, going or traveling in a strange country,
being as it were a stranger or a pilgrim. Pellegrinare, to wander or go on
pilgrimage, to go or travel into strange countries, to dwell or be in a
strange land, to seek far off. Pellegrinatione, a peregrination, a
pilgrimage, a going or being abroad in a far or strange country, a voyage,
a seeking far off. Pellegrinita, stra^genes, being in a strange country, a
strange manner of behavior, going, speech or pronunciation, the condition of
such as be in a strange country. Pellegrino, a wandrer, a pilgrim, a palmer,
a stranger, an alien, an outlander, an outlandish man, a fren, a foreign, one
of a strange country. Also a haggard hawk. Pelleri, the garnishing of gates
or doors. Pelle pelle, hushed, softly, closely, hold there, there ho, slily.
Pellesina, a thin little skin, skinlet, caul or filme. Pellettaria,
Pelletaria, the skinners or furriers trade. Pelletta, the name of a bird.
Pellica as Pelliccione. Pellicegli, little woormes breeding in ones hand
between the flesh and the skin. Pelliccia, any kind of furre or furred
garment. Pellicciaio, Pellicciaro, a skinner or a furrier, a fell-monger, a
leather seller, he that makes things of skins and furs, and sels them, a pelt
monger. Pellicciare, to furre or line with furs. Pelliccina, Pellisina, as
Pellesina. Pelliccino, the ears or corners of a sack, or full bag by which
hold is taken when they be very full. Also a little furde garment.
Pelliccieria, a skinners or furriers shop. Also death or a man's last home.
Pelliccione, a furd gown or garment. Pellicola, as Memb^ana. Pelligata, any
thin, skinnie, or flappie piece of meat. Pellizza, as Pelliccia. Pellizzaio,
as Pellicciaio. Pellizzare, as Pellicciare. Pellizzone, as Pelliccione.
Pelloridi, as Pelore. Pelo, any kind of hair. Also the cote or color of a
horse, or the countenance of a man. Also as Boccata. Peloni, great, long,
shagged hairs. Pelore, a kind of shell fish called a palour. Pelosella,
Pelosina, the herb mouse-eare. Pelottare, to thump, to cuffe, to smite, to
bang, to rib-b^ste. Pelotti, thumps, cuffes, blows, stripes. Peloso, hairie,
shagd, full of hairs. Pel passato, in times paste, heretofore. Pelta, a kind
of shield or target made like a half a moon. Peltraio, Peltraro, a pewterer.
Peltrame, all manner of pewter stuff. Peltro, any kind of pewter. Peluccare,
Pelucare, to pluck off the hairs or skin of any thing, to pick out hairs.
Peluzzi, little small hairs. Pena, pain, punishment, torture, grief, labor,
swinke, torment, execution, forfaite, penalty, reuengement. Also upon pain or
forfeiture, a Pena, hardly, scarcely. A gran pena, with very much adoo, very
hardly. Penace, painful, paining, languishing. Penare, to pain, to pine, to
toil, to linger. Penati, household gods, peculiar gods to every family: the
secret parts of ones house, spirits of the butterie. Penazz^, a kind of bird.
Penco, butter. Pendaglio, a tassell or pendent of a trumpet, a down hanging
pendent. Pendente, hanging, depending, belonging, downe-hanging, stooping,
bending, enclining, dangling down. Also doubtful, or doubtful and uncertain
what to do in suspense. Also pendent, a word in armory. Also a pendent or
jewel in ones ears. Also the bending or slopenes of a parapet out ward.
Pendente da orecchia, a jewel or pendent for ones ears. Pendere, pendo,
pendei, penduto, peso, to hang up or be hanged, to incline on one side, to
stoop, to lie a slope, to depend, to subject or belong to, to stay upon. Also
to be in doubt or uncertain, to be in suspense, to way or be of any weight.
Also to dangle down. Also to poise, or balance. Also to ponder, to consider.
Penduto, Peso, hanged up, inclined on one side, etc. Look Pendere. Pendice, a
penthouse, a downe-hanging, a hanging labell of any thing, a houell. also a
haven, a rode, or a port, the ouer-hanging or hollow of a rock, the hanging
or side of a hill. Pendino, as Pendente, a down-hanging, a fall or sloping of a
hill. Pendinoso, as Pendente, or Pendino. Pendio, as Pendino, or Pendente.
Pendolante, dangling, bending, downe-hanging as a bunch of grapes. Pendolare,
to dangle, to bend or hang downward. Pendolina, a kind of bird. Pendolo, as
Pendolante. Pendoloni, as Pendolante. Pendulo, as Pendolante. Pendule labbra,
big, down-hanging blabberd-lips. Pene, pains, punishments, tortures. Also
forfaitures. Pene del' inferno, the pains of hell. Penese, a kind of officer
in a ship. Penesti, men foiled in fight that voluntarily yield themselves unto
the victory. Peneti, a kind of apothecaries stuff for the cold called
pennets. Penetrabile, penetrable, that may pierce or be pierced or entered in,
piercing or passing through, that will sink or go in deeply. Penetrante, as
Penetratiuo. Penetrare, to penetrate, to pierce or enter in, to go, to come, to
pierce or bore through, to go beyond or pass through, to sink in deeply.
Penetratiuo, piercing, penetrating, sharp, that will go or sink in deeply.
Penetreuole, piercing, penetrable, as Penetrabile. Penisola, a place almost
environed about with water, that is but partly an island. Penitentia,
penitencie, repentance, penance, forethinking. Penitenza della quaresima, the
passion or penance of lent. Penitentiale, penitential, of, or pertaining to
penitencie. Pentitente, penitent, repenting, he that repententh him.
Penitentiero, a penitentiarie, a man professing penitencie. Penna, any kind
of feather or quill, or pen, a writing pen. Also a plume. Also a wing.
Pennaccio, Pennacchio, a plume or bunch of feathers. Penna da scriuere, a
writing pen. Pennacchiato, all hanged or dressed with feathers. Pennacchino, a
bunch or plume of feathers. Also a wag-feather, a tospot. Pennacciaro, a
feather-maker. Pennaiuolo, Pennaruolo, a penner to put in writing pens, a
woman's needle case. Pennati, any kind of feathered foul or bird, feathered.
Also hedge bills, forest bills, welsh hooks, or weeding hooks* it has also bin
used for the latin word Penates, which is as much to say little household gods,
or peculiar gods to every family, or spirits of the butterie, or of the secret
parts of ones house. Pennato, feathered, winged, flying, fledged. Pennecchio, a
roll of wool ready carded for the distaff or spinning. Pennellare, to draw,
limne, or paint with a pensell. Pennellata, a draught or line with a pensell,
painted or drawn with a pensell. Pennellatore, a painter or drawer with a
pensell. Pennelleggiare, as Pennellare. Pennello, a painters pensel or pincill.
Also a fane on the top of a house to know the wind by, a wethercocke.
Pennello, fatto a pennello, perfectly, curiouslly wrought. Pen maestre, a
hawks principal feathers. Pennetta, Pennina, a little small pen, quill or
feather. Pennipotente, mighty in flying, strong and puissant of wings, well
winged or feathered, able to fly. Pennola, as Cugno. Pennoncione, a great
plume or bunch of feathers. Pennone, as Pennoncione. Pennoncello, a plume or
bunch of feathers, the little streamers or banderols that soldiers have at
their lances point* the tassell, pendent or fringe about a halbard or a
iauelin. Pennuto, feathered, full of feathers, winged, fledged. Penocchij, a
kind of long comfets to stick upon march panes. Penole, strings or veins in
the liver. Penoso, painful, taking pains, laborious. Pensare, to think, to
imagine, to deem, to ween, to suppose, to muse, to care, to weigh, to ponder,
to consider, to surmise. Pensabondo, as Pensoso. Pensamento, as Pensiere.
Pensatamente, consideratly, warily, with good deliberation. Pensierato, full of
thought, care or carking. Pensiere, Pensiero, thought, care, imagination,
deeming, weening, musing, supposing, carke. Pensiereggiare, to take care,
thought or carking. Pensieruccio, a little foolish thought. Pensionare, to
wage, to pension, to stipend, to keep in pay. Pensionario, a pensioner, a
stipendarie. Pensione, a pension, a stipend, a pay. Pensole, as Pendolante.
Pensoso, pensive, careful, musing, full of care or thoughts. Pensoroso,
Pensieroso, as Pensoso. Pensule, as Pendolante. Penta, the number of five in
Greek, whereof many words are composed. Pentacolo, any thing or table of five
corners. Also certain tables or boords. Pentadramma, a coin in Greece of five
dragmes. Pentagonale, having five angles, fiue-cornered. Pentametri, a
pentametre verse. Pentapoli, of five cities. Pentarco, a captain of five men.
Pentateuco, a volume of five book, as the book of the laws of Moses.
Pentathlo, he that won the best or was victor at the five kinds of games
used among the Grecians called the Olimpiks games. Vide Olimpici giuochi, which
was casting with the slinge, running, leaping, wrestling, and shooting or
whurling. Pentatoti, nounes declined only by five cases. Pentaura, a precious
stone that has the virtue of all other stones, and will draw them also to it
if they be no bigger then the same. It shines and is of the color of fire.
Pentecoste, the fiftieth, the feast of pencecoste or whitsontide. Pentemimeri,
a certain part of an heroical verse. Penteori, the space of four years
complete, or that which returns every fifth year. Penthali, Look
Quinquercij. Penticulo, a kind of fish about Tara^to that will fly out of the
water. Pentina, a little pike, lance, spear or staff. Pentimento, repentance,
penitencie, rath or sorrwing for some thing done and paste. Pentire, pento,
pentito, to repent, to rue, or to be sorry for some thing done and paste, to
be grieved, to forethinke, to be ashamed of, to wish a thing had never been
done, to be miscontented. Pentiremi, a gallie that has five oars on a seat or
bank. Pentitamente, with repentance, repentingly. Pentola, any kind of
pitcher, pipkin, possenet or pot of earth. Pentolaio, a potter or pipkin maker.
Pentolino, a little pipkin, pot or possenet. Pentolo, bals made of earth and
filled with ashes. Pentuto, as Pentito. Penula, a kind of cloak worn when it
raineth. Penultimo, the last saving one. Penuria, penury, want, dearth,
scarsitie, need, extreme need, and necessity, lack or want of all
necessaries. Penurioso, penurious, scarce, needy, poor, wanting all
necessaries. Pensolare, as Pendolare. Penzolo, as Pendolante. Penzolone, as
Pendolante. Peone, as Peonico. Peonia, the herb Peonie or Kings bloom or Rose
of the mount. Peonico, a foot in meeter of four syllables, the first long,
and the three short, or the first three short, and the fourth long. Peota,
Peotta, a pilote or guide by sea. Pepato, a kind of simnell or ginger bread.
Pepe, Pepere, the spice called Pepper. Pepe acquatico, the weed arsesmart. Pepe
montano, Spurge-flaxe, Dwarfe-bay or Widow-waile. Pepe di monte, as Pepe
montano. Peperata, a kind of meat or pottage made of pepper. Peperella,
Pepper-woort. Peperigno, a kind of black building stone. Also of the color of
pepper. Pephago, a beast in India as big as a horse with a very fair tail
and fine hair. Peplio, the herb Devils milk or petie-Spurge. Pepolo, as
Peplio. Some take it for Purslaine. Pepone, as Melone, a Pepon or Pumpion. Per,
for, by, through, to, ready to, for to, in with, by reason of, what between.
Per ben che, howbeit, although, albeit. Per il, Pel, Perlo, Perla, Peri, Pe',
Pergli, Pelli, Pegli, Pella, Pelle, Perle, for the, by the, through the. Peril
che, wherefore, whereupon. Perloche, wherefore, whereupon. Per finche, until
that, till such time. Pera, a pear, pears. Also let him perish. Peracuto,
very sharp, witty, fine, and subtle. Per adietro, heretofore, in times past.
Per alcun tempo, for any time, for a while. Per amore, for love, for the sake,
gratis. Peraio, Peraro, a pear tree. Also an orchard of pears. Perauanti,
hereafter, in time to come. Perauentura, perhaps, peradventure. Per cagione, by
reason, for because. Per chi? for whom? for who? who for? Per dio, for the
love of God, for God sake, by God. Per dove? which way? whether away? Per
entro, within, inward. Per me stesso, for or by me self. Per qua, this way,
hereaway. Per qui, Per qua via, as Per qua. Per caccio, as Procaccio, a
mule-tier, a mule-driuer, a horse-keeper, a carrier. Per casa, at home, in the
house, up and down the house. Per caso, by chance, by hap, perhaps. Per
costa, Per cola, that way, thereaway. Per cadere, ready to fall. Per andare,
ready for to go, for to go. Perbenche, although, albeit. Per buon rispetto,
for a good consideration. Pertanto, therefore, for so much. Per tornar' a casa,
to come home, to come to the matter again. Per tutto, each where, in every
place. Per fare, ready for to do. Per me, has been used for Per mezzo, over
against or by means. Per niente, for nothing, for any thing, by no means. Per
cosa alcuna, for any thing, for nothing. Per nulla, for nothing, by no means,
at no hand. Per vista, by sight, by view. Per pratica, by practice, by
experience. Per amicitia, for love, for friendship-sake. Per inauertenza, by
oversight, at unawares. Per esperienza, by experience, by trial. Per tanto,
therefore, whereupon. Per transito, coursorie-wise, in a trance, a snatch and
away. Per maniera di dire, as a man would say, for example sake. Per
consequente, then, by consequence. Per certo, certainly, for a certainty. Per
un poco, for a little, for a while. Per poco, almost, within a little, for a
little. Per via, by the way, by means. Per quanto, for as much, as concerning.
Per quando? when? against when? Perca, a fish called a perch. Perch? why?
wherefore? for what cause? Perch, because, for so much, for that, that, to the
end. Perch conto? for what cause? wherefore? Perch mo, wherefore? why now?
Perch no? why not? wherefore not? Per che via? what way? how? by what means?
Perch modo? by what means? how? Perchi? for whom? Per la qual cosa, for
which thing. Per via di dire, by way of speech, as a man would say. Per mezzo,
by means, through, by, by the middle, oueragainst, foreanempst. Per mano, by
the hand, through. Per grosso, by the great, in gross. Per minuto, by retaile,
by small, distinctlie. Per molto chesia, how much soever it be. Per chi si sia,
for whom soever it be. Per chi si voglia, for whom soever it be. Perchia, a
fish called a perch. Also a kind of sparow. Perciato, bored, or pierced
through. Perciere, a partridger, a hawk for partridges. Percio, therefore,
whereupon, whereof, because, for so much. Percioche, for because that, because
that. Percipere, to take or receive, to conceive or comprehend. Perciuto, any
kind of smoke-dride meat, as bakon. Percnottero, a kind of kite called a bald
buzzard. Also a kind of eagle keeping much about pooles and lakes like a
Vulture, and having very little wings. Percotare, to baste rostmeate. Also to
parboyle. Percotere, coto, cotei, cosso, to strike, to beat, to smite, to hit.
Percosso, Percotuto, strooken, beaten, smitten, hit, troubled in mind, vexed,
astonished. Percossa, a stroke, a blow, a stripe, a smiting. Percotitore, a
striker, a smiter, a beater, a fighter, a quareller. Percrocetta, a kind of
multiplying in arithmetike that merchants use. Percuotere, as Percotere.
Percussione, a percussion, a smiting, a striking. Percussiuo, percussiue,
hitting, striking. Perdere, perdo, persi, or perdei, person, or perduto, to
loose, to forgo, to let slip, or omit an occasion. Perduto, Person, lost,
forlorn, let slip, or omitted an occasion. Perder la patienza, to grow out of
patience. Perder la vergogna, to lose shame and honesty. Perder' il tempo, to
lose time, to be idle. Perder la liscia, and il sapone, to lose both lie and
soap, that is, to lose both time and labor. Perder' il tempo, and la fatica,
to lose both time and labor. Perdenza, Perdezza, loss, loosing, damage, hurt,
harm. Perdibile, subject to be lost, that may be lost. Perdicio, pellitorie of
the wall. Perdice, a partridge. Perdigiornata, a kind of bird that never
feeds but at night, and all day skips up and down idly. Also taken for an
idle loytrer. Perdimento, as Perdenza. Perdiqui, this way, heereaway. Perdita,
as Perdenza. Perditione, Perdicione, loss, ruin, destruction, loosing.
Perditore, a looser. Also a wast-good, or spend-thrift. Perdonanza, pardon,
forgiveness, remission. Perdonare, to pardon, to forgive, to remit any fault or
payment. Perdonde, whence, whereby. Perdono, pardon, forgiveness, a pardon. Also
by gift, a remission of any fault. Perducere, Perdurre, as Condurre. Perduto,
Look Perdere. Pere, the fruit pears. Also he perishes. Pere sementine, a
kind of stone, hard choke-peare so called. Peredi, too great or a ravenous
desire to eat. Peregrinaggio, as Pellegrinaggio. Peregrinante, as Pellegrino.
Peregrinare, as Pellegrinare. Peregrinatione, as Pellegrinatione. Peregrinita,
as Pellegrinita. Peregrino, Peregrinatore, as Pellegrino. Peremptalia, among
Augures were those lightnings which did utterly destroy and put away the
significations of other lightnings and tokens preceding. Peremptorio,
peremptory, sudden, rash, hitting to death without heed or care, deadly,
killing without peradventure. Peremptorio editto, a peremptory warning given
to him that makes default in appearance, after which he shall never have any
day given him, but the judge shall proceed to the determination of the matter.
Perenne, perpetual, aie-during, everlasting, endless, neuer-ceasing,
continual, always running as rivers do, having a continual course, and that
is never dry. Perennia, a certain ceremony observed of diuiners and Augures.
Perennita, continuance, long-lasting, euerduring, perpetualnes. Perentrare, to
enter in, ready to enter. Per entro, within, inward. Per entro via, within,
inward. Peretro, a kind of venomous herb. Perfettare, to perfect, to finish,
to accomplish, to perform or bring to an absolute and perfect end.
Perfettionare, as Perfettare. Perfettione, perfection, absolutenes, a full
dispatching and atchieuing of a matter. Perfetto, perfect, very good, finished,
complete, absolute, performed, achieved, ended, made up, accomplished.
Perfidia, treachery, disloyalty, treason, unfaithfulness, falsehood against
promise and trust, discredit, untruth, false dealing. Perfidiare, to become or
play the treacherous or disloyal, to betraie, to be false of truth, trust and
promise, to be unfaithful, to practice all manner of treachery and disloyalty.
Perfido, Perfidioso, perfidious, treacherous, disloyal, traytrous, false,
untrue, unfaithful, deceitful, crafty, false of promise, doing against the
trust committed to him. Per fin a tanto, as Perfinche. Perfinche, until that,
until such time as. Perfino, until, until such time, so far as. Perfitone, a
divination when the devil speaks in another man. Perforare, to boar, to make
a hole or pierce through, to thrust into. Perfoliata, Perfogliata, the herb
thorow-waxe or thorow-leafe. Perfondere, fondo, fondei, fonduto or fuso, to
power out on every part, to sprinkle, to flow, to power, or wash all over.
Perforata, the herb saint John's woort. Perfuga, a runaway, he that forsakes
his own captain and runs to the enemy. Perfugio, a place whereunto one
runs for succor, a place of refuge or shelter, any thing whereby a man may
be succored. Also an excuse, an evasion, or a starting hole. Perfumare, to
perfume. Perfumiere, a perfumer. Perfumo, perfume or sweet sent. Pergamena,
Pergamina, parchment, vellame, or sheep dride skin. Pergamo, a pulpit or
chair for a preacher. Pergere, to go, proceed, continue or tell on.
Pergiuramenti, periurings, for swearings, a breaking of ones oath or swearing.
Pergiurare, to periure, to forswear, to swear untruly and falsely, to break
an oath. Pergiuro, perjured, forsworn* also a forsworn knave, false of his
word. Pergola, an arbor made in gardens, or a boure of vines or other boughs,
any kind of close walk covered with leaves or boughs. Pergolare, to reduce
into arboures or shadie covered places. Pergolato, as Pergolo. Pergoletta, a
little arbor, boure, or shadie place. Pergoletto, a little pulpet in a church.
Pergolo, as Pergamo, as Pergola. Pericardio, the membrane or thin skin
inuoluing the whole heart like a case or casket. Pericarpio, a kind of roots
round like to onions. Periclitare, to hazard, to ieopard, to endanger, to
venture, to put in peril. Pericolare, as Periclitare. Pericolo, Periclo,
peril, danger, hazard, venture, ieopardie, harm, mischief. Pericoloso,
perilous, dangerous, hazardous, full of danger and peril. Pericranio, the
hairie scalpe or skin covering and compassing all the scull. Periermenia, a
certain figure in speech. Periesi, as Perisci. Periergia, curiosity.
Periergo, curious. Perigeo, that point of the heaven wherein the sun or other
planet is nearest to the center of the earth. Periglio, as Pericolo.
Periglioso, as Pericoloso. Periferia, as Peripheria. Perifrasi, a
circumlocution, one word expressed by many. Peril che, wherefore, whereupon.
Peril passato, heretofore, in times past. Perileuco, a precious stone having a
white thread going down from the very mouth to the root. Perinanzi, hereafter,
in time to come. Perineo, a line like a seame parting the wrinkled skin of the
cods in the midst, and reaching to the fundament: of some taken for the
fundament, and of other some for the part between the rising of the yard and
the fundament. Perineunomia, an inflammation or impostume of the lungs, with
shortness of breath, and rednes of the cheeks. Perioca, Periocha, a brief
argument containing the sum of a whole matter or discourse. Periodichi, those
diseases that are not continual, or else that goes and comes by course or
fits. Periodo, a period, an end, a conclusion, a perfect sense. Also the last
date, a stint, a course, a perfect sentence falling in full compass and
measure: that term of time wherein any thing is finished, an end. Periostio,
a little thin skin immediately enwrapping the bones of any body, by reason
of which skin and not of their own nature, the bones are supposed to feel.
Peripatetici, a sect of walking philosophers, whereof Aristotle was chief.
Peripheria, a circumference, a carrying or going about, the crooked line
wherewith a circle is bounded and compassed in. Perire, Pero, or Perisco,
perij, perito, to perish, to come to naught, to be lost, to be consumed, to
die, to wither, to miscarie, to be cast away, to be utterly undone, or to be
past all hope, to consume away, to be bankcrupt, to come to decay. Periscij,
those that have their shadows cast round about them, as they have that dwell
in the cold z^^es, for to them the sun after it is once risen goes round
about their Horizon, and so casts the shadows round, some call them the
people that dwell in one self parallel, how distant soever east or west.
Perissologia, superfluous speaking. Peristerio, the herb verueine. Peritarsi,
to grow expert. Also to be offended with. Peritia, cunning, skilfulnes,
experience, knowledge. Perito, perished, come to naught. Also expert, wise,
skillful, learned, cunning in a science. Look Perire. Peritoneo, the inner
rind of the belly ioining to the caul covering all the intrailes. Peritoso,
expert, skillfull. Perizoma, a trusse worn about the privy parts or cover for
them. Perla, a gem, a pearl. Also for the, by the, thorough the. Perlare, to
impearle, to adorn with pearls. Perlaro, a tree that bears a fruit like a
cherrie, called the lote or nettle tree. Perle, pearls, jewels, gems. Also for
the, by the, through the. Perlecebra, a thing that presently draws a man to
favor it, a marvelous allurement or inticement. Perlenga, a flurt or toy, or
trifle or nothing. Perlette, little, small, seed pearls. Permanere, mango,
mannei, manuto, to abide, to remain, to tarry, to continue, or stay till the
end. Permanuto, abided, remained, tarried, continued. Permanente, permanent,
remaining, constant, abiding. Permanenza, continuance, permanencie, constancy.
Per me, as Per mezzo. Also for the best. Also for me. Permettere, metto, misi,
messo, to permit, to suffer, to allow, to tolerate, to let, to grant, to
license or pardon, to bear with, to give commission, power or authority.
Permesso, permitted, suffered, allowed, tolerated, let, granted, licenced,
pardoned, borne with, given commission, power or authority. Permettente,
permitting, suffering, tolerating, granting, bearing with, licencing, giving
commission or authority. Permezzo, over against, by means, by way, through,
through the midst. Perminenza, pre-eminence, prerogative. Permissione,
permission, toleration, sufferance. Permissiuo, tolerable, that may be
permitted. Per molti modi, many ways, by many ways or means. Permutare, to
change, to shift, to alter, to transmute, to barter or exchange one thing for
another. Permutatione, a permutation, a change, an alteration, a shifting, a
bartring, an exchange of one thing for another. Permutanza, as Permutatione.
Perna, a shell fish called a nakre or a narre. Perne, the fins of fishes.
Pernice, a partridge. Pernicie, perniciousnes, mischief, wickedness, death,
hurt, danger, destruction, corruption, undoing. Pernicioso, pernicious, wicked,
deadly, hurtful, mischievous, mortal, bringing death or destruction,
dangerous, noisome. Pernicita, swiftnes, quicknes, nimblenes. Perniconi, great
old partridges or stagers. Perniente, for nothing, by no means. Pernione, a
kibe on the heel, or a chilblane on the hands. Perno, a peg or a pin of wood,
a carpenters swallow tale, the axel tree of a cart, a stalk of an apple or a
pear. Legata a perno, is a joint in the port or vpset of a bit, having a pin
thorough it, wherewith the players in the midst do hang. Pernocchia, a kind of
crabbe or creuis fish. Also as Perna. Pernottare, to tarry or lodge all night,
to watch, to stay, or walk all the night, to pass the night in. Pero, a
pear tree. Also the fruit thereof. Pero, therefore, whereupon, then. Pero a
cappione, the mouth of a bit set with pears having a port. Pero che, because
that, for so much as. Perodi meno, nevertheless, notwithstanding. Pero
ghiacciolo, a kind of pear red on one side. Pero moscatelleo, a muskadine
pear. Pero tardio, a late or lateward pear. Pero zoccolo, a kind of long
pear. Perolo, a little button or tassell of wool on the top and middle of a
knit cap. Peroratione, the last part of an oration, which most mooues the
hearer. Perona, a kind of herb. Perone, such high shoes as clownes use to
wear. Perosarasa, a kind of rough ray or thornbacke. Perpendere, pendo,
pendei, penduto, to consider diligently or examine exactly. Perpendiculare,
perpendicular, directly down right. Perpendiculo, a plum line such as
carpenters use, a plum rule with a piece of lead in the end. Perpero, rude,
foolish, vain, rough, froward, wrongful. Also a kind of coin. Perpensa, the
herb Cabaret or Hazlewoort. Perpetrare, to do, make, finish or atchieue.
Perpetuale, perpetual, aye-during, continual, everlasting, endless, never
ceasing. Perpetuare, to perpetuate or continue a thing or any course without
ceasing. Perpetuita, perpetuity, euerlastingnes, continuance, fulness,
perfectnes, eternity, endlesnes, a continuance without breaking, interruption
or stopping, immortality, that shall never fail, decay or come to naught.
Perpetuo, perpetual, euer-during, ayelasting, continual, eternal,
everlasting, constant, that shall always and ever endure, immortal. Also
whole, continued, all of one piece, not in portions or divided. Perpetuo
carcere, the whole world. Also perpetual prison. Perplessamente, perplexedly,
ambiguously, doubtfully, intricately, obscurely, vncertainlie. Perplessare, to
perplexe, to grieve or vex in mind, to entangle so together that the meaning
is not perceived, to speak ambiguously, and words of a double meaning.
Perplessione, perplexion, trouble or grief of mind, doubtfulnes, an ambiguitie
or intricatenes of words, that shall leave a perturbation or perplexion in the
mind. Perplesso, perplexed, troubled, grieved, doubtful, entangled, twisted
together, intricate, hard to be loosed, perplex, ambiguous. Per poco, for a
little, very near, within a little. Per qualche luogo, in some place, some
where or some way. Per questo, for this, by this, through this. Perrompere,
rompo, ruppi, rotto, to break asunder and in the midst, to break or splint or
riue or shiuer in pieces violently, to break or enter in by force, to break
through violently. Persa, the herb Margerome. Also lost, of Perdere.
Persecutare, to persecute, to prosecute, to pursue, to follow. Persecutione,
persecution, prosecution, pursuit, process, following on. Persecutore, a
persecutor, a prosecutor, a pursiuant, a follower. Perscriuere, scriuo,
scrissi, scritto, to write through or to an end. Persega, a fish called a
perch. Perseguitare, as Persecutare. Perseguire, guisco, guito, as Persequire.
Perseo, a kind of strange tree like a pear tree, always green and laden
with fruit good for the stomach. Persequitare, as Persecutare. Persequire,
quisco, quito, as Persecutare, but properly to pursue, to hunt, to continue in
that mind or work one began, to follow on, to fulfill, to accomplish, to
persecute, to revenge. Perseuerare, to persevere, to continue, to remain
steadfast, to abide, to stand steadfastly or stoutly in one mind and opinion.
Perseuerante, perseuering, constant, steadfast and stout in one opinion and
mind. Perseueranza, perseverance, constancy, stedfastnes, continuance, a
stoutnes or stable abiding in a thing reasonable. Persicaria, the herb
arsesmart. Persico, a peach tree, the fruit called a peach. Also peach color.
Persi fiori, peach flowers. Persichino, a peach color. Persillo, a vessel,
wherein was the ointment with which Remus had his arm anointed. Persistere,
sisto, sistei, sistuto, to persist, to continue, to abide or stand stoutly to
the end, to hold out. Person, lost, forlorn. Also a dark, broune, black
mourning color. Some take it to be properly the color of dead marierom, for
Persa is marierom. Some have used it for peach color. Persolata, a kind of
herb that bears burres. Persona, a person, a personage of man or woman, a
body, a wight. It is defined of some to be the quality or state whereby one
man differs from another. Also a false face, as a vizard or masking face, an
image, an appearance. also a charge or office, a majesty. Also a part in a
play. Persona di male affare, a naughty wicked body. Personaggio, a
personage, as Persona. Personale, personal, in person, of or pertaining to a
person. Personare, to personate, to act, to imitate any person, to act or
play a part in a play, to counterfaite another person. Personcina, a little
body or person. Per sort, by chance, by hap, casuallie. Perspettiuo,
perspectiue. Also a professor of the perspectiues. Perspicace, sharp, quick,
witty, wise, wary, provident, foreseeing, forecasting, perspicuous, quick of
fight, of understanding, and perceiving of a thing, quick-witted, quick of
judgment, having a good insight into a thing. Perspicacia, as Perspicacita.
Perspicacita, sharpnes, quicknes, foresight, wit, farseeing, perspicuitie,
quicknes of sight, of understanding or perceiving of a thing, a quick insight.
Perspicientia, perfect knowledge, or full perceiving of a thing. Perspicuita,
as Perspicacita, but properly cleerenes, plainenes, or perspicuitie namely in
words and sentences. Perspicuo, as Perspicace, but properly clear, that may
be seen through. Also plain, easy, evident, apparent, or manifest.
Persuadere, suado, suasi, suaso, to persuade, to counsel, to animate, to make
to believe, to put, bring, or cause to sink into ones mind or head, to
exhort, to move, or induce to do a thing, or to believe it. Persuaso,
Persuaduto, persuaded, counseled, animated, made to believe, exhorted,
induced, or moved to believe or do a thing. Persuasione, persuasion, a
persuading, a sure belief in a thing. Persuasiuo, perswasiue, that can, or may
be persuaded, perswadable. Persuasore, a perswader, a counselor, an inducer,
or exhorter to a thing. Persutto, Persuto, dride bakon. Also a gamon of bakon.
Per tanto, therefore, wherefore, then, for so much. Per tempestiuo, betimes,
very earelie, most timely. Per tempo, betimes, earelie. Pertempissimo, very
timely, or earelie. Pertenere, tengo, tenni, tenuto, to appertain or belong
unto. Pertenuto, appertained or belonged unto. Pertenente, pertaining,
pertinent, or belonging unto. Pertenenza, pertinency, an appurtenance.
Perterrito, skared, affrighted, flighted, dismaide, astonished, terrified,
amazed. Pertica, a perch, a pole, a rod, or long staff to measure land or
timber with. Also an akre of ground, properly a furlong. Perticare, to measure
by pearches, poles, rods, akres, or furlongs. Perticato, a houell, or rick, or
stack of any thing. Also a fence made of rods or poles. Perticatore, a measurer
of grounds by pearches, rods, or furlongs. Perticone, a long pole, a great
perch. Also a gull, or a noddie, a sla^grell. Pertinace, obstinate,
headstrong, sa^cie, stubborn, stiffnecked, opinatiue. Also taken sometime in
good part, for constant, or resolute or firm in some opinion. Pertinacia,
obstinacy, wilfulnes, stubbornes, strong opinion: n^times taken in the good
part for perseverance, constancy, or firm opinion. Pertugiare, to boar or
pierce through full of holes. Pertugio, Pertugia, any kind of hole, or
boaring. Perturbare, to disturb, to disquiet, to vex, to trouble in mind, to
bring out of quiet. Perturbamento, a perturbation, passion, vexatio^, or
trouble of mind, a troublous passion, affliction or motion or agitation of the
mind and spirits, disturbance, disquieting. Also a boistrous, stormy, or
tempestuousnes of the weather. Perturbatione, as Perturbamento. Perturbatore, a
disturber, a promoter, a vexer, a troublous fellow, a man that disquieteth and
disturbeth much. Perturbo, as Perturbamento. Pertusare, as Pertugiare. Pertuso,
as Pertugio. Per tutto, euerie-where, in all places, wheresoever, for all,
withal. Per tutto cio, for all that, with all that. Per vana gloria, for
vainglory, for ostentation. Perucca, a periwig or gregorian of counterfeit
hair. Peruccare, to dress with a periwig. Perucchiera, a periwig or gregorian
maker. Peruenire, vengo, venni, venuto, to become, to come unto, to reach unto,
to happen, to come to a place or to his iournies end, to attain unto.
Peruenuto, become, come unto, reached unto, happened, attained unto, or come to a
iournies end. Peruenimento, a hap, a chance, a coming unto, a befalling, an
attayning unto, a coming unto a iournies end. Peruento, as Prouento.
Peruersare, to become or make perverse, froward, malicious, skittish, or
mischienous. Also to spoil, to mar, to subvert, or overthrow. Peruersione, a
perverting, a peruersion, a subuerting, a deprauing, etc. Peruersita,
peruersenes, skittishnes, frowardnes, crabbednes, waywardnes, maliciousnes of
nature, ouerthwartnes, doing or seeking to do that which one ought not to do.
Peruerso, perverse, skittish, froward, waiward, crabbed, hard to please.
Peruertire, verto, vertito, to pervert, to ouerturne, to overthwart, to turn
vpside down, to subvert, beat, or cast down to the ground, to mar and
destroy, to deprave, to make ill, to undo and cast away, to wrest to an ill
sense. Peruertito, perverted, subverted, ouerturned, ouerthwarted, turned
vpside down, beaten or cast down, marred, destroyed, depraved, made ill, cast
away, wrested to an ill sense. Peruertitore, a peruertor, a subuertor, an
ouerturner, a destroier, a deprauer, etc. Perugino, a kind of fretted or
carved ioyners work. Peruicace, as Pertinace. Peruicacia, as Pertinacia. Per
un vie va, glancingly, cursorie wise, a snatch and away, in haste. Peruzze,
wild, little, hedge-peares. Pesare, to way, to poise, to ponder, to grieve,
or lie heavy upon. Pesato, waide, poised, pondred, grieved, laid heavy upon.
Also grave, considerate, discreet. Pesante, heavy, weighty, poisie, pondrous.
Pesanza, heaviness, weight, grief or vexation of mind. Pesatore, Pesaro, a
waigher, a poyser, a pondrer. Pesatamente, waightily, heavily, pondrouslie,
considerately, discreetly. Pesca, a peach, a young man's bum. Also all manner of
fishing. Pescagione, any kind of fishing or fish. Pescaia, a fish pond. Also a
fish market. Pescare, to fish, to catch fish. Pescarezza, a fishers bote.
Pescaria, a fish street, a fish market. Pescata, a fishing. Also fished.
Pescatore, a fisher, a fishmonger. Also a fish that with a budget hanging at
his neck which he like a net lets in and out catches other small fishes.
Pescatore del Re, a bird called a kings fisher. Pescatorio, of, or pertaining
to fishing. Pescatrice, a fish woman, or seller of fish. Also a kind of sea
fish much like a frogge. Pescauento, an idle loytrer, a vain foolish gadding
gull. Pesce, any kind of fish. Also a sign in heaven. Pesce balestra, a fish
called in latin Zygaena. Pesce calamaro, a cuttle fish, a cutfish, or a
calamarie. Pesce cane, a dog fish. Pesce coruo, a fish yellow in the sea, and
black in fresh water. Pescelegno, the fish we call stockefish. Pesce molle,
soft, smooth or slippery fish, a whiting fish, a cod, or codfish. Pesce
martello, a fish called in latin Zygaena. Pesce ignudo, a fish called a dace
or a merlane. Pesce di fortezza, a fish called in latin Blennus. Pesce di
pietra, a fish called in latin Blennus. Pesce porco, a hog or swine fish.
Pescefico, a cod, or codfish. Some take it for a sea tench. Pesce prete, a
kind of fish that has but one eye in his head. Pesce stella, a star fish.
Pesce piano, a plaise-fish, or any kind of flatfish. Pesce san Pietro, a fish
called a dorea, or gold fish. Pesce porco, a sea hog, a hog fish. Pesce
spada, a fish that has a beak like a sword, called a sword fish. Pesce in
canella, a fish called in latin Enyx. Pesce squaglioso, scaglioso, any shell
or scaly fish. Pesce marino, any kind of sea fish. Pesce d'acqua fresca,
fresh water fish. Pesce di conca, any kind of shell fish. Pesce ratto, a fish
like a raye or skeate. Pesce palombo, a fish like a lamprey. Pesce pastinaca,
Look Pastinaca. Pesce rondine, a sea swallow, a sea night bat, or reare-mouse.
Pesce rospo, a tode-fish. Pesce pescatore, Look Pescatore. Pesce papagallo, a
fish called in latin Pauo, or Pauus. Pescestella, a star-fish or five foot.
Pesce tarantola, to fish called in latin Scaurus. Pesce vanga, a sole fish
with rough skin or a skate. Pesce salato, any kind of salt fish. Pesce
volatore, a kind of little fish whereof there fly whole sholes together.
Pescheggiare, to feel or grope ones buttocks or arse. Also to fish.
Pescherello, a fish called a bleise. Peschiera, a fish street or market, a
fish ponde. Pescina, as Peschiera. Pesciolini, all manner of minutes, frye, or
small fishes. Pesci vendolo, a fishmonger or seller of fish. Pesco, a peach
tree. Also taken for a young man's bum or arse. Pescoso, full of fish, fishie,
or that may be fished. Pescuglio, a little pibble stone. Pesetto, a little
weight. Peso, a weight, a stone weight, a load, a burden, a charge, weighty,
lawefull, full weight. It is also taken for a man's body. Also hanging down,
hanged. Pesole, dangling or hanging down. Pessimamente, woorst of all, most
ill, badly, wickedly, most naughtily. Pessimare, to mar, to spoil, to make
of bad worse. Pessimo, very bad, most ill, very naught, woorst, exceeding
naught. Pesso, a pessarie or suppositorie made of soft wool like a finger used
for secret purposes among women. Pessolo, a creek in the sea. Also as Pesso.
Pesta, a footing, a track, a trace, a footestep, the print or mark of a foot.
Also a crowd, a throng, or press of people. Also a way much beaten and
frequented, the view of a hare, or the prick of a dear. Pestacchio, a
pistacho, a fistike nut or bladder nut. Also a flurt with ones fingers used in
disgrace. Pestacciare, as Pestare. Pestare, to stamp, to pound, to bray or
pill in a mortar, to bruise, to break, to bang, to bebast, to beswaddle with a
cudgel. Pestare l'agresto, as Menare l'agresto. Pestare la salsa nel mortaio,
to pill, to pound, braie or beat sauce in a mortar. Pestatoio, a pestle of a
mortar. Pestatore, a stamper or beater in a mortar. Peste, the plague, or
pestilence, a contagion or infection. Also a thing or person that marreth or is
confusion to another, a mischief, a death. Also a poison. Also as Pesta.
Pestello, a pestle of a mortar, or pouner. Also taken for a man's tool or
priuities. Pestello di vetro, a dildoe of glass. Pestero, a kind of venomous
serpent in India. Pestifero, plaguie, pestiferous, pestilent, contagious,
deadly, mortal, unwholesome, dangerous, signifying plague or death to come,
that brings pestilence and destruction. Pestilentia, as Pestilenza.
Pestilentiale, as Pestifero. Pestilentioso, as Pestifero. Pestilenza, a plague,
pestilence, murrian, or contagion, the foul evil, the infection of the air
or vnwholesomnes of a place. Pesulo, a bench, a form or a seat. Peta, farts.
Petaccie, rags, clouts, dragles. Petalite, the herb Harts-horne. Petalio, the
plate of pure gold which was set in the forefront of the high priest and head
having Jehovah graven in it. Petalismo, a kind of banishing used in Siracusa
by writing the parties name in Olive leaves. Petamogeto, a kind of weed growing
in water. Petare, to fart, to crack behind, as Pettare. Petate, farts,
fartings. Petasetto, a little hat or round cover for any thing, a lid.
Petasite, Lagwoort or Butter-bur. Petaso, a Persian or Turkish cap, hat,
bonnet, head attire or turbant. Petecchia, a specke, or freckle or spot in ones
face. Petecchie, the disease we call the meazels or Gods marks. Petardo, a
squib or petard of gun powder used to burst up gates or doors with. Also a
farter. Petaruolo, a cracking squib made of gun powder. Also a farter
Peteggiare, to fart or blurt at one. Petegola, a slut, a flurt, a pi^kitching,
a filth, a gixie, a gill, a minxe. Also the chiefest skold in a parish, an idle
proud huswife. Petegolare, to play the idle flurt, trull, slut or whore, to
braule, chide or skold. Petenecchio, as Pettinale. Peteriggio, the pilling or
going off of the skin about the nails. Peterrare, to shead, to spill, to
scatter. Petignone, the grine between the priuities and the thighs where
hair grows. Petilio, a flower growing among brambles in the later end of
summer, like a wild rose with fine small leaves. Petimbo^sa, the bitter herb
called Fellwort or Gentian. Petitione, a petition, a demand, a laboring for,
a suit, a request. also the name of a magistrate in Venice. Petitore, a
petitioner, a suter, a requester, a demander, an asker, a beggar. Petitoria
lettera, a letter of request, a supplication. Peto, one that does lightly roll
his eyes with a grace from corner to corner, goat-eied, rouling-eied. Also he
that looks as his eyes were half closed, or he that looks a squint upward.
Petone, something about a fullers mill. Used also for the herb Tobacco, but it
is taken from the French. Petorselo, a saucie malapert companion, a bold
haiard. Petra, Pietra, any kind of stone. Petraia, a quarie of stones, all
manner of stone work. Petraio, Petraro, a mazon or stone cutter, a digger of
stones. Petrale, a quarie of stones, stony, made of stones. Petranciana, a
kind of fruit: but some take it for the herb Saxifrage. Petraruolo, as
Petraio. Petrata, a blow, a hit, a hurt or cast with a stone. Petrelle, a tool
to melt metals with or cast in them, an ingot. Petrificare, to grow hard as a
stone. Petrificatione, a growing hard to a stone. Also a disease in the eye or
eie-lids. Petrina, any little stone. Petrinale, a kind of gunne called a
petrinall. Petriuolo, a kind of gum or drug that burns. Petronciana, as
Petranciana. Petrone, a great huge stone or rock. Petronella, a lark with a
bush on his head. Petronelli, as Pietranelli. Petronello, as Pietronello.
Petrosa, a kind of rough hard thorn back. Petrosellino, the herb we call
Parslie. Petrosemolo, Petrosillo, as Petrosellino. Petroso, stony, grettie,
full of stones. Petruzze, small pibble stones. Pettacchiare, as Pettacciare.
Pettacchina, as Petegola. Pettacciare, to botch, to piece, to cobble, to clout,
to stud, to beset. Also to fart, to crackell. Pettacciaro, a botcher, a souter,
a cobbler, a tinkar. Pettanculo, a kind of fish. Some take it for the scallop
fish. Pettare, to fart, to crackle, to rattle, to break wind backward, to let
a escape or a fart. Pettaro, a farter, a crackler, a ratler. Pettardo, as
Pettaro, as Pettaruolo. Pettaruolo, as Petardo. Petteggiare, to fart or blurt
at. Pettegola, as Petegola. Pettegolare, as Petegolare. Petteneggio, the hairs
about man's or woman's priuities, or the grine about the priuities. Pettenorzo, a
kind of scalop fish. Petti, breasts. Also fartes. Pettido, a kind of musical
instrument. Pettiera, a stomacher or breast garment. Pettiggiare, as
Petteggiare. Pettignone, as Petignone. Pettinale, the priuities that have
hairs upon them. Pettinecchio, as Pettinale. Pettinara, a combe-case, or box
for combs. Pettinare, to comb, to currie, to dress flax, to card wool, to
scrape. Also to feed, eat, or make good cheer merrily, hungerlie, or at other
men's charges: it is a phrase used only among good fellows and soldiers, taken
from the metaphor of the comb, because it has teeth. Pettinaio, Pettinaro, a
combe-maker. Pettinatore, a comber, a currier, a carder, a wooll-man, a
scraper. Also a good feeder, a hungry fellow, a tall trencherdman. Pettinare
la lana, to card wool. Pettina zazzere, used for a Barber, because he combeth
men's fore-locks, or bushes of hair. Pettine, any manner of comb to comb, or
kemb the head or beard. Also a currie-combe for a horse. Also a comb to dress
flax or hemp, called a beche, or a hatchell. Also a stay of a weauers loome,
through which his web or woofe goes, having teeth like a comb. Also a pair
of cards to card wool withal. Also a kind of rake with small teeth to rake
corn. Also a rake, a dragger, or harrow. Also the grine about the privy
members where hair grows. Also a stick wherewith they play on dulcimers.
Also a shellfish called a scallop. Also another fish with a hard finne on his
back. Also a kind of herb. Pettine di legno, a wooden comb. Pettine
d'auorio, an yuorie comb. Pettine di tessitore, a weauers part of his loome
with teeth in it like a comb, some call it the stay of the loome. Pettirosso,
a robin red-breast. Petto, that part of the body which is next beneath the
channel or neck-bone called the breast: it is also used for a fart. Petto di
castrato, a breast of mutton. Pettole, fritters or pancakes. Pettoncolo, as
Pettanculo. Pettone, a great loud fart. Pettorale, a breast plate, a peitrell, a
stomacher, the arming of the breast of a horse. Also that belongs to the
breast. Pettorale del cauallo, a peitrell of a saddle. Pettoreggiare, to fart,
or to blurt with the mouth. Pettoreggiare, to bear down, to front, or resist
with the force of ones breast. Pettorina con lardo, a fat breast of hogs flesh.
Pettoroso, as Pettoruto. Pettorosso, a bird called a robin red-breast, or
rudcock. Pettoruto, breasted, having a big large breast. Also that is hollow
chested. Also bossed. Pettozzo, a guirding, loud, shrill fart. Pettunculo, the
name of a fish. Petulante, wanton, shameless, malapert, saucie, ribaude,
dishonest, reproachful, outrageous, ready to do wrong, one that passes not
how ill he speaks or does to a man. Petulantia, wantones, saucines,
malapertnes, ribaudrie, lecherous wantonness, reproachful speaking, dishonestie,
impudency. Petusso, a robin red-breast. Peucedano, hog-fenell, sulphur-wort,
or sow-fenell, or maiden-weede. Peuera, a kind of wooden leauer. Also a great
tunnell. Peuerare, to pepper, or dress or season with pepper. Peuerata, a kind
of meat or potage made with much pepper. Peuerazze, a kind of cockle, or
other shellfish. Peuere, the spice called pepper. Peuerigno, of the color of
pepper. Peuerino, a pepper box. Also of the color of pepper. Peuerone, as
Peuerata. Also long pepper. Pezza, a while or space of time. Also any piece,
cloat, rag, or tatter. Also a patch. Pezza di denaro, a piece of money. Pezza
di panno, a piece of cloth. Pezza di veluto, a piece of velvet. Pezza intiera,
a whole piece. Pezzare, to clout, to piece, to patch, to cobb^e, to botch.
Pezzaruolo, a botcher, a cobbler, a clouter, a ^outer, a tinkar, a patcher.
Pezze, rags, clouts, tatters, patches, pieces. Pezzenare, to beg for pieces
of broken meat. Pezzente, a beggar for broken pieces of meat. Also as
Pezzaruolo. Pezzetta, a little clout, rag, patch, tatter. Pezzette di leuante,
certain pieces of linen that women rub and paint their faces with. Pezzetto,
as Pezzetta, a small while or space of time. Pezzigaruolo, wanton, froward,
peevish, puling, ticklish, skittish. Also as Pizzicagnolo. Pezzire, zisco,
zito, as Pezzenare. Pezzo, a piece of any thing, a while or space of time, a
pine tree, or pitch tree. Pezzo a pezzo, by piece-meale, in pieces, piece by
piece. Pezzola, a kind of purple clout that painters and cooks use to color
meats with. Pezzolana, sand or gravel. Pezzuco, a swallow-taile to join
timber, a pin or peg of wood. Pezzuole, as Pezzette. Pezzulo, dangling, or
downe-hanging. Pezzuto, sharp, sharp-pointed, or keen. Also patched, botched,
or pieced. Phagedena, a kind of pock or running canker, which fretteth through
the skin, and eats the flesh. Phalange, a troop or squadron of 8000. men
that the Persians were wont to war with, being four square, and set in such
array that they might encounter with their enemies foot to foot, man to man,
and shield to shield. Also a spider so called. Phalarica, an engine of war
with wild fire enclosed in it to set towns on fire. Phalari, spanish seed,
or seed of Canarie, petty panike. Some call it grasse-corne. Phantasma, a
dream, a vision, an image of things conceived in the mind, an appearance, a
vain vision or false imagination, a fairie, a hobgoblin. Phanatico, one that
has vain visions. Pharee, a kind of serpent that creeps on his tail.
Pharetra, a quiver for arrows or shafts. Pharetraro, a quiuer-maker. Pharmace,
a medicine, a remedy, all kind of dregs good or evil. also that part of
physic that cures with medicines. Also taken for a sorceresse or
enchantresse. Pharo, a tower, a beakon, or high place by the sea coast, wherein
were continually lights and fires which served for seamen to see the haven
and the safest entrance: a sea mark. Phasma, a horrible, ghastly, grizlie
vision or sight. Phebea, the Moon so called because she is Phoebus sister.
Phebo, the Sun. Also Phoebus. Phemigno, a medicine causing rednes, making the
body to break out in pushes. Phecasio, a kind of shoes that priests were wont
to wear, peculiar to sacrificing priests. Phemo, a certain medicine good
against the colike. Phenice, a bird in Arabia, a Fenix, or the quintessence of
fire, or philosophers stone. Phenomeno, an appearance either in the heaven or
the air. Phici, a fish which changes her color, being sometimes white, and
other times speckt. Phicite, a precious stone, having the color of Alga.
Phidicie, the common suppers among the Lacedemonia^s openly kept in the
streets with great temperance. Phigethlo, a little swelling hard and red,
rising chiefly in the crown of the head, or in the arme-pits, or in the
privy parts, our chirurgions do call it a little loaf or manchet.
Philadelphia, brotherly love. Philagatho, he that loves goodness. Philalethe,
a lover of truth. Philanthio, an herb used to dye purple. Philantropia,
humanity, or loving of men. Philantropo, a lover of mankind, gentle and
loving. Also the herb goose-grasse or love man. Philarco, one that loves to
bear rule. Philargiria, covetousness, or love of money. Philatteria, scrolles
of parchment, having the commandments written in them, which the Pharisees ware
about their heads and arms. Philatterio, a preservative against poison.
Philautia, love of ones self, self-love, selfe-liking. Philerenio, a lover of
solitarines. Phileteria, an herb, of some called wild sage, but in
ecclesiastical books it is used for enchantments. Phillite, the herb called
harts-^oong. Philocalia, delight in fairenes. Philocare, an herb called
horehound. Philocrate, constant in love. Philoginia, doting on women.
Philologia, love of learning, study, or talk. Philologo, a lover of learning,
knowledge and study. Philologo, a man given to study, a lover of learning,
talk or conference. Philomathia, the love or desire of learning. Philomela, a
Nightingall. Philosarco, voluptuous, loving his flesh. Philosofare, to bestow
his study in philosophy, to profess, to teach, to dispute and reason of
philosophy. Philosofante, a philosopher, or one professing and studying
philosophy. Philosofastro, a smatterer in philosophy, a foolish, pedanticall,
counterfaite philosopher. Philosofia, philosophy, a love of learning, study,
knowledge, and wisdom. Philosophico, philosophical, pertaining to
philosophy. Philosofo, a philosopher, a lover of learning, virtue, wisdom or
knowledge, or a student of them. Philostorgia, the love of parents toward their
children. Philosseno, Philossino, a lover of hospitality, one that gladly and
with a cheerefulnes entertaineth guests and friends. Philoteoro, one given to
speculation and contemplation of things. Philtro, Philtri, amorous potions,
poisons of love; or medicines to make one love. Also the hollownes or gutter in
the upper lips under the nosthrils. Also the fair and comely proportion of
ones body, and his courteous behavior, which with the very sight does
purchase love and favor. Philura, a little thin skin as parchment, a sheet or
leaf of paper, that which is between the bark and the wood of the tree, of
some called Tylia, whereupon in old time they were wont to write. Phima, a
little swelling like a fellon or bile, but somewhat rounder and flatter. Also a
certain beast, which if a man behold, it makes him to look pale many days
after. Phimosi, a disease when the nut of a man's yard will not be covered, or
being covered, will not be opened. Phiontidi, those creatures which nature has
made deadly enemies each to other, as the Storke and the Frog, the Cat and the
Mouse, the Spider and the Toade, etc. Phisato, a great fish called a
Whirlepoole, that with his tongue casts great store of water into ships.
Phisica, the art of physic or natural philosophy, the art of natural
things. Phisicale, physical, natural, according to natural causes, of or
pertaining to natural things and causes. Phisico, he that understands or
sets out the causes of things natural, a physician, or thereunto belonging.
Phisiognomia, a science or rule to conjecture or judge of man's natural
affections by his visage or form, phisiognomie. Phisiognomo, one that
professes to know the manners and natures of men by the view of their body,
eyes, face, and forehead, a Phisiognomist, for Physis is nature in greek.
Phisiologia, a searching out of natural things, a reasoning of the nature of
any thing. Phisiologo, he that searches natural things, or disputes of
natural causes. Phisitero, Phisistro, as Phisato. Phiteuma, a kind of herb.
Phitone, a kind of great serpent. Phlebotomia, the cutting of a vain, or
blood-letting. Phlemma, all manner of fleagme. Phlemmone, an inflammation of
blood which the Chirurgions call Phlegmon, an inflammation or swelling against
nature, being white and red. Phlegonte, a precious stone having as it were a
flame of fire in it. Phlittena, a rising or swelling much like unto blisters,
caused when the skin is scalded with hot water, which swelling or blister is
full of yellowish matter, commonly called wild fire, or wheat on the eyes.
Phoca, a sea calfe. Phormione, an herb good against the pin and the web in
the eye. Phosophoro, the day or morning star. Also the twy-light either in
the evening or morning. Phrase, a phrase or proper form of speech. Phrene, the
midriffe, which deuideth the vmbles of a man or beast. Phreneticare, to rave,
to be frantike, to be possessed with a frenzy. Phrenesia, frenzy, the chief
and greatest mischief that can happen to the brain, coming by an
inflammation of the midriff, and always drawing a fever with it. Phrenetico,
one that has the frenzy, or is frantic. Phrigio, a melody, a music or
tune, wherein seemed to be a divine fury. Phronesia, has bin used for
prudence and wisdom. Phronimo, one that is prudent, wise, or witty.
Phthiriasi, a disease called the lousie evil. Phthisico, he that has the
consumption of the lungs. Phthisi, a disease in the lungs, with a consumption
of all the whole body. Phthoe, a consumption of the whole body with a little
ague following. Also the incurable sores of the lungs. Phtongo, a sound, a
tune, or a note. Phthorio, a medicin which kills children being yet in the
wombes of their mother. Phu, the herb that some call Valerian, great Setwall,
or capons tail. Pia, godly, devout, pitiful, religious, virtuous, merciful,
gentle, benign, good, honest, just, righteous. Piabile, for which satisfaction
may be made. Piacere, piaccio, piacqui, piaccinto, to please, to satisfy, to
delight, to like, to content, to think good. Also a pleasure, a content, a
delight, a liking. Also a benefit, a good turn, a gratitude, a kindness, a
favor, mi piace, it pleases me, it likes me, I am glad of, mi dispiace, it
displeases me, I am sorry. Piaciuto, pleased, satisfide, liked, delighted.
Piacente, pleasant, pleasing, delightsome. Piacenza, as Piacere. Piaceuole,
pleasant, delightsome, merry. Piaceuoletto, somewhat pleasant, merry, or
delightsome. Piaccuolezza, pleasantnes, delight, mirth, pleasure, iollitie,
blithnes, glee. Piacimento, a pleasing, a delighting. Piaculare, serving for
the purging of, or that has power to purge some fault or offense. Also that
which shows some sorrowful thing. Piaculo, a sacrifice, and all other things
that are done and given for the purging and satisfaction of some grievous sin
and offense. Also a heinous offense by some satisfaction to be purged. Piadena,
a dish, a platter, a charger. Piadire, disco, dito, to plead, to sue, to law,
to contend in law. Piadito, pleaded, sued, lawed, contended in law. Piado, a
plea, a pleading, a suit, a process. Piadoso, litigious, pleading,
contentious. Also pitiful, ruthful, merciful, just. Piadotto, a kind of
course bread. Piaga, a wound, a sore, a hurt, a plague, an ulcer, a blow, a
beating or a stripe, a cut, or an incision. Also a great loss, hurt,
hinderance, or displeasure, a heavy chance: used also for a clymate, a
country, a region, a coaste, a land or portion of the world. Piagare, to
wound, to plague, to hurt, to torment, to beat, to cut, to mangle or make an
incision with any cutting weapon, to vex, to hinder or cause some great hurt
or hinderance to one. Piaggia, a meadow, a plot of ground, a large open
field. Also the stronde of the sea. Piaggia del mare, the stronde of the sea.
Piaggiare, to reduce into meadows, to walk in the open fields, to coast along
the sea strond. Also to stand still and moon not, to cogge, to foist, to flout
or clawe one injuriously, to consent, sooth up and yield unto. Also to pledge,
to answer or be surety for. Piaggioso, medowie, large, bleach, fieldie. Also
full of plain shores or strondes. Piaggietta, a little meadow or fine open
field. Piagnere, as Piangere. Piagnuto, as Piangiuto. Piagneuole, as
Piangeuole. Piagnesterio, a place of wailing, whining or lamenting. Piagnone, a
whining, crying, weeping fellow, an hypocritical fellow. Pialla, a plane such
as carpenters use to plane timber or boords with. Piallare, to plane, to smooth
or shave boordes, to planish. Piallure, shauings, chips, or planings of timber.
Pia matter, or madre, the caul or filme of the brain. Piamente, devoutly,
godly, dutifully, mercifully, with a^ honest affection. Piana, as Pialla.
Pianare, as Piallare* also to raze or make plain, to planish. Pianca, a
pauement, a seeling, a flooring, a planking, a planke of boordes. Pianella,
Look Pialla. Also a woman's pantofle. Pianellaio, a pantofle or chopinos maker.
Pianellaria, a place where shoes and pantofles are made and sold. Pianelle,
night slippers, chopinos or pantofles. Pianellette, little pantofles, chopinos
or night slippers. Pianeta, Pianetta, a planet or wandering star, of which sort
are rekoned seven, so called because it keeps not always one place under
the firmament, nor is always of one distance from the fixed, but is sometime
higher, and sometime lower, sometimes swifter, and sometimes slower, according to
the particular motion it has in the Zodiac. Taken also for a chance, lot,
destiny, fortune, luck or fate. Pianezza, plainnes, euennes, smoothnes. Also
a down, a plain field, a leueld ground. also a certainty, an appearance or
cleannes of any thing. Pianezza del' anello, the bezell or head of a ring where
the stone is set in. Piangere, piango, piansi, pianto, to weep, to whine, to
cry, to wail, to bewail, to lament, to moan, to sob, to blubber. Piangiuto,
or Pianto, wept, whined, cride, wayled, sobd, etc. Piangimento, a weeping, a
whining, a crying, a wailing or lamenting, a sobbing. Piangeuole, full of
weeping or whining, lamentable, waylefull. Pianger dirottamente, to weep out
right, to cry out amain. Piangolare, to whine and cry as little children do.
Piangolina, a whining puling woman. Piangoloso, mournful, whining, weeping,
puling. Piano, a plain, a field, an even ground, a champaine, a meadow. Also
soft, smooth, plain, manifest, without wrinckles, evident, clear, easy, flat*
apparent. also softly smoothly, quietly, lowly, openly, flatly, easily,
certainly, without doubt, indeed, evidently, plainly, apparently, manifestly,
leisurely. Also a fish called a plaise. Also low, as Parlar piano, cantar
piano, to speak or sing low. Piano piano, soft and fair, fair and softly,
leisurely, very softly and plainly. Piano un poco. soft and fair, stay a
little, not so fast. Pianta, a plant, a root, a stock, a graffe, a set, a
syen, a tree. also a ground, a platform or foundation of any thing, the sole
of the foot. Also among the Anatomists as Pedio. Pianta chese, any plant that
is removed. Pianta de' piedi, the soles of a man's foot, the plant or middle
part of the foot from the first joint of the toes to the instep, being
answerable to the back of the hand. Pianta da cuoio, an herb used to die
black and to tanne leather with called sumach. Pianta di lione, the herb
sauce or our ladies mantle. Also the herb Pate de lion. Piantagine, the weed
or herb called plantaine. Piantagine minore, the herb rib-woort or
lambs-toong. Piantagine aquatica, the herb water plantaine. Piantagione, the
planting, setting or graffing of any thing. Piantanimale, a fish with many
feet. Piantare, to plant, to set, to ground, to settle, to graffe. Also to
cosen, to cheat, to coni-catch, to give one the slip. Piantarsi la in quatro,
to lie down after the plain fashion, to lie abroad. Piantarsi, to stand and
stop still, as some horses that are restie. Piantata, a cheating or
coni-catching trick. Piantatoio, a dible or gardners setting stick. Also a
goldsmiths tool. Piantare lo stendardo nella rocca, to set up ones colors in
the castle. Piantatore, a planter, a setter, a graffer, a setler, a gardner.
Also a cheater, a conicatcher, one that gives others the slip. Pianto, wept,
whined, moaned, cride, wailed, plained. Also a weeping, a whining, a moaning, a
crying, a wailing, a playning, greet. Piantone, a great plant. Also a stake or
a pile driven in the ground. Also a sudden slip. Pianura, a plain field, a
champaine ground, a plain or a downs. Piasire, a plate or leaf of any
metal. Piastra, any kind of plate or leaf of metal, namely a breast plate,
as Plasma. Piastra d'argento, a coin or plate of silver used in Spain.
Piastra di mettallo, a plate or leaf of metal. Piastrella, a little leaf,
plate or blade of metal. Look Piastrelle. Piastrellare, to play at quoits.
Also to slate a house, to quoit. Piastrelle, slates, flat-stones, tiles, sowes
of lead, bars of iron, blades or plates of any thing. Also quoites to play at
quoites with. Also little plasters. Piastrine, as Piastrelle. Also a breast
plate or vant plate. Piata, as Pieta. Piastro, a plaster. Piatano, the platane
or plane tree. Piatanza, a pittance or allowance of meat and drink. Piatire,
as Piadire. Piatitore, a pleader in law. Piato, a plea, a suite in law, a
controversy, a process, a pleading. Also flat, squat, cowred down, hidden,
close to the ground, even, level, just, razed with the ground. Piatosarie, as
Pietosarie. Piatoso, as Pietoso. Also litigious. Piatta, a flat bottom boat or
barge. Piatta forma, a plat form, a ground work or model of a form.
Piategli, little dishes. Also crablice. Piattello, a little dish or platter.
Piatti, all manner of dishes, platters or plates. Piatto, a platter, a dish, a
charger, a plate, a mess or dish of meat. Also the allowance given to any
officer for his mess or board, a course served in at any feast. Also made
flat, razed or level to the ground, hidden, squatted, close, hushed, secret,
lurking, cowring down flat. Piattole, crablice: but namely quoiting stones or
quoits. Piattoli, a kind of fig, so called in Italy. Piattonare, to streeke
flatlin with any weapon. Piattonata, a blow given with the flat side of any
weapon. Piattoncella, a close, sly, crafty, lurking wench. Piattoni, Piatoni,
crablice. Piazza, a market place, the chiefest street or broad way or place in
a town. Also an open court or castle yard, a place or seat of justice. Also a
place, a fort, a hold, a fortress. Also a court in great men's houses where the
people do walk. Piazza di mercanti, a place where merchants meet daily, as the
royal exchange in London or Rialto in Venice. Piazzaro, a common crier or
proclaimer of a town. Piazzeggiare, to walk or frequent the common streets.
Pica, the bird we call a pie, a iaie or a piot. Also the strange lusting and
longing of women. Picardia, the country of Piccardie; but taken in common
speech for hanging or the place where men are hanged. Andar in picardia, to go
to the gallows. Picca, a pike, a spear, a lance or soldiers long staff.
Piccafichi, as Pappafico. Piccare, Look Appiccare or Impiccare. Also to leave
a touch, a loose, a tang or pleasing taste upon the tongue in tasting any thing.
Piccante, well savoring, smacking, brisk, biting upon the tongue as wine does,
relishing somewhat sharp or tarte. Also a tartenes upon the tongue, a tang left
upon the tongue. Piccarello, a wag, a halter-sacke, a knauish boy. Also a little
hammer or clapper hanged at doors to knock with. Picchiare, to knock at a
door. Also to beat, to bang, to streeke, to bounce, to thump. Picchiarello, as
Piccarello. Picchiata, a knocking, a beating, a bouncing, a blow. Picchiate,
blows, bouncings, strokes, knocks, bangs, thumps. Picchia petto, a
dissembling, hypocritical puritan. Picchiatoio, a hammer to knock at a door
with, a striker, a knocker, a little bell that begging Friars use to ring and
^^g at doors with. Picchiere, a pike-man, a lance-man. Picchij, great iron
hammers, sledges, mattockes or crows. Picchio, an iron hammer, a sledge, a
beetle, a mattock. also a bird called a wood-hacker, a wood-wall or a
wood-pecker. Also a knock, a stroke, a thump. Picchione, a great hammer, a
sledge, a beetle or mattocke, a stone cutters pick. Also a kind of coin.
Picchio verde, a bird called a green peake. Piccia ferro, a bird called a
wood-pecker. Picciare, to knock, to bounce at a door, to pinche, to itch.
Also to kindle fire, to smart. Picciare, to pinch, to snip. Also to itch or
smart. Piccicatura, a pinching, a snip, a pinche, a smarting, an itching.
Piccico, as Piccicatura. Piccichetto, a glouers tool. Piccicotto, as much of
any powder or any thing else as a man may take up between the thumb and the
forefinger. Piccigare, as Piccicare. Piccin, Piccino, very little, slender or
small. Piccinino, as Piccin. Piccio, as Picchio. Also the bill, beak or snout
of any bird. Picciocolo, the stem or stalk of any fruit. Picciolare, to
turn or twirle a top or gig about as children. Also to make little. Picciole,
a kind of praunes or shrimps. Piccioletto, very little or small. Picciolezza,
littlenes or smalnes. Piccioli, a little kind of coin. Also casting counters.
Picciolino, very little or small. Picciolo, little or small, petty. Also a
stalk of any fruit. Also a top or gig or twirle that children use to play
withal. Piccione, a pigeon, a dove. Also a chicken. Piccirillo, a childs
wastband or swathe. Also a young infant child or babie. Picciuolo, as Picciolo.
Piccolezza, as Picciolezza. Piccolino, as Picciolino. Piccolo, as Picciolo.
Piccone, as Picchione. Piccozzo, as Picchio. Picicth, an herb. Picilla, a
ferriers tool or shauer to pare the hoose of a horse before be sh^^e him.
Picio, a kind of seabreame or ruff. Pico, a kind of menow fish. Pico verde, a
bird called a green peake, wood-peaker or hickway. Picrocoli, choleric men,
so used among physicians. Pidocchiare, to louse or vnlouse one. Pidocchieria,
lousines, niggardlines, ^ichingnes, roguerie, roguishnes, filthiness, wrangling,
dodging, paltring. Pidocchio, a louse. Pidocchioso, lousie. Pidottare, as
Pilottare. Pie, as Piede. Piecora, all manner of sheep, a wether, a mutton.
Piecoraio, a shepherd. Piede, a foot, a base, a footstall or foundation of
any thing. Pide d'asino, the weed sauce alone or jack of the hedge. Piede di
colomba, the herb doves foot or cranes bill. Piedestallo, a footstall or a
treshall of a door. Piede di lepre, the herb hares foot. Pie di ceruo, an
herb called in latin Polynathemum. Pie di gallo, a kind of herb. Pie di
gatto, a kind of horse bit that some riders use for some kind of horses made
like a cats foot. Piega, a fold, a plait, an enfolding, a bending, a bowing, a
stooping, a yielding, a wrinkling, a wrinkle. Piegabile, as Piegheuole.
Piegamento, as Piega. Piegare, to bend, to wrye, to fold, to plie, to plaite,
to bow, to incline, to stoop, to yield. Also to appease, to mollify, to alay,
to assuage, to draw which way one list. Piegaria, Piegatura, as Piega.
Piegatoie, a pair of benders that goldsmithes use called bowing pincers or
plyers. Piegheuole, bowing, bending, folding, wrying, plying, inclining,
stooping, yielding, stoping, easy, tractable, flexible, limber, pliable.
Pieggiare, to pledge, to paune, to bail, to be surety for. Pieggieria, a
pledge, a bail, a surety, a maine prize. Also suretiship. Piego, as Plico, an
enfolding. Piegora, a sheep, a mutton. Piegoraio, a shepherd. Piena, a tide,
a full tide, a flow, a flood. Also full or filled. Also a fulness. Pienamente,
fully, thoroughly, wholly, completely. Pienezza, fulness, store, plenty. Pieno,
full, ample, large, whole, perfect. Also wealthy, full of goods, abundant,
well furnished, stored, rich, plentious, gorged, stuffed. Also a pudding or
farcing in any meat. Piercia, ods, uneven. Pierla, as Perla. Pieta, the duty,
honesty, conscience, and good affection and dealing that is due by every
Christian first unto God, and afterward to our parents, father and mother,
children, kinsfolks, etc. Also devotion, godliness, godly affection, piety,
righteousness. Also natural and reverent love, natural affection or zeal,
reverence, remorse, conscience, pity, ruth, mercy, compassion, commiseration
or compunction of another harm. Pieta, as Piega. Pietanza, large or
bountiful alms. Also a pittance. Also as Pieta. Pietosarie, pitiful or
mournful conditions. Pietoso, pitiful, merciful, ruthful, compassionate,
natural and loving. Pietra, any kind of stone. Pietra d'arotare, a whet-stone,
a grinding stone. Pietra da oglio, a whet-stone. Pietra colombina, a kind of
stone good to make lime with. Pietra cotta, any kind of baked stones, namely
brickes. Pietra de gli indi, gold according to the Alchimists phrase. Pietra
focaia, a flint stone or any stone that will strike fire. Pietra pomega, a
pumice stone. Pietranelli, soldiers serving on horseback well armed with a
pair of cuirasses and weaponed with a fire-locke-piece, or a snaphance or a
petronell. Pietraria, a quarie of stone, a mazons shop, all manner of stone
work. Pietraro, a lapidarie, a digger, a cutter, a worker or seller of stones.
Pietra spugna, a kind of stones found in spunges, which broken small and drunk
breaks the stone in the bladder. Pietricina, a little stone. Pietronello, a
petronell. Pietroso, stony, rugged, grettie, full of stones. Pietruccia, a
little or small stone. Pieua, a vicarage, a curatship or parsonage. Pieuale,
Pieuiale, a church-vestment or coape or a bishops rotchet. Piezzaria, as
Pieggiaria. Piezzo, Piezo, a surety, a bail, a paune, a pledge. Pifara,
Piffara, a flute, a pipe, a fife, a recorder, a bag pipe. Pifarata, Piffarata,
a fit of mirth. Pifaro, Piffaro, a musition that plays upon any wind
instrument. Pifero, Piffero, as Pifaro. Piferoni, Pifferoni, all manner of great
wind instruments. Also musitions. Pigamo, bastard Rewbarb. Pigargo, a beast
like a row-bucke. Also a bird. Some take it to be the hearn^, and some a kind
of hawk having a white tail; other some take it to be the eagle or faulkon of
the second kind. It does keep much in towns and fields. Pigazzo, the name of
a tool that turners use. Piggiorare, as Peggiorare. Piggiore, as Peggiore.
Pigionare, to rent or farm house or land. Pigionaro, a renter or a farmer of
house or land. Pigione, a dove or a pigeon. Also rent for house or land. Also
as Pigone. Pigista, one that uses buggerie. Piglia mosche, a fly catcher.
Piglia pesci, a fisher, a fish taker. Piglia sorgij, a rat-catcher. Piglia
vccelli, a bird-catcher, a fowler. Pigliare, to take, to catch, to snatch, to
surprise, to receive. Pigliare alcuno, to take or catch any body. Pigliare ad
imprestito, to borrow, to take to loan. Pigliare a credito, to take up on
credit or trust. Pigliare a fitto, to take to farm or rent. Pigliare a
vettura, to hire by the day or at liuerie. Pigliare alla riuersa, to take in a
contrary sense. Pigliare ad onta, to take in scorn or as an injury. Pigliare
ombra, to take snuff or pepper in the nose. to mistrust. Pigliare ad
interesse, to take up at interest. Pigliare animo, to take courage or heart.
Pigliare la punta, used for wine to loose his force and virtue. Pigliare
partito, to take a resolution. Pigliarla conqualcuno, to take or pick a
quarrel with any body. Pigliare querela, to take or pick a quarrel.
Pigliare porto, to take or come to a haven. Pigliare per il verso, to take the
right way or true biase. Pigliare amore, to conceive or set love to any thing.
Pigliare marroni, to gad, roaue or wander up and down idly. Pigliare il
legno, to go to the wood, id est, to take the diet drink for the pox. Piglia
piglia, a hue and cry, take and hold, catch and take. Pigliatore, a taker, a
catcher. Piglio, a look of the eye. Also a taking or snatching up. Pigma, a
greek measure of 22. inches. Pigmaico, according to the stature of pigmeys.
Pigmento, the figures and colors, and ornaments of rhetorike. Also guile,
deceit, lies, vain florishes. Also women's paintings, or painters colors.
Pigmeo, a pigmey, a kind of little man like a dwarf, a dandiprat, a twattle,
or an elfe. Some think that they be but a kind of spirits engendered of the
corruption of the earth, even as the Scarab is bread of horses doung. Pigna, a
stoue or a hot house. Also a pineapple. Pignatta, a pitcher, a pipkin, a
posnet, or such earthen pot. Pignattaro, a potter, a pipkin maker. Pignatella,
a little pipkin or earthen pot. Also a pot of wild fire. Pignatto, a kind of
basket. Pignere, pingo, pinsi, pinto, to paint, to devise, to draw out the
form and shape of a thing, to distinct with diverse colors. Also to describe
or set out a matter. Also used for Spingere. Pignetto, a grove or thicket of
pine trees. Pigno, a pineapple tree. Pignocata, a kind of conserve, preserve
or comfets made of pine-apples. Pignolare, to dress hemp or flax upon the
hetch, or hatchell. Pignolo, a hatchell to dress flax or hemp withal. Also a
kind of meat of pine-apples. Pignora, a pawn, a pledge, a maineprise, a
surety, a bail, a morgage, an assurance, a destresse, a destraining.
Pignorare, to pawn, to gage, to pledge, to bail or be surety for, to bind
by assurance, to morgage. Also to seize, to distress or distraine.
Pignoratiuo, bailefull, that may be bailed, pledged, or pawned. Also that which
is laid in pledge, or pertaining to a gage. Also that has a gage, or may
strain and take distress. Pignottare, to sneake and lurk up and down for
good here. Pignottante, a sneaker, or lurker up and down for good cheer, a
smell feast. Pignuoli, a kind of duck or mallard. Pigo, a fish, called in
latin Cyprinus. Pigolare, to croke or cry as a dawe or chough, to waver, to
wave, to twind in and out. Also as Nicchiare. Pigone, as Pigma. Pigozzo, as
Picozzo. Pigritia, sloth, idleness, lazines, slownes, vnlustines, lithernes,
slothfulnes, sluggishnes, dulnes, heaviness, lumpishnes, sweatines. Pigro, slow,
idle, lazy, slothful, lither, sloth, sluggish, loath, long, dull, nothing
quick, heavy, cold, unlusty, as it were unwilling. Pigrone, an idle,
slothful, lazy, lither companion, a slow, sluggish, heavy, unlusty body.
Piissima, most godly, devout, or pious, Look Pieta. Pila, a boat of a
fountain, a sunt in a Church, a waterpot, a lauer. Also a mortar, or flat
sided pillar. Also a dam, arch, or bay, made of plankes, or piles to bear off
the force of the water. Also a ball or round thing. Pilandra, as Palandra. Also
a kind of bird. Pilare, a pain in the breasts or dugs of a woman, caused by
some hair by chance swallowed in drinking, and never cease, till it either
be sucked out, or till it goes out of his own accord. Pilastrelli, little
pillars. Pilastro, any kind of pillar or pilaster. Pilate, a kind of white
stone. Pilati, as Pilone. Also pyled, or vnderpiled with stakes. Pilaturo, a
pair of mulets to pull out hairs with. Pilello, the name of a goldsmiths
tool. Pilla, a pile of wood, a great fire of logs. Also a lime-pit. Pillaia, a
tanners pit. Pillara, a thrush, or blackbird. Pillola, a pill as physicians
give to purge. Pillolare, to make round, or reduce into pills. Pilloso, rugged,
hairie, rough. Pillotto, a kind of small coin. Pilluccare, to pick or pull
out hairs or feathers one by one. Also to molest or vex one, to pick up, to
dodge, to much, to wrangle. Pillucone, a fool, a gull, a sot, a coxe-combe, a
dodger, a wrangler, a micher. Pillula, as Pillola. Pillulare, as Pillolare.
Pilo, a ^unt. Also a bole, or lauer. Also a trough. Also a iauelin or a dart
with a head of steel. Pilone, a great pile, stake, or piece of timber thrust
into the water to build bridges upon. Piloro, the nether orifice or mouth of
the ventricle which transmitteth the meat changed into the entrails, called
otherwise the stomach gut, or mawe gut. Piloso, as Peloso. Pilota, a pilot or
director of a ship. Pilottare, to rib-baste, to bang, or beat one, to fling
any thing at one. Pilotto, a kind of wicker-basket. Pilucare, as Pillucare.
Pilucone, Pilluccone. Pimmei, little men called pigmeis. Pimpinella, the herb
pimpinell, or burnet. Pina, a spire, or sharp steeple, a tower or a turret.
Pinacolo, a pinnacle or spire of a steeple. Pinaro, a grove, or thicket of pine
trees. Pinazza, Pinaccia, a kind of ship called a pinnace. Pinca, a woman's
quaint, or privy parts. Pincellone, as Pinchellone. Pincerna, a butler or
cupbearer to a prince, a fill-cup, one that waits on a man's cup. Pincette,
little pincers. Pinchellone, a chopping boy, a handsome striplin, a pillicock,
a gull, a noddie. Pinchino, a pillicock, a primcock, a prick, a pretty lad, a
gull, a noddie. Pincia, a favorite, a minion, a sweet heart, a pigsneye, a
darling, a dilling, a babe, a beloved. Pincino, as Pincone. Pincione, as
Frenguello. Also a dove or a pigeon. Also a kind of bunne or roll of bread.
Pinco, a prick, a pillicock, a pintle, a dildoe. Pincone, as Pinco. Also a
gull, a fool, or a noddie. Pindatelli, a kind of sparowes in India. Pingere,
as Pignere, or Dipingere. Also as Spingere. Pinello, a fire-forke to stir up
the fire with. Pinetto, a grove or thicket of pine trees. Pinguedine, fat, or
fatnes. Pino, a pineapple tree. Pinna, a shellfish which some call a nakre.
Also a finne of a fish. Also the great or chief feather of a bird. Also the
broad gristle part of the ear, used also for the crest of a helmet. Also
turrets, spires, battlements, or pinnacles of walls. Pinnacolo, a pinnacle of
a tower. Pinnofilace, Pinnotero, a nakre fish. Pinocchiata, a kind of drug or
conset made of pine-apples. Pinocchiati, a kind of banqueting dish or comfets.
Pinocchij, kernels of pine-apples. Pinta, a thrust, a job, a iustling, a
pinching. Also a measure called a pint. Pinto, painted, drawn. Also thrust
away, or put by. Pintore, a painter, a drawer, a limner. Pintura, a painting,
or a picture. Pinza, a tarte, a white-pot, or a cake. Pinzerna, as Pincerna.
Pinzo, glutted, or full gorged. Pinzoccherare, to play the hypocritical
puritan friar. Pinzocchero, a friar of the third order of Saint Francis, a
dissembling hypocrite. Also a kind of figs so called. Pinzone, as Pincione.
Pinzotta, a dissembling hypocritical woman. Pinzuto, stalking aloft. Also long
and sharp. Pio, godly, devout, religious, honest, upright, righteous,
merciful, gentle, benign, good, just. Piodare, to slate or tile a house with
slate or flat stones. Piode, slate stones, or such other flat stones to slate
houses with. Pioggia, a shower of rain, a rain. Pioggiale, rainish, showring,
moist, wet, drizling. Piola, as Pialla. Piolare, as Piallare. Pioletta, as
Pianella. Piolaro, a playner or shauer of boords. Piombaggio, a kind of stone
of the color of brass. Also lead ore or earth, wherein is both silver and
lead together. Also a mine or vein of lead and silver. Also the herb called
Leadewoort. Piombare, to throw, to hurl, to fling or cast with violence, to
fall heavily as a plummet of lead. Also to lead or cover with lead, to
solder or fasten with lead. Also to level or measure with a plummet or a
ruler. Also to sound any depth. Piombaro, a plummer, or merchant of lead.
Piombaruola, a plummet of lead. Piombata, a plummet of lead, a leading, a
terrace of leads. Piombatore, a plummer, a leader, a caster. Also a violent
flinger, a hurler, a sounder of any depth, a plummeter. Piombatura, a soldring,
a leading, a fastening or covering with lead. Piombello, a play that children
use with a plummet of lead tide to a thread, and so seek to catch it at the
end of a stick that is hollow. Piombino, a plummet of lead or level as
carpenters use. Also a seal or stamp of lead set to any merchandise. Also
leaden, of lead, of the color of lead. Also a bird called a kingsfisher.
Some take it for a dobchickin. Also blunt, dull, lumpish, heavy, or blockish.
Piombo, the metal called lead. Some have taken it for a certain disease in
the eye. Piomboso, leadie, full of lead. Also heavy, dull, course, leaden
minded, lumpish, blunt. Pioppo, a poplar tree. Piorno, lowering, duskie,
gloomie, foggie weather. Piota, a green turfe or clod of earth with grass
upon it, a kind of roch fish. Piottolare, to play or cast at quoites.
Piottole, quoites to play withal. Pioua, as Pioggia. Piouaiuolo, rainish,
waterish, shourish, drizling. Piouaiuoli giorni, raynie, wet days. Piouale, a
church-coape, or priests garment. Piouana, rayne-water. Piouano, a vicar, a
curate, a parson, a country priest, a sir John lack-latine. Piouego, the name
of a magistrate in Venice. Piouelicare, to drizle, to mizle, or rain smallie.
Piouere, piouo, piouei, piouuto, to rain, or shower down. Piouuto, rayned,
showred, drizled. Piouiale, raynie, drizling, showring, mizling, moist.
Piouetta, a small drizling shower of rain. Piouoso, raynie, showrie, wettish.
Pipa, the pip of a hen. Pipare, to cackle or clock as a hen, to pip, to pule as
a hawke. Pipata, the cackling or pipping of a hen, a pip, a puling of a hawke,
a child's babie, or puppet. Piperna, the herb pepperwort, or cockweede.
Pipillare, to chirp as a sparow, to squeake as a peacock. Pipione, a pigeon, or
a dove. Pipioncello, a young pigeon or dove. Pipire, pipisco, pipito, to peep
as a chickin. Pipistrello, a night-bat, or rearemouse. Pipira, as Pira. Pipita,
the pip that chickins have. Pipitula, the skin growing at the fingers ends
about the nail, called of some the wortwales, or liuereages. Pippa, a kind of
measure of liquid things. Pippionata, as Fagiolata. Pippione, as Corribo. Also
a pigeon, a dove. Pira, a pile of wood made for the burning of dead men.
Pirale, as Pirausta. Pirama, a kind of rosin dropping from the tree Merodion.
Piramidale, Piramidato, made steeple-wise, broad beneath, and sharp toward the
top. Piramide, a piramide, or steeple, broad at the low end and narrow at the
upper end, any great building of stone or other matter, broad or fouresquare
beneath, and upward small and sharp. Also a geometrical body, broad beneath
and sharp above, with a right lined bottom. Pirata, a pirate or roauer by sea,
a thief, a robber. Piratare, to rob by sea, to commit piracie, to be a rouer
by sea. Piratia, Piratica, piracie or robbing by sea, rouing and stealing by
sea. Pirausta, a fire-flye or worm bred and living in the fire, and going from
it dies, and flies into the leame of a candle: some call it a candle-flie, a
stout, a miller-fowle, or bishop. Piretro, the herb pellitorie or
sneesing-woort. Pirgo, a company of horsemen in battle, containing forty
soldiers. Piria, a tunnell to put liquor into any vessel with. Also the
hopper of a mill. Piriolo, a cock of a conduit. Also a spigot, or a tap for a
barrel, or a forcehead, such as Vintners use. Pirite, a kind of marcasite or
fier-stone which being rubbed will burn ones finger. Pirla, a top or a gigge.
Also a twirle, as Piriolo. Pirlare, to turn a top or a gigge with a scourge,
to twirle round. Pirlo, as Pirla. Also a kind of childs play used in Italy.
Piro, a pear, or a pear tree. Pirois, the star of Mars. Also one of the
horses of the Sun. Pirola, the herb piroll, or winter green. Pirolo, a
winding stopple of a flagon. Also a pin or a peg for an instrument of music.
Also a play called nine pinnes or skailes. Also a top or gigge to play withal.
Also a kind of beast. Piromante, a deuiner or foreteller by fire. Piromantia,
divination by fire. Pirone, a forke of silver wherewith they eat meat in
Italy. Also the name of one of the wheels of a clock. Piropo, a precious
stone called a carbuncle. Pirotecnia, all manner of fierworks. Pirotico, a
medicine that serves in stead of fire used to restore life in decaide parts, a
caustike. Pirrafarro, spelt corn. Pirrera, a quarie of stones. Pirrica, a
kind of dancing in armor used in Athens. Also a kind of verses or song to
dance by. Pirrico, a foot consisting of two short sillables. It is so called
of nimble moving used in the dance Pirrica. Pirula, the bout or tip of ones
nose. Pirune, as Pirone. Piruolo, as Pirone, as Pirolo. Pisa, a kind of child's
play so called. Piscagione, as Pescagione. Piscare, as Pescare. Piscaria, as
Pescaria. Piscatore, as Pescatore. Pisceuendolo, as Pesciuendolo. Pisciare, to
piss, to stale, to urine, or make water. Piscianza, stale, piss, or urine.
Pisciatoio, a pissing-place, a pissing-conduit. Also a pis-pot. Pisciaruola, a
burnt prick, an inflammation in the priuities. Pisciauino, a drunkard, a
quaffer, a haunter of tauernes, a piss-wine. Piscina, a pissing-place, a
pissing-conduit, a poole, a pond, a lake. Also a piskitchin wench. Piscio, any
kind of piss, urine, or stale. Pisciotta, a piskitchin, a flurting wench.
Pisciotto, as Piscina. Pisciozza, as Pisciotta. Pise, false dice, high men or
low men. Piselli, all manner of small peason. Pisellone, a round shapelesse
thing, a dunce, a gull, a noddie. Pisera, a pair of balance or skales to
weigh with. Pisistrello, a kind of fish. Also a nightbat or reare-mouse.
Pisitare, to chirpe as a stare, a thrush or a sparrow. Piso, as Peso. Pisolare,
to slumber or be drowsy. Pisolone, a slumbrer, a drowsy leaden companion.
Pispigliare, as Bisbigliare. Pispiglio, as Bisbiglio. Pispissa, a wag-taile.
Pispinelli, gushings, spinnings or streamings out as blood does out of a vein.
Also a kind of bird. Pispola, a little bird. Some take it for the wren.
Pissacaro, a wood-cocke. Some take it for a snite. Pisso epasso, a kind of
child's play used in Italy. Pisside, a box, namely made of boxewood. Also the
hollownes whereon the huckle bone turns. Pista, as Pesta. Pistacchiade, a
kind of conserve or comfets made of pistaches. Pistacchio, as Pestacchio.
Pistare, as Pestare. Pistello, as Pestello. Pisterna, a bustard. Pistico, a
kind of fish. Pistola, a dag or pistol. Pistola, an epistle, a pistle, a
letter. Pistolenza, as Pestilenza. Pistolese, a great dagger, a wood-knife.
Pistoletta, a little short epistle or letter. Pistoliere, a pistolier, one that
shootes in a dag or a pistol. Also as Pietranelli, but weaponed with a
pistol. Pistone, as Pestello. Pistore, a baker of bread. Pistredo, a kind of
very long fish. Pistrello, a night bat, a rear mouse. Pistrina, a bake-house,
a mill, a grinding house, a place where before mils were invented men used to
braie their corn in morters, which because of the intolerable pains they used
as a prison to punish their bondmen and slaves among the Romans: the wheel in
Bridewell may well be called so. Pistrinaro, a miller or white baker. Pistrino,
a white bakers shop or workehouse. Also a hand-mill or grinding house.
Pitaphio, an epitaph upon ones death. Pitalamio, a kind of marriage song.
Pitale, a close stool, the pan or pot of a close stool. Pitania, a kind of
red fruit in India. Pitarusa, a kind of berrie or grain. Pitero, an earthen
pot or potsheard or pitchard. Piteta, or Pitheta, a comet or fiery impression
in the firmament, appearing in a mist like a tun. Pithone, as Pitone.
Pithonici, as Pitonici. Pitigio, a tetter, a ring worm or an itch. Also a
horn in a horse leg near the inside of the knee. Pitignone, as Petignone.
Pitimia, as Pitigio. Pithij giuochi, certain games in honor of Apollo among
the Grecians. Pitoccare, to beg up and down for broken meat, to dodge about a
matter. Pitoccheria, beggerie, poverty. Pitocchiare, as Pitoccare. Pitocchio,
a dodger, a micher, a beggar. Pitocco, as Pitocchio. Pitome, an epithome or
abreuiation of any discourse. Pitone, a kind of great serpent. Also a
prophesying spirit. Pitonici, such as prophecy and tell things to come by some
devilish spirit that is in them. Pitrimo, an executor, an administrator, an
assign of ones will. Pitta, a cake, a tarte, a whitepot. Pittaro, a kind of
earthen pot or pitcher, a gallie pot. Also a menow fish. Pitteloni, crablice.
Pittime, pittimes, a kind of physic so called. Pitto, painted, drawn in
colors. Pittore, a painter, a drawer, a limner, a colourer. Pittura, a picture
or painting. Also the art of painting. Pituita, phlegm or a rheum. Also
sniuell, a running matter out of sores. Also a watrie disease in trees.
Pituitaria, an herb called Stanes-acre, that dries the rheumes in the mouth.
Pituoso, flegmatike, rheumatike, sniuely, slimie. Piu, more, both in quantity
and quality, in space and time, in weight, number, and measure, many, diverse,
sundry, above. Also better. Also a long or longer time. Piu e Piu, more and
more. Piu d'una volta, more then once. Piu in la, further, beyond. Piu in qua,
more on this side, nearer. Piu o meno, more or less. Piu tosto, sooner,
rather, lever. Piu volte, many, sundry, diverse or more times: Piua, a pipe, a
bag-pipe. Also taken for a man's priuities. Also a kind of butterfly or of the
color of a butterfly. Also a bird called a piot or a pie. Piua sorda, a
sourdine put in a trumpet, to still the shrilnes of it. Piuaro, as Piuero.
Piue, used for Piu. Piuero, a kind of bird called a plouer. Piuiero, as Piuero.
Piuma, a quill, a pen, a feather. Also down or feathers for beds. Piumacetto,
a little bolster, a pillow. Piumacciaro, an vpholster, a featherbed maker. Also
a feather maker. Piumaccio, a bolster or a pillow. Piumacciolo, a little bolster
or pillow of a saddle. Piumacciuoli. Look Fare chiomazz^oli. Piumacchio, as
Piumaccio. Piumare, to begin to have feathers. Also to feather or plume.
Piumato, feathered, having feathers, plumed. Piumazzaro, as Piumacciaro.
Piumazzo, as Piumaccio. Piumeo, of a feather, plumish, fetherie. Also down or
full of down. Piumetta, a little feather, quill or pen. Also a counterpoint or
quilt for a bed. Piumigero, that bears feathers. Piumipiedi, rough footed
with feathers, that has feathers on his feet. Piumoso, full of feathers or
plumes. Piuiale, coapes or church vestments. Piuina, a feather. Also a feather
bed. Piuiolo, a man's prick or yard, a pillicocke or dildoe, a pin or peg of
wood, a setting or poaking stick to set ruffes with Also a gardners tool to
set herbs with called a dibble. Piuolo, as Piuiolo. Pizza, an itch, a tetter,
an itching, a scurf, a skald-head, a ring-worme. Also a kind of cake or
simnell or wafer. Pizzacagnolo, a retailer, a regrater or huckster of all manner
of victuals as our chandlers be or our fruterers. Pizzamosche, a hedg-sparrow.
Pizzare, as Picciare. Pizzaruolo, as Pizzacagnolo. Pizzacaruolo, as
Pizzacagnolo. Pizzelo, a kind of pulse as our peason or hastings be. Pizzetta,
a joint in the midst of a part or vpset of a bit which our riders commonly
call a piece or compartement, whereat the plaiers in the midst of the port are
fastened. Pizzicagnolo, Pizzicaruolo, as Pizzacagnolo. Pizzicaiuolo, as
Pizzacagnolo. Pizzica questioni, as Accatta brighe. Pizzicare, to pluck, to
rend, to pinche, to twing, to carpe, to tant, to rail, to snip, to bite, to
detract, to deprave, to wrangle, to hucke, to itch, to claw, to smart, to
tetter, to burn, to ache. Pizzicata, a plucking, a rending, a pinching, a
twinging, a carping, a tanting, a railing, a snipping, a biting, a detracting,
a deprauing, a wra^gling, a hucking an itching, a clawing, a smarting, a
tettering, a burning, an aching, a twitching. Also a clot, a cluster or clotter
of any thing, a kind of banqueting dish of paste pinched and fretted about, as
tartes and custards be. Pizzico, as Pizzicuore. Pizzicuore, a griping, a
smarting, a pinching or gnawing at the heart, an itching or pinching.
Pizzigamorti, a burier of the dead, such as carry dead men to be buried.
Pizzigotto, a pinch, a pinching, a snip or griping, a biting. Also a smarting.
Also a handful. Pizzo, a peake or tip of any thing. Pizzocchera, a poor
dissembling hypocritical woman. Pizzocchero, as Pinzocchero. Pizzocolo, a lone
man, a single man, a batcheler, an unmarried man. Also as Pinzochero. Pizzoni,
pigeons or doves. Pizzopazzo, a kind of boys play in Italy. Placabile,
gentle, mild, tractable, flexible, soon qualified, that may be appeased,
placable. Placabilita, gentleness, mildnes, asswaging, appeasing, flexiblenes,
calmnes, when a body is easy to be appeased or pacifide. Placamento, an
appeasing, an asswaging, a qualification, a calming. Placare, to appease, to
assuage, to calm, to molifie, to pacify, to quiet, to content, to reconcile,
to tame, to make calm, mild or gentle, to alay. Placidamente, pleasantly,
mildly, gently, quietly, tractablie, calmely, softly, patiently, without noise
or trouble. Placido, calm, pleasant, mild, gentle, tractable, patient, quiet,
still, amiable, running quietly as a still water, blowing softly as a gentle
wind, without trouble or noise, tame, favorable. Placitare, to please often.
Placito, a firm consent in opinion. Plaga, as Piaga, as Piaggia. Some take it
for the meridian line. Plagoso, full of wounds or hurts, plaguie. Also a
beater, one that beats much. Plana, a plaise fish. Plango, a kind of kite or
such ravenous bird. Planiloquio, that speaks his mind plainly, boldly, and
freely. Planimetria, measuring of land in length and breadth or level.
Planipedia, a comedy where the players are simply arraide and barefooted.
Planipedio, that goes barefoote or without shoes. Also a flat whole foot as
water foul have. Planispherio, an astrolabe, a plain sphere, the sphere
cast into a plain. Plasma, a kind of coin or plate of silver in Spain. Also
as Prassina. Plastica, the art of plaistring or working or pargetting in
earth. Platanista, a fish in the river Ganges having a snout like a Dolphin,
but is much bigger. Platano, the platane or plane tree. Platea, a kind of bird
that is an enemy to the raven. Platiasmo, a certain incongruitie in speech.
Platicerote, a certain beast that is armed with a great broad horn. Plaudere,
plaudo, plausi, plauduto, to applaude, to consent, to yield unto, to rejoice,
to clap our hands together for joy, to rejoice with countenance, to clap, to
clutter, to chuckle. Also with claping the hands to encourage or show that they
do allow and praise one. Used also to flatter, to sooth up or seek to please
one. Plauduto, Plauso, applauded, consented, yielded unto, reioiced. Look
Plaudere. Plausibile, plausible, that may or will be applauded, acceptable, a
thing that men do rejoice at, or wherefore men do receive praise. Plausiuo, as
Plausibile. Plausitare, to wail or lament or mourn, or cry as a dove or a
wood-culuer. Plauso, as Plauduto. Also a clapping of hands in sign of
reioicing, a shouting, an allowing of a thing with praise. Plaustro, a cart, a
wane, a wagon, a tumbrel, a dung cart. Also taken for Charles wain nigh the
north pole. Plauto, he that is flat or splaie-footed, or that goes flat with
his feet, as if they were made of a piece of board. Used also for one that
has broad ears. Plebaccia, the filthy, common, base, rascal kind of people.
Plebe, the common kind of base people, the meaner sort, the multitude or route,
the many headed monster multitude. Plebea, Plebeio, of, or pertaining to the
common base people. Also one of the comminaltie, poor, base, mean, simple,
homely, of little value, of the common sort, of small account or estimation.
Plebicciuola, the poor base abject, or silly kind of people. Plebiscito, a
decree, a law, an ordinance or statute made only by the consent of the common
people without the senate. Plebita, baseness, ignobilitie, mean or obscure
estate. Pleco, Plecho, the space between the groynes and the thighs. Pleiade,
the seven stars about the bull. Plenaria, plenarie, full, absolute, whole,
total. Plenilunio, the fulness of the moon. Plenitudine, fulness, amplenes,
plenitude. Plethora, Pletora, a headache caused of equal abundance of the
four humors of the body. Also taken for a fulness or abundance of good humors
in the body, a plenitude. Plethorico corpo, a body over full of good blood or
good juice. Pletro, a fidling stick, a bow, a stick or quill to play upon
any instrument of music. Also a greek measure of a pace, a step, or six
foot, or four cubits: yet some think that it should be a 100. foot or 60.
cubits, some would have it to be all one with Giugere. Also a spur of brass
set upon a fighting cock. Also two processes breaking forth from the
foundations of the bones of the temples, which are very small, long, and hard.
Pletro dello coscia, the hollownes of the huckle or hip bone. Pleura, a thin
and smooth skin which closes the ribs on the inner side. Pleuritico, one that
has or is subject to the pleurisy. Pleurisi, Pleurisia, or Pleuritisia, the
pleurisy, which is an inward inflammation of the upper skin girding the ribs
and the sides, shooting and pricking with a continual fever and shortness of
breath. Plicare, as Piegare. Plichetto, a little packet, role, bundle or boult.
Plico, a packet or plike of letters, a fardle, a bundle, a boult, a role. Also
as Piega. Plinterie, certain holli-daies among the Athenians dedicated to
Ceres. Plocitare, to croke or cry as a raven. Plocitamento, the croking or
crying of a raven. Ploia, as Pioggia. Plombata, a pellet of lead with iron
pricks used as an engine or weapon in war. Plombeo, leadish, leaden, of
lead, leaden colored. Also dull, lumpish or heavy. Plorare, as Piagnere.
Plurale, that contains many, plural. Pluralita, a plurality, a morenes.
Plurality, pluralities, a morenes. Pluteo, a kind of warlike engine made of
boardes like a penthouse, and covered with haire-cloth and rawe-hides, under
which the soldiers marched when they approached near the walls of any town or
forte to besiege it, which kept them from stones, darts, arrows, or wildefire
that was cast at them. It has also been used for a press, a hutch, or other
fit place to keep any thing in. Also a place or distance between pillars.
Also a wooden frame to set tables upon. Pluuiale, rainie, showrie, wet, moist,
drisling. Also a cope or church vestment. Pluuieri, the birds we call plouers.
Pluuioso, as Pluuiale, as Pioggioso. Pneuma, a spirit, a wind, a blowing, an
inspiration. Pneumatomfoli, they which by wind or inflation in the belly have
their navel thrust out. Pnigite, a kind of black claie or earth. Pnosi, a
disease coming in the eyes. Po, Puo, may, can, or is able. Also an
interiection of swearing putting any thing to it, as. Po farche, an oath of
swearing, as gods me, and may it be? Po, a little, as Poco. Poauola, a childs
babie to play withal. Pocaggine, as Dapocaggine. Poccia, a teat, a pappe, a
dugge, a nipple. Pocciare, to suck a teate, to teat a dugge. Poccietta, a
little dugge or teat. Pocenio, a banquet after supper, a rear supper.
Pochetto, a little, a very little, a little while. Pochetino, a very very
little. Pochi, few, not many. Pochino, as Pochetto. Poco, a little, a small
quantity, a little while. Pocolino, as Pochetto. Poco a poco, by little and
little, by line and leisure. Poco poco, very very little. Poco dapoi, a little
while after. Poco fa, a little while ago, not long since, whilome. Poco stante,
in a small while, shortly, not long since. Poco auanti, a little while before.
Podagra, the sickness called the gout in the feet, and as some think it is the
gravel that gathers in the ioints whereby the gout is caused. Podagroso,
goutie in the feet. Podare, as Potare. Podargo, the name of a dog as we would
say swift-foot, or make-speede. Podatore, as Potatore. Podere, a farm, a
living in the country, a freehold. Also a copy hold, a husbandmans living.
Also power, might, puissance, strength, ability, worth or wealth. Poderetto,
a little farm, living, copie-holde freeholde or cottage. Also small power or
might. Poderoso, strong, mighty, sturdie, powrefull, puissant, stout, able,
wealthy, boistrous. Podesta, a potestate, a mayor, a portrieue a justice, a
shrieue, a burgamaister, a governor, a great officer or magistrate, a provost.
Also power, authority, might, puissance, or jurisdiction, ability, strength,
office, rule, government, dominion, faculty, force, virtue, liberty, free
choice, permission, leave, sufferance or opportunity. Podestaria, the office
or precinct of a potestate, a mayor or a shrieue. Also a mayors house, a
guildhall. Podesteria, as Podestaria. Podice, the arse or fundament. Podomani,
to morrow next. Poema, a poem, a composition or Poets work or invention, a
work in verse or rhyme. Poesia, poetry, poesy, a poets work. Poeta, a poet,
a writer in verse, one that writes of diverse matters in verse. Poetaggine,
poetishnes, riming. Poetana, as Poetessa. Poetare, to poetise, to write
poetry, to exercise poetry, to make verses. Poeteggiare, as Poetare.
Poetessa, a poetesse, a woman poet or rymer, she that can make verses. Poetica,
the art of poetry, poetry, the science to make verse. Poetico, poetical,
like a poet, pertaining to poetry. Poggia, the sheet or cable that ties the
maine yard of a ship, on the right hand of a ship. Poggia piedi, a rowers
stretcher, any thing to set ones feet against, a footestoole. Poggiare, to
soar up as a hawk, to ascend up, to lean, or poise upon. Poggio, a hill or
mounting side of a hill, a block to get up on horseback. Poggiolo, Poggiuolo,
a hillocke, a little hill. Also a turret. Also an outbutting high window, a
little ascent or climbing place. Poggietto, as Poggiolo. Poglio, Look Molino
da Poglio. Pogniamo, let us presuppose, or put case, let us put or set. Poiana,
a bird which some take to be the bittour, and others for a kite, a glade or
puttocke. Poi, after, then, than, since, afterward. Poi che, since, since that,
after that, now that. Poi da che, as Poi che. Poina, a kind of fresh cheese
and cream. Pola, a bird like to a swallow called a martin. Some take it to be
a dawe or a chough. Polami, all manner of foul or poultrie. Polanda, a
shellfish in form like a horn. Polana, a kind of course woollen cloth.
Polandra, as Palandra. Polare circolo, that circle that is described by the
pole of the zodiake being carried about the pole of the world. Polare, a kind
of woollen stuff as buffin, mockadowe, durance, or rash. Also of or pertaining
to the poles. Look Circolo Polare. Polastraro, a poultrer. Polastrelli, young
chicks or chickens. Polastriera, a woman poultrer. Also taken for a baude.
Polastreria, a poultrie, where poultrie is to be sold. Polastro, a pullet, a
chicke, a chickin. Polcella, a maiden, a virgin, a girl. Polcello, a young lad,
a batcheler, a virgin boy. Polcino, a chick, a chickin. Also a flea. Poledra, a
mare-colt. Poledrino, a horse-colt, or a fillie. Poledro, a horse-colt.
Poledruccio, a young colt, or fillie. Polegnia, a blazing star, with a long
streaming or beam before it, like a beard Polemonia, the herb wild sage.
Some take it for horse-mint. Polenta, a meat used in Italy made of barlie or
chestnut flower soked in water, and then fride in oil or butter. Poletto, a
kind of butterflye. Polezzuolo, the herb called pudding-grasse, or
pennyriall. Poliantho, the herb gould-cup, golden knap, butter-flowre, or
batchelers buttons. Policanto, starre-thistle or caltrop. Policare, a thumb of
a man's hand. Poligrammo, a precious stone like a Smaragde. Policata, an inche,
the breadth of a thumb. Police, a thumb, a great toe. Also an inch measure.
Polidoria, magnificence or liberality. Poligala, the herb milkewort, or
frank, or spurie. Poligamia, the having of more wives then one. Poligonato,
the herb called Salomons seal, or whitewort. Poligonio, swine-grasse, or
knot-grasse, or bloud-woort. Poligono, that has many corners. Polihistro, he
that knows much or many things. Polinemone, wild sauorie or origane. Polino,
a flea, louse or worm that breeds upon hawks. Polion, an herb called Poley,
whose leaves in the morning are white, at noone purple, and at night green.
Poliorcete, a destroyer of cities. So was Demetrius called. Polipo, a fish
called pourcontrell, or many feet. Also a disease called noli me tangere,
which comes in the nose, breeding a piece of flesh that often stifleth the
nose, and stops the wind of it. Polipodio, the herb called polipodie,
oke-ferne, wall-ferne, or mosse-ferne. Poliposo, he that has the disease
Polipo. Poliptoto, a noune that has many cases. Polire, lisco, lito, to
polish, to trim up, to beawtifie, to burnish, to cleanse, to rub, to skoure, to
smooth, to plane, to make neat and fine, to neatifie, to garnish, to deck, to
make smooth and bright, to skoure or make clean. Polito, polished, trimmed up,
beawtified, neatifide, burnished, cleansed, rubbed, skoured, smoothed, planed,
garnished, decked, or made neat, bright, and fine. Also neat, fine, smug,
smirke, handsome, trim, spruse, gallant, trixie, pretty. Also eloquent,
exquisite. Polisa, as Poliza. Politamente, neatelie, finely, cleanely, smuglie,
smoothly, polishedlie. Politello, somewhat neat, fine, smug, trim, handsome,
or cleanly. Politezza, neatenes, cleanlines, polishednes, finenes. Politia,
policy, politic or civil government, the governance and rule or policy of a
town or commonwealth, a politic regiment. Politica, a book written of
policy, or touching the civil government of a state. Politico, politic. Also
a politician, one that has good understanding, or that deals in the
governance or rule of a common wealth. civil, a statesman. Also pertaining to
a political or civil government. Politura, a polishing. Poliza, Polisa, a
schedule, a bill, a note, a writing, a remembrance, a bond, an inventory, an
obligation. Polizetta, a little schedule, note, bill, or memorial in writing,
a ticket. Polizono, a kind of precious stone with many black circles in it.
Polla, a henne-pullet, a spring of water, a vain of water, a spout, or gushing
of waters. Pollaio, Pollaro, a hens roost, a capons coope or pen. Also a
poultrer. Pollaiuolo, Pollaruolo, a poultrer. Pollami, all manner of poultrie
ware or foul. Pollastraro, a poultrer. Pollastrelli, young chickins, or
pullets. Pollastriera, a woman poultrer. Also taken for a bawd or chickin
carier. Pollastrini, very young chickins or chicks. Pollastreria, a poultrie, or
place where poultrie is to be sold. Pollastro, a pullet, a chick, a chickin.
Polle, drops, or droppings, trillings. Polledra, a mare-colt. Polledrino, a
young colt, or fillie. Polledro, a horse-colt. Pollena, a kind of pan or
pot-pudding. Pollentia, might, puissance, power. Pollera, a coope or roost for
poultrie. Pollero, any kind of young colt. Polli, chickens or pullets.
Pollicini, young chickens or chicks. Pollire, as Polire. Pollito, as Polito.
Pollitezza, as Politezza. Pollo, a pullet, a chicken, a colt or a fillie. Pollo
pesto, to be at the last gasp, to need a culleis or some cordial thing.
Pollore, a branch, a graffe. Polluro, a bird called a coote. Pollutione, a
pollution, a defiling, a destaining, a corrupting, a soiling. Polluto,
polluted, defiled, distained, dishonested, corrupted, soiled, beraide, filthy.
Polmo, a kind of fish without sense, who when he shows himself betokens
storms to be at hand. Polmonaria, lungwoort, or our ladies wildewoort, or
cowslips of Jerusalem. Polmoncello, as Polmone. Polmone, the lights or lungs of
any creature. Also a disease in a horse called the navel gall. Polmon marino,
as Polmo. Polo, the pole, end, or point of the axeltree, or axetree, whereon
astronomers imagined heaven to be moved, there be two of them, one in the
north, noted by a star called Polo Artico, and another in the south out of
sight called Polo Antartico. It is also taken for heaven, and so used of poets.
Polognia, as Polegnia. Polono, as Morgone. Polpa, the pith or brawne of any
flesh or wood, a piece of meat or flesh closed in muscles without bands: in
wood it is properly that which may be separated or cleft by the grain. Also
the fish Polpo. Polpa della gamba, the pith, the brawne, or flesh, or calfe of
ones legs. Polpa di capone, the white or brawne of a capon. Polpare, to grow
fat, pithie, plum, fleshie, or brawnie, to pampre. Polpastrella delle dita, the
flesh or brawne, or pulpe-top of ones fingers. Polpette, a kind of meat made
of veale called olives of veale. Polpettone delle dita, the brawne or thick
flesh of ones fingers ends. Polpo, a fish called a pourcontrel or many feet,
or cuttle-fish. Polposo, brawnie, pithie, fleshie, plum, or thick in feeling,
full of substance or meat, pampred. Polputo, as Polposo. Polsare, as Pulsare,
to beat, to pant, as the pulses do. Polso, the moving of the arteries called
the pulse, whereby the strength or weakness of the vital power is discerned.
also beating or thumping, or panting. Poltiglia, a morsel, a gobbet, a collop,
a steake, or such brawnie piece of flesh, a pudding pie, a bag pudding. Also
a white pot, or such other kind of meat Also a pultis. Poltrare, as
Poltroneggiare. Poltrire, poltro* poltrito, as Poltroneggiare. Poltreggiare, as
Poltroneggiare. Poltremola, Poltro, a colt or a filly, a varlet, a knave, a
villain, a rascal, a base idle fellow, a coward. Also a bed or a couch.
Poltronaccio, a base coward, a rascal, a lazy villain, lout, rogue, or
knave. Poltronare, as Poltroneggiare. Poltroncione, as Poltronaccio.
Poltroneggiare, to play the coward, varlet, lout, rascal, idle and base
fellow, to loll or wallow in idleness, to lie idly a bed. Poltroneria,
cowardice, knauerie, raskalitie, idleness, dastardize. Poltronesco, cowardish,
knauish, loutish, baselike. Poltroniere, as Poltronesco. Polue, Poluere, all
manner of dust or powder. Poluerare, as Poluerizzare. Poluere da bombarda,
gunpowder. Poluereggiare, as Poluerizzare. Poluerina, small dust or powder,
touch-powder. Poluerino, small dust or powder. Also a dust box. Also a sand or
dun color of a horse. Poluerizzare, to cast dust upon, to besprinkle with
dust, to dust, to bedust, to reduce into dust or powder, to braie or poune to
powder. Polueroso, dustie, full of dust, bedusted. Poluizze, a kind of
swelling or disease in a horse. Polzonetti, the two buttons with hooks at the
ends, which do pass through the branch and hold the water cheine. Polzone, a
cizell, a pouncer. Also as Bolzone. Poma, any kind of apple. Also a woman's
dugge or pap. Pomada, Pomata, a pomado to supple ones lips, lip-salue. Pomaro,
an apple tree, an orchard of apples. Pomato, as Pomellato. Pomega, as Pomice.
Pomellare, to spot or bespeckle as it were with drops of fleabitings.
Pomellato, spotted, bespeckled, pide, daple-graie or fleabitten, the color of
a horse. Pomelle, the berries of any tree, as of baies. Also the head of a pin
or little pomell of a dagger. Pomettato, as Pomellato. Also poudred in armorie.
Pometti, young, little, green, pretty apples. Pomice, a pumice-stone, a stone
growing in the sea, which is light and spongious and full of little holes, used
of scriueners to make parchment smooth. Pomifera stagione, the apple-bearing
season. Pomettare, as Pomellare. Pomettato, as Pomellato. Pomo, an apple tree,
an apple, the apple of ones eye, the pomel of a sword or dagger, or of a
saddle. Also the round ball or globe that princes hold in their hands. Pomo
apiolo, a kind of green apple. Pomo cotogno, a quince apple. Pomo della spada,
the pomell of a sword or rapier. Pomo d'Adamo, a knob or bunch that some men
have in their throat. Pomo granato, a pomegranate. Pomo nano, an apple called a
paradise apple. Pomo rancio, an orange. Pomolino, a little apple, or pommell, a
young apple tree. Pomolo, a pommell of a sword or of a saddle. Pompa, pomp,
statelines, majesty, glory, pride, magnificence, a solemn sight, a
sumptuousnes, a glorious ostentation, a triumph, a brave show. Also a pump for
water, or of a ship. Pompa funebre, funeral pomp, funeral obsequies with
great bravery and sumptuous shows. Pompare, to pumpe water. Pompeggiare, to
lavish or riot, or cut it out of the whole cloth, to show pomp, majesty or
statelines, to flant or swagger it out. Pompholice, the foil that comes of
brass called nill, which is so light that it flies like a feather in the air.
Also a kind of metal. Pompilo, as Nautila. Pomposo, sumptuous, pompous,
glorious, stately, maiesticall, proud, full of magnificent shows. Pondera, a
griping or gnawing in ones belly. Also a push, a bile, a whelke. Ponderare, to
ponder, to poize, to weigh, to consider, to examine, to judge, to esteem.
Ponderezza, waightines, pondering, heaviness, consideration. Ponderosita, as
Ponderezza. Ponderoso, ponderous, weighty, of consequence, heavy,
substantial and massy. Pondo, a weight, a burden, a poize, a consequence, a
burden, a load, a heavy thing. Pondora, kind of painful bloody flixe.
Ponente, the west part of the world, the west wind. Also downe-lying or
setting down. Ponente garbino, the southwest wind. Ponente maestro, the
north-west wind. Ponente tramontana, a north-west wind, or west and by north.
Ponere, pongo, posi, posto, as Porre. Ponere amore, to settle love, to place
affection. Ponere da canto, to cast off, to lay aside. Ponere in mente, to put
in mind, to remember. Ponere odio, to put, to settle hatred or ill will.
Ponfolige, a kind of ore to draw metals out of. Pongere, Pongo, Punsi,
Pongiuto, or Ponto, as Pugnere. Pongiuto, Ponto, pricked, stung, provoked.
Pongente, as Pungente. Pongitopi, the shrub kneeholme, butchers broom,
petigree, or kneehuluer. Pongitore, a pricker, a stinger, a prouoker.
Pongitura, as Pungimento. Pongolo, as Pungolo. Ponno, Possono, they may, can or
be able. Ponta, as Punta. Ponta della spada, the swords point. Pontale, the
chape of a dagger or sword, a tag of a point, an aglet in a cap. Also according
to line and measure, just, level, even, iump. Pontali, aglets in caps, or tags
of points. Pontalmente, particularly, point by point, precisely, justly, even,
iump, according to line and measure, nicely, squeamishly, captiously. Pontapie,
as Poggiapiedi. Pontare, as Puntare. Pontaruola, as Puntaruola. Pontatamente,
prickingly, sharply, as Pontalmente. Ponte, any kind of bridge. Ponte arcato,
a bridge with arches. Ponte leuatoio, a drawbridge, a falling-bridge, or
trap-bridge. Ponte sisto, the name of a bridge in Rome, but taken for an
impudent, vnblushing, or brazen face. Pontefice, a Bishop, a Prelate, a Pope, a
chief Bishop. Pontega, a bird that is an enemy to pigeons. Ponteggiare, as
Punteggiare. Pontellare, as Puntellare. Pontello, any kind of underprop or
stay, a bodkin, a prick. Also a little bridge. Pontellini, little underprops,
or stays, little bridges, little pricks or bodkins. Ponteruola, as Pontaruola.
Ponti, points, pricks. Also bridges. Pontia, a stopping of the lungs, or
hinderance from breathing. Ponticello, a little bridge. Pontica, a kind of
pale but very bright glittering stone. Pontico, sour, sharp, or tarte in
taste. Also a fish called a beauer. Also a kind of herb. Pontificale,
pontifical, lordlike, sumptuous, like a pope or great prelate. Pontificato,
the estate, place, or dignity of a Pope, or a chief Bishop. Pontificio, of or
pertaining to a Bishop. Also the charge, office, function, or authority of a
Bishop. Pontifice, as Pontefice. Pontiglio, strickt points of honor, a small
point, a puncto, the lest prick that can be. Pontito, sharp pointed, having a
point. Ponto, as Punto. Ponto, A ponto. Look Punto. Ponto, Catta di ponto.
Look Punto. Ponto fermo, a full point in a sentence. Pontogopi, as Pongitopi.
Pontone, a great broad bridge. Also a great bodkin. Pontuale, as Puntuale.
Pontuare, as Puntuare. Pontura, a pricking, a stinging, a pleurisy, a stitch.
Also a foine, a thrust, a stoccado, etc. Pontuto, pointed, sharp, keen,
having a point. Ponzare, to speak ones words sneakingly, drawingly or
faltringly. Ponzecchiare, as Punzecchiare. Ponzecchij, as Punzecchij.
Ponzellare, as Punzellare. Ponzellatura, a pricking, a stinging, a goading.
Ponzello, as Punzello. Ponzello delle api, the sting of a Be. Ponzello
de'bifolchi, a ploughmans goad. Ponzettare, as Ponzellare. Ponzzettura, as
Ponzellatura. Ponzetto, as Poncello. Ponzone, as Punzone. Pople, the hamme of
ones leg behind the knee. Popa, he that slew sacrifices and offered them being
slain, or he that bound them to the altar, struck them and cut the throat of
them. Ponzonare, to pounce or prick or work pouncing work. Also as
Punzecchiare. Popolaccio, Popolazzo, the gross, base, vile, common people,
rifraffe people, as Plebe. Popolaglia, as Popolaccio, or Plebe. Popo, a very
little. Popolano, a parish priest, a popular or common man. Popolare, popular,
of or belonging to the common people, accepted and favored, of the people,
that delights and pleases the people, favoring the quarrel or given to
maintain the liberty of the commons: one that seeks by all possible and
flattring means to have the favor of the people, one that is made by the
people a companion of the same town or city, universal to the common
people, a companion or fellow with the common people. Also to people a town,
country or place. Popolarita, a popularitie or common people. Also friendship
or familiarity by reason of countrie-ship, the favor and will to maintain
the popular common kind of people. Popolarmente, homely, after the fashion or
opinion of the common people, commonly, ordinarily. Also with the love and
favor of the commons. Popolato, populous, peopled, inhabited. Popolatione, a
population, a popularitie. It has also bin taken for a wasting, a destroying,
a pilling, a robbing, and spoiling of people, or a ransacking of countries.
Popolesco, popular, of the common people, as Popolare. Popolini, a kind of
small coin. Also casting counters. Popolo, the people or folks of a nation or
country. Also the white poplar tree. Popoloso, populous, peopled, full of
people. Popone, a fruit called a musk mellon. Poppa, a teate, a dug, a pap, a
breast, an vdder. Also a poope. Poppa della naue, the poope or hinder part of a
ship, the hindeck, tail, poope, or castle of a ship, sometime taken for the
whole ship. Also used for the administration or government of a common weal.
Poppabile, having teats or paps. Poppara, a suckling, a sucking girl, a young
wench, a childs babie, or puppet. Poppare, to suck or draw a dug, to milch or
draw milk, to feel or grope dugs or teates. Popparella, a little pretty
childs babie, or puppet. Poppoline, little teates, dugs, or breasts.
Poracchia, the herb called purcelane. Por, Look Porre, or Ponere. Porca, a
sow, a swyne, a hog. Also a fi^thie, sluttish, driggle draggle queen. Porca
fattrice, a Sow that brings pigs. Porcaio, Porcaro, a hogheard, a
swinekeeper, a sowter. Porcaggine, as Porcheria. Porcaruolo, as Porcaio.
Porcella, a sow-pig, a porkelin. Also a young sow or yelt which never farrowed
but once. Porcellana, the herb called purcelane. Also a kind of fine earth
called Porcelane, whereof they make fine China dishes, called Porcellan dishes.
Also as Epinittide. Also a purple fish. Porcellette, a kind of cockle or such
other shellfish. Also young sow-pigs. Porcello, Porcellino, a young hog, a pig,
or a porkelin. Porcelletti, a kind of worm with many feet, called a ^urrer,
or palmer. Also a hog-louse. Also young pigs. Porcheggiare, to wallow like a
hog, to play the swyne or sow. Porcheide, hoggishnes, swinishnes.
Porcheggiamento, a wallowing or playing the hog. Porcheria, a wallowing like a
swine, all hoggish tricks. Porchesco, hoggish, swinish. Porchetta, as Porcella.
Porchetto, as Porcello. Porcile, a place for swine, a hogs-stye. Porcile di
venere, the hogs-stye of Venus, a woman's priuities or gear. Porcina, swines or
hogs-flesh, or porke. Also hoggish or swinish. Porcinaia, the herb called
purcelane. Porcini, young pigs, hogs or porklins. Also a kind of mushrome, or
toade-stooles. Porco, a hog, a swine, a porke, a boar. Porco cinghiale, or
Cignale, a wild boar. Porcinali, any kind of meat or pudding made of porke.
Porcine, a kind of pear so called in Italy. Porcino, hoggish, swinish,
sowish, beastly, filthy, Look Riccio. Porcone, a filthy great hog, swine,
porke, or boar. Porconeggiare, as Porcheggiare. Porezzuolo, the herb called
pennyriall or pudding-grasse. Porfido, porphyrie, or fine marble of diverse
colors, namely red. Porfirione, a bird drinking as though he did bite the
water, having long and red legs and bill. Also a serpent in India, having a
white head, wanting teeth, his body of a purple color: that which he vomiteth
out of his mouth consumes what it touches. Porfiro, as Porfido. Porgere,
porgo, porgei, porgiuto or porto, to reach forth, to yield, lend or give
help, to afford or bring. Also to stretch, reach or spread out, to offer with
ones hand. Also to iut, to iettie, or butte forth as some parts of building do
further then the rest. Porgiuto, reached, yielded, lent, given, brought,
affoorded, etc. Porgimento, a reaching, an affoording, a yielding, a bringing.
Porgitore, a reacher, a deliverer, a bringer, an affoorder. Pori, small and
insensible holes whereby the sweat and vapors pass out of the body by the
skin, called in English pores. Look Poro, the singular of Pori. Porisma, a
consectarie, id est, a thing that follows out of things already
demonstrated. Poro, of physicians is called the brawne or hard thick skin
which joins and fasteneth up the breaking of gristles and bones. In the
ioints Pori be called swellings coming of a thick and earthly humor flowing
thereto. Porosa, the herb saint John's woort. Poroso, full of pores or little
holes. Also tough or strong. Porphirione, as Porfirione. Porpo, as Polpo.
Porpora, purple or scarlet. Also a Kings roabe. Also a purple fish. Porporare,
to inpurple or inroabe with scarlet. Porporeo, of purple or of scarlet hew.
Porporina, of purple color. Porradello, a kind of wild leeke. Porrata, as
Fagiolata. Porre, pongo, posi, posto, to put, to set, to lay, to place, to
pitch, to pight, to make or build or lay a foundation, to lay in wager or as a
gage, to lay a side, to leave of or cease, to lay down or put off, to set
before one. Posto, put, set, laid, placed, pight, pitched. Porre aguati, to
lay ambushes, to set snares. Porre auanti gliocchij, to set before ones eyes.
Porre il campo, to set or pitch a field. Porre l'assedio, to lay siege. Porre
in campo, to propose, to lay forth, to publish. Porre a cauallo, to set on
horse back. Porre in naue, to set or lay aboorde any ship. Porre in collera,
to anger, to vex, to grow angry. Porre cura, to endeavor, to apply the
mind, to take care. Porre da canto, to lay by, to set aside. Porre diligenza,
to endeavor with diligence. Porre giuso, to lay or put or set down. Porre le
mani adosso, to lay hands upon one. Porre in ordine, to set or place in order.
Porre pensiere, to set or take care or thought. Porre amore, to place or
settle love and affection. Porre in luce, to publish or set forth in light.
Porre in oblio, to forget, to cast in oblivion. Porre leg, to set, to make,
or impose a law. Porre in sbaraglio, to scatter, to havoc, to disorder, to
confound. Porre paura, to make afraid. Porre in tauola, to set or lay upon the
board. Porre a pericolo, to put or set in danger. Porre campo, to pitch a
field. Porreo, of the color of a leeke. Porrezzuolo, as Porezzuolo. Porsi in
letto, to lay down in bed. Porrifico, as Porrofico. Porrigine, the dandraffe,
scurffe or scales in men's heads, beards or brows. Porro, a wart growing about
one. Also a Leeke. Porro, I will put, place, set, lay or pitch. Porrofico, a
disease called the piles or hemorrhoides. Porroso, full of warts, wartie,
knobbie, full of pores. Porrosita, porositie, thicknes of pores. Porta, a gap, a
door, a gate, an entrance, a way to enter at. Also used for the great Turks
court, palace or counsel chamber. Portaggio, the freight, the custom, tallage
or impost, carriage or portage of any thing or merchandise, or as we call it a
fare. a beer for dead men to be carried upon, a horse litter or chair to
carry folks in, the reward given for carrying or bringing of any thing. Porta
beretta, a capcase, a hat case, a bugget, a portmanteaw. Portafede, a vein in
a horse proceeding from the liver. Porta grano, a malt man, a corn man. Porta
di ferro, an iron gate. Also the name of ward or guarde that fencers use.
Porta lettere, a carrier, a currier, a post, a messenger or bearer of letters,
a bugget or satchell to carry letters in. Porta maestra, a chief great gate.
Porta mantello, a male, a bugget, a portmanteaw. Portamorsi, is that part of
the headstall, whereunto the eye of the bit is made fast. Porta seggiette, a
porter or bearer of chaires with men in them as they use in Italy. Porta sonno,
a drink to make one sleep. Porta feed, a little vein in a horse leading unto
the liver. Portabile, that is portable, that may be carried, tolerable.
Portamento, carriage or bringing, bearing or sufferance of any thing. Also
behavior, demeanor, manners, fashion, or the carriage of a man. Portante,
bearing or suffering. Also an amble or an ambling pace. Porta pennacchij, a
toss feather, a slanter, a swaggrer. Portare, to carry, to bring, to bear
either on the breast or on the back, to wear, to behave, to suffer, to
endure. Portare a Giorgio, or a Cauallo, to carry or ride a cock-horse.
Portarsi da Paladino, to behave or demean himself like a tall fellow.
Portata, a carriage. Also import, worth or consequence, the carriage or burden
of a ship. Also the freight paid for carriage. Look Portaggio. Portatore, a
porter, a bringer, a bearer, a carrier, a wearer. Portatile, as Portabile.
Portatura, as Portamento. Portello, a little door, a wicket, a gate, a postern
or entrance. Also a port hole. Portendere, tendo, tesi, teso, to portend, to
foretell, to betoken, to give token of a thing to follow, to betoken, to
foresignifie, to foreboade. Portente, monstrous, strange, prodigious,
marvelous, seldom seen, betokening good or ill. Portento, a thing monstrous,
strange, and seldom seen, a marvelous thing, foreboading some mischance or
evil fortune to come. Portentoso, as Portente. Porti, used for Ponerti, to put
thee. Also reached. Porticella, as Portello. Portico, a porch, a portall, a
gallerie or walking place underpropped with pillars, where men to avoid the
parching heat of the sun or the rain do walk in the shadow, they be much
more common in Italy then in England. Portiera, a portall or the hangings over
a door. also a woman porter. Portiere, an usher, a dore-keeper, a porter.
Portinaio, Portinaro, as Portiere. Portionare, to portion, to share, to part,
to rate, to measure, to divide equally and in just shares and proportion, to
partage. Portione, a portion, a share, a parcel, a part, a rate, a quantity,
a proportion, a measure or piece, a partage. Portioncella, a small portion,
share, or rate. Portitio, as Portiere. Porto, brought, reached, carried, worn,
borne, Look Porgere, fraighted. Also a haven, a rode, a port, or harborough
for ships. Also the carriage, bringing, or fraughting of any thing, as
Portaggio. Also a place of refuge or succor against danger. Portonaio, as
Portiere. also a port keeper or ferrie man, one that receives toll or custom
at any port or passage. Portone, a great gate. Portuale, having ports, havens
or harboboroughs for ships. Portuoso, bearing, able to bear. also full of
havens, rodes, ports or harboroughs for ships, having many good havens.
Porzane, a kind of bird. Posa, a pause, a quietness, a ceasing or repose, an
intermission, a giving over. Posada, a dwelling, a house, or resting place.
Also a pausing. Posamento, a place of rest, quietness or repose, aresting, a
reposing. Posare, to rest, to quiet, to pause, to repose. Posata, a resting, a
baiting place, a bait, a rest. Posatamente, leisurely, quietly, reposedly,
with a pause or rest. Posate, a rest^ which a horse does make in advancing his
forepart. Look Fare le posate. Posaturo, a resting, a reposing, a pausing, a
ceasing. Posbrachiale, the space between the wrist of the hand and the first
joint of the fingers. also the back of the hand. Poscena, eating or drinking
after supper, a rear banquet. Poscenare, to eat or drink after supper.
Poscia, after, then, since, afterward, behind. Poscia che, since that, after
that. Poscimane, to morrow next. Poscrai, to morrow next. Poscritta, a
postscript, an afterwriting. Posdomani, to morrow next. Posero, they did put,
set, lay or place. Posgenito, borne, bread, sprunge, engendered, and brought
into the world after. Positione, a position, a putting, a placing, a
situation, the state of. Also the fall of a clause in a sentence. Also a
situation, a seat, a soil. Also a termination. Also a primitive word whence
others are derived. Positiuamente, positiuely, affirmatively, without
contradiction. Positiuo, positive, that is of it self. Positore, a positor, an
affirmer. Positura, a positure, setting or standing of a man going about to do
any thing. Posliminio, a return of one which was supposed to be dead, and so
restored to his house not by going over the threshold, but by making a hole in
the wall. Posolino, Posporre, pongo, posi, posto, to omit, to neglect, to
ouerslip, to set behind, to esteem less. Pospositiuo, to be put behind, or
set after. Posposta, a kind of after-turne that cunning riders teach their
horses. Postposto, omitted, neglected, ouerslipt, set behind, esteemed less.
Posprandio, an afternoon. Also a nunchions or anders meat between dinner and
supper. Possa, puissance, might, power, strength, ability, wealth, authority.
Also that I or he may. Possamorire, an oath of swearing, as we say, I would I
might die and if it be not so. Possanza, as Possa, as Podesta. Possedere,
seggo, sedei, seduto, to possess, to enjoy, to hold, to own, to have in
possession, and to his proper use. Also to have, to get or obtain. Posseduto,
possessed, enjoyed, held, had in possession, owned. Also had, gotten, or
obtained. Posseditore, a possessor, an owner. Possente, mighty, powrefull,
puissant, strong, able. Possessione, a possessing, owing, enjoying, possessing,
or propriety, or rightful use of a thing. Also a farm, a copie-hold, a
free-holde, substance, goods, lands, or wealth. Possessioncella, a small
possession, copie-hold, freehold, farm or land. Possessiuo, possessiue, of
or pertaining to possession. Possesso, as Posseduto, as Possessione.
Possessore, as Posseditore. Possibile, possible, that may be. Possibilita,
possibility, likelihood. Possuto, as Potuto. Posta, a running post or
currier, or messenger, a post. Also a station or stand. Also a winde-fall, or
unexpected good hap. Also a stake at any game. Also a present, a bribe or a
gift. Also an assignement, or appointment. Also a garter, a philet or girdle.
Also an impostume or a swelling. Also will, pleasure, self conceit, opinion,
selfe-ch^ife, peril, or danger. Also put, set, placed, or laid, of Ponere.
Also a good hand or winning at any play or game. Also a kind of thin silk
stuff. Posta* Aposta, for the nonce, expresselie, of purpose. Posta, the
place, stand, or station where the sentinel stands to watch. Posta, Di posta,
taken at the volie as a ball is, before it fall or bound on the ground. Posta,
In Posta, in post haste, in great haste. Posta, A tua posta, at thy peril or
choice be it. Postare, to prefixe, to appoint, to ordain, to station, to
post. Postbrachiale, as Posbrachiale. Postema, an impost^me, a swelling, an
impostumation, a byle. Postemare, to swel, to impostume, to grow to an
impostumation. Postemetta, a little swelling or impostume, a byle. Postergano
ratto, a crampe happening to the hinder parts of the body, and turning the head
awry to the back and shoulders. Postergare, to put, lay, cast, or set behind
ones back, to neglect, to cast by. Posteri, successors, posterity,
offspring, children, they that succeed in blood, and follow, and live after us.
Posteriore, posterior, succeeding after, coming behind, hindemost, lagge,
base, vile, inferior, hinmost, latter, slower. Posterita, posterity, the
world to come, offspring, they that shall come after us. Postero, that comes
or follows after, next. Posthieri, the day before yesterday. Posthumio,
Posthumo, a child borne after the fathers death. Postra, as Poscia. Postiache,
as Posciache. Postica, a line dividing the sides from the east to the west,
that part which is toward the west or behind us. Posticcio, Posticco, forged,
false, counterfaite, supposed, fained, showing what it is not. Posticciare, to
forge, to counterfaite, to falsify, to feign, to dissemble. Posticciamente,
forgedlie, falsely, fainedlie, dissemblinglie. Postiglione, a postilion, a
posts guide, a forerunner. Postilla, a gloss, a short compendious exposition,
the image that a man sees of himself in a looking-glass or in the water.
Postillare, to gloss upon, or expound compendiouslie. Posto, put, laid, set,
placed, pight, pitched, settled, fixed. Also put case, supposed, or imagined.
Also laid aside, builded, founded, situated, Look Ponere. Posto che, since
that, seeing that, since that, howbeit, although, albeit. Posto scritta, a
postscript, or after-writing of a letter, a subscription. Postremita, as
Estremita. Postremo, the last, lag, or the hinmost, vilest, or worst, final,
last of all, at the last. Postriboli, horse-boyes, base grooms, base people,
raskals, the skum of the world. Postribolo, a stews or bawdie house, a
brothell. Postulare, to require, to desire, to covet, to demand, to complain,
to expostulate, to accuse or sue by law. Postulatione, an expostulation, a
desire, a demanding, a complaining, a request, a supplication, a complaint
made against one. Postura, the setting or disposing of a man's body, as
Positura. Potacchio, Potaggio, any kind of potage. Potaggiere, a potage cook,
a lover of potage. Potamantina, an herb which put into drink and drunk,
makes them that drink of it run mad. Potamogito, an herb that has the
power to make crocodils tame and gentle, called water-speeke, pond-weede, or
water-grasse. Potare, to prune, to cleanse, or to lop trees, or cut and dress
vines, to cut off superfluous boughs. Potate, certain spanish roots which we
call Potatoes. Potatore, a pruner, or cutter or lopper of vines, or other
trees. Potatore d'alberi, a lopper, a cutter, a pruner. Also a setter, or a
graffer of trees. Potea, Poteua, he might, could, or was able. Potentato, a
potentate, a puissant man, a dominion, a great power, puissance, or authority.
Potente, mighty, puissant, able, strong, rich, wealthy, powrefull, that can
or is able to do much, of great power, valiant, of great strength and virtue.
Potentia, Potenza, might, ability, power, strength, puissance, wealth,
authority, force, rule, virtue. Also as Podesta. Potentiale, potentiall, that
may be. Potentilla, wild tanzie, or silver herb, and as some think wild
Agrimonie. Potere, posso, potei, potuto, or possuto, to may or can, to have
power or might, to be able, to be possible, to have strength and virtue. Also
as Podere. Also as Possa. Poterio, an herb good for the sinews, named by
Galen, but not known now adays. Potesta, as Podesta. Potestaria, as
Podestaria. Potione, a potion, or drink that phisicions give to patients.
Potissima, forcible, efficient, mighty, able, chief of all, the best, or
principal. Potuto, bin able, had power or might or strength, bin possible.
Potta, a woman's privy parts, a cunt, a quaint. Pottaccia, a filthy great
cunt. Pottamarina, a fish, in latin Vrtica. Pottuta, that has a cum, cunted,
quainted. Poueia, a Butterflye, or a Ladie-bird. Pouento. Poueracci, filthy,
poor, beggarly people. Poueraglia, the poor, base, silly, abject people.
Pouerello, Poueretto, poor, mean, wretched, silly, beggarly, a poor silly
man. Poueri, the poor kind of people. Pouerissimo, most poor, very beggarly.
Pouero, poor, silly, wretched, mean, defective, simple, beggarly, bare,
needy, that lacks, having little. Pouerta, Pouertade, poverty, beggerie,
need, want. Pouioni, has bin used for doves or pigeons. Pozza, a well, a
poole, a puddle, a pit, a slow of water, a standing-water. Pozzanghera, as
Pozza. Pozzale, that is full of wels, or pits, that may be dug. Pozzare, to
dig a pit, to make a well, to make as a well, to well. Pozzaro, a well or
pump-maker, a digger of wels. Pozzaroia, a kind of earthen pot, pitcher, or
bucket to draw or keech water with. Pozzette, dimples, pits, or little holes
in women's cheeks. Pozzettine, as Pozzette. Pozzetto, a little well or pit.
Pozzo, a well, or deep pit, a puddle or standing poole of water. Pozzolana,
gravel or sand to mingle with lyme to make mortar of. Also as Porcellana.
Pozzolino, a little well. Pozzuolo, a little well. Pragma, an act or business.
Pragmatica, a pragmaticall law, a thing done in the common weal. Pragmatico,
an atturnie or practicioner in the law, a proctor, a petiefogger or
sollicitour of suites. Also one wont to stand by a pleader or orator
instructing him in law points. Also one expert in doing of things. Prandere,
prando, pransi, pranso, to dine, to eat his dinner. Pranso, dined. Also a
dinner. Prandio, a dinner, a refreshing, or feeding at noone. Pranzare, to
dine. Pranzo, a dinner. Also dined. Prasino, a kind of yellowish green, or as
some think a greene-leeke color. Prasio, the herb horehound. Also a kind of
green stone. Prasmo, a kind of fish. Also a kind of green precious stone.
Prasoide, a stone of the color of leekes. Prassina, a kind of precious stone,
which if it be where any poison is, will glitter with sparks like fire.
Pratello, a little meadow or field, a close of medow-ground. Also the herb
melilot. Pratense, of or belonging to a meadow, or green field. Prateria, any
kind of meadow or hay-grounds. Pratica, practice, experience, trial. Also a
haunt, a frequenting, or an acquaintance. Also a canuasing, a trying, a proving
or using. Praticabile, conuersable, that may be frequented or practiced.
Praticare, to practice, to try, to experience, to put in ure, to use, to haunt,
to frequent, to converse with, to follow. Also to shift or canuase for any
thing. Praticheuole, as Praticabile. Pratico, expert, experienced, skillful,
wise, prudent, wary, frequented, practike, full of practice and skill.
Praticone, a subtle, old, practiced, experienced, crafty fox, a sly
companion. Pratino, Praticello, as Pratello. Prato, a field, a meadow ground.
Prauare, to deprave, to detract, to be perverse, overthwart or lewd.
Prauamente, wickedly, shrewdly, badly, peruersely, prauely, detractingly,
lewdly, crookedly, knauishly, ouerthwartly, etc. Prauita, shrewdnes, wickedness,
prauitie, detraction, peruersenes, crookednes, ouerthwartnes, illnes, lewdnes,
waggishnes, unhappiness, knauishnes, deformity, badnes, dishonestie,
corruptnes, stubornnes, obstinacy, frowardnes. Prauo, wicked, shrewd, bad,
deprauing, detracting, perverse, crooked, knauish, unhappy, corrupt,
dishonest, stubborn, obstinate, froward. Pre, used much in composition, and
set before other words, as a going, or acting before. Preambulo, a preamble, a
foregoing, a forespeech. Prebenda, a prebend, an ecclesiastical living so
called. Also prouender, fodder, or food for cattle and horses. Prebendare, to
prouender, to feed or fodder horses or cattle. also to benefice with some
church living. Precario, most dear, or very dear. Precatione, a desiring, a
craving, an entreating. Precedere, cedo, cedei, or cessi, ceduto, or cesso, to
precede, to go before, to take the upper hand, to out go, to outstrip, to
out-passe, to surpass, to surmount, or to ex-cell in any action. Preceduto,
Precesso, preceded, gone before, out-gon, out-stript, out-past, surpast,
surmounted. Precedente, precedent, going before, of better worth, ouerpassing,
outpassing, surmounting. Precedentia, precedencie, eldership, senioritie,
surmounting. Precesso, as Preceduto. Precertione, a lesson, a precept, an
instruction, a document, a warning, an admonition. Precetto, a precept, an
institution, a commandment, an iniunction, a rule given, an admonition, an
aduisement, a good lesson or instruction, a document, a warning, a lore.
Precettore, a tutor, a master, an instructor, a governor, a teacher. Preci,
prayers, oraizons, supplications, suits, requests, intercessions. Precidere,
cido, cisi, ciso, to cut off, to shorten, to decide, to curtall, to chop off,
to take away, to prevent, to note and mark. Also to note and tell precisely
what one will speak of. Precinto, a precinct or compass. Also girt in or
compassed about. Precipere, cipo, to command absolutely, or give commandment.
Preciputo, commanded absolutely. Precipire, pisco, pito, to teach, to instruct,
to correct, to rule, to govern. Precipitantia, a tumbling, rolling or falling
down from some high place, overmuch rashness. Precipitatione, as Precipitantia.
Precipitare, to precipitate or tumble down headlong into some pit, to cast, to
hurl, to bring, to fall, or throw down headlong, to overthrow, to do
unadvisedly and rashly. Precipitato, a kind of corroding powder, or corosiue
that chirurgians use to corrode rotten flesh from out of sores. Precipite,
according to rule, government, instruction or order. Precipitio, a precipise, a
steep downfall, a down right pitch or fall, or dangerous place. Precipitoso,
ruinous, steep down, that has a downe-fall, dangerous, perilous. Also
sudden, quick, or ouer-hastie, without consideration, headstrong, foole-hardy,
ouer-bolde, furious, rash, violent, headlong, haire-braind. Precipuamente,
specially, chiefly, principally, peculiarly, above all things. Precipuo,
chief, principal, especial, singular, sovereign, excellent, above all.
Precisamente, precisely, determinately, purposedly. Also shortly, cuttedlie,
briefly. Precisione, a brevity in writing or speaking, leaving somewhat to be
understood. Also precisenes. Also a cutting off. Preciso, cut of, cut short,
curtalled, cutted, taken away. Also decided. Also precise, determined,
exquisite, exact. also a part of the entrals. Precissione, a procession or
going before. Precognitione, foreknowledge. Precondia, the skin about the
heart. Preconio, a praise, a glory, a renoume, a commendation or setting forth.
Also a solemn cry, or cryers office, or publishing of any thing to be sold.
Preconoscentia, foreknowledge. Preconoscere, conosco, conobbi, conosciuto, to
foreknow, to know before. Precontratto, a precontract, a handling, or treating
of a matter before. Prec^rdij, or Precordio, the fleshie skin, called also
Diafra^ma, or Diafragma, or the midriffe separating the heart and lungs from the
stomach, the liver, and other bowels, the parts about the heart. Also the heart
strings, or the filme of the heart. Also the sides of the belly under the ribs.
Sometime it is taken for all the vmbles or entrails, as the heart, liver,
lungs, the spleen, etc. Also inward cogitations, affections, passions, and
apprehensions of the heart. Also the mind or breast. Precorrere, corro, corsi,
corso, to forerun, to outrun, to excel, to ouerrun, to prevent. Precorsione, a
going before, a forerunning, a prevention. Precorso, forerun, outrun,
prevented, excelled, ouerrun. Precorsore, a forerunner, an outrunner, a
foregoer, an ouerrunner, a preuenter, a fore-rider, a fore-messenger. Precuio,
Precoio, a lardrie to keep meat in. also a dairy house. Precursore, as
Precorsore. Preda, Predagione, a booty, a pray, a prize, a robbery, a
spoil, a foraging, a pillage. Predare, to pray, to spoil, to rob, to make a
booty, to forage, to poll and pill. Predatione, a foraging, a spoiling or
praying, or stealing away, a pillaging. Predatore, a thief, a robber, a
spoiler, a pouler, a praie-taker, a forager, a seeker for a pray, a pillar.
Predecessore, a predecessor, a foregoer, our forefather, an auncestor, one
that has gone before us, or has been before us. Predella, any kind of
footestoole, settle, or kneeling low stool. Also the rain of a bridle.
Predestinare, to predestinate, to preordaine, to ordain before what shall come
after. Predestinato, predestined, foreordained. Predestinatione,
predestination, foreappointment. Predica, a sermon, a preaching, or public
declaration. Predicabile, predicable, that may be told and spoken of publicly.
Predicamento, a predicament. Predicante, a preacher, a sermon maker, a
publisher, a reporter. Predicare, to preach, to publish, to declare openly, to
noise abroad, to make report, to praise. Predicatione, a preaching, a
publishing or open declaring, a common or open talk and report, a praising.
Predicatore, a preacher, a publisher, a reporter. Predire, dico, dissi, detto,
to foretell, to prophecy, to tell of a thing before it com to pass. Predetto,
foretold, foresaid, prophesied, forespoken, said, forementioned,
fore-alleaged. Predicitore, a foreteller, a prophet. Predittione, a prediction,
a foretelling, a prophecy. Prediuinatione, a foretelling, a divination or
guessing of things to come. Predominare, to predominate, to govern before
others. Predominante, predominante. Predominatione, predomination,
predominancie. Predoni, a highway thief, bootehailers, such as live by
praying. Predutio, Prefatione, a preface, a forespeech. Prefato, fore-alleaged,
forenamed. Prefatto, done before, foredone. Prefetto, a ruler, a governor, a
deputy, a provost marshall, a president, a captain, a principal, or chief
officer, a lieutenant. Prefettura, a presidencie, a chief place, a
marshalship, a lieuetenancie, a rule, a deputation, a government, or
captaineship, an authority, a jurisdiction committed to the power of some
officer to do right and justice. It may also be taken for a shire-weeke, being
a certain limited place of land, under a certain jurisdiction. Preferrire,
risco, rito, to prefer, advance, or set before, to esteem or set more by.
Preferrito, preferred, advanced, set before, raised up, esteemed or set more
by. Prefigurare, to prefigure, to figure before hand, to foreshew. Prefiggere,
figgo, fissi, fisso, to prefixe, to appoint, to limite. Prefisso, prefixed,
limited, appointed, fastened or set in the forepart. Prefocatione di madrice, a
disease in women called the mother, which is a choking or stopping of the
matrix, whereby a woman falls into a sw^^ne. Preforata, herb saint John
woort. Pregare, to pray, to beseech, to entreat, to sue, to crave, to desire,
to request. Pregato, prayed, beseeched, entreated, sued, craved, desired,
requested. Pregatore, a prayer, a beseecher, a suter, an intreater. Preghi,
prayers, entreaties, suits, requests, intreatings, beseechings. Preghiera, a
prayer, a beseeching, an entreating, a request. Pregiare, to prize, to esteem,
to value, to regard, to endeere, to make prize or bargain for a thing.
Pregiaria, bail, suretiship, maineprize. Pregieuole, worth the estimation,
value, regard or to be prized. Look Pregio. Pregio, prize, value, worth,
honor, worship, glory, regard, esteem, the prize that is given for a thing
that is bought or bargained for, hire, value, account, reward or money.
Pregionare, to imprison or take prisoner. Pregione, a prison, a ieale. Also a
prisoner. Pregionero, a prisoner, one that is in prison, a iealor or keeper of
a prison. Pregiudicare, to foreiudge, to judge before hand, to prejudice, to
concern, to hurt, to touch near, to preiudicate, to judge first or before
another to whom the matter appertains, to judge by an example of another like
matter before judged. Also to conceive an ill opinion or judgment of a thing
before he comes to the place to hear it. Pregiudicatamente, preiudicately,
with a fore judgment, with prejudice, wrong, hurt or loss, with a fore
conceived opinion. Pregiudicatione, a giving of sentence or judgment before, a
conceiving of judgment before due time. Pregiudiciale, prejudicial, hurtful,
concerning or touching the state of some thing. Pregiuditio, prejudice,
hinderance, hurt, wrong, foreiudgement, a foreconceiued opinion, a hurting of
ones case. Also a case which being once decided makes a rule or example to
judge semblably in like matters, as those which we call ruled cases in law.
Also a manner of sentence given before judgment, as if two did contend for one
office, and the magistrate because the controversy will be long, in the mean
time appoints one of them to minister the office, wherein he seems to give
judgment before for him whom he favors. Pregiuditioso, foreiudging, judging
before, as Pregiudiciale. Pregna, pregnant, a woman great with child, a
beastfull of young ones. Pregnante, pregnant, fruitful. Pregnanza, greatness
with child, pregnancie, a being great with child or with young. Pregnare, to
beget with child, to li^e or cover as a dog or a horse. Pregneuole, fruitful,
that may be gotten with child. Pregnezza, as Pregnanza. Pregno, full,
pregnant, big with child or full of young ones. Also full of good sap and
juice. Prego, an entreaty, a prayer. Pregressione, a going before, a
preventing, an outgoing. Pregresso, that is gone before or that has
ouerpassed. Pregustare, to taste before, to take a taste or assaie before.
Preheminenza, pre-eminence, prerogative, advantage. Prelatesco, prelate-like,
like a priest. Prelato, a prelate, a clergy man. Prelatura, the dignity of a
prelate. Preliare, to fight, to skirmish, to battle, to fight in battle.
Prelio, a fight, a battle, a skirmish, a conflict, a combat, a foughten field.
Preludio, a proheme in music, a voluntary before the song, a flourish, a
preamble or entrance to a matter, as ye would say signs and profers to do a
thing, or before the doing of it. Premeditare, to premeditate, to forethink, to
muse and think on a matter before hand, to devise with himself before hand.
Premeditatione, a premeditation or foremusing, a foremeditation, a musing or
thinking of a thing before hand. Premere, premo, premei, premuto, to press, to
press or weigh down, to tread down or upon, to vex, to grieve, to
endammage, to ouercharge, to suppress, to wring, to strain, to be instant or
urgent upon, to force, to compel, to urge, to make, to constrain, to press
on. Also to keep a thing in that it come not abroad, to dissemble and hide, to
keep under, to squise, to crush, to thrust, to thrust down, to destroy, to be
contrary or against, to pursue them that fly, to blame in words, to rate and
speak earnestly against, to aggrauate, to weaken and overthrow. Also to
concern or touch a man's person or state-neere. Premuto, pressed, crushed,
suppressed, wroong, strained, forced, enforced, compelled, urged, made,
constrained. Also concerned or touched near. Vide Premere. Premesse, premitted,
put or set before, the premises, premised. Premitore, a crusher, a strainer, a
presser, a constrainer, a wringer. Vide Premere. Premitura, a pressing, a
crushing, a wringing, a straining. Vide Premere. Premiare, to reward, to meede,
to guerdon, to recompense one according to desert. Premiatore, a rewarder, a
recompencer. Preminenza, pre-eminence, prerogative. Premio, a reward, a meede,
a guerdon, a recompense given to any man for his deserts. Premonire, nisco,
nito, to forewarne, to give warning before hand, to foreaduise Premonito,
forewarned, foreaduised, given warning before hand. Premonitione, a
premonition, a forewarning, a foreaduise. Premosso, promoted, preferred,
prem^oued. Premostrare, to foreshew, to foretell. Premostranza, a foreshewing,
a foretelling. Premura, a close pressing or working together. Premutare, to
forecharge. Prence, as Prencipe. Prencipato, a principality, a sovereignty, a
lordship, a seignorie. Also excellency, soueraintie, dominion, seignorie,
rule, pre-eminence. Prencipale, principal, chief, higest. Also pertaining to
a Prince, of a Prince, belonging to the first, chief or Princelike. Also a
beginning. Prencipalita, as Prencipato, a principality, a chiefe-dome.
Prencipe, a Prince, a sovereign, a potentate, a governor, a chief, he that
has the sovereignty or dominion. Also a nobleman, a ruler, a head-ruler, the
first, the foremost, a ringleader. Prencipessa, a Princess, a woman Prince or
gouernesse. Prencipetto, a young or little Prince. Prendere, prendo, presi,
preso, prenduto, to take, to receive, to take hold off, to catch, to snatch, to
accept, to embrace any occasion. Prenduto, Preso, taken, received, taken hold
off, caught, caught, snatched, accepted. Prendere la fortuna per il ciuffetto,
to take occasion by the snout. Prendere in errore, to mistake one for another.
Prendere in iscambio, to mistake. Prendere a nuolo, to hire ship or horse.
Prendere a fitto, to hire, to rent or farm. Prendere a vettura, to hire a
horse at liuerie. Prendere per la mano, to take by the hand. Prendere fastidio,
to take care. Prenomato, Prenominato, forenamed. Prenome, the first name, the
name given at the font. Prenominare, to forename, to forealleage. Prenominanza,
a forenaming. Prenonciare, to foretell, to foreshew, to declare a fore hand.
Preocupare, to preoccupate, to anticipate, to prevent, to ouerreach, to take or
possess by prevention or anticipation, to take before another. Preocupatione,
a prevention, an anticipation, an ouerreaching. Preordinare, to fore-ordaine,
to ordain or appoint before. Preordinatione, the first ordinance, a
fore-ordaining. Preparamento, a preparing, a preparation. Preparantia vasa, the
seminall veins and arteries. Preparare, to prepare, to provide, to dight, to
make ready, to make provision before hand. Preparatione, a preparation, a
provision, a readiness, a preparing. Preparatiuo, a preparatiue or a
preparation, that pertains to preparation. Preparatore, a preparer, a
prouider. Prepede, swift, or light in flying, Vcello Prepede, the bird that
first shows himself to the Augure, whereby he guesseth what is to come.
Preponere, pongo, posi, posto, to prefer, to aduan^^, to put before, to set
before, to esteem or set much by, to give one a place before another.
Prepositiuo, to be put or set before. Preporre, as Preponere. Preposto,
preferred, put before, made chief, advanced, one preferred or advanced before
others. Also as Prouosto: one that is in authority above the rest.
Prepositione, a part of speech called a preposition. Also a putting or setting
before. Prepositore, a prepositor, an aduancer. Prepositura, a preferring
before others. Preposteramente, preposterouslie, backwardlie, ouerthwartlie,
arsiuersie, akewardlie, contrary to due course. Prepostero, preposterous,
overthwart, out of order, backward, arsiuersie, clean contrary to all good
order and due rule and formal fashion. Preputio, the fore-skinne that covers
the head or nut of a man's yard. Prerogatione, a prerogation, a pre-eminence.
Prerogatiua, a prerogative, a pre-eminence, a privilege, an authority, an
advantage, a sway or rule above other men. Prerogatiuo, he whose voice,
consent, or sentence is first asked, that man or that thing that is of more
effect, prerogative, and authority then others. Presa, a prize, a reprizall, a
taking, a snatching. Also taken. Presagia, the art of presaging or divination,
or fore-boding, or fore-guessing, or foretelling of things to come.
Presagiare, to presage, to divine, to foretell by tokens what shall happen, to
perceive or have a guess before what will follow, to perceive a thing that is
toward before it come, to betoken, to forebode, to prophecy. Presagiente, a
presager, a foreteller, a deuiner. Also deuining, fore-guessing, fore-boding,
prophesying. Presagio, a presage, a divination by tokens, a deuining, a
foreguessing, a prophesying, a foretelling, a foreshewing or token of that that
is likely to come, or shall happen, a foresignification, or betokening of some
thing to follow. Presagire, presago, presagito, as Presagiare. Presaglia,
whatsoever may be taken or is taken, a booty. Presago, a presaging or
foreguessing man, one that foreguesseth, foretells, prophecieth, or
forebodeth things toward before they come, or betokening of something to come
and follow. Prescia, haste, or speed, care, urging, hying, solicitation.
Presciare, to hasten, to make haste, to speed, to solicit, to hye, to
dispatch, to press, to urge. Presciente, having foreknowledge, that knows
things perfectly before they come to pass. Prescientia, foreknowledge or
prescience, an understanding beforehand of a thing before it come to pass.
Prescioso, hasty, speedy, hying, pressing, urging. Presciutto, any kind of
dride bacon. Prescriuere, scriuo, scrissi, scritto, to prescribe, to assign,
to limit, to appoint, to show how and what, to give advertisement, to make and
ordain. Also to write before. Prescritto, prescribed, assigned, limited,
appointed, showed how and what, given advertisement, made and ordained. Also
written before. Also a form or precept, a determinate rule, order, or fashion.
Prescrittione, a prescription, a limiting, a rule, an assignement, a
limitation, an appointing or determining, an ordinance, or form. Also a form
or precept, a determinate rule, order, or fashion. Presentagione, a
presentation, or presenting. Presentaneo, present, sudden, at hand, for the
present only, ready, speedy, dispatching. Presentare, to present or offer, to
represent. Also to resemble. Also to make ready, or set in a readiness before
the presence of some man. Presentatione, a presentation, a presenting, a
representing. Presentatore, a presenter, a representer. Present, present, in
sight, before his face, in view, in mine own person, before. Also the time
present, or instant. Also a present, or a gift. Presentia, the presence of a
man, the countenance or aspect of a man, presentnes. Presentiale, presentiall,
that has a good presence, personal, in person. Presentialmente, personally,
in person, in presence. Presentire, sento, sentito, to hear or understand
aforehand, to fore-heare, to foreknow, to perceive or have a feeling or
hearing of a thing before it happen. Also to smell or sent before. Presentito,
fore-heard, foreunderstoode, foreknowne, perceived, or had a feeling or hearing
of a thing before it come to pass. Also smelt or sented before. Presentuccio,
a small or mean gift, a little poor present. Presepio, a cratch, a rack, a
manger, an oxe-stall in a stable, a crib, or a critch. Presedere, seggo, fedei,
seduto, to preseade, or sit before, to be or sit in more aucthorjtie and
dignity, to have the protection or tuition of any thing, province, place, or
people, to have the oversight or charge of, to sit in some place of
pre-eminence. Preseduto, Presiso, preseaded, or sitten before. Look Presedere.
Preseruare, to preserve, to keep, to maintain, to save, to defend.
Preseruatione, a preservation, a keeping, a saving, a defending. Preseruatiuo,
preservative, that will preserve, saving, defending. Preside, a kind of tree
in Egypt. Presi, prese, presero, I took, he took, they took. Presidente, a
president, a lieutenant, a captain, a governor, a provost, a viceroy, a
chief, a defender, a ruler or president, he that has authority in a
province next under a King, a lord president, a chief ruler, he that has the
tuition, protection, disposition, and government of. Also an example, a
pattern, or a president to follow or show to others. Presidiale, of or
pertaining to a president, or presidencie, presidiall, of a garrison. Also that
is ordained to be an aid to others, as soldato presidiale, a soldier in
garrison, either for the defense of the frontiers of a land, or some other part
in the land. Presidiare, to munite, to fortify, to defend, to strengthen, to
arm with garrisons, to live, to stay, or continue in a garrison. Presidio, a
help, a succor, a fortifying, a reenforcing, a defense, an avail, a camp, a
force of men, a supply of forces, a garrison of men set with a captain to
defend and keep a fortress or country. Also all manner of aid and defense.
Also a place of refuge or succor, a fortification of a thing. Presidioso, that
has forces, fortifications, garrisons or men, Look Presidio. Presignificare,
to signify, to notify, or show before, to fore-token, to fore-bode. Preso,
taken, received, undertaken, caught, snatched, accepted, hent. Preso nella rete,
taken or caught in a net. Preso disputa, taken a disputation in hand.
Presoluta, an herb which who so has about him shall be able to commit no
letcherie. Presontione, as Presuntione. Presontuoso, as Presuntuoso. Pressare,
Pressiare, as Presciare. Pressa, Pressia, as Prescia, as Calca. Presso, near,
by, with, hard by, fast by, near upon, almost, as it were. Presso che, almost,
as it were, near upon. Presso di me, near me, by me, with me. Pressore, as
Impressore, as Oppressore. Pressoso, as Prescioso. Pressura, oppression,
heaviness, grieuance. Also a wringing or wresting. Prestamente, quickly,
readily, presently, out of hand, nimbly, speedily. Prestante, excelling,
passing, surmounting, excellent, notable, noble, better, virtuous, mighty,
great, honorable, regardfull, or to be regarded. Prestantia, worthiness,
excellency, virtue, noblenes. Prestantissimo, most excellent, passing,
notable, virtuous, or chiefly to be regarded. Prestanza, lone, or the lending
of any thing. Also as Prestantia. Prestare, to lend. Also to borrow. Also to
prepare, to dight, to make ready. Prestare ad vsura, to lend or give out to
usury. Prestare feed, to give credit, to yield trust. Prestatore, a lender,
a borower, a preparer, a prouider, a dighter, a usurer. Prester, a kind of
venomous worm called Dipsas. Also a kind of tempest or whirlewind. Prestezza,
quicknes, nimblenes, speed, dispatch, haste, promptnes, fleetenes.
Prestigiare, to practice or play legerdemaines, iuglings, or crafty
conueyances. Prestigiatore, a iugler, a cosener, one that deludeth the
eiesight, or plays legerdemaine tricks. Prestigie, deceits, illusions,
iuglings, legerdemaines, crafty conueyances, things seeming to be that are
not, subtle and wily delusions. Prestigioso, deceitful, crafty, subtle,
sly, full of craft, or dissimulation. Prestinaro, a baker or kneader. Presto,
quick, nimble, sudden, quickly, out of hand. Also fleet, swift, quick,
wight. Also presently, ready, prepared, adressed, prompt, prone, dight. Also a
lone or lending of money. Presto, presto, by and by, suddenly, out of hand,
very ready or quickly, very nimbly. Presule, a prelate, a prior, or he that
leads the dance among the Roman priests called Salij sacen^^^^^.
Presumere, sumo, sumei, sumuto, to presume, to suppose, to conjecture. Also to
take first or before. Also to prevent. Also to deem, to guess, to count
himself, to conceive, to do or take before hand. Presuntione, presumption,
ouerboldnes, arrogancy, sawcines, malapertnes, conjecture, conceit,
uncertainty, or taking or receiving before. Also preoccupation, or preventing
of our adversaries objection. Presunto, as Presumuto. Presuntuoso,
presumptuous, saucie, malapert, ouerbold. Presuponere, pongo, posi, posto, to
presuppose, to conjecture, to imagine, to put case, to admit. Presuporre, as
Presuponere. Presuposito, a purpose, an intent, a presupposed matter.
Presuposto, presupposed, imagined, coniectured, admitted, put case. also a
purpose or intent. Presuta, a taking, a scazing or laying hold of. Also an
herb in Italy which they use for rennet to make cheese with. Presutto, any
kind of dried bacon. Pretacchione, a filthy, lubbarly, greasy, hedge priest.
Pretaria, the order or crew of priests, a priests dwelling, a parsonage. Also a
priesthood. Prete, a priest, a churchman, a clergy man. Also a fish so
called. Prete, or Preue, as Becca in cauo. Pretelle, Pretendere, tendo, tesi,
teso, or tenduto, to pretend, to design, to intend, to mean, to challenge.
Also to lay for a thing before it come, to make a pretense or color, to show
or pretend, to dissemble. Also to draw, set, hold or hang a curtain or other
thing before, to cover, or hide with any thing, to lay for ones self or
against another, to lay for a cloak or excuse. Pretenduto, Preteso, pretended,
deseigned, intended, meant, challenged, claimed, Look Pretendere. Pretendente, a
pretendent, a pretender, an intender, a meaner. Also pretending or intending.
Pretendentia, as Pretensione. Pretensione, a pretense, an intent, a challenge, a
pretext, a claim, a pretending. Preterire, risco, rito, to transgress, to
trespass, to pass or go over, to go beyond, to go past, to escape, to
ouerslip, to make no mention of, to ouerpasse, to leave out a thing that should
be spoken. Preterito, transgressed, trespassed, past over, ouerslipt, ouerpast,
past, that is gone past, neglected. Also dead or departed, vide Preterire.
Preterito, past, forepast, of yore, ouerpast, neglected, ouerslipt. Preterito
perfetto, the preterperfectence of a verb. Preterito piu che perfetto, the
preterpluperfectence of a verb. Pretermettere, metto, misi, messo, to
pretermit, to omit, to neglect, to intermit, to ouerslip, to leave untouched,
to forget, to pass over, not to speak of. Preterrnesso, pretermitted,
omitted, neglected, intermitted, ouerslipt, left off, left untouched, forgotten,
past over, not spoken of. Pretermissione, a pretermission, an omitting, a
neglecting, an ouerslipping, a leaving out, a letting a thing pass, a
forgetting. Pretesa, as Pretentione. Pretesco, priestlike, like a priest.
Pretesmo, Pretesimo, priesthood, the order of a priest. Preteso, as Pretenduto.
Pretesta, as Pretesto. Also according to Roman histories a long roab or gown
edged or guarded about with purple silk that noblemens children used to wear
till seven years of age, and therefore were called Pretestati. It was also
the robe of estate that the king of Rome or other chief officer did wear when
they sat in their majesty, and was wont to be burned with them that died in
their office: neither could any judge give sentence on a man, till he had put
off the robe. It was also a cote that captains wore in triumph, and that
senators were known by from the order of gentlemen. Pretesto, a pretext, a
pretense, a meaning, a color, a show, a cloak, an excuse for any thing.
Pretiare, as Pregiare. Pretio, as Pregio. Pretiatore, a prizer, a valuer, an
esteemer, a sessor a syzer, a setter of prizes. Pretignolo, a poor silly
priest. Pretiosita, preciousnes, deerenes, great price and value. Pretioso,
precious, costly, dear, of great price and value, very good, sumptuous,
excellent. Pretore, a praetor, a captain, a chief in justice, a lord mayor,
namely according to the Roman histories: an office in old time having the
rule of an army, who afterward had authority in judgment, and was as a chief
justice, having other judges sitting under him: the Romans had as many
pretors chosen, as they had countries or provinces subject to the Empire.
Pretoriale, of or pertaining to a praetor. Pretorio, a place of judgment, a
guildehall, a seat or court of justice, the house or pauilion of the praetor or
chief captain, of a mayor, of a judge or of an alderman or such magistrate.
also a princes palace, court or manor. Also a place or court where judgment
was given, and matters were heard by the pretour, or lord chife justice.
Pretta, full, perfect, right, very, meare, sheare, pure. Pretura, the office,
dignity, or degree of a praetor, lord chief justice or other like slate.
Preualentia, the excellency or better value. Preualere, vaglio, valsi, valuto,
to prevail, to excel, to pass, to be better or of more value, to be more
worth, to be more strong and doughtie. Preualuto, prevailed, past, excelled,
vide Preualere. Preuaricare, to offend, to transgress or break the law, to
make semblance or show to do a thing and do clean contrary, to work by
collusion in pleading, and purposely to suffer his adversary to obtain
against him that he defends, to betray ones cause to his adversary: to
falsify by collusion, and swerve from truth, to go out of the right way, to
leave out that which ought to be spoken, and more earnestly declared, as
effectual to the matter. Preuaricatione, preuarication, collusion in pleading,
corrupting of an accuser, a letting pass or light touching of that which
should more earnestly have been declared, as making much to the matter.
Preuaricatore, a corrupter, an offender, a worker by collusion, a transgressor.
also he that leaves the right, or speaks not that which ought to be spoken,
he that pleads by collusion and furthereth the adversaries cause, an attorney
or man of the law pretending to help a man and betrayeth his cause to his
adversary, an answerer corrupted by the person accused, a false dealer, a
corrupt accuser, a swaruer from truth, reason, and honesty. Preuatura,
prouender. Also a kind of fresh cheese and cream. Preue, as Pieue. Preuedere,
veggo, viddi, visto, or veduto, to foresee, to forecast, foreundersta^d, to
prevent, to see before, to forespie. Preueduto, Preuisto, foreseen, forecast,
fore-vnderstood, prevented, seene-before, fore-espide. Preuedimento, foresight,
forecast, a foreheedines, a fore-espying. Preueditore, a fore-seer, a
forecaster, a foreheeder, a fore-espyer. Preuenire, vengo, venni, venuto, to
prevent, to come or go before, to forestall, to outgo, to overtake, to do a
thing before another. Preuenuto, prevented, come before, overtaken,
forestalled, outgon. Preuentione, prevention, anticipation, an ouertaking, an
outgoing, a coming before one. Preuento, as Preuenuto, as Prouento.
Preuentore, a preuentor, an ouertaker, an anticipator. Preuertire, tisco, tito,
to pervert, to divert, to let, to hinder. Preuertito, perverted, diuerted, let,
hindered. Preuia, private, particular, singular. Preuincia, as Prouincia.
Preuosto, as Prouosto. Prezza, as Prescia. Prezzare, as Pregiare. Prezzemolo,
the herb parsely. Prezzo, as Pregio. Prezzolare, to hire, to bargain upon a
price. Pria, first, erst, sooner, before. Pria che, rather then, before that,
sooner. Priapea, all manner of filthy, bawdie verses touching priuities of men.
Priapo, the god of gardines. Also a man's privy member or yard. Priapismo, the
office of the god of gardins, of, or pertaining to a man's priuities, or the
standing of a man's yard, which is when the yard is stretched out in length and
breadth, nothing provoking the pacient to lust or desire. If it come with a
beating and panting of the yard the phisicions call it then Satiriasi. Called
also in English priapisme, pricke-pride, or lust-pride. Priario, the first,
chief, or supreme, as Primario. Pridiano, of the day before. Priegare, as
Pregare. Prieghi, as Preghi. Prieghiera, as Preghiera. Prigionare, to emprison,
to take prisoner. Prigione, a prisoner, a iaylor or keeper of a prison. Also a
prison. Prigionia, emprisonment. Prigioniere, as Prigione. Prignuoli, a kind
of mushroms, or todestooles. Prima, first, erst, sooner, rather, before. Also a
game at cards called Prime, Primero, or Primanista. Primamente, first, erst,
sooner, before. Primaio, Primario, the first or chief man, chief, passing,
good, worthy, above other. Primano, the tribune or lieutenant that appointed
wages to the first legion, or a soldier of the first legion. Primare, to
choose or prefer first. Primato, chosen or preferred first. Also a primate or
chief in the clergy. Also a magistrate or chief governor of a city with
other by whom the people are governed, a chief or noble man. Also primacie,
chief place, excellency, chief rule and authority, the hiest state. Prima
rosa, the flower called the primrose or cowslip. Primaticcio, such fruits as
are ^arelie ripe, and come before others. Primauera, the spring time of the
year. Also the flower called cowslips. Prima vista, a game at cards called
Primauista. Primera, a game at cards called Primero. Primeramente, as
Primamente. Primero, as Primiero. Primeuo, the elder, or the first age.
Primicci frutti, such fruits as are soonest ripe, timely or early fruits.
Primicero, as Primocero. Primicie, as Primitie. Primiera, the game at cards
called primero Primierano, a primerian, one that plays at primero. Primiero,
first, sooner, rather. Also a chief or principal. Primigenia, as
Primogenitura. Primigenio, that comes naturally of it self, that has not
the beginning of another, the first or original. Primi nati, our forefathers,
our ancestors, our elders, such as were before us. Primipilaro, as Primipilo.
Primipilo, a captain of the vantgarde or he that fights next the standard.
Primitie, the first offerings or first fruits of the year that are offered unto
God or the firstlings of yearly fruits. Primitio, the foremost, the first, he
that is next to one. Primitiua, the first cause or former matter Primitiuo,
primitive, first, that has no beginning of other. Primo, first, erst, before,
sooner, rather, soonest, prime. Also best, more esteemed, new, more excellent,
chief, principal, highest, sovereign, above others. Primocerio, a supreme,
first or chief in dignity or authority, a Princes chief secretary: he that
in a religious house has charge of the wax, torches, tapers or lights.
Primogenito, the first borne or first begotten. Primogenitura, the eldership in
birth, the title of the eldest child in inheritance. Primo nato, as
Primogenito. Primo piatto, the first or chief mess at a table. Also a young
ridden horse. Primordio, a first beginning, offspring, or original. Primori,
noble men, chief men, peers, states. Also they that stand foremost in an
army. Primpilo, the first or chief rank or order of soldiers, or as
Primipilo. Primula, a Primrose or a Cowslip. Prince, as Prence. Principale, as
Prencipale. Principalita, as Prencipalita. Principatione, a beginning, a
commencing. Principato, as Prencipato. Principe, as Prencipe. Principetto,
Principino, as Prencipeno Principessa, as Prencipessa. Principiante, a
beginner, a commencer. Principiare, to begin, to commence, to give the onset.
Principij, beginnings, principles, the grounds of any thing. Principio, a
beginning, a commencement, an onset, an entrance, a proem, a ground, a
fountain, a well spring, a race, a stock or chief original of a thing.
Priorato, Priorado, a priorie or religious house for men, a priorship,
eldership, senioritie or pre-eminence. Priore, a prior, a chief, a superior, a
senior, an ancestor, a former, a preceding man, a more excellent. Prioretto, a
little priorie, a little prior. Prioria, a priorie or a priors office.
Priorita, prioritie, eldership, ancientnes, senioritie. Prisco, as Pristino,
that is of the time passed, of old time, ancient, former, old. Priste, a kind
of fish of great length and slender, which in going cutteth the waves. Also a
long and narrowship or gallie fashioned like that fish. Pristino, old, ancient,
former, first, woonted, accustomed. Pritanij, the presidents of the senate of
Athens were so called. Priuagione, as Priuatione. Priuare, to deprive, to
bereave, to take from, to spoil, to reaue. Priuato, Priuado, bereaved,
deprived, spoiled, reaued, bereft or taken from one. Also private, familiar,
acquainted or near and inward with one. Also properly a man's own, of or
belonging to one or to a few, particular, peculiar, special, private. Also a
private person that has no common office or authority, out of office.
Priuatamente, privately, secretly, privily, familiarly, peculiarly, severally
as a private man. Priuatione, a privation, a depriving, a bereauing, a reauing.
Priuatiuo, privative, that does deprive or bereaueth or may be deprived.
Priuigna, a daughter in law whose first husband is dead. Priuigno, a son in
law whose first wife is dead. Priuilegiare, to privilege, to give pre-eminence
or prerogative. Priuilegio, a privilege, a pre-eminence, a prerogative, a
grant. Priuo, void, naked, empty, bare, sance, without, deprived, bereaved,
reaued, made void, exempted. Also as Priuato. Pro, valiant, worthy,
courageous, hardy, full of prowess. Also gain, saving, wealth, riches. Also
good, profit, health or welfare. Bu^n pro vi faccia, much good may it do you.
Pro vi faccia, much good may it do you. Also used for God give you joy.
Proagonio, whoredom, adultery. Proamita, a great aunt, a great grandfathers
sister. Proaua, a great grandame or great grandmother. Proauo, a great
grandsire or great grandfather. Probabile, probable, likely, that may be
proved to be true, like to be true. Probabilita, probability, likeness of
truth, a color or appearance of truth. Probare, to prove, to approve, to
confirm, to establish, to allow, to persuade or show by reason, and example
that it is good. Probatione, a probation, an approbation, an allowing, a
proof, a trial or assay. Probeuole, probable, that may be proved, as
Probabile. Probita, honesty, sincerity, goodness, virtue, vprightnes.
Problema, a problem, a proposition or sentence proposed with a question
annexed. in Mathematikes it is opposed to Th^or^^a, and signifies such a
proposition as is especially referred to practice or the doing of something.
Probostide, the snout, nose or trunk of an Elephant. Procacchia, the herb
called purslane. Procacciante, a procurer, an obtainer, a purueyer, a
purchaser. Also a good lad, a bon companion. Procacciare, to procure, to
obtain, to get, to puruey, to shift for, to endeavor for to get.
Procacciatore, a procurer, an obtainer, a shifter, a purueier. Procaccino, a
broker or procurer for another, a shifter for himself. Procaccio, as
Procacciatore. Also a carrier or post, namely the ordinary post that goes
between Rome and Naples. Also a procuring or shifting for. Procace, a malapert
or shameless asker, reproachful, ill toonged, a railer, one always saucily
craving, violent and importunate, lecherous, a wanton riotous banquetor or
Epicure. Procacita, a procuring, getting or shifting for. Also saucines,
wantonness, malapertnes, scoffing. Procedente, proceeding, a proceeder, marching
forward, passing on. Procedentia, a proceeding or going on, a marching forward.
a behavior. Procedere, cedo, cedei, ceduto, to proceed, to go on, to go
forward, to go beyond, to go or pass forth, to prevail or profit, to keep
on a course, to rise to dignity or promotion, to increase or run on, to
advance himself or prosper. Procedere alla sfacciata, to proceed impudently.
Procedere alla carlona, to proceed clownishly or plainly. Procedere realmente,
to proceed like an honest man. Procedimento, a proceeding or going on, a
marching forward. a behavior. Proceditore, a proceeder, a goer on. Procedura,
a proceeding, a behavior, a going forward, a marching on. Proceduto,
proceeded, gone on, gone foreward. Look Procedere. Procelemmatico, consisting
of four short syllables. Procella, a storm or a tempest of wind or rains,
namely at sea. Also a danger, a blustering, an adversity. Also a troubling or
ruffling in a common weal. Procellare, to storm, to be tempestuous, to
ruffle. Procelloso, stormy, tempestuous, blustering, troublesome, turbulent.
Procerita, length, height, tallnes. Processare, to sue, to process, or call
one in suit or law. Processione, a procession, or going in procession. Also a
process, a success, a going on, a proceeding, a progress, a passing forward.
Processionale, of or pertaining to procession. Processo, of the latins and
greeks called Apophisi, that part of a bone which exceeds in height the
natural places near unto it, stretching forth its substance in increasing
manner like a knot swelling out from the stock of a tree, such parts of bones
the Anatomists call Processes, and are true parts of the bones themselves.
Also a process, a proxy, a suit in law. Also space, tract, or process, or
proceeding of time. Also going on, proceeding. Also progress, increase,
success, or event. Prochemasi, a foretoken of a tempest to come. Prochi, has
bin used for riuals or foefellowes in love. Also a greedy lecher, or lecherous
man. Prochissi, riuals, corriuals, or copartners in love. Procianare, to
approach. Procianamente, nearly, neighborly. Procianita, neighborhood,
neerenes. Prociano, near, nigh, neighbor. Proci, as Prochi. Procidentia, the
falling down of the fundament, a falling down of his place. Procinto, ready,
prepared, in order, in a readiness. Also the procinct or state of an army or
battle when it is ready to give the onset. Also guirt and encompassed about.
Also provision before any thing is done. Also readiness, or promptnes. Proclama,
a proclamation. Proclamare, to call or proclaim, to cry out. Proclamatione, a
proclamation, or crying out. Proclino, a rival, a competitor, or foefellow in
love. Procliuio, prompt or ready to fall, enclining, bending. Procliuita,
inclination, disposition, easines, or facility to any thing. Proco, as
Proclino. Proconsolo, a proconsull, a commissioner or a deputy, he that was
sent with an extraordinary power of a consul into any country to govern it.
Proconsolare, of or pertaining to a proconsull, or such an officer.
Procrastinare, to defer, to prolong, to put off from day to day, to make
delay, to linger the time. Procrastinatione, a deferring, a prolonging, a
delaying or putting off from day to day, a lingering. Procreare, to engender, to
beget, to create, to make and bring forth, to procure and work. Procreatione,
an ingendring or begetting. Proculo, he that is borne when his father is far
out of the country, or when his father is very old. Procura, a letter of
attorney, a proxy, a commission, an administration, a procurement, a mean, a
procuration, or solicitation. Also an administration of a thing, the office or
charge in doing a thing. Procurare, to procure, to obtain, to play the
proctor, to do or solicit another man's business, to have the charge of another
man's matters, to see to the affairs of another man. Procuraria, Procureria,
the doing or managing of another man's business by atturneyship. Procuratia, a
proctorship. Also a procuration, as Procura. Procuratione, as Procura.
Procuratiuo, procuring, that may be procured. Procuratore, a proctor, a
procurer, a solicitor, an attorney, an advocate, an administrator, an
obtainer, an agent for another, a factor, one that sees to another man's
affairs, or that has the charge of a thing committed to him. Procuratoria,
the office or dignity of a lawyer, atturnie, or proctor. Proda, the side,
shore, bank or brim of a river. Also the fore-deck, forepart, fore-castle, or
prore of a ship. Prodare, to come near or touch the shore, to board or grapple
ships together. Prodato, come near the shore or bank or side. Also boarded or
grapled with a ship. Prode, valiant, hardy, courageous, full of prowes, stout,
noble, worthy, haughty, wise, grave, notable, of great worth. Prodese, the
name of a cable in a ship. Prodeuole, as Prode. Prodeuolmente, valiantly,
hardilie, courageously, stoutly, nobly, haughtilie, wisely. Prodezza,
valiantnes, hardines, courage, prowess, valor, stoutnes, noblenes, worthiness.
Prodigale, as Prodigo. Prodigalita, prodigality, lauishnes, unthriftiness,
wastefulnes, riot. Prodigalmente, prodigally, wastefully, riotouslie,
excessiuely, outragiously, disorderly. Prodigare, to be or play the lavish or
prodigal man, to be wastefull or riotous, to lashout money wastefully, or in
things needless, to consume or spend riotously, to spend frankely.
Prodigentia, as Prodigalita. Prodigio, a prodigy, a wonder, a thing monstrous
and unnatural, a thing seldom seen, which signifies that some great good or
evil shall follow. Prodigioso, prodigious, monstrous, unnatural, woondrous,
that gives a strange sign or token, wonderful, contrary to the common
course of nature. Prodigita, as Prodigalita. Prodigo, prodigal, riotous,
lavish, excessive, wastefull, outrageous, disordred in expenses, a spendall, a
waste-good, an unthrift, that will lavish where it needs not, one over
liberal. Prodire, disco, dito, to betray, to accuse, to bewray with treason,
to show, to utter, to appeach, to accuse, to disclose, to deceive, to forsake
in ones need, to leave without succor. Prodito, betraide, accused, bewraid
with treason, detected, deceived, discovered. Proditione, treason, betraying,
uttering, bewraying, disclosing, disloyalty. Proditore, a traitor, a villain,
a deceiuer, a betrayer, an accuser, a discloser. Proditoriamente,
traiterouslie, villainouslie, trecherouslie. Prodotti, the fruits or gains of
any man's labor. Prodotto, as Produtto. Prodromo, he that runs before to
bring tidings of ones coming, a forerunner. Producere, duco, dussi, dutto, or
dotto, to produce, to yield, to bring forth. Also to prolong or draw in length.
Also to draw forward. Also to drive off with fair words and promises.
Produceuole, bringing forth, fruitful, producing. Producitore, as Produttore.
Produtto, produced, yielded, or brought forth, prolonged, or drawn in length,
driven off, etc. Produrre, as Producere. Produttore, a producer, or bringer
forth. Produtt^one, a production, or bringing forth. Produttino, fruitful,
producing, yielding, bringing forth. Proemiale, of or pertaining to a proeme.
Proemio, a proeme, a preface, a prologue, a fore-speech. Profanare, to profane,
to abuse, to unhallow, to pervert, or turn holy things to a common and
unholy use. Profanatione, profanation, or making of a thing profane that was
holy. Profanatore, a profaner, an abuser, an vnhallower. Profanita,
profanenes, abuse of holy things. Profano, profane, unhallowed, wicked, not
consecrated or given to God. Also converted from an holy to a base or common
use. Profato, a general or universal proposition or rule in any science or
art, a position, an axiom, as the logitians call it. Also a principle or
maxim as lawyers term it. Proferenza, a pronunciation, or ready utterance in
speech. Proferire, profero, proferito, to profer, to offer. Also to pronounce,
to bring, put, or show forth, to take or bring out, to show, publish,
disclose, tell abroad, utter, set or bear forth, to set forward, to allege,
or say for himself, to recite, to rehearse, or reckon. Proferta, an offer, a
profer, an offering. Proferto, Proferito, offered, profred, pronounced, Look
Proferire. Professare, to profess, or make profession of. Also to read
publikelie. Professione, a profession, a quality, a trade, a calling, a
vocation, a faculty, an open confession or acknowledgement, an open reading or
professing. Professore, a professor, a reader in open schools. Profeta, a
prophet, a soothsayer, a foreteller of things to come. Profetare, as
Profetizzare. Profetessa, a prophetess, a woman prophet. Profetia, a
prophecy, a divination, a foretelling of things to come, a revelation.
Profetico, prophetical, as a prophet, pertaining to a prophet, or divination.
Profetiggiare, to prophecy, to soothsay, to foretell things to come. Also to
sing praises to God, to preach, to interpret. Profetizzare, as Profetiggiare.
Proficiente, helping, profiting, doing much good. Profilare, to draw, to limne,
to paint, to mark, to erect. Profilatoio, the name of a goldsmithes tool.
Profilo, a border, a limning or drawing of any picture. Profio, as Porfido, or
Profilo. Also in Grison, a round welt or ring filed and raised in the nether
side of the scath to keep the horse in subjection by pressing the gum, not
greatly needful at all. Profittare, to profit, to gain, to get, to thrive.
Profitteuole, profitable, gainful, good. Profitto, profit, gain, utility,
cheuissance. Profluentia, abundance, plenty, flowing store. Profluuio, an
issuing, a gushing or violent streaming out. Profondare, to sink, to dig
deep. Profondere, fondo, fondei, fonduto or fuso, to power or cast out
largely, to spend exceedingly, and out of measure, to lavish or lash out, to
burst forth abundantly. Profondita, profoundnes, deepnes, depth. Profondo,
profound, deep, high, insatiable, of much receipt. Also a gulf, a deep place
of water. Also a bottomless pit, the sea, the deep. Also the belly.
Profugio, a place of refuge or help, a place of safety, a sanctuary, a thing
whereto one flies for succor Profugo, a fugitive, a wandrer, a fleeter, a
runnagate, one that flies or is driven out of his country, a wandrer from
place to place. Profumare, to perfume, or cause to smell sweet. Profumaro, a
perfumer. Profumato, perfumed. Profumaria, a perfumers shop. Profumatello, an
idle, wanton, perfumed, effeminate smell-seast. Profumatore, a perfumer.
Profumeria, a perfumers shop. Profumiere, a perfumer. Profumo, a perfume or
sweet smell. Profundare, as Profondare. Profundere, as Profondere. Profundita,
as Profondita. Profundo, as Profondo. Profuso, profuse, flowing, gushing,
issuing or streaming out, very abundant, very much, liberal, prodigal,
lavish, riotous, excessive, sumptuous, glorious, immoderate, disordered,
wastfull, unthrifty. Progenero, my nieces husband. Also the husband of my
daughter. Progeny, a progeny, an issue, a generation, a stock, an offspring,
a pedigree, a lineage, a success in blood. Progenitore, a progenitor, a father,
a grandfather. Progettare, to project, to cast off, to prostrate. Progettione,
as Progetto. Progetto, a project, a casting out, a prostrating, a iutting out.
Also thrown out a far, cast forth, prostrate, forsaken and laid aside. Also
contemned or of a little account. Proglossi, the forepart of the tongue.
Prognata, a kind of meat or sauce made of prunes. Also venison sauce or
galandine for swans. Prognato, borne, descended or come of a stock or linnage,
begotten. Progne, a swallow Progredere, gredo, gredei, gresso, to go forth,
on, out, before or forward, to proceed, to enter or go forward in. Progresso,
a progress, a proceeding, a marching or passing forth, that has passed or
gone forward, the course or continuing of a course begone. Progressione, a
progression, a proceeding, a going forward, a progress. Prohemiare, to begin
an oration, to make an entrance or proheme. Prohemio, a proheme, a preamble, a
preface, a beginning of a matter. Prohibire, bisco, bito, to forbid, to
prohibit, to let, to hinder, to stop, to stay, not to suffer. Prohibito,
forbidden, let, hindered, prohibited, stopped, staide, not suffered. Prohibitione,
a prohibition, a forbidding, a let. Proietto, as Progetto. Prolatione, a
prolation, a speaking or pronouncing. Also a prolonging or deferring. Prolato,
spoken, pronounced, rehearsed, delayed or prolonged, uttered, set, brought, or
showed forth. Prole, issue of ones body, progeny, a child, a race, a stock,
a lineage, or offspring. Prolessi, a figure in speaking, whereby we preue^^ and
dissolve what is intended to be said against us, a certain natural knowledge
conceived in the mind. Proletaro, vel Proletario, of a poor and base
condition, that has many children and little or no maintenance by reason of
their small ability, or such a one as gives nothing to the commonwealth, but
only a supply of children, poor sorts of people unfit for war. Prolissita,
prolixitie, liberality, abundance, length, tediousnes in speech. Prolisso,
prolixe, tedious, long, plentious, sumptuous, liberal in speech, large, free,
bounteous, inclined to. Prologare, to speak first, or make a preface or a
prologue. Prologio, as Prologo. Prologo, the party that speaks a prologue, a
prologue, a preface, a forespeech, the first entry into a communication.
Prolonga, a delay, a demur, a deferring, a prolonging, a delaying or putting
off. Prolongamento, as Prolonga. Prolongare, to prolong, to prorogue, to defer,
to lengthen, to put off. Prolongatione, as Prolonga. Proloquio, a perfect
sentence. Also a beginning, a proposition, a maxim, an axiom, an aphorism, a
clause taken as a sure ground to prove a thing. Proluuie, filth or ordure
washed off from any thing. Also the laske or loosenes of the belly. Proluuio,
a shedding of waters or any thing else in great abundance: ordure or filth
washed from any thing. Also prodigality and wastefull spending. Promesciere,
to shed and power out. Also to mesh or mingle together. Promessa, a promise, a
warranting, a ^ow a covenant. Promessione, Promissione, a promise, a vow, a
covenant. Promettere, metto, misi, messo, or mettuto, to promise, to warrant,
to answer for, to vow. Promesso, Promettuto, promised, warranted, answered
for, vowed. Prometter mari and monti, to promise heaven and earth or impossible
things. Promettere Roma and Toma, to promise impossibilities or gods coape.
Promettitore, a promiser, a warranter, a surety, a vower. Prominentia, the
extending or iutting of a thing out or over. Also a penthouse, a prominence, by
which word the Anatomists understand what portion soever does notably surmount
the parts circumiacent in thicknes, like as a hill in the plain. Promiscuo,
confused, mingled, one with another, mingle mangle, common to many, without
difference, mutual. Promissione, a promise, a vow. Promolgare, to publish, to
proclaim, to noise abroad, to propose. Promontorio, a promontorie or hill
lying and shooting out into the sea as an elbow. Promoto, moved forward, set
forth, promoted, advanced. Promouere, to prefer, to advance, to promote.
Promulgare, as Promolgare. Promulgatione, a proclaiming, a publishing.
Promuside, the trunk or snout of an Elephant which he uses in steed of a
hand. Pronepote, a nephews son. Pronica, a kind of root in Arithmetike.
Pronezza, a nieces daughter. Prono, having the face downward, flatling. Also
prone, inclined, ready, easy, quick, light, prompt, nigh at hand, quickly
passing or running away, bending to an end, headlong down. Pronome, a
pronoune. Pronontia, a pronunciation or utterance of speech, a speaking out.
Pronontiare, to pronounce or utter in speech, to declare openly, to name, to
make express mention, to tell precisely and expressly, to give and pronounce
sentence, to say by heart. Pronontiatione, a pronunciation or utterance in
speech, a speaking out. Pronosticare, to prognosticate, to foreshew, to
foretell or foreknow things before they come to pass. Pronosticatione, a
prognostication, a foretelling, a fore-signe: a token of a thing to come.
Pronosticatore, a prognosticator, a foreteller of things or rather he that
knows things ere they come to pass. Pronostico, as Pronosticatione.
Prontare, to make ready, to prepare, to provide. Also to prompt. Prontezza,
promptnes, readiness, pronenes, preparation. Prontitudine, as Prontezza. Pronto,
ready, prompt, prone, quick, prepared, careful, speedy, apt, fit, nimble,
easy, at hand. Also shameless or bold. Pronuba, she that brings a bride
home to the bridegroomes house, or else that trimmeth and makes her ready
when she goes to bed, a bride maid. Also the goddess of marriage. Pronulo, a
kind of thornie tree. Pronuntia, as Pronontia. Pronuntiare, as Pronontiare.
Pronuntiatione, as Pronontia. Pronuora, the nephews wife. Prophanare, as
Profanare. Prophano, as Profano. Propagare, to propagate, to extend, to dilate,
to increase, to multiply, to prolong, to continue. Also to prune or cut vines
to make them grow the faster. Propagatione, a propagation, an increase, a
multiplying, an extending, a continuing. Propagatore, an increaser, a
multiplier, a continuer, an inlarger. Propagina, as Propagatione. Propensione,
inclination of mind or readiness. Propenso, ready, toward, inclined unto,
weighty and great, apt, bent or ready for. Propensita, readiness, towardnes,
inclination. Properantia, speedmaking, haste. Propheta, as Profeta. Prophetico,
as Profetico. Prophetizzare, as Profetiggiare. Propiare, as Propriare.
Propieta, as Proprieta. Propio, as Proprio. Propina, a drinking, a health or a
pledge to one. Also a place a part from another place. Propinquare, to approach,
to adioine unto, to neighbor, to come near. Propinquita, propinquitie,
proximitie, neighborhood, affinity, neerenes, alliance, kindred. Propinquo,
near, by, adjoining, close to it, a neighbor, a kinsman, an allie or a nigh
friend. Propitiabile, soon pleased with supplications or entreaty, meet to
do sacrifice with. Propitiare, to reconcile, to appease, to atone, to
mitigate, to assuage God with sacrifice. Propitiatione, a sacrifice to appease
Gods displeasure. Propitiatorio, the place wherr God is pacified. Also a table
set on the arc of the old testament. Also of or belonging to such a sacrifice.
Propitio, propitious, favorable, loving, not displeased, gentle, propice, not
displeased with. Propoli, that which Bees make at the entrance of the hiues to
keep out cold called Beeglue. Propolsato, repelled, driven back, beaten
down. Proponere, pongo, posi, posto, to propose, to purpose, to propound, to
intend, to mean, to set out, to show, to publish and set abroad to the
people, to be advised, to set before him, to promise or lay down a prize or
reward for any notable act, to open and declare. Also to consider, regard or
imagine, to appoint or determine. Proporre, as Proponere. Proponimento, a
purpose, an intent, a deseigne, a proposition. Look Proponere. Proportionare,
to proportion, to rate, to measure out equally, to make one thing answer
another in due proportion. Proportionale, proportionable, according to true
measure and proportion. Proportionalita, proportion, proportionalitie,
equalnes. Proportione, a proportion, a share, a sise of any thing, a measure,
an equalnes, when one thing answers to another in comparison.
Proportioneuole, proportionable, each part answering other in due proportion.
Proposito, a purpose, an intent, a meaning, a deseigne, an end. Propositione, a
proposition, an intent, that whereby we show whereof we will speak or what we
will prove, a sentence proposed containing the sum of that we will speak.
Proposo, as Proposto. Proposta, a purpose, a proposition. Also as Propositione.
Proposto, proposed, purposed, determined, appointed, propounded, intended,
meant, a decree, a purpose, an intent, a law, a proposition, a determination, a
deseigne. Also one that is advanced or set in a place of dignity, preferred,
advanced. Also a provost over others, set abroad or open before men's eyes,
proclaimed. Look Proponere. Propretore, a lieutenant sent to govern a
Province with the authority of a Praetor, a Lord justice. Propriamente,
properly, particularly, conveniently, as the nature of the thing requires.
Propriare, or Propiare, to appropriate, to make proper, to make special ones
own. Propriatione, an appropriation. Proprieta, a propriety, incidencie,
quality, nature, or specialtie. Proprio, proper, peculiar, ones own,
incident, private, particular, specially ones own. Propudio, shame,
dishonestie, abominable use of lechery in most unseemly sort. Also the
party so abused. Propudioso, that is filthilie abused in lechery.
Propugnacolo, a fortress, a strong hold, a bulwark, a skonce, a defense, a
blockhouse. Propugnare, to fight, to defend or contend for. Propugnatione, a
defending or fighting for. Propugnatore, a defender, a maintainer, one that
fights in defense of some body, a champion. Propulsato, as Propolsato.
Proquestore, he that extraordinarily is sent as questor into any country.
Prora, as Proda. Prorare, as Prodare. Prorire, risco, rito, to itch, to smart,
to tetter, to gnaw inwardly. Also to have a list or desire to a thing.
Prorito, itched, smarted, tettered, skurned, gnawne inwardly. Also an itch, a
smart, a tetter, a skurffe, a ringworme. Proritatione, a biting or gnawing in
the entrails or stomach, which is caused by a sharp humor, engendered of
sorrow, anger, watching, mawe-wormes, etc. Prorogare, to prorogue, to prolong,
to defer, to delaie, to drive off. Prorogatione, a proroguing, a prolonging,
a deferring, a delaying, a driving off. Prorogatiua, a prerogative, a
pre-eminence. Prorompere, rompo, ruppi, rotto, to break or burst forth with
violence, to burst out, to leap or go out of a place with violence, to rush
out. Prorotto, broken, or burst forth with violence, lept or gone out
rushinglie or running swiftly. Also desperate and headlong. Prorsi, limits or
bounds of land directed to the east. Prosa, any thing written or spoken in
prose, a continued style, that which is not meetre. Prosapia, a progeny, a
descent of blood, a pedigree, a generation, a race, a lineage. Prosare, to write
or speak in prose. Prosatore, a writer or speaker in prose. Proscenio, a stage
or skaffold for players to play upon, but properly the place before the
skaffold out of which the players come. Prosciutto, any kind of dride bakon,
or martlemas beef. Prosciogliere, sciolgo, sciolsi, sciolto, to loosen, to
free, to set at liberty, to discharge. Proscriuere, scriuo, scrissi, scritto,
to sell, publish or proclaim openly, to banish, to proscribe. Proscrittione,
the manner of condemnation when it is proclaimed, that who so ever finds a
man may lawfully kill him, and have a reward, a proscription, a banishment.
Also an open sale. Proscritto, set out, or proclaimed to be sold, proscribed or
banished, so that any man may kill him. Prosedano, an unaptness to generation by
overmuch labor, namely in beasts. Proseguire, guisco, guito. Proseguitare, to
prosecute, to pursue, to follow after, to declare or speak further, to
continue with, to bring to an end. Prosimurio, a place without the walls of
Rome where the bishops of the Gentiles made their diuinations. Prosodia, the
art of accenting, or rule of pronouncing words truly, long, or short.
Proslanuanomeno, a kind of musical note, or tune. Prosontione, as
Presontione. Prosontuoso, as Presontuoso. Prosone, a slow, wary, circumspect
speaker. Prosopopeia, a faining of any person to speak, a representing of
persons. Prosperare, to prosper, to thrive, to have good success in things, to
be fortunate, to give prosperity, to make prosperous, to give success unto.
Prospereuole, as Prospero. Prosperita, prosperity, thrift, good fortune, good
success in things. Prospero, prosperous, thriuing, in good plight, that gives
or receives prosperity, luckie, fortunate, good, happy. Prosperoso, as
Prospero. Prospicientia, providence, circumspectnes, foresight, and
consideration, foreheede. Prospicuo, goodly or fair to see, or behold, or
which may be seen a far off. Prossimano, as Prossimo. Prossimare, to
approach, to come near, to neighbor, to adioyne unto. Prossimita, the nighest
degree of kindred, kindred, lineage, neighborhood, nighnes, proximitie.
Prossimo, near, nearest, next to, the second, the very next and immediately,
by, at hand, adjoining, neighboring. Also a neighbor, a neere-dweller, a
kinsman, an allye. Prossimurio, a place without the walls joining to the
city. Prostasia, pre-eminence. Prostate, a captain that comes to help in
wars, a governor. Prostendere, tendo, tesi, teso, to stretch for lazines or
want of sleep. Prosteso, stretched for lazines or idleness. Prostergere, tergo,
tergei, tergiuto, as Prosternare. Prostergiuto, as Prosternato. Prosternare, to
overthrow, to fell, to foil, to cast down, to bear, fell, strike, or cut
down, to fell flat, or lay a long to the ground, to vanquish in battle, to
saint or fail. Prosternatione, an overthrow, a casting down, a felling flat,
a vanquishing in battle. Prosthapherusi, a number or part which is sometime to
be added, and sometime to be taken away, called in latin Aequatio, in
astronomy it is commonly used for the difference of the true and equal
motion. Prostibula, a common whore, harlot, or strumpet. Prostituire, isco,
ito, to abandon to every man's abusing for money, to set to sale, to forsake, to
play the whore or bawd. Also to set open to every man that comes, to
practice bawdrie or harlotrie. Prostituito, abandoned to every man's abusing for
money, forsaken, set to sale, given over to others pleasure, played the whore,
the harlot, the bawd, or common strumpet. Also one that for money suffers
himself to be abused. Prostitutione, a prostitution, a setting to sale, or
open for money, a playing the whore, etc. Prostrare, to prostrate, to lie
along, to foil, to fell. Prostratione, an extreme weakness or feeblenes of
the body, insomuch that the diseased is feign to lie groueling in his bed,
being not able to stand on his feet, a prostrating, a lying flat, an
overthrow, a destroying. Prostrato, prostrate, lying flat, overthrown,
destroyed. Prostibolo, as Postribolo. Prosumere, sumo, sumei, sunto, as
Presumere. Prosunto, as Presumuto. Prosuntione, as Presontione. Prosuntuoso, as
Presontuoso. Protasio, a proposition, or a prologue of a comedy. Protatica
persona, he which is brought in in the beginning of a comedy to lay open the
argument, and appears no more throughout the whole comedy, the prologue.
Proteggere, teggo, tegei, teggiuto, to protect, to maintain, to uphold, to
defend, to cover, to hide, to save, to shield, to countenance, to back or
uphold one. Protendere, to set, put, cast, or stretch forth, to spread, to
defer, to prolong. Proteruia, as Proteruita. Proteruita, frowardnes,
peeuishnes, peruersenes, curstnes, waywardnes, skittishnes, snappishnes,
saucines, malapertnes, pride. Proteruo, froward, peevish, wayward, cursed,
perverse, skittish, snappish, saucie, malapert, proud, foolish, knauish,
fierce, arrogant, impudent. Protesi, a kind of figure in speech. Protesta, as
Protestatione. Protestare, to protest, to swear, to affirm, to denounce, or
to declare openly and manifestly whether a thing be to be done or no.
Protestatione, a protestation, a declaration, a denouncing, a swearing, an open
declaring of ones sentence or mind. Protestatore, a protestator, a swearer, a
denouncer, a declarer, he that declares manifestly what is to be eschued and
not done. Protesto, as Protestatione, as Pretesto. Protettione, a protection, a
couertbarne, a defense, a covering or fence of a thing. Protettore, a
protector, a defender, a maintainer. Prothimia, promptitude, gentle
entertainment. Protipo, that is made for an example or pattern, an image or
form whereof moulds be made in which things be cast. Proto, chief,
principal, highest, best, first, used much in composition, and taken from the
greek. Protocollo, a book wherein Scriueners register all their writings, any
thing that is first made, and needs correction. Protogono, of the first
kindred. Also the first child or first borne. Protomartire, a chief or first
martyr or witness. Protomatto, a chief or principal fool. Protomedico, a
chief or first physician. Protomedia, an herb much used at banquets in
Persia, that makes all them merry and forget all sorrow that eat of it.
Protomista, a first or chief Bishop, or Deane. Protonotario, a chief notarie,
or scriuener, or secretary. Protoplasto, first formed, or made. Protosi, a
disease or inflammation in the eyes, which by rupture makes them fall out of
their places, or when the membrane of the eye called Vuea by rupture falls
through Cornea. Prototipo, the first pattern. Protrarre, traggo, trassi,
tratto, to draw or drag forth, to protract, to defer, to prolong. Protratto,
protracted, deferred, prolonged, drawn forth. Protribunale, in judgment
before the magistrate seat. Proua, proof, trial, experience. Also an
attempt, a proffer, a show, an enterprise. Prouana, a bud or branch of a vine.
Also obstinate, wilful, or headstrong. Prouaneria, obstinacy, stiffneckednes,
wilfulnes. Prouanare, to bud or branch as a vine does, to be obstinate,
headstrong, or stiffnecked. Prouanza, obstinacy or wilfulnes. Also a proof or
trial. Prouare, to prove, to try, to experience, to persuade or show by
reason or example. Prouatore, a proouer, a trier, a probationer, a
practicioner. Prouatura, as Preuatura. Prouedenza, as Prouidenza. Prouedere,
veggo, viddi, veduto, or visto, to provide, to purueie, to prepare, to
forecast, to see for, to foresee, to take heed, to see, to consider, to take
order for. Proueduto, Prouisto, provided, purueied, prepared, forecast,
foreseen, taken-heed, taken order for. Prouedimento, a provision, a providing,
a purueying, a providence, a supply, a foreseeing, a taking heed, a taking
order for. Proueditore, a prouider, a purueier, a foreseer, one that takes
order for all things. Prouenca, as Prouinca. Prouenda, prouender or meat for
horses. Prouendare, to prouender or meat horses Prouento, the profit, increase
or fruit that comes and is gathered of any thing, plenty, revenues, yearly
rents and profits. Also good success. Prouenire, to come or proceed from. Also
to come or stepfoorth, to grow or increase, to be borne or brought forth into
the world, to happen or chance, to come to pass, to prove or come to good.
Prouenuto, commen or proceeded from. Also grown or increased, borne or brought
forth, happened or chanced, come to pass, proved good. Prouerbiale,
prouerbiall, frumping, full of skoffes, tants, quips, proverbs or old sawes.
Prouerbiare, to rebuke, to check, to tant, to reprove, to quip, to frump, to
sk^ffe, to cog withal. Prouerbiatore, a frumper, a sk^ffer, a quipper, a
flouter. Prouerbietto, a fine witty proverb or old saw: a quip, a frump.
Prouerbio, a proverb, an adage, a short witty saying, a common saying, an old
said saw. Prouerbioso, full of proverbs, quips or sententious sayings, tants,
frumps or skoffes. Prouetto, grown, sprung up, advanced, promoted, continued,
far spent. Pro vi faccia, much good may it do you. Also God give you joy.
Prouidente, as Prouido. Prouidentia, providence, foresight, warines, forecaste,
wisdom in providing for things to come, fore-heed. Prouido, provident, wary,
charie, foreseeing, wise, prudent, diligent, foreseeing a thing a far off and
providing for it before it come, circumspect, heedfull. Prouigione, as
Prouisione. Prouinca, the herb called Lesseron or Perwinke. Prouincia, a
province, a region, a country, a shire, properly a province or far country
subdued by force of arms, and kept under jurisdiction by a lieutenant sent
thither with commission to govern the same. Prouinciale, provincial,
national, pertaining to a province. Vide Corona. Also a forreiner. Prouisanti,
prouiders, purueiers, caters. Also such as sing extempore and speak at
random. Prouisare, to speak or sing extempore. Prouisionale, prouisionall,
pertaining to provisions. Prouisionare, to provide for, to give a pension or a
standing fee. Prouisione, a provision, a purueying or providing for, a
foreseeing of a thing. Prouisore, as Proueditore. Prouocare, to provoke, to
challenge, to defy one to fight, to appeal, to stir up, to call a far off, to
call forth, to stir, to inuit, to exhort. Prouocatione, a provocation, a
provoking, a chalenging. Prouocatiuo, provoking, chalenging, defying.
Prouocatore, a prouoker, a chalenger. Prouosto. as Proposto, a provost, a
marshall. Prua, as Proda. Pruare, as Prodare. Prudente, wise, wary, witty,
prudent, subtle, sly, charie, sage, expert, cunning, circumpect, learned,
skillful, witting, knowing. Prudentia, prudence, wisdom, wit, warines,
cunning, sage knowledge. Prudentissimo, most prudent, wise, witty or sage in
eschuing of things. Prugna, Prugnola, any kind of small plum, damzon, bulloes
or slow. Prugno, Prugnolo, a plum tree, damzon tree or slow tree. Pruina, a
hoare frost, a white frost. Also a mist, a fog, a chilling cold. Pruinare, to
freeze to a white hoarie frost, to be mistie or foggie. Pruire, pruisco,
pruito, as Prorire. Pruito, as Prorito. Pruna, Prunola, as Prugna. Pruneggioli,
as Pruniggioli. Prunella, the herb Selfheale, prunell, carpenters herb or
hooke-heale. Pruno, Prunolo, as Prugno. Pruni, shrubs, brakes, sprigs, bushes,
thorns, brambles or firs. Pruniggioli, small shrubs, brakes or brambles.
Prunoso, thornie, shrubbie, bushie, full of shrubs or thorns. Prunotta, a kind
of plum or damzon or prune. Pruoua, as Proua. Pruouare, as Prouare. Pruouatore,
as Prouatore. Prutire, as Prorire. Prurito, as Prorito. Prusa, a kind of fly
called a horse fly or a brizze. also a kind of fish so called in Genoua. Also
a worm that breeds in a kind of fish. Psalmodia, as Salmodia. Psalmo, as
Salmo. Psaloide, as Saloide. Psegma, as Semma. Psephisma, as Sephisma.
Psalterio, as Salterio. Pseudisodomo, a kind of building when the walls be made
of stone and of unequal thicknes. Pseudo, false, counterfeit, forged.
Pseudographia, a writing of a forged matter, a counterfeit writing. Pseudologo,
a liar, a false speaker. Pseudomartire, a false martyr. Pseudomeno, a
sophistical argument, a captious conclusion, a fallacy in reasoning.
Pseudonimo, h^ that has a counterfeit name. Pseudopropheta, a false prophet or
false teacher. Psice, a kind of beast having a voice like a man. Psicomantio, a
place where inchanters call up spirits. Psidracio, a little swelling or rising
in the uppermost part of the skin like unto blisters full of yellow matter.
Psillio, an ointment to take away hair. Also the herb Fleawoort or Fleabane.
Psoloe, a kind of lightning which does kill and destroy with the flash.
Pterigio, a skin growing from the corner of the eye, and in continuance
covering the sight. Also the going away of the flesh from the nail with great
pain, or the little pieces of skin that sometimes rise about the nails at the
fingers ends called in English wort-whales or liureges, or as some think a
swelling of the flesh over the nail. Pterigode, that has the bones of his
shoulders or his shoulder blades standing out like wings, which kind of men
are subject to consumptions. Pterigoide, four processes to the outward part of
the cuneall bone at the foundation of the skull, where the teeth called the
grinders are fastened, that is to say on each side two, spreading like unto the
wings of a bat. Ptiade, a kind of adder of a greenish color, somewhat drawing
to the color of gold. Ptinge, a ravenous bird sometime fighting with the eagle
so valiantly, that in grapling together they fall to the ground, and be taken of
shepheardes. Ptisana, Ptisan or Tysan, that is to say barley husked and sodden
in water, or barley water such as physicians commonly give to sick folks to
drink. Puauola, as Poauola, as Putta. Pube osso, the second part of Osso ilio,
which being not so broad as the former is throwed on each side with a large
and ample hole. Pubero, of age, able to engender, full grown, properly of the
age of twelve or fourteen years. Puberta, the age of fourteen years in
men, and twelve in women. Also the first coming forth of young hairs. about
the privy parts. Pubescere, besco, bescei, besciuto, to begin to grow from a
boy to a man, to begin to have a heard, to wax ripe, to shoot out
plentifully. Pubesciuto, begun to grow a man, begun to have a beard, waxed
ripe. Pubi, the hairs about the privy members in man about fourteen years
of age, and in women about twelve. Publica, a publication, a proclamation, a
manifestation, a revealing, a making common. Also a confiscation. Publicamente,
openly, publicly, in the face of the world, in the name or behalf of the
common weal. Publicano, a farmer that has taken in farm the common rents of
the King or of the people. he that took to farm of the people of Rome the
revenues due to the city at a certain rent, who were reputed as gentlemen.
Also a publicane. Publicare, to publish, to proclaim, to set forth, to
declare, to manifest, to make known, to lay open, to cause to be cride.
Publicatione, as Publica. Publicatore, a publisher, a crier, a proclaimer.
Public, a flea. Publico, public, open, manifest, apparent, common, vulgar.
also the comminalty or public people. Also pertaining to every estate of the
people jointly or severally. Also in the streets or common places abroad among
people. Also the revenues or ordinary paiments due to a common weal.
Publicola, he that reuerenceth, and honoreth the people. Puche, berries of
bays or juniper. Pudendagra, a disease about the privy parts like a
winchester goose. Pudende, filthy, unclean, stinking. Also the privy parts
Pudica, chaste, clean, unspotted, maidenlike, shamefast, honest. Pudicita,
chastity, cleanlines of life, virginity, maidenhead, honesty, purity.
Pudicitia, as Pudicita. Pudore, shamefastnes, bashfulnes or chastity,
moderation, letting the mind to do any thing wantonly or dishonestie,
virginity. Also a shameful or unclean act. Puerile, childish, boyish,
trifling, of or pertaining to a child. Puerilita, as Pueritia. Also a child's
act. Pueritia, childishnes, infancy, childhood, noneage, boyishnes. Pufera, as
Bufera. Puffino, a kind of foul called a puffin. Puga, a prick, a pilicocke,
a dildoe. Pugile, a champion, a paladine, an errand knight, a strong fighter.
Pugna, fists, handfuls, blows with fistes. Also a fight, a braule, a skirmish,
a battle, a combat, a fraie, a conflict, a buffeting. Pugnace, warlike,
fighting, contentions, quarrellous, a great fighter. Pugnacita, a sharp desire
or longing to fight. Also a contention or fighting. Pugnacolo, a place where
men do fight. Pugnalare, to stab, to strike or hurt with a dagger. Pugn^lata, a
blow, a stab or hurt with a dagger. Pugnale, a dagger, a poynado, a poyniard.
Pugnale vetrino, a dagger or poynado of glass, a dildoe. Pugnaletto, a little
dagger, poynado or poyniard. Pugnante, fighting, striving, contending,
repugnant. Pugnare, to fight, to skirmish, to combat, to contend, to assault,
to strive, to repugne. Also to dispute or reason contrary. Pugnata, a hand or
fistfull, as Pugna. Pugnatore, a fighter, a combatant, a skirmisher. Pugnetto,
a little fist or handful, a blow with a fist. Pugnere, pungo, punsi, punto, to
prick, to sting, to stitch, to foine. Also to make somewhat careful or
pensive, to touch to the quick, to nettle, to bite the stomach, to be sharp
upon the tongue, to vex or disquiet. Pugno, a fist or a handful. Also a blow
with a fist. Pugnoro, a measure being about a hands breadth or shaftman.
Puiana, a kind of bird. Puina, a kind of fresh cheese and cream. Pula, an
herb or weed which grows among corn and choketh it much. Pulce, Pulice, a
flea. Pulcella, a maiden, a virgin, a damzell, a maid, a less, a girl.
Pulcino, a chicke, a young chicken, a little flea. Pulcra, fair, beautiful,
comely, welfauoured, handsome, gaie, exellent, glorious. Pulcritudine, fairnes,
beauty, favor, handsomnes. Puledra, a mare colt. Puledro, a horse colt.
Pulegio, Peniroyall, Pudding-grasse or Puliall-royall. Puleggio, a pullie in a
ship or a well. Pulicano, an instrument to draw out teeth with. Pulice, Pulce,
a flea. Pulicare, an herb called Flea-woort or Fleabane. Pulicaria, as
Pulicare. Pulione, some take it to be the Flea-woort or Fleabane. Pulire, as
Polire. Pulito, as Polito. Pulitello, as Politello. Puliteo seluatico, a wild
ass colt. Pulitezza, as Politezza. Pulitura, a polishing. Pullano, a glade, a
kite or a puttocke. Pullato, rude, ignorant. Pulli prema, a stealer of
children. Pullore, a bird called a coote. Pullulare, to bud, to blossom, to
spring, to sprout, to shoot out young shootes. Pullulatione, a budding, a
blossoming, a sprouting. Pulluli, buds, blossoms or young sprigges, sprouts,
young shootes. Pulmone, as Polmone. Pulmonaria, as Polmonaria. Pulpa, as Polpa.
Pulpito, a pulpit or chair or place for a preacher, or to make an oration in.
Pulpo, a cuttle fish. Also a cuttle bone. Pulsare, to beat, to knock, to
smite, to strike, to pant, to thump. Pulsatilla, the herb black Hellebor.
Pulsatile, breathing, panting, beating, knocking, striking. Pulsatione, a
panting, a striking, a smiting, a thumping. Pulsatiuo, as Pulsatile. Pulsiuo,
pursie, pursicke, broken winded, panting. Pultiglia, a poultis. Also a pap.
Pulzella, as Pulcella. Pumice, a pumice-stone. Puncella, as Pulcella. Pungere,
as Pugnere. Pungente, pricking, sharp, stinging, keen, foyning. Pungentino, a
subtle, sly, quipping, close fellow, a stinger. Pungetopi, Knee-holme or
Butchers-broome. Pungetto, a plowghmans goade or a sting or a prick.
Pungimento, a pricking, a stinging, a compunction, a remorse. Pungolo, a
prick, a sting, as Pungimento, a goade. Punico, a color as red as scarlet.
Some take it for yellow. Punire, nisco, nito, to punish, to chastise, to
correct, to take vengeance of. Punito, punished, chastised, corrected.
Punitione, a punishment, a chastisement, a correction. Punitore, a punisher, a
corrector, a chastiser. Punta, a point, a sting, a sharpnes, a prick, a foyne
or thrust with any weapon* a disease called a stitch, or a pleurisy, a tip.
Look pigliar la punta. Puntale, the chape of a dagger or sword. Puntali, tags
of points, aglets* bodkins. Puntaletti, as Puntali. Puntalmente, particularly,
point by point, coylie, nicelie, as Pontalmente. Punta di coltello, the point
of a knife. Punta di piedi, the tip of the toes. Punta delle stringe, the tag
of a point. Puntare, to point, to sharpen, to appoint, to prefix, to spurn, to
prick, to sting, to provoke, to egg one, to whet, to stitch, to quilt any
work, to foyne, to prick, or thrust at, to wyre-draw any matter. Also to find
fault with, to oppose, to carp at anything. Also to set ones foot against any
stay* to blame, to tax. Puntato, pointed, sharpened, appointed, prefixed,
spurred, pricked, stung, provoked, egged on, whetted, sticht or quilted,
counterpointed any work, foyned or thrust at. Also nice, coy, fine, dainty,
affected, scrupulous, ouerweening. Also keen or sharp-pointed, a man standing
on points. Also carped, or found fault with, blamed or taxed. Puntaruola, nice,
coy, scrupulous, standing or going on tiptoes, carping, squeamish, captious,
still finding fault with others. Puntaruolo, a nice, coy, affected, scrupolus,
selfconceited fellow* a bodkin* a man that stands upon points, a carper, a
findefault, a gouldsmiths pouncer. Puntatamente, as Puntalmente. Punteggiare,
to sharpen, to make sharp, to prick, to foyne at, to point, or prick by points.
Puntellare, to underprop, to underset, to strengthen, to uphold. Also to make
sharp. Puntelli, underprops, stakes of timber to underset anything, the spakes
of a cart. Also bodkins, or pricks. Punteruola, as Puntaruola. Puntiglio,
little, small, nice points, as we say punctos of honor and reputation. Punto,
pricked, pointed, stung, stitched, counterpointed, foyned, or thrust at. Also
provoked, encited, egged on, pricked on. Also a prick, a point, a prick with a
pin or any sharp thing, a center, a foyne, a thrust, a stitch* a moment of
time, an instant, a minute, or the least portion of a thing that can be, a jot,
a whit, a dram, a crum, at all, never awhit, no jot, no point as the frenchmen
say* a game on the head at cards, five and fifty at primero* a point in the
tables, a point upon the dice, a point or prick, or full point in writing, a
stitch or prick in any work or sowing, a counterpoint. Also the principal
proposition or chief point of an argument. Also vexed, disquieted, netled,
touched to the quick. Punto, Carta di punto, a card that has no cote on it.
Puntofermo, a full point or a period in a sentence. Punto, A punto, just, iump,
even so, in the nick. Also as Boccata. Puntuale, punctual, according to
points. Puntuare, to point, to sharpen, to make keen or sharp-pointed.
Puntura, a foyne, a prick, or a thrust, a stoccado. Also a disease called a
stitch or a pleurisy. Also a stinging. Puntuto, sharp-pointed, keen, having a
point. Punzecchiare, to iussle, to push, to thrust, to shooue, or heave off
with ones hands or elbow, to foine at, to iog, to shoulder, to punch, to thump.
Punzecchij, blows, pushes, iogs, shouldrings, or iusslings with ones elbow,
punches, thumps. Punzella, as Pulcella. Punzellare, to prick, to sting, to
goade, to push at, to thrust at, to provoke, to prick or egg on. Also as
Punzecchiare. Punzello, a pricking or setting on, a shouldring, iogging, or
iusling, a goade that ploughmen use, a prick, or a sting, the sting of a be or
waspe. Punzello delle api, the sting of a be. Punzello de' bifolchi, a
ploughmans goade. Punzonare, as Punzecchiare. Also to pounce or work pouncing
work. Punzone, a blow with the fist, a thumping, a iogging, a iusling or
shouldring. Also a bodkin, or any sharp pointed thing. Also a piece, a barell,
a tierce, pipe, rundlet or hogshead for wine* a thump, a bounce, a knock or a
blow, a goldsmiths pouncer or pounce. Also a little stamp. Puo, Puole, Puote,
he may, he can, he is able. Puo fare, an oath that Italians use, adding to it
what they will swear by, as Puo fare la natura, can nature do this? Puotere,
as Potere. Puotuto, as Potuto. Puouolo, a popler tree. Pupicella, a babie or
puppet for children to play with. Pupilla, the sight of the eye, the ball or
apple of the eye. Also a woman-childe within age and under ward, one that has
no mother alive, a pupil, a ward. Pupillare, to cry as a Peacock, to play the
pupil, like a ward or a pupil; of or belonging to one in ward by reason of
nonage. Pupillo, a pupil, or a ward, a fatherless child, an orphane, a
man-child within age. Also one that is not under his fathers charge. Pupina,
as Pupicella. Pupo, a pigsneye, a sweet-hart, a pretty musse, a dainty mop, a
playing babie, a puppet. Pupola, a bird called a houpe. Puppa, as Poppa.
Puppare, as Poppare. Puppula, a bird called a houpe. Pura, pure, neat, chaste,
clean, naked, unspotted, clear, honest, fine, upright. Look Puro. Puragna,
corruption of blood, goare blood, clods of blood. Puramente, purely, cleanly,
vnspottedlie, candide, clearly, finely, uprightly, honestly, without welt or
guard, without exception or condition. Look Puro. Pur, as Pure in all places.
Pur che, so that. Pur adesso, even now, now now. Pur assai, to to many, or to
to much, overmuch and enough, or many. Pur come, even as, even when, yet how.
Pure, a word of great ornament in the Italian tongue, yet, albeit, although,
notwithstanding, in case, not only, at least, surely, only, when all is done,
in the end, so much as, for all that, algates, and as we say needs, as Mi
conuien pure, I must needs, or of force. Pure alhora, even then, at that
instant. Purhora, even now, now now, not long since. Pur mo, even now, now now.
Pur pure, nevertheless, notwithstanding. Purvia, on, away, go to, on on,
forward. Pur un tantino, as much as nothing, a iotkin. Puraccio, a simple,
foolish, nice, wellmeaning gull, a noddie-poope. Purata, as Puragna. Puretto,
somewhat cleanely, or neat, or pure. Purga, a purge, a purgation, a cleansing.
Also a purgation or clear discharge. Also a skouring. Also an excuse or
clearing. Purgabile, that may be purged or cleansed. Purgamento, a purging, a
cleansing. Also taken for any filth coming from that that is cleansed. Also a
purgation or clear discharge. Purgare, to purge, to cleanse, to clear, to
skoure, to make clean, to excuse, to remedy. Purgatione, as Purga. Purgatiuo,
purging, that does purge, or may be purged. Purgatore, a purger, a cleanser, a
skourer. Purgatore di panni, a trimmer, a skourer or dresser, or cleanser or
washer of clothes. Purgatorio, a purgatory, a purging place, a clensing place.
Purificare, to purify, to cleanse, to purge, to scour or make clear.
Purificatione, a purification, a clensing, a scouring, a clearing. Also the
purification of the virgin Marie, Candlemas day, the day whereon women be
churched, having lain in a month in imitation of our lady. Purita, purity,
clenlines, neatenes, vnspottednes, pureness, cleerenes. Puritani, puritaines,
such as profess purity. Puritanismo, the profession or order of puritanes.
Puro, pure, neat, unspotted, upright, sincere, naked, clean, clear, honest,
just, fine, thin, innocent, spotless, without filth, fair, white, simple,
plain, of it self, uncorrupted, without mixture, without exception or
condition. Purpura, the purple color, a princes or chief man's purple garment,
or the dignity of a chief magistrate. Also a a purple fish, which is a
shellfish, whereof the purple color comes. Purpurato, purpured, apparelled
in purple, of, or belonging to purple or purple color* also belonging to the
place where fishers kill or take the purple fish. Also clothed in garments of
purple. Also a noble man, a peer of the realm. Purpureo, of the color of
purple, like purple, red, bluish, araid in purple. Purpurisso, red painting
wherewith some women do use to paint their faces, a lively ruddie color called
cheeke-varnish. Also like purple, or of the color of purple. Purpurino, as
Purpureo. Also a lively read color women use for painting, called
cheeke-varnish. Purpurite, a kind of marble in Egypt, ruddie and full of white
spots. Pur troppo, even too much, to too much, enough and enough. Pur vno, so
much as one, one only. Purulente, full of matter and filthiness, as of an
impostume or other running sore, filthy, irksome, matterie, scuruie.
Purulentia, a s^re full of corruption and matter. Pusilla, small, little,
short, slender. Also a virgin or a maiden. Pussilanimita, pusillanimitie,
cowardice, dastardise, baseness of courage, fainthartednes. Pussilanimo, weak
or base hearted, cowardish, a crauen, a dastarde, faintharted. Pustella, as
Pustula. Pustula, a push, a blisher, a blane, a wheale or winde-gall in a
horse. Pustuloso, full of blisters, pushes, blanes, wheales or winde-gals.
Pusula, a little bladder rising on bread when it is baked. Also a disease
rising of hot choleric blood, and which begins with a blister, and grows
to a sore or scabbe like a tetter, called saint Anthonies fire. Putana, as
Puttana. Putanare, as Puttaneggiare. Putatiuo, presupposed, thought, reputed,
imagined, imaginary, supposed. Putelle, little wenches, girls or lasses.
Putente, stinking, unsavory, tainted. Putido, stinking, unsavory, unpleasant
in smell. Putigine, as Lentigine. Putiginoso, as Lentiginoso. Putire, putisco,
putito, to stink, to savor ill, to have an ill savor. Putore, a stink or
ill savor. Also a beast called a fitch. Putredine, putrefaction, corruption,
rottennes. Putrefare, to putrify, to rot, to corrupt, to taint, to be addle.
Putrefatto, putrifide, rotten, addle, tainted, corrupt. Putrefattiuo, that will
putrify, rot, or corrupt. Putrefattione, putrefaction, corruption, rottennes.
Putrida, rotten, putrifide, addle, tainted. Putridezza, as Putrefattione.
Putta, a wench, a girl, a modder, a less, a young maid. Also a whore, a
harlot, a strumpet. Also a magot a pie, a ^aie or piot. Puttana, a whore, a
harlot, a strumpet, a queen. Puttanare, as Puttaneggiare. Puttanaccia, a
filthy great whore or iadish strumpet, a stallion rampe. Puttanaria,
whoredom, the art of whoring. Puttanella, a young whore, a pretty strumpet,
a little harlot. Puttaneggiare, to play the whore, to follow harlots.
Puttaneggio, whorisme, whoredom, bawdrie, the art or trade of a whore.
Puttanesco, whorish, bawdie, strumpet-like. Puttanesimo, as Puttaneggio.
Puttanina, as Puttanella. Puttanita, whoredom, whorishnes. Putina, a little
girl, wench or less. Putti occhi, greedy eyes: used by Dante so. Putto, a
boy, a lad, a young man, a striplin, a lackey. Puttotta, a good handsome,
plum-cheekt wench or less, a pretty trull. Puuione, a dove, a culuer, a
pigeon. Puzza, a stink or an ill savor or smell. Puzzare, to stink, to
yield an ill smell. Puzzo, as Puzza. Puzzore, as Puzza. Puzzolente, stinking,
yielding an ill sent. Puzzulente, as Puzzolente.
Q
QVa, here, hither, in this place. Quaderni, two fowers, or two quaters at
dice. Quaderno, fower-square. Also the arse by a metaphor. Also a little quier
of four sheets. Quadra* Dare la quadra, to smooth or sooth up a matter
finely, to make one believe the moon is made of green cheese, to give one a
gudgeon. Quadragesima, the fasting time of the year called lent. Quadragesimo,
the fortieth in number. Quadrane, a kind of pear in Italy. Quadrangolo, a
quadrangle, a place that has four corners. Quadrangolare, quadrangular,
fower-square. Quadrante, fower-square, a quadrant, a sun-dyall, squaring. Also
a kind of weight. Quadrare, to square, to make fower-square. also to befit, to
suit well, to agree together. Quadrato, squared, made fowre-square, befitted,
become, suited, well agreed or squared well. also quarrie and big, great and
strong, well pight, handsome, well made and fashioned. Also a square number, a
number which is made by the multiplying of some one number upon it self.
Quadratura, a squaring or setting in order, the squaring of any thing. In
astronomy it signifies the half moon, because then the sun and the moon
are a quarter of a circle a sunder. Quadrella, a quarer, the arrowe of a
crosse-bowe, a shaft, an arrow, a thunder bolt. Quadrelli, brickes, or the
square colored stones in chimnie paces. Quadretti, little dishes, rondlets,
wreaths, or plates, that are used to put or lay under dishes to keep the
table clothes clean. losenges in armory. Quadretto, any little fowre-square
thing, a woman's low stool, a foot stool, a picture or a square, a square or
a bed in a garden: a brick or square stone, a cushion, namely a tailors
cushion, a gusset. a trencher, a tablet, a table. a losenge in armorie. Quadri,
squares, those that we call diamonds or picts upon playing cards. Quadriga, a
cart or wagon with four wheels. Also a teeme of four horses. Quadrilatero,
having four sides. Quadriforme, that has four forms. Quadriglio, a crew, a
troop, a company. Quadrigemino, four double. Quadrilingue, that speaks
four toongs. Quadri parti, square, fower-squared. Quadrimembrale, of four
parts. Quadrinottio, four nights space. Quadripartito, divided or cut in four
parts. Quadriuio, a fower-way, a way that has four turnings, a place where
four ways meet. Quadro, square, fower-square, a square, a cushion, a
fower-square trencher, any four square tablet, board, or picture. Quadrucci, a
kind of square bricks. Quadrunciale. Quadrupede, fowerfooted, having four
feet. Quadruplicare, to double four times, to make fower-times so much as it
was. Quadruplo, fowe-folde, or four double, of four fashions. Qua e la, here
and there, up and down. Quaglia, a bird called a quail. Quagliare, to curd
or congeale as milk does. Quagliato, curdded or congealed as fresh cheese.
Quagliaruolo, a quail pipe, a catcher of quails. Quagliata, a dish of curds,
a curdding, a congealing. Quagliera, a quaile-net. Also one that sels quails.
Quagliere, a catcher of quails, a quail basket. also a tailers cushion.
Quagliette, young quails. Quaglio, the rennet that they curd milk withal to
make cheese. Quai, who? which? what? such as, whosoever. Qual, who? which?
whether? such, as, so as. Qualche, some, some one. Qualche sciocco, none but
some fool, some fool. Qualcheduno, some one, some body. Qualcheuolta, some
times, at times, now and then. Qualcosetta, some little thing. Qualcuno, some
one, some body. Qual di duo, whether, which, or whosoever of two. Qual tu vuoi,
which, or whether thou will. Qual si voglia, which, or whatsoever. Qualhor,
Qualhora, at what time, whenever. Quale, which, who, what, as, like, like
unto, such, such as, even as, whosoever, whatsoever, whether. Quales, a tree in
Prouence about the root whereof grows certain bladders full of a kind of
liquor as red as blood, which dried in the sun at the end of summer there
arise out of them certain woormes wherewith they die crimson in grain.
Qualificare, to qualify. Qualificatione, a qualification. Qualita, a quality,
sort, size, or matter, a condition, a state, a calling or profession.
Qualitatiuo, that may be qualified, full of qualities, well conditioned.
Qualmente, how? in what sort? Also howsoever, so, that, how, how as. Qualunque,
whosoever, whatsoever. Qualunque si sia, who, or whatsoever he be. Qualunque si
voglia, whosoever, whosoever he be. Qualunque volta, what time soever. Quando,
when? when as, then, at that time, at what time, if, if so, if that, if so be
that. Quando been. Quandopure, if so be that, if, howbeit, all were it. Quondo
che sia, whenever it is, at what time soever. Quando may, whenever.
Quandunque, when soever. Quante, how many? as many. Quante volte, as many
times, how many times. Quanti, how many, as many. Quantita, a quantity, a
deal. Also a store, bigness, greatness or multitude. Quanto, how much? how
far? how long? what? so much as, concerning, touching, as much, as for,
about, so, or as much as it is worth, what or how great a matter, how or so
much, how great, so much as, as far, as soon, how far, so many, according
as, to the uttermost, how great, how excellent? as big or great. Quanto a
questo, as touching or concerning this. Quanto piu, as much as may be, the
most. Quanto presto, as soon as, the soonest, so soon as may be. Quanto prima,
as Quanto presto. Quanto sia, how much soever. Quanto tempo, how long, how long
time, so long as. Quantunque, howbeit, albeit, although. Quaranta, the number
of forty. Quarantana, the space of forty days fasting or abstinence. Look
Fa^e la quarantana. Quarantesimo, the fortieth in number. Quarantia, a
magistrate of forty in Venice. Quaresima, the time of the year we call le^t
Quaresimare, to fast, to abstain, to lent it, to keep lent. Quaresimeggiare,
as Quaresimare. Quarnara, the name of a roape in a ship. Quaro, a kind of bird.
Quarra, a kind of sail in a ship. Quarta, a measure called a quart, a fourth
part, the fourth. Also a quarter wind of the compass. Quarta leuante verso
greco, east and by north. Quarta greco verso leuante, north east and by east.
Quarta greco verso tramontana, north east and by north. Quarta tramontana verso
greco, north east and by east. Quarta tramontana verso maestro, north and by
west. Quarta maestro verso tramontana, north west and by north. Quarta maestro
verso ponente, north west and by west. Quarta ponente verso maestro, west and
by north. Quarta ponente verso garbino, west and by south. Quarta garbino verso
ponente, south west and by south. Quarta garbino verso austro, south and by
west. Quarta austro verso garbino, south and by east. Quarta austro verso
scirocco, south east and by south. Quarta scirocco verso austro, idem. Quarta
scirocco verso leuante, south east and by east. Quarta leuante verso scirocco,
east and by south. Quartana, a quartane ague. Quartare, to quarter or cut in
quarters. Quartario, a measure used in Greece. Quarteria, a payment or taking
of the fourth part of any thing. Quartiere, a quarter of a year or of any
thing else, a quarters rent, wages, pa^e or stipend, a quartredge. Also the
part of a camp, whereon any company or number of soldiers be quartred and
lodged. Quartirone, a quarters rent, wages or pay, a quarter of a year, a
quartredge. Quarto, the fourth in number. Also fourthly. Also a quarter or
fourth part of any thing, the sise or volumne of a book called quarto. Also a
false quarter upon the hoof of a horse toward the talon. Quarto decimo, the
fourteenth in number. Quarto di castrato, a quarter of mutton. Quartuccio, a
little wine measure. Quarza, the name of a sail in a ship. Quasi, almost, as
it were, veri-neere, as if, near like as, in a manner, as though, as who
says, about. Quasi che, as if, as if it were, near that, as though.
Quassare, as Conquassare. Quasso, as Conquasso. Quaterno, as Quaderno.
Quaternita, a company of four together. Quatordeci, fourteen in number.
Quatordecimo, the fourteenth in order. Quatriduano, of four days continuance.
Quatriglia, a little squadron, crew or troop. Quatrino, a farthing, a small
coin. Quattare, to squat, to hushed, to lie close. Quatto, squatte, hushed,
close, still, lurking. Quatto quatto, very squat, very wh^sht, close or still.
Quattraggio, a certain rate of cloth that is given above measure, as we say a
shaft man or a handful. Also a kind of course home-spunne cloth that
shepherds use. Quattro, the number of four. Quattro a quattro, by four and
four. Quattro tempora, the four embring weeks that be in the year. Quattro
fia tanto, four times as much. Que', Quegli, they, those, them same. Also he,
the same, that man. Quei, as Que', or Quegli. Quel', as Quello. Quel che, that
which, the which, he which. Quel che tu vuoi, whether, what or which thou will.
Quella, she, that, the same. Quelle, those, those same, them. Quelli, as Que',
or Quegli. Quello, he, that, that man, yond, the same, thilke. Quello istesso
or medesimo, the very* same. Quel' tanto, that much, that so much. Quennaro, a
fish in latin called Atherina. Quercia, a tree called an oak. Quercietto, a
grove or thicket of oaks. Quercino, made of oak or wainscot. Also a little
cake. Querciola, herb Germander or English treacle. Querciolo, a young or
little oak. Querculo, a little young oak. Querela, a complaint, a
moane-making, a grief, an unkindness, a wailing, a moan. Also a quarrel, a
fraie, a fight, a bickering, a braule, a suite. Querelare, to complain, to
grieve, to wail, to moan. also to quarrel, to fight, to make a fraie, to
scuffle, to braule. Querelatore, a quarreller, a complayner, a plaintiff.
Quereloso, quarrelsom, quarellous, troublesome, complaining, that complayneth
or is full of complaints. Querimonia, complaint, moan, moaning, wailing or
lamentation, a moane-making, a lamentable expressing of a thing that one is
grieved at. Querimoniare, to complain, to moan, to wail, to lament, to make
moan. Querimonioso, moaning, wailefull, lamenting, complaining, wailing.
Quero, as Quirino. Querquedule, a kind of water foul. Querulare, as
Querimoniare, to shril, sing or chirp. Querulo, as Querimonioso. Also shril,
singing or chirping. Quesitare, to question, to demand, to inquire, to ask,
to quest. Quesitante, questioning, demanding, inquiring, asking, questing.
Quesitatore, a questioner, a demaunder, a disputer. Quesito, a question, a
questing, a demanding, an asking, a thing asked. Also a thing obtained. Also
inquired, asked, demanded, searched. Also gotten or obtained. Questa, this,
this same. Questa mane, this morning. Questa notte, this night. Questa volta,
this time, this once. Queste, these, these same. Questi, these, these here.
Also this man, this same man. Questionare, to question, to dispute, to contend,
to examine, to ask, to quest. Also to fight, to quarrel, to braule, to
scould, to cope, to square. Questionabile, questionable, disputable, litigious.
Questionante, questioning, disputing, contending, fighting, brauling,
scoulding. Questione, a question, a demand, an asking, an inquisition or
examination, a disputation, an inquest, a searching. Also a fraie, a braule, a
contention, a scoulding. Questioneuole, questionable, disputable.
Questioncella, a small or idle question, a demand or disputation, a little
foolish braule, fraie or contention. Questo, this, this same, thilke. Questo
istesso or medesimo, this very same. Questore, a treasurer, a receiver, an
auditor or gatherer of rents, a treasurer of wars. Also a judge of criminal
matters. Also a chamberlain of a city. Questorio, a place as the exchequer of
a Prince or city is. Also the questors tent in a camp. Also of or belonging
to questore. Questura, the dignity of a treasurer, the office of a questor, of
a treasurer or of a chamberlain. Quetare, to quiet, to pacify, to appease, to
whosht, to still, to rest, to sleep, to take rest, to be at quiet, to cease or
end, to be void of labor, care and business, to be calm, to hold ones peace
and make no more ado, to pause and take breath, to stand still and not to
move. Queto, quiet, whosht, still, at rest, silent. Also a quietus est or
general discharge. Queto, Dare un stacci queto, to give a whirret or box on
the ear. Queto queto, very quiet, still or whosht. Qui, here, in this place,
very here, hither, hereaway, hereabout. Quici, here, in this place. Quiconce,
a kind of orderly and very exact planting and setting of trees in an orchard
by square, so that which way soever one look the trees shall stand directly
one against another, and of like distance. it has the name of the letter V,
that signifies five, and being double makes ten, which may be mulplied many
ways. Quietare, as Quetare. Quietanza, as Quiere. Also a quietus est. Quiet,
quietness, rest, repose, peace, silence, ease, sleep, vacation, and ceasing
from labor and trouble. Also calmnes, fair and still weather. Quietitudine,
as Quiet. Quieto, quiet, still, at rest, gentle, mild, whosht, restfull,
calm, peaceable, without trouble and combersomnes, free from worldly matters.
Quil, a kind of little beast like a firret. Quilino, Look Aquilino. Quinario,
containing five. Quinci, hence, from hence, thence, from thence, then, after,
afterward. Quinci e quindi, hence and thence. Quinci inanti, henceforwarde,
hereafter. Quinci in poi, as Quinci inanti. Quinconce, set or planted five in
a rank. Quincuplo, five double, fiue-fold. Quindeci, the number of fifteen.
Quindecima, the fifteenth, a subsidy we call a fifteen. Also the full of the
moon or the second quarter of the same. Quindecimo, the fifteenth in number.
Quindi, thence, from thence, then, after, afterward. Quindici, the number of
fifteen. Quindi e quinci, thence and hence. Quindi inanzi, thence forward,
from that time forward. Quindi in poi, as Quindi inanzi. Quini, two cinques or
two fiues at dice. Quinquennale, that lasts five years or that is done
every fifth year. Quinquennio, the space of five years. Quinqueremi, a kind
of gallie that has five oars of a side or five men to an oar. Quinquertij,
certain fiue-fold games used among the grecians. Quinta essentia, a
quintessence or spirit extracted out of any thing. Quintare, to divide or share
into five parts: Quinternare, to toss and turn over books and quiers or
records. Quinternale, that is divided into quiers. Quinterno, a quier of paper.
Quintile, the month of July, the fifth month from March reckoning it for one.
Quinto, the fifth in number, the fifth part. Quintuple, fiue-fold. Quirino, a
precious stone found in the hoopes nest, which laid upon a man's breast that
sleeps, it will make him tell what he has done. Quisquiglia, sweepings,
filth, rubbish, vncleanlines, a sluts corner. Quistionare, as Questionare.
Quistionabile, as Questionabile. Quistionante, as Questionante. Quistione, as
Questione. Quistioneuole, as Questioneuole. Quitanza, a quittance, a release, a
discharge. Quiui, there, thither, yonder, in that place, here. Quosi, red
pimples, bumbs or pearls in ones face. Quotidiano, daily, quotidian, that
returns every day. Quoto? how many in order? how long, how much? of what
number? Quoto, has been used of Dante for judgment.
R
RA, in composition is as much as the doing, undoing, or redoubling of any
thing, according as the word to which you join it does import. Rabbarbaro, the
drug rewbarbe. Rabbattere, batto, battei, battuto, to meet, to chance upon.
Also to rebeate back, to clinch a nail. Rabbattuto, met or happened upon by
chance, rebeaten, clinched a nail. Rabbattimento, an encounter, a meeting by
chance, a clinching of a nail. Rabbellire, lisco, lito, to beawtifie, to
readorne again. Rabbellimento, a readorning or rebeawtifying. Rabbia, rage,
fury, madness, wrath, mood, cruelnes, woodnes, outragiousnes, fiercenes,
terriblenes. Also the madness of a dog. Rabbiare, to enrage, to be furious, mad,
raging, or fell. Rabbicane, a horse shapened like a grayhound. Rabbino, Rabi,
Rabis, the Rabbis, or Rabbis. Rabbio, as Furigone. Rabbioso, mad, raging,
furious, fell, moodie, enraged, wood, outrageous, in great rage, enraged as a
dog. Rabboffare, as Rabbuffare. Rabbracciare, to embrace again.
Rabbracciamenti, embracings, huggings, collings. Rabbruscarsi, for a man to
strut or rouse himself aloof in anger as a Turkiecock does being angry.
Rabbuffare, to skould, to braule, to chide, to check, to taunt, to look
staringlie as a mad man, to rouse, to tug, to stare, to disheuell ones hairs,
to shag, to ruffle. Rabbuffato, skoulded, brauled, chidden, checked, taunted,
looked staringlie as a mad man, rouzed, tugged, disheueled, stared, flaring,
all shagd, or ruffled. Rabbuffo, a check, a taunt, a skoulding, a brauling, a
staring, a tugging, a chiding. Rabicano, a horse that has a white tail or
rump. Racanello, Racano, as Ramarro. Raccappezzare, to piece, to cobble, to
botch, to patch or put together. Raccapricciare, to look staringlie, to raise
the hairs of ones head as one frighted with spirits. Raccendere, cendo, cesi,
ceso, to rekindle or set on fire again. Racceso, rekindled or set on fire
again. Racchetta, a racket to play at tennis with. Racchettare, to toss or
beat to and fro with a racket. Racchiudere, chiudo, chiusi, chiuso, to
re-enclose or shut up again. Racchiuso, re-enclosed or shut up again.
Racciabattare, as Rattaconare. Racco, gather, or collect thowe. Raccogliere,
colgo, colsi, colto, to gather together again, to recover and get up again,
to collect, to assemble. Also to receive or entertain friendly. Also to
gather in harvest. Raccolto, gathered together again, recovered or gotten up
again, collected, assembled. Also a gathering, a collection, an assembly, a
harvest. Raccoglienza, Look Accoglienza. Raccolta, the time of harvest, the
harvest or gathering in of the fruits of the earth. Also as Raccolto. Also as
Raccoglienza. Also the call or assembly of soldiers together into the place
of arms by the sound of a drum. Also a collection, a gathering, an assembly.
Also entertainment or embracing, or receiving of friends. Raccomandare, to
recommend. Raccomandatione, recommendations. Raccominciare, to begin again.
Raccominciamento, a rebeginning. Raccompagnare, to accompany again.
Raccomunare, to make common to others. Raccomunicare, to make common, to impart
to others. Racconciare, to reform, to redress, to mend, to dress, to settle,
to order. Racconciamento, as Racconciatura. Racconciatore, a reformer, a
redresser, a mender. Racconciatura, a reforming, a redressing, a mending, a
settling. Racconciliare, to reconcile, to accord, to atone, to agree. Racconcio,
mended, reformed, patcht up, settled in order. Racconsolare, to recomfort or
cheer up again. Raccontare, to recount, to rehearse, to report, to recite.
Raccontamento, a recounting, a report, a relating. Raccontatore, a reporter, a
recounter, a rehearser. Raccorciare, to shorten, to abridge, to curtall.
Raccordare, to remember. Also to accord again. Raccorre, as Raccogliere.
Raccosciare, to sit close with legs acrosse as tailers and women do.
Raccozzare, to join, to piece, or patch together again, to shock or but
again. Racemi, boughs, branches, sprigs, underwood, hedges, briers, brambles,
shrubs. Racemo, as Racemi, a bunch or cluster of grapes, a grape. Also the
kernel of a grape. Racemoso, full of clusters of grapes, kernels or beries.
Racente, sharp, sour, or tarte in taste. Racese, a kind of sharp wine in
Italy. Racha, an hebrew word signifying extreme anger of the person that
speaks it to him that he speaks. Rachetare, to reapease, to quiet, to
assuage, to still again. Rachinarsi, to stoop, to decline or come down.
Racimillo, Racimolo, as Racemo. Racogno, a Serpent called a Lizard, or an Eft.
Racopiare, to write or copy over again. Racoppiare, to recouple or double
again. Racquetare, as Rachetare. Racquistare, to recover, to reobtaine, to
repurchase, to reget. Racquistatore, a recouerer, a reobtainer, a repurchaser.
Racquisto, a recovery, a repurchase, a reobtaining. Racula, a kind of green
frog. Radain, a kind of black stone. Raddolcire, cisco, cito, to sweeten, to
appease, to assuage, to mollify, to soften, to pacify, to calm. Raddolcito,
sweetened, appeased, assuaged, mollifide, softened, pacifide, calmed.
Raddolcimento, an appeasing, a pacifying, a sweetening, a mollifying.
Raddomandare, to redemaund or ask again. Raddoppiare, to redouble, or double
again. Raddoppiamento, a redoubling or twofoulding. Raddoppiata, a double
trick or turn in riding or dancing. Raddrizzare, to right or set up right, or
straighten again. Rade, few, thin. Look Rado. Rade volte, few or seldom
times. Radere, rado, rasi, raso, or raduto, to shave, to notte, to pole. Also
to raze or go along the shore as a ship does, or to fly level to the ground
as some birds do. Also to graze on the ground as an arow or a bullet. Also to
make smooth, or scrape. Also to cut, to scour, or fly away swiftly. Raduto,
Raso, shaven, notted, pouled, razed, gone near the ground or shore, grazed
along as an arrow or a bullet, made smooth, or scraped, etc. Radiano, a bright
black stone found in a cocks head. Radij, beams, rays, streams. Also as
Zatte, Look Radio. Radiante, radiant, shining, blazing, glimmering, twinkling,
flaring, streaming, blazing bright, casting beams of light, glittering.
Radiare, to shine, to beam, to ray, to radiate, to gleame, to leame, to
glitter, to cast beams or rays of light, to glimmer, to blaze, to twinkle, to
flare, to stream. Radicale, radical, proceeding from a root or beginning,
humido radicale, the natural moisture. Radicare, to root, to settle, to take
hold or root, to plant, to set. Radicchio, cicorie to make sallets with. Also
a kind of meat made of herbs. Also a kind of wet sucket. Radice, any kind
of root, a cause, a spring, or beginning. Also the foot or bottom of a thing
as of a hill. in mathematikes, that number, which by one or often
multiplication of it self brings forth any number. Radice dolce, the wood
licorish. Radicella, a little or small root. Radico, a kind of salt so called.
Radimadia, a kneading tub that bakers use to knead their paste or dough in, a
scraping tool that bakers use to scrape their kneading tubs with. Radimandare,
as Raddomandare. Radio, a beam or raie of the sun or other bright star,
the brightness of the eyes. Also a line, a rod, a yard or staff that
Geometricians use. Also a weauers shuttle. Also the spoke of a wheel. Also a
striking round stick to make measures even. Also the uppermost and greater of
the two long bones of the cubit, which are both joined together between
themselves, as also with the shoulder bone and the wrest of the hand, which is
also called Focile maggiore. It is also used for the bigger bone of the shanke.
Also the sharp weapon of a fish supposed to be the Raye. Also the streaming of
any thing or blaze. Radioso, as Radiante. Raditore, a shauer, a barber that
shaues. Raditura, a shauing, a powling. Rado, rare, not often, seldom,
fewtimes, thin, clear, geason, dainty, seld, not often, thinly, not thick,
seldom seen, not thick grown or set. Also excellent, precious, rare to be
had or seen. Radrizzare, to stiffen, to rear or set upright again. Radunare,
as Adunare. Radunanza, as Adunanza. Rafano, a radish root. Raffardellare, to
fardle, to bundle or trusse up again. Raffazzonare, to bring or reform to a
fashion, to fashion again, to trick up smuglie. Raffermare, to affirm or
settle again, to reconfirme. Raffernare, as Raffrenare. Raffetto, a tool that
carpenters use. Raffij, hooks, dragging hook, as Rastelli. Raffiare, to
hook, to drag with dragging hooks, as Rastellare. Raffiggere, to fix unto
again. Raffigurare, to mark, to view, to note with the eye, to remember
well. Raffilare, to whet or make sharp again, to make keen. Raffinare, to
refine, to whet, to make sharp keen or cutting, to lin, to cease, to come to
an end. Raffio, any scratch or scratching tool, a rake or dragging hook.
Raffittare, to hire, let or farm again. Raffolare, to pinch, to scrape, to
hug, to get by hook or crook, to gather, to hoord up to rake or huddle up
together. Raffola ruffola, by rifraffe, by hook or crook, by pinching or
scraping. Raffrancare, to encourage, to harten, to make lusty, to infra^chise
or set at liberty. Also to give the start to a running horse, to take heart of
grace or courage. Raffreddare, to cool or take cold again. Raffreddamento, a
cooling, a cold, a taking cold. Raffreddato, a cold in a horses head being
congealed in the brain. Raffreddatoio, a cooling place. Raffrenare, to
refrain, to restrain, to bridle or snaffle again, to pull back, to stay or
stop, to hold back, to keep short, to draw back with the bridle. Raffrenato,
refrained, restrained, bridled or snaffled again, pulled back, staid or stopped,
held back, kept short, drawn back with the bridle. Raffrettare, to hasten or
make haste again. Raffrontare, to affront, to confront, to meet face to face,
to compaire together. Also to chocke again. Rafioli, Rafiuoli, a kind of
dainty paste meat used in Italy, in form like little pies or chewets. Rafla,
a rifling for any thing at dice. Raflare, to rifle at dice. Ragade, a certain
disease in the fundament like the chaps that the cold March wind makes in
men's hands or lips. Also the chaps or clefts coming thorough cold in hands or
lips. Ragadie, a kind of disease in the priuities of man or woman. Ragagno,
Ragano, an efte, a lizard, a nute, an aspe. Also a clown or a boore or a
rascal. Ragate, a kind of disease in the fundament or privy parts of women.
Ragauignare, to recover again suddenly when one is almost fallen. Ragatta, as
Rigatta. Ragazza, a less, a ^ench, a girl, a maid-seruant. Also a magot-a-pie
or piot. Ragazzo, a lad, a lackie, a page, a boy, a footman. Raggelare, to
freeze again, to recongeale. Ragghiare, to bray as an ass. Ragghio, the
braying of an ass. Raggia, a fish with whose skin fletchers smooth their
arrows called a ray or a skate. Some have taken it for the thornbacke. Also
rasin. Raggiare, as Radiare, as Ragghiare. Raggietti, little twinkling beams
or rays. Raggio, a ray, a beam, a glimps, a streaming, a gleaming light, a
squib of wild fire. Also a spoke of a cart wheel or of a cart. Also the hand
or needle of a dyall, horologe or clock. a certain rod, yard or staff that
Geometricians use. Also the greatest of the two long bones of the cubit. Also
the bigger bone of the shank. as Radio. Raggioso, as Radiante. Also full of
rasin. Raggiornare, to reiourne, to adiorne again, to wax day again.
Raggiungere, giungo, giunsi, giunto, to join or overtake again. Raggiunto,
joined or overtaken again. Raggrauare, to aggrauate or ouerburthen again.
Raggrazzolare, as Raffolare. Raggricchiare, as Raggrinzare. Raggrinzare, to
wither, to pucker, to wrinkle, to grow full of wrinkles. Also to shrink up
close together. Raggrinzata, withered, grown full of wrinkles, wrinkled,
shronken up. Raggruzzolare, as Raggrinzare. Ragguaglianza, as Ragguaglio.
Ragguagliare, to make equal again. Also to advertise or give information of
any thing. Ragguagliato, made equal again. advertised, or given information
of. Ragguaglio, information, notice, advertisement or instruction, an equalling
or match. Ragia, a knauerie, a knauish plot, a crafty device. Also rasin.
Ragiatura, a disease in a horse called the laxe. Ragio, a kind of spider.
Ragionamento, a reasoning, a discourse, a talk, a speech, a parlie. Ragionare,
to reason, to discourse, to talk, to speak, to parlie. Ragione, reason,
right, due, knowledge, wit, wisdom, discourse, discretion, judgment, advise,
purpose, counsel, care, respect, consideration, aduisement, regard* the case,
the matter, the state, the means, the way, the fashion, the form, the
proportion, the kind, the sise, the sort. a rule, the trade, the feate, the
manner and sort, a mind, a counsel, a persuasion, a cause, an account, a
reckoning* business, quantity, value. Also justice, doom, or place of justice,
and law. Ragioneuole, reasonable, endued with reason, that has the use of
reason. Ragioneuolezza, reasonablenes, reason. Ragioni, sorts, kinds, manners
of things. Ragioniere, a discourser, a talker. Ragioso, as Radiante. Ragliare,
to bray like an ass. Raglio, the braying of an ass. Ragna, a cobweb, a
spiders web or spinning. a fowling net, or hay to catch comes, a bait, a trap,
a spring, or entrapping. Ragnatella, a small net, or hay. a spiders web or
spinning. Ragno, any kind of spider or spinner, a kind of shellfish like a
crab. Ragnuola, a little fine sowling net, a little cobweb. Ragoide, the third
rind or skin that compasses the eye wherein is the hole by which we see. It
is also called Vuea. Ragosta, a fish called a Crab, or Lobster. Ragroppare, to
tie or knot together again. Ragroppamento, a tying or knotting together
again. Ragruppare, as Ragroppare, as Raccosciare. Ragruzzolare, to scrape
together as a hen does. Raguardare, as Riguardare. Raguardeuole, as
Riguardeuole. Ragunare, as Radunare. Ragunanza, as Radunanza. Ragunata, as
Radunanza. Rahumiliare, to rehumble, to assuage, to make gentle, tame, or
humble. Raia, as Raggia. Raiare, as Radiare. Raio, as Radio. Raimondina, the
secret art of Alchimie of Raymondus Julius. Raina, a fish called a Carpe.
Rainese, a kind of coin. Raitare, to cry, to yell, to whine, to bray out as a
woman in labor, to baule, to waule. Raitamento, a crying, a yelling, a
whining, a braying, a walling, a bauling. Raitri, Swart rutters in Germany.
Rallargare, to enlarge or spread out. Rallegrare, to rejoice, to glad, to make
merry, to blythe. Rallentare, to relent, to yield, to give over, to slack.
Rallentamento, a relenting, a yielding, a slacking. Ralli, the herb Saltwort,
or prickled kalie. Also the birds called Rayles. Rallieuare, as Rileuare.
Ralignare, as Allignare. Raluminare, to lighten, to illuminate. Ralustrare, to
reshine, or make bright again. Ramaiuolo, a grater to grate with. Ramaria, the
trade or shop of a brasier. Ramarginare, to cure, to heal, or close up a wound
or a sore. Ramaricare, to bewail, to lament, to moan, to sorrow, to wail, to
whine bitterly. Ramaricamento, a bewailing, a lamenting, a sorrowing, a moning,
a wailing, a whining, a weeping. Ramaricheuole, wailefull, sorrowful,
monefull, whining, dolorous. Ramarico, Ramarco, harts-griefe, sorrow, dolor,
grief, moan, wailing, a grudging, a complaining. Ramaricchio, as
Ramaricamento. Ramario, a brazier, a copper-smith. Ramaruola, a ladle, a
scoope, a great spoone. Also a grater to grate with. Ramarro, an eft, a nute,
an ask. Also a kind of bird. Ramata, a bastonado, a blow with a cudgel, a
bough full of fruit. Ramatata, as Ramata. Ramatica, full of boughs or
branches. Ramazzotto, a chimney sweeper, a dragger, a raker, a farmer. Rame,
the metal called copper or brass. Ramea, brazen or made of brass. Ramece, a
kind of swelling namely in the cods, which commonly is called a rupture or
bursting, whereof there be diverse kinds, according to the place where it
happens. Ramegliero, a brazier, a copper-smith, a tinker. Ramembrare, to
remember or call to mind. Ramembranza, remembrance, memory, mindefulnes.
Ramemorare, as Ramembrare. Ramemoratione, as Ramembranza. Ramengo, wandering,
rouing, loitring, gadding, roming, poor, solitary, silly, forlorn. Also a
rammish hawk. Ramentare, as Ramembrare. Ramentatione, as Ramembranza.
Ramenteuole, mindful, remembering. Ramerino, rosemarie. Rametto, a little
bough, branch, spraie or twigge, or sprigge. Rami, boughs, branches, spraies,
sprigs. Ramicello, as Rametto. Ramigno, made of copper or brass, brazen.
Ramingo, as Ramengo. Also when a horse goes as it were in two minds, as
betwixt going and not going. Ramini, pots, ladles, pans, or kettels of brass.
Rammaricchio, as Ramarico. Rammarino, rosemarie. Rammattonare, to paue with
brickes again. Rammentare, as Ramembrare. Rammentatione, as Ramembranza.
Rammorbidare, to make soft, dainty, or gentle again, to cockre or make much
of. Rammorbidamento, a cockring, a wantonizing, a softning. Rammorbidire,
disco, dito, as Rammorbidare. Rammorbidito, made soft, dainty, cockrish, or
gentle again. Rammorzare, to extinguish, to suppress, to put out again, to
quench. Ramno, a kind of tree. Ramo, any bough, branch, sprig or spraie. Also
the metal called copper or brass. Also an arm or a part, as an arm of the
sea, a branch of a tree, of horns, or of the sea. Ramo di mare, a branch or
arm of the sea. Ramogna, success or following chance. Romolacci, a kind of
round black radish roots. Ramora, branches, boughs, sprigs, spraies.
Ramoracci, as Romolacci. Ramorbidire, as Rammorbidare. Ramoso, full of boughs
or branches, branchie, far spredding. Ramoscioloso, Ramoscoloso, idem.
Rampante, rampante, climbing, clammering. also a word in armorie. Rampardo, a
rampire, a fortification or wall of earth. Rampare, to rampe, to clammer to
climb, to hook, to dragge. Rampata, a blow given with a beasts pawe, foot,
or clawe. Rampazzo d'vua, a bunch or cluster of grapes. Rampecare, as
Rampegare. Rampegare, to grapple, to hook, to drag. Also as Rampare.
Rampegone, a graper, a hook, a dragge, a clasping iron, a graple. Rampi, iron
hooks or drags, or snags. Rampicare, as Rampegare. Rampicone, as Rampegone.
Rampinare, as Rampegare. Rampinato, full of hooks, snags, or tentrehooks. also
dragged or hooked, ramped or clammered. Rampino, as Rampegone. Also a tenter
hook. Rampogra, a grumbling, a muttring, a grudging, a repining, a snuffing.
Rampognare, to grumble, to mutter, to grudge, to repine, to snuff, to twit one
in the teeth any good turn done him. Rampognoso, grudging, muttring,
grumbling, repining, snuffing. Rampollare, to grow or bud forth into branches,
as Scaturire. Rampollo, a young branch, bough, sprigge or spraie. Ramponato, a
kind of high horse shoe called a calkin shoe. Rampone, a calkin in a horses
shoe to keep him from sliding. Ramponzoli, a kind of root used in sallads
called rampes. Ramuscello, as Rametto. Rana, a frogge or a padock. Also a
certain push or swelling commonly in the tongue of beasts. Pescerana, a fish of
the sea, called a frog fish. Morso di rana, an herb having round leaves lying
flat and spread upon the water called frogbitte. Ranabotolo, a young frogge.
Ranauotto, a little frogge. Ranca, scarcely, hardly, with much ado, almost, a
neanst. Rancare, to make a matter difficult or hard. Rancia, an orange. also
reazie, stale, tainted, or old. Also pale or wan, sallowe colored. Rancia
rosso, orange tawnie color, almost like red. Ranciata, a kind of sucket of
orenges called ranchado. Ranciato, orange tawnie color. Rancidire, as Rancire.
Rancido, reazie or stinking bacon. Also rammish, mouldie, mustie, rank, or
stinking like things vinewed or rotten. Also very unpleasant and out of use.
Rancio, orange tawnie color, an orange, or orange tree. also reizie, stale,
tainted, rotten, vinewed, withered, stinking, old as bacon will be. Rancire,
cisco, cito, to grow or become reazie, to become rotten, mouldie, rammish,
mustie, rank, vinewed, unpleasant, stale, tainted in taste and smell. Also to
make a noise, yell, or braie out like a tygre. Rancito, grown or become reazie
as stinking bacon is, tainted, rotten, mouldie, rammish, mustie, rank,
vinewed, unpleasant in taste and smell, rammish. Also braide, yelled or made a
noise like a tygre. Rancorare, to rankle, to fester, to wax full of rage,
spite, rancor or malice. Also to animate, to reincourage, to harten. Rancore,
rancor, hatred, malice, spite, venom, deadly feed. Also rammishnes or
rottennes. Also a rankling, a festring. Rancura, as Rancore. Rancurare, as
Rancorare. Randa, scarce, very near, almost, a neanst, a neaust, scarcely,
nothing. Randagio, a hard hearted, cruel, covetous man. Also a gadding or
roauing about. Also a hagard hawk. Randellare, to hurl, to fling or pitch or
throw furiously, to make a whirling noise. Randello, a hurling, whirling or
hissing noise in the air. A randello, at random, carelessly, furiously,
hurlingly. Randione. Look Falcon randione. Ranegga, as Brasci. Rangifero, a
beast in Lapland as big as a moyle, in color like an ass, horned like a stag,
which they use in stead of horses to draw their chariots and are wonderful
swift in going, for in a day and a night they will go an hundredth and fifty
miles. Rangolamenti, grumblings, grudgings, muttrings. Rangolare, to grumble,
to grudge, to mutter. as Rampognare. Rannicchiare, to shrug, crinch or shrink,
in the back as a frog does, to lie close together, to cowre. Rannicchio,
stooping, shrugging, cowring, close shrinking, crinching. Ranniere, a lie pot
that barbers use to boil and make their lie in. Ranno, a kind of poor folks
pottage like water gruell. Also hot, strong, sharp, skalding lie. Also a kind
of white bramble bearing more fruit then others do having branches with
straight prickles. the herbalists call it Ram, Christes-thorne,
hartes-thorne, waythorne, buckthorne or Rhein-berri^bush. Rannuuolare, to
ouercouer or ouercast with clouds, to be gloomie, cloudie or duskie, to cloud.
Ranocchia, a frog or a padocke. Ranocchia della lingua, the root of the tongue.
Ranocchio, a frog or a padocke. Also a tool to pull out teeth with. Ranoncolo,
a young frog. Also the herb Crowfoote, Golden knap or Butter flower.
Rantolosa, withered, full of wrimples, fading, drooping. Ranula, a plate of
metal, an ingot, a wedge of metal. Ranza, as Rancia. Ranzata, as Ranciata.
Ranzato, as Ranciato. Ranzetto, of the color of raw silk. Ranzo, as Rancio.
Rapa, a root called a turnep or rape-root. Rapace, ravenous, greedy, pilling,
polling, covetous, an extortioner, violent, devouring, given to pilling and
polling, and extortion. Rapacita, greedines, rauenousnes, ravening, pilling and
polling, extortion. Rapano, a radish root. Also the herb raifort. Rapare, as
Rampare. Rapariro, a bird called a thistlefinch. Some take it for a linnet.
Rapatumare, as Rappatumare. Rapatume, as Rappatume. Rapata, a blow or hit with
a Turnep. Also a flout, a frump, a gudgeon. Raperonzoli, as Ramponzoli.
Rapezzare, as Rappezzare. Rapezzatore, as Rappezzatore. Raphio, a beast in
shape like a wolf, and speckled like a libard. Rapicano, as Rabicano.
Rapidezza, violence, fury, swiftnes of a stream, suddennes, hastines,
quickenes. Rapidita, as Rapidezza. Rapido, violent, furious, swift, hasty,
quick as a running stream, sudden, ravenous, cruel, vehement. Rapimento, as
Rapina. Rapina, rape, rauin, taking or snatching away by force, rapine,
robbery, pillage, a rauishment, a forcing, a snatching, a violating. Rapinare,
to rape, to rauin, to rob, to pill and pole, to snatch, to commit all manner of
rapine. Rapinarie, robberies, filchings, rapes, snatchings. Rapinoso, ravenous,
robbing, pilling, snatching. Rapire, rapisco, rapito, to ravish, to rape, to
pull, to snatch or take away by violence, haste or fury, to take hastily, to
carry away by maine force. Rapito, ravished, raped, pulled or snatched by violence
or fury, taken hastily, carried away violently. Rapitore, a rauisher, a raper,
a snatcher, an offrer of violence. Raponcoli, as Ramponzoli. Rapontico, the
herb or root Sowbread or swinebread. Rappa, a wrinkle, a wrimple, a
withering. It is also a coopers tool about a barrel. Look Alla rappa.
Rappacciare, as Rappacificare. Rappacciume, as Rappatuine. Rappacificare, to
pacify, to appease, to assuage, to allay. Rappallozzolare, to shrug or
shrink, to sneake or squat close in some corner. Rappare, to wither, to
wrimple, to wrinkle. Rapparire, to appear again. Rappatumare, to accord, to
appease, to agree a matter, to whosht. Rappatume, an accord, an agreement, an
atonement. Rappe, a kind of scurffe in a horse called the pains. Rappellare,
to reapeale or call again, to revoke. Rappellatione, an appeal, a reuoking, a
calling back. Rappello, as Rappellatione. Rappezzare, to piece, to patch, to
cobble, to soute, to mend, to botch, to clout. Rappezzatore, a patcher, a
botcher, a souter, a cobbler, a piecer, a tinker, a clou^er. Rappiccare, to
reioine, to fasten or cleave together again. Rappicciare, to rekindle, to set
on fire again. Rapportare, to report, to relate, to refer, to rebring, to
recarie. Rapportatore, a reporter, a relator, a rebringer. Rapporto, a report,
a relation, a rebringing. Also reported. Rapprendere, prendo, presi, preso, to
retake. Also to curd, to clod, to congeale. Also to shrink* up sinews, to
become lame, to founder as a horse. Rappresa, is properly when a horse is as we
call it taken in his legs so as he cannot stand or go. Rappreso, retaken. Also
curded, clodded, congealed as milk or blood, foundred, lame, shrunk up.
Rapprendimento, the foundring of a horse, as Rimpresione. Rappresa, as Ripresa.
Rappresentare, to represent, to resemble, to show, to play comedies or
enterludes. Rappresentatori, players, comediants, enterlude-plaiers. Rapsoidi,
the interpreters or rehearsers of Homers verses. Rapucci, young little turnips.
Rapto, as Rapito. Raramente, rarely, thinly, fewtimes, seldom. Rarezza, as
Rarita. Rarificare, to rarifie, to clarify, to make thin, s^ant and seld.
Rarita, raritie, thinnes, seldnes, daintines, seldomnes, sewnes, scantnes, a
spoongie hollownes. Raro, as Rado. Rare volte, as Rade volte. Rasagrasso, the
fat or gum that grows in some trees. Rasare, to shave, to level, to smooth,
to even, to streeke corn, to raze. Rasatore, a shauer, a leueler, a smoother,
a sirceker or measurer of corn. Rasca, a cobweb, a spiders web. Also a bone or
finne of a fish. Also a measure of liquid things used in Italy. Also a
scraping tool. Rascare, to strain for to cough, as Raschiare. Also to
burnish, to rub, to furbish. Rascamento, a coughing, or straining in the lungs,
as Raschiatura. Rascassa bianca, as Becca in cauo. Rascatoio, a burnishing or
furbishing tool. Rasce^ta, the wrist of a man's hand. Also a kind of fine
silk rash. Raschia, as Raschiatura. Raschiare, to skud away. Also to rake or
scrape together, to hoord up. Also to cough, to spawe, to spit. Also to file,
to saw, to scratch. Raschiato, skudded away, raked, scraped, or hoorded up.
Also cought, spit, spawde. Also filed, sawed, or scratcht. Raschiatura, a
skudding, a raking, a scraping, a hoording. Also a coughing, a spitting, a
spawing. Also a scratching. Also any manner of fyling or fyle dust. Rascia, a
kind of stuff called silk rash. Rasciare, as Raschiare. Rasciatura, as
Raschiatura. Rasciere, a rash maker. Raschio, a scratch, a scraping, a raking.
Also a coughing, a spawing. Rasciucare, as Rasciugare. Rasciugare, to wipe or
dry again. Rasciugatoio, a wiper, a towell, a dryer, a rubber. Rasega, a saw,
to saw with. Rasegare, to saw in sunder. Rasempiare, to copy, to match, to
ensample, to compare, to patron, to exemplify. Rasempiatura, an ensampling, a
matching, a coping. Rasene, rosine, it is like turpentine. Rasentare, as
Rasare. Rasente, even, aneanst, level, just, aneust, near, even or full
measure. Rasiere, a sha^er. Also a razor. Rasin, a tree in Arabia, whereof
there is but one found, and upon it the Phoenix sits. Raso, the stuff called
Sattine. Also shaven, shaued, smooth, scraped out, made smooth and clean. Also
fled near the ground, or sailed near the shore. Also razed, grased, or
glanced near as an arrow or a bullet will do. Look Radere. Rasoio, Rasore, a
razor to shave with. Also a shauer, or a scraper, a barber. Rasonare, as
Ragionare. Rasonato, a merchants counter, or counting board. Rasola, a razor, a
file, a scraping tool, a rake, a paring shouell. Raspa, as Rasola. Raspare, to
file, to pare, to scrape, to fret. Also to hoord up. Raspato, filed, scraped,
pared, raked, fretted. Also hoorded up. Also a kind of raspise wine.
Rasparuola, a raker as bakers use to scrape their kneading tubs. Raspatore, a
raker, a scraper, a parer, a filer. Raspatura, a raking, a scraping, a filing,
a paring. Also saw-dust, or file dust. Raspo, a kind of dry skurfe, scab or
tetter. Also a fruit or berie called Raspise. Also as Raspa. Rassare, as
Raschiare. Rassatura, as Raschiatura. Rassegna, a retreat, or mustring of men.
Also a rendezuous. Rassegnare, to show or muster men, to assign, to muster
together, to sound a retreat. Rassembrare, to resemble, to be like. Also to
gather or assemble together. Rassembranza, a resemblance, a likeness. Also an
assembly. Rassemplare, as Rasempiare. Rasserenare, to clear up the sky, to
be bright or shining, to look cheerefullie. Rassettare, to settle, to set in
order, to lay up, to dress up. Rassetto, settling, setting in order, good
order. Rassicurare, to assure, to warrant, to confirm again. Rassicuranza,
assurance, warrantise. Rassodare, to stiffen, to harden, to strengthen, to make
tough. Rassomigliare, to resemble, or be like. Rassomiglianza, resemblance, or
likeness. Rastellare, to rake, to scrape, or drag together. Rastellatore, a
raker, a scraper, a dragger. Rastellatura, a raking, a scraping, or a dragging.
Rastelliera, as Rastello. Rastello, a rake, a harrow, a drag. Also a rack, a
cratch, a manger. Also a style, yate, or gate in a hedge. Also a purculleis, or
grate of iron. Also a labell or lambeaw in armorie. Also an instrument to weed
corn, or to rid away earth from vines. Rastiare, to poule, or shave. also to
trudge or skud away. Also to rake together as Raschiare. Rastiatura, a raking
together, a pouling, a shauing. Rastrare, as Rastellare. Rastratore, as
Rastellatore. Rastrellare, as Rastellare. Rastrelliera, as Rastello. Rastrello,
as Rastello. Rastro, as Rastello. Rasura, a shauing or paring away. Rata, a
rate, a share, a part, a portion. also the milt or spleen of any body.
Ratagli, scrapings, retailings, od ends, small wares, mammocks, small pieces,
shreads of tailers, vailes of any cuttings, a cooks fees. Ratare, to rate, to
portion, to share, to part, to divide by equal portions. Ratificare, to
ratify, to confirm, to establish, to approve, to allow, to warrant.
Ratificatione, a ratification, a confirming, an establishing, an approving, an
allowing. Ratiocinatione, a reasoning, debating, or disputing of matters.
Rationabile, as Rationale. Rationale, reasonable, humane, endued with reason.
Also a kind of the priests attire among the Hebrews. Rationalita,
reasonablenes, reason, discourse. Ratrappare, to overtake, or entrap again.
Ratrappirsi, pisco, pito, to be frozen, stiff or benumbed in the ioints with
cold. Ratrappito, frozen, stiff, or benumbed in ones ioints with cold.
Ratrarto, shrunken or withered, one whose sinews are shrunken. Ratristarsi, to
be sorrowful. Ratta, as Rata. Rattaccare, to fasten or join together again.
Rattacconare, to cobble, to clo^t, to b^tch, to patch, to piece, to mend or
trim up. Rattamente, swiftly, nimbly, speedily, suddenly, quickly, out of
hand. Rattemperare, to retemper, to temper, to abstain. Rettenere, tengo,
tenni, tenuto, to detain, to withhold, to retain, to keep back. Rattenuto,
detained, retained, withheld, restrained, kept back. Rattenimento, a
restraint, a restraining, a withholding, a retaining. Rattentare, to reattempt,
to reassaie. Rattento, a reattempting, a reassaying. Also a stay or a delay.
Rattepidire, disco, dito, to cool, to assuage, to calm, to allay the heat.
Rattezza, swiftnes, violence, haste, speed. Ratto, swift, speedy, hasty,
quick, nimble, fleet, sudden. Also high, steep, craggy, steep up. Also a
rat or a mouse. Also rapt, ravished or raped, carried away perforce, taken away
suddenly. Also a rape or a rauishment, a rauishing or deflowring of a woman
against her consent and will. Also a kind of fish like a raie or a skeate.
Rattoppare, as Rattaconare. Rattopenago, Rattopenugo, a night bat or a
reremouse. Rattore a rauisher, a snatcher, a puller away by force, a robber, an
extortioner, a spoiler, a violent taker away. Rattrappare, to overtake, to
ouerreach, to ouercatch, to shrink or draw together. Rattratto, as Ratratto.
Raua, the root called a turnep. Rauaggiolo, a kind of dainty cheese.
Rauanello, a little radish root. Also the crinits of a hawk. Rauano, a radish
root. Rauarino, as Raparino. Rauazzone, rape seed, whereof they make oil.
Raucare, to be or become hoarse in speaking. Also to snort. Also to cry or
yell as a tygre. Raucisono, that has a hoarse voice, or makes a hoarse noise.
Raucita, hoarsenes, snorting, which is caused by the means of humors fallen
down into the winde-pipe and there abiding. also the yelling of a tygre.
Rauco, hoarse in speaking, whistling, disagreeing, that faints or fails.
Raued, vel Rauet, the herb Reubarbe, but namely the root thereof so called of
the Arabian phisicions. Rauedere, veggo, viddi, veduto, or visto, to be aware,
to epsy, to bethink himself, to perceive, to advise with himself, or take
heed. Raueduto, bewared, espied, foreseen, aware, wary, wily, foreseeing,
perceived, crafty, perceiving, heedie. Rauedimento, warines, perceiving,
foresight, heed. Rauellare, to reveal, to manifest. Rauellino, a rauelin, a
wicket, or a posterne gate. Also the uttermost bounds of the walls of a castle,
or sconces without the walls. Rauello, a young turnep, or radish root. Rauiare,
Rauuiare, to take the way again, to set or addres in the way, to set
foreward. Rauiccie, a kind of meat made of young turnep leaves. Rauiccio, as
Radicchio. Rauicinare, to approach, to neighbor or come near again.
Rauiggiolo, a kind of conserve, preserve, or sucket used after meats to close
the stomach. Rauignoli, as Rafiuoli. Rauincidire, disco, dito, to yield, to
stretch, or to become tender and soft, humble and meek. Rauioli, Rauiuoli, as
Rafioli. Also a kind of clouted cream called a fool or a trifle. Rauisare,
to readuise or mark again, to know, to remember, to put in mind.
Rauisciuolo, a kind of course rye or tiph bread. Rauisolare, to recover health
again. Rauisto, as Raueduto. Rauiuare, to revive, to quicken, to encourage
again. Rauizze, the leaves or stalks of turnep roots. Raunare, as Radunare.
Raunanza, as Radunanza. Raunata, as Radunanza. Rauogliuolo, a kind of fresh
cheese in Italy. Rauolgere, volgo, volsi, volto, to reuolue, to ouerturne, to
toss, to tumble, to roll, to range or trudge about, to enwrap, or enfold in.
Rauolto, reuolued, enwrapped, enfolded, ouerturned, tossed, tumbled, rouled,
ranged, trudged about. Rauolgimento, a reuoluing, an enfolding, an enwrapping,
an ouerturning, a tossing. Rauoglio, an enfolding, an enwrapping, a bundle, a
fardle. Raus, a game at cards used in Italy. Rauuilluppare, to enwrap, to
entangle again. Rauuiuare, as Rauiuare. Razza, Raza, as Raggia, a kind, a
race, a brood, a blood, a stock, a name, a pedigree. Razzamenti, arasse
work, all manner of arasse work or tapestrie. Razzare, as Raspare. Also to
raze out any thing. Razziere, as Tapezzarie. Razzi, tapistrie, arasse works,
hangings for chambers. Also squibs of wildefire, beams, streams, or rays of
the sun, also spokes of carte wheels or carts. also as Radio, or Raggio.
Razzina, any kind of little root or race. Razzimato, smug, spruce, refined,
newely shorn or shaven. Razzo, the fish called a raye, or a thornebacke. also
a piece of arrasse or tapistrie. Also as Raggio. Razzolare, to scrape or dig
as a hen does, to rake up together, to toss and tumble over any thing.
Razzolatura, as Razzolo. Razzolo, the scraping or digging of a hen. Re, a
king, a sovereign, a crowned prince. Also a note in music. Re d'ucelli, a
bird called a wren. Readottare, to choose by adoption again, to readopt.
Reale, royally, or kingly, princely, pertaiteining to a king, like to a king,
honest, upright. Also real or essen^tiall. Realgare, the sum, vapor or smoke
of minerals, and by a metaphor, taken for vile corruption in man's body,
whereby arise many filthy diseases. Realita, royalty, kinglines, loyalty,
vprightnes, sincerity, honesty, realtie. Realizzare, to royalize or make
kingly. Also to exercise the true duty of a king. Realmente, really,
essentially. Also kinglike, royally, uprightly, princelike, like a king. Reame,
a realm, a kingdom. Rear, to commit wickedness, to become guilty.
Reassumere, as Resumere. Reatino, a bird called a wren. Rebalzata, a trapdore,
or drawing window. Rebechista, as Ribechista. Rebellare, to rebel against
authority, to rise against, to revenge himself. Rebelle, Rebello, a rebel.
Rebellione, a rebellion, a rising against. Rebelloso, rebellious, stubborn,
rising against. Reboare, to low, or bellow again, to sound or ring again.
Rebuffare, as Rabuffare. Rebuffo, as Rabuffo. Rebuola, a kind of wine so
called. Recalcitrare, to kick or strike or winze with ones heels again.
Recamare, to embroder, to beset, to embosse. Recamatore, an embroderer.
Recamatura, any kind of embroderie. Recambiare, to exchange or shift again.
Recami, all manner of embroderies. Recantare, to recante, to repent or gainesay
himself. also to sing again. Recantatione, a recantation. Recapitare, to have
or give intertainment or refuge. Recapito, intertainment, event, issue,
success, refuge, help, supply, shelter. Also delivery of letters. Recare,
to bring, to reach, to take, to fetch, to draw, to betake. Also to allure,
persuade or draw unto. Recato, brought, reached* taken, fetched, drawn,
betaken. Also allured, persuaded or drawn unto. Also spittle, fleagme, or such
excrement. Also as Recateria. Recarsi all cose honest, to draw, to incline or
yield to honest things. Recarsi ad honor, to take it or repute it as a grace
and honor. Recarsi ad onta, to take it as a shame or disgrace. Recarsi a
piangere, to betake himself to weep. Recatare, to buie and sell again by
retaile, to regrate, to retaile. Also to forestall markets. Recateria, a
fripperie or brokers shop. Recatiere, a huckster, a retailer, a regrater, a
fripper, a broker, a forestaller. Recatore, a bringer, a reacher. Recchione, a
disease or swelling in the neck called the mumps. Recedere, cedo, cessi,
cesso, to recoile, to retire, to retraite, to give or go back, to yield
ground. Recensione, a tale, a reckoning, a rehearsing, a reuiewing or
examination of an account or number. Recentare, to make fresh or new. Also to
wash, rence or cleanse clean. Recente, fresh, new, of late, late, lusty,
newly or lately made, new come. Recere, recio, recei, reciuto, to spue, to
vomit, to cast, to spaule. Reciuto, spued, vomited, cast, disgorged, spauled.
Recesi, shadie, pleasant or summer places. Recesso, a recoiling, a retiring, a
going back or further off, a retraite. Also an innermost or closest place or
corner of a house. Also the hollownes of the mouth. Also the ebbing of the sea.
Recetta, as Ricetta. Recettacolo, as Ricettacolo. Receuere, as Riceuere.
Receunto, taken, received, accepted. Receuitore, as Riceuitore. Recidere, cido,
cisi, ciso, to cut or hew in sunder, to divide or part in sunder, to cut
again, to cut behind, to pare, to shave, to take away. Reciso, cut or hewn
in sunder, cut again, cut behind, pared, shaven, taken away. Recinio, Recino,
a square garment like a nymphs mantell, which they that did wear it did cast
one part thereof over their shoulders. Recinto, a compass, a precinct, a
circumference, a limite. Also vnguirded, loose, unlaced, untied. Recipiente,
the receiving part of a still or limbecke. Also capable or receiving.
Reciprocamente, mutuallie, interchangeably, reciprocally* also retiring or
returning to the place whence one came* ebbing and flowing or going back as
the sea does. Reciprocare, to return from whence one is come, to turn back,
to eb and flow as the sea does, to depend one of another by mutual
consequence. Reciprocatione, a going back, a retiring, a returning to the place
from whence one is come. the ebbing of the sea. Reciproco, mutual,
reciprocal, answerable, interchangeable, that has recourse, respect or
return thither from whence it comes. that ebbeth and flows or goes
backward. Recisione, a cutting off, away or again. Recitare, to recite, to
rehearse, to relate, to report, to read out aloude that others may hear and
understand, to tell by heart or without book, as players do rehearse their
plays or comedies. Used also to play a comedy or tragedy. Recitante, a
rehearser, a recitor or reader with a loud voice that others may hear. Also an
interlude plaier. Recitamento, a rehearsing, a reciting, a relating with a loud
voice that others may hear. Recitatore, as R^citante. Recitare vna comedia, to
rehearse or play a comedy. Rechiamare, as Richiamare. Reciticcimi, spuings,
vomitings, castings, or strainings to cast. Reclamare, as Richiamare.
Reclamatione, as Richiamatione. Recolendo, worthy to be honored or worshipped.
Recondita, secrecy, deepenes, profunditie. Recondito, secret, covered,
secretly kept, hard to be known, laid up, close, remote, deep. Riconfare, to
agree or square with again. Recopiare, to copy or write over again.
Recourare, to recover, to reobtaine, to rescue. Recreare, as Ricreare.
Recreatione, as Ricreatione. Recreatiuo, as Ricreatiuo. Recusare, as Ricusare.
Recusante, refusing, renouncing. Also a recusant. Redare, to inherit, to
succeed in any inheritance. Redarguire, guisco, guito, to reprove, to
reprehend, to blame, to show by argument or reason that the same which is said
is not true, to control, to disprooue. Read, an heir, a successor, an
inheritor. Also a net. Redentione, redemption, redeeming, a ransoming. Redento,
redeemed, reskued, ransomed. Redentore, a redeemer, a reskuer, a ransomer.
Redere, to return again, to come or go again. Redigere, to bring again by
force, or cunning, to cause, or compel. Reddire, to return again. Also to
restore, to render, to yield up, or give again. Reddito, returned again. Also
delivered, restored, rendered, yielded up, or given again. Redditione, a
restoring, a rendering or giving again. Redificare, to re-edifie or build
again, to build anew. Redimere, dimo, dimei, dimuto, to reskue, to redeem, to
ransom, to recou^r. Redimuto, redeemed, reskued, ransomed, recovered again.
Redinare, to rain as a horse does. Redine, the raynes of a bridle. Redinelle,
little or small raynes of a bridle, false raynes. Redintegratione, a renewing, a
beginning afresh. Redire, disco, dissi, ditto, as Ridire. Redita, an
inheritance, an heritage, a patrimony. Reditione, a returning or coming
again. Redituro, returning or coming back. Rediuio, a worm called a tyke,
which sucketh blood from man or beast. Rediuiuo, that which returns to life
again, or that which long has bin unused, and is now occupied again.
Redondare, to redound, to abound superfluouslie, to be so full that it run
over, to result, to return unto, to ouerflow, to reflow, to rise above the
bank. Redondandia, excessiuenes, overmuch, a surcharging, a superfluity, an
ouerflowing, too much abounding. Redoppiare, to redouble, to make as much more.
Redoppio, a double blow, a redoubling, as much more. Redunia, a fellon or sore
that breeds between the nail and the flesh. Some conster it to be a
loosenes and cleft of the skin about the roots of the nails of the fingers,
and call the same wortwales, or liureages. Redurre, duco, dussi, dutto, to
reduce, to bring back, to draw or pluck back, to bring safe again, to lead
forth again, to deliver out of peril. Reduttione, a reduction, a leading or
bringing home again. Redutto, reduced, brought back, drawn or plucked back,
brought safe again, lead forth or home again. Reduuia, as Redunia, or as
Pterigi. Reduuie, the skin of Serpents which they cast off every year when
they wax old. Refare, as Rifare. Refe, any kind of twisted sowing thread.
Refellere, refello, refelsi, refelluto, to refell, to prove false, to
disprooue, to refute, to reprove of falsehood, to confute that is objected, to
show reason and argument that it is false that one says. Referendare, to
report, to blab or tell tales from one to another. Referendario, a blab, a tell
tale, a reporter, an eawes-dropper. Referire, risco, rito, as Riferire.
Referentia, as Riferenza. Referto, as Riferito. Refettione, a refection, a
refreshing, a recreation, a repaste, a taking of meat and drink. Also a
repairing of that which is worn and decaide, a bait or refreshing by the way.
Refettorio, a refectorie or dining place in a religious house, a place in
monasteries and colleges where the company dine and sup together, a hall, a
refreshing or baiting place. Reficiare, to strengthen with food or meat, to
repair, recreate or comfort. Refinare, as Rifinare. Refiutare, as Ricusare.
Refiuto, as Ricusa. Reflettere, as Riflettere. Reflesso, as Riflesso.
Reflessione, as Riflessione. Reflessiuo, as Riflessiuo. Refluente, flowing,
returning or recoyling back again. Refondere, as Rifondere. Refocillare, to
comfort, to recreate, to strengthen, to make lusty again, to whet again or
set a new edge on. Reflusso, as Riflusso. Refocilato, newly whetted or having a
new edge set on, comforted, strengthened, made lusty again. Refragare, to
resist, to repugne, to be against, to gain say, to deny, to kick against.
Refrangere, as Rifrangere. Refrattario, wilful in opinion, rebellious,
obstinate, headstrong, unruly, froward, skittish. Refrenare, as Raffrenare.
Refrendare, as Referendare. Refrendario, as Referendario. Refrigerare, to
refresh, to ease, to comfort, to help, to recreate, to cool or make cold, to
diminish or assuage. Refrigeratiuo, cooling, easefull, refreshing, comfortable,
that has the nature and quality to cool and re^^esh. Refrigeratorio, as
Refrigeratiuo. Refrigerio, a succor, a help, a comfort, an ease, a
refreshing, a cooling. Refrustare, as Rifrustare. Refudasone, Refudagione, a
refusal, a refusing. Refuga, a runnagate, an unruly person, a fugitive, one
that will not remain in subjection. Refugio, as Rifugio. Refuggire, as
Rifuggire. Refuggito, as Rifuggito. Refugo, he that flies away, a runaway, he
that takes his flight. Refulgere, as Rifulgere. Refulgido, bright, glittering
or shining. Refusati, the coursest veluets that be, called refusados. Refutare,
as Rifutare. Refutatione, as Rifutatione. Rega, a strike, a rule, a ruler, a
line, a leuelling staff or squire. Regalare, to present or give gifts unto,
to bestow a largess upon. Regalbulo, a bird called a witwall or loriot.
Regale, as Reale. Regali, a musical instrument called rigoles. Regalitia, the
sweet wood licorice. Regare, as Rigare. Regatta, as Rigatta. Regattare, as
Rigattare. Regattiere, as Rigattiere. Regazza, a pie or piot. Regenerare, to
regenerate or engender again. Also to resemble in nature and property.
Regeneratione, a regeneration or new birth. Regente, regent, governing. a
regent, a governor. Regerminare, to bud, to burgen or spring a new. Regestola,
a kind of lanaret hawke called a shreeke or ninemurtherer. Regettare, to
reject. Look Rigettare. Reggere, reggo, ressi, retto, to rule, to govern, to
swaie, to command, to withstand, to weilde. Reggi, used of Dante for thou
returnest or come again. Reggia, a Kings or Emperors palace, court, seat
or house. Reggimento, government, a command, a rule, a sway, a regiment of
men, that is a number of sundry companines under the charge of a colonel.
Reggitore, a ruler, a commander, a governor. Regia, as Reggia. Also kingly,
royal or maiesticall. Via regia, the Kings high way, a common high way.
Regimento, a direction or diet of man's life, a ruling, a regiment, a
governance. Also the rudder or stern in a ship. Regina, a Queen, a kings
wife. Regina capri; the herb Medow-sweet or Maidens-sweete. Regio, regal,
kingly, royal, princely, of or pertaining to a king. Also a kind of reeling or
falling sickness in a horse. Morbo regio, the iaundise, which is an ouerflowing
of the gall over the whole body. Regione, a region, a province, a country, a
part, a coast or quarter, a situation. Reginare, as Regnare. Registrare, to
register, to record, to inroule, to enter in a book. Registratore, a
registrer, an examiner, a clarke, a remembrancer, a keeper of records.
Registro, a register, a record, a file, a tallie, an index of a book.
Regnante, reigning, regnant, ruling, swaying. Regnare, to reign, to swaie, to
rule, to govern, to be in authority, to be a king, to bear rule and swaie,
to bear a great or chief stroke. Regnatore, a ruler, a governor, a
possessour, a king, a lord, a master. Regnicolo, a little kingdom or realm,
a petie king. Regno, a kingdom, a realm, a dominion, a rule, a government.
Also a reign or space of reigning. Regoglio, as Orgoglio. Regoglioso, as
Orgoglioso. Regola, a rule, a prescription, a ruler, a method, an order. Also a
chip, a splint, a lathe, a squire, a rule, a square. Also a brief lesson or
instruction of things, a pattern or example to follow. Regolare, to rule, to
order, to govern, to direct, to moderate, to temper. Also regular or according
to rules and prescriptions, vnder-rule or made according to rule.
Regolatamente, temperatly, moderately, according to order and rule.
Regolarmente, regularly, according to prescriptions. Regolatore, a ruler, an
order, a governor, a moderator. Regolitia, the sweet wood licorice. Regolo, a
rule, a direction, a compass, the hand, style or index of a dyall. Also a
Cocatrix or Basiliske. Also a carpenters squire. also a prince, a Duke, a Kings
son or nephew. Also a bird called a wren. Regredere, to return back again.
Regressione, a regression or returning, a reco^ling. Regresso, a progress or
regresse. Also returned or reco^led back. Regulo, as Regolo. Reiere, as
Recere. Reiuto, as Reciuto. Reina, a Queen, a kings wife. Also the fish called
a carpe. Reillo, a little bird called a wren. Reintegrare, to renew, to
restore, to make whole again. Reintegratione, a reintegration or making whole
again. Reiterare, to reiterate, to repeat or do or say a thing over again.
Reiteratione, a reiteration, a repetition, a doing or saying again, a
repeating of a thing. Relapso, fallen or suncke down again. Also a relapse or
falling down again. Relassare, as Rilasciare. Relassatione, a release, a
releasing. Relasso, as Rilascio. Relatare, to relate, to report, to declare, to
rehearse, to tell. Relatione, a relation, a report, a discourse, a declaration,
a telling, a rehearsing. Relatiuo, relative, that has relation to another
thing, respective. Relato, showed, reported, uttered, declared, told,
rehearsed. Also brought back again. Relatore, a relator, a reporter, a
declarer, a teller, a rehearser. Relegare, as Rilegare. Relegatione, a
confining, a banishment, an exile, a sending away. Religione, religion,
holiness, godliness, true worshipping or God, all holy things, a reverence, a
fear, an honesty, a dread, a scruple, a conscience, an vprightnes or dreadnes
to do amiss, a devotion, a solicitous care and fear, a reverent fear, and
doubt of conscience least he shall offend in any thing, a scruple of
conscience, a curiosity. Religioso, religious, holy, godly, devout, honest,
upright, serving God, truly devout, of great devotion, timorous, scrupulous,
superstitious, that has a conscience. Reliquia, a relic or old monument, the
rest that remains, the remnant, the ashes or bones of the dead, relics,
scraps, fragments, leauings. also a grudging of a fever. Reliquiario, as
Reliquiero. Reliquiero, a shrine or place to keep relics in. Relitto, left,
forsaken, relinquished, abandoned, cast off, given over, laid a part.
Relucere, as Rilucere. Reluuio, as Reduuia. Remandare, to send again.
Remanere, as Rimanere. Remare, to row with an oar in any boat. Remaro, a
rower. Also a maker of oars. Rematore, as Remaro. Remasticare, to chewe, to
ruminate, to consider well again. Remasto, remained, left, abided, staide,
tarried, ceased, given over. Remasuglia, any kind of leauings, scraps, or
relics, or od ends. Rematiche cose, things to be considered or remembered.
Rembrencioli, pieces, or loabes, or bunches of flesh, hanging loose like
clusters. Remeligine, a fish which cleaving to the keele of a ship staieth it,
as Remora. Remengo, as Ramengo. Ramenia, the herb Henbane. Remeritare, as
Rimeritare. Remero, as Remaro. Remi, oars to row with. Amongst horsemen remi
is taken for a man's legs when he is on horseback. Remigare, to row with
oars in a boat. Remigio, the flying of birds in the air. Reminiscentia,
remembrance, memory, mindfulnes of that was once before in the mind.
Reminiscente, mindful, remembering, calling to mind again. Remire, as
Rimedire. Remissamente, demislie, remislie, basely, cowardly, remissiuely,
slackly, faintlie, humbly, without courage, softly, weakly, nothing lively,
nor vehemently. Remissibile, that may be pardoned or remitted, remissible.
Remissione, remission, pardon, forgiveness. Also a slacking a loosing, a
release, a faintnes, a remissenes, a negligence. Also a recreating of the mind
from study and labor. Remissiuo, that may be forgiven or remitted, remissiue.
Remisso, remitted, forgiven, pardoned. also remiss, demisse, cowarde, crauin,
base, slack, that is not vehement, dull, negligent, nothing regarding.
Remissoria, as Rimissoria. Remisurare, to measure again. Remo, an oar to row
with. Remogliare, to lay in steep: also to marry again. Remoglio, wetting
or sleeping in water. Remola, course bran, as Semola. Remolata, a poult is such
as are applied to horses, to supple any sore. Remolazzo, a radish root.
Remolino, a whirle-winde, a whirle-poole. also a mark which some horses have
about them called the feather. Remora, a fish called a suckstone, or sea
lamprey, which cleaving to the beak of a ship hinders the course thereof.
Also the weed called rest-barrowe or cammocke. Remordere, as Rimordere.
Remordimento, as Rimordimento. Remori, birds, which by their flight or voice
signified that the thing purposed was not to be followed. Remorso, as
Rimordimento. Remoto, as Rimoto. Remulcare, to draw a great ship or barge with
another lesser vessel, to towe a ship. Remulco, the rope or cable wherewith a
great ship being fastened to a lesser is by force of men towed and drawn. Also
a towing or rowing barge. Also a rolling piece of timber wherewith ships be
driven on land, and lanched into the water again. Remulo, the narrower part
of the ribs which touches the turnings of the backbone. Remunerare, as
Rimunerare. Remuneratione, as Rimuneratione. Remuneratore, as Rimuneratore.
Rena, gravel, or sand. Also the eating out of that little piece of flesh,
which is in the bigger corner of the eye. Renagie, parables, ambages, ambiguous
sayings. Renaglie, as Renagie. Rendene, a swallow. Rendere, rendo, resior
rendei, reso or renduto, to render, to restore, to yield, to give again, to
repaie. Renduto, or reso, rendered, yielded, restored, given again back,
repaid. Renditore, a rendrer, a restorer, a yeelder, a repaier. Render conto,
to yield or give an account. Also to inform. Render' il fiato, to yield or
give up the ghost. Render il cambio, to yield the like again. Render pane per
fogaccia, to give bread for cakes, to give as good as one brings. Render
gratie, to yield or give thanks. Render risposta, to give or yield an answer.
Render frutto, to yield profit or give fruit. Render buon odore, to yield
or give a good sent or savor. Redersi atto, to enable or make himself fit.
Rendeuole, pliable, yielding, stretching, inclined unto, tractable. Rendie,
rents, incoms, profits, revenues. Rendita, a rent, a revenue, an income, a
profit. Renella, the gravel or stone in the bladder, small gravel. Renga, an
oration, a declamation or formal discourse. Also a herring fish. Also a pulpit
to make an oration in. Rengare, to make an oration or formal discourse.
Rengatore, an orator. Reni, the raines or kidneies of ones back. Renitente,
resisting, skittish, froward, stubborn. Renitentia, a resisting, a
frowardnes. Renoceronte, as Rinoceronte. Renontia, a renouncing, a forsaking,
an abiuring, a refusal, a resigning, a denouncing, the refusal or denial of
that thing which was couenanted and promised. Also a report or deposition of
one sworn, a sommons of an officer by word. Renontiare, to renounce, to
forsake, to abjure, to refuse, to resign, to give over and meddle no more
with, to bid farewell for ever. Also to make relation, to report, to bring word
again, to signify, to proclaim or show openly, to give knowledge or
warning. Renontiatione, as Renontia. Renoso, sandy, grauelly, greetie, full of
gravel. Rensa, Renza, lawne or cambrike, or such fine linen cloth. Renso,
Renzo, very fine flax to spinne lawne with. Rentifoglia, a kind of wild
hedge-roses, that have neither good smell nor good fashion. Renuntia, as
Renontia. Renuntiare, as Renontiare. Reo, wicked, guilty, culpable, accused
of, faulty, condemned, bad, convinced. Also a defendent in any challenge. Also
the defendent in a process, he that is accused or sued, a person arrayned.
Reorgarza, the name of a french dance used in Italy. Reparare, Reparatione,
Look Riparare. Repatriare, to restore or come to ones native country again.
Repatriatione, a restoring or coming to ones country again. Repentaglio, as
Ripentaglio. Repent, suddenly, violently, rashly, too timely, unseasonably,
unawares, unlooked for, unexpected. Repentino, sudden, violent, rash,
unseasonable, hasty, unawares, unexpected. Repentire, as Pentire. Repentito,
as Pentito. Repentimento, as Pentimento. Repentiuo, repentant, penitent.
Repertorio, a reportarie, a memorial, a register, an inventory of ones goods.
Repese, an herb called orache. Repetere, peto, petei, petuto, to repeat, to
reply, to rehearse or begin again, to resort and return eftsoons to a thing,
to call or ask again. Repetuto, repeated, rehearsed, replide, told, or begun
again, called or asked again. Repetitione, a repetition, a rehearsing, a
replying, a replication, a telling over again, a repeating or saying again,
as when a thing is told many times. Repetitore, a repeater, a rehearser, an
Usher of a school. Repicare, to sound or iangle as bells, to clatter or clash
as armor does. Repico, a noise, a sound, or iangling, a clattering, a
clashing. Repignerare, to redeem a pledge or gage. Also to replieue a
distress. Repigneratione, a redeeming of a gage or pledge. Also a replieuing.
Repilogare, to rehearse or repeat from the beginning what has bin said.
Repletione, a filling, a refection, a replenishing. Repleto, full, replenished,
filled. Replica, a replye, a replication, a repeating, a rehearsing, a
confirmation of ones saying with new allegations. Also a folding again, an
enfolding. Replicare, to reply, to repeat, to unfold, to fold again, to
display, to tell a thing twice or often. Replicatione, as Replica. Repo, used
of Dante, for I creep like a Serpent. Repoloni, Look Maneggiare a repoloni,
is when a horse does gallop in a right path, and still returns in the same,
in english it is now called a Repelone. Reportare, as Riportare. Reportatore,
as Riportatore. Reposare, as Riposare. Reposiotrio, as Ripostiglio. Reposo, as
Riposo. Repostiero, as Ripostiglio. Reprendere, as Riprendere. Reprensione, as
Riprensione. Reprensore, as Riprenditore. Reprensiuo, reprehensiue,
reproachful. Reprenditore, as Riprenditore. Reprenduto, reproved, reprehended.
Represaglio, aresting, stopping, reprisall, attaching, or staying, as
Ripresaglia. Represare, to arrest, to attach, to stop, to repriue.
Representare, to represent or be like to, lively to set forth, to offer or
present a thing, to exhibit, to bring in presence, to lay before one, to show
or declare, to show himself and be present. Also to play plays or comedies.
Representatione, a representation, or representing of a thing. Represso,
repressed, overcome, suppressed, quelled, refelled, kept down or under, tamed.
Represo, as Ripreso. Reprimere, primo, pressi, presso, to repress, to
suppress, to refell, to quell, to stop and keep down by force, to let that a
thing be not done, to keep under, to tame. Reprobabile, reproueable,
condemnable. Reprobare, to condemn, or to reprobate, to reprove, to reject, to
disallow. Reprobato, condemned, a reprobate, reproved, rejected, disallowed.
Reprobatione, reprobation, condemnation, a reproving, rejecting, or
disallowing. Reprofondare, to diue, to duck, to sink, to plunge again.
Repromettere, as Ripromettere. Rep^blica, a commonwealth, a free estate, the
weal public. Repudiando, to be refused, etc. Repudiare, to deuorce, to
repudiate, or separate asunder, to forsake as one does his wife, to refuse, to
put away, to cast off, to reject, to abandon and leave. Repudio, a deuorce or
separation of man and wife, a putting away, a refusing, a rejecting. Repudioso,
villainous, dishonest, reproachful, not to be kept company with. Repugnare, to
contradict, to withstand, to gainesay, to impugn, to resist, to fight against,
to repugne, to overthwart, to be contrary with might and maine. Repugnante,
repugnant, contrary, contradicting, impugning, that is contrary in all
things, quarellous, contentious, that gainesayeth and withstandeth every body.
Repugnantia, a repugnance, a contradicting, a gainesaying, contrariety, or
disagreement of things one with another. Repulsa, a repulse, a foil, a
denial, a rejecting, a beating back, a putting by, or refusing of one that
sues for something. Repulsare, to repulse, to beat back, to reject, to knock
again, to repel, to give the foil, to put by. Repurgare, to purge, or clear
again, to cleanse or scour again. Reputare, as Riputare. Reputatione, as
Riputatione. Reputeuole, to be reputed, esteemed, regarded, or accounted of.
Requie, rest, quietness, repose, ease, peace, content. Requilitia, the sweet
wood licorise. Requisitione, requisition, requirie, request, instance,
entreatie. Resca, a brack, a flawe, a crack, a hole namely in cloth. Also a
small sharp bone of a fish, or the prickles of an ear of corn. Rescriuere,
scriuo, scrissi, scritto, to copy or write over again, to write an answer.
Also to write again. Rescritto, written over again, written an answer. Also
written again, a copy or a transcript. Resegna, a retraite, a muster, or
rendezuous for men, a surrender. Resegnare, to resign or deliver again, to
surrender. Also to call soldiers to a retraite or to their colors.
Reseminare, to sow or plant again. Resentare, to wash or rense any thing.
Resia, an heresy. Residere, sido, sidei, siduto, as Risedere. Residente,
resident, remaining, dwelling, abiding, resiant. Residentia, a residence, an
abode, a dwelling, an abiding, a stay. Residita, as Residentia. Residuo, a
residue, a remainder, an overplus or rest, that which is left in arerages.
Resignare, to resign or yield up, to surrender. Resignatione, a resignation or
yielding up, a surrendering. Resima, a reame of paper. Resimo, that has a camoy
nose, or nosed like an ape, flat nosed. Resipiscentia, a repentance, a
returning to perfect understanding or health, a reaknowledging. Resipilla, as
Risipilla. Resistere, sisto, sistei, sistuto, to resist, to withstand, to
oppose, to kick against. Resistuto, resisted, withstoode, opposed, kicked
against. Resistente, resisting, withstanding. Resistentia, a resistaunce, a
withstanding. Resma, a reame of paper. Reso, Look Renduto or Rendere.
Resolubile, that may be resolved. Resoluere, as Risoluere. Resolutione, as
Risolutione. Resoluto, as Risoluto. Resonare, Resonantia, as Risonare.
Respingere, as Rispingere. Respinto, as Rispinto. Respirare, to breath again,
to take breath, to vent. Also to take comfort, to be refreshed or eased, to
pause, to rest. Also to send forth a certain savor. Respiratione, a
breathing, a vapouring, a respiration, a venting, a sending forth of some
savor. Respondente, as Rispondente. Respondere, as Rispondere. Resposto,
Resposo, as Risposto. Respondentia, as Rispondentia. Respondeuole, as
Rispondeuole. Responsione, as Risponsione. Responsiuo, as Risponsiuo. Ressa, a
withstanding, a ruling. Resso, as Retto. Look Reggere. Resta, an ear of
corn, a prickle or bone of a fish. also a bunch of garlike, a rope of onions,
a rope, a string, a cord, a with, a cable. Also it remains, it rests. also
the rest of a breast plate or vante-plate. Restagno, a kind of stuff like
bustian, such as they make waste-cotes of. Restante, a remnant, a rest, a
remainder. Also remaining. Restanza, a rest, a remainder. Restare, to rest, to
arest, to cease, to remain, to tarry, to stand still or abide in some place.
Also to fail, to want, to miss. Restare sopra di se, to stand or rely upon
himself. Restata, a rest or remainder. Restaurare, as Ristorare.
Restauratione, as Ristoratione. Restoratore, as Ristoratore. Rest, a disease
in a horse which we call the pains, there is small difference between
crepaccie and rest. Resticulo, the least remnant or remainder that may be.
Restio, reastie as some horses are, idle, lazy, hackward, slow, slug, slack.
Restipulare, to make answer in the law, to make answer to an action in law.
Restituire, isco, ito, to restore, to render, to restitute, to yield again, to
pardon, to reform, to set up again, to put or set again in his first state,
to repair, to renew, to make new again. Restituito, restored, rendered,
restituted, yielded again, pardoned, reformed, set again in his first estate.
Restitutione, a restitution, a restoring, a rendering, a setting of one in his
former estate. Restitutore, a restorer, a rendrer, a setter up of some body,
he that makes restitution. Restiuamente, restily, idly, lazily, slowly,
slackly, faintly. Restiuare, to be or become reastie as a horse, to be idle or
laizie. Restiuo, as Restio. Resto, a rest, a remainder, a remnant, an overplus,
a rest at primero. Restoppia, straw, thatch, holme, haume, husk, or stubble
that is left after the reaping or threshing of corn. Restringere, as
Ristringere. Restretto, as Ristretto. Restrettiuo, as Ristrettiuo.
Restringente, as Ristrettiuo. Resumere, sumo, sonsi, or sumei, sonto, or sunto,
to reassume, to resume, to take again, to recover, to begin again. Resunto,
reassumed, resumed, taken again, recovered, begun again. Resupinare, to turn
upward or upright, to hold up backward, to tumble vpside down. Resupino, with
the face upward, upright, along on the back. Also effeminate, nice, and
womanish. Resurgere, surgo, sursi, surto, to rise up again, to spring or grow
again. Resuressi, is used for the ascension or resurrection day.
Resurrettione, a resurrection or rising up again, an vprising. Resurto, risen
up again. Resuscitare, to rise up again from death, to set in the former
state again. Resuscitatione, a resurrection, an vprising. Reta, as Retaggio.
Also lewdnes, wickedness or naughtines, as Ratagli. Retaggio, inheritance,
heritage, patrimony. Retagli, vailes, od ends, giblets, shreads, cuttings of
tailers. Retardare, as Ritardare. Retardanza, as Ritardanza. Retardamento, as
Ritardanza. Retare, to inherit,. Rete, any kind of net for fish or foul, a
hay, a snare or a trap. Also any kind of net work or caul such as women wear.
the caul of any body. Retentione, as Ritentione. Retentiua, the retentiue or
holding part, retentiue or holding in. Reticella, a little net or casting net.
Also a searce or little sieue. also any caul or networke. Also a kind of paste
meat. Reticentia, a silence, a concealing or keeping a thing secret by
counsel. Retico, an heretic. Retina, the fifth thin membrane of the eye,
lying more inwardly then does Vuea. It is soft and white, and nourishes the
vitrious and glassie humor. Retine, the raines of a horse bridle. Retinente,
that diligently observes and keeps in mind. Retinitiua, as Retentiua.
Retorica, the art of rhetorike, which is the science to speak well and
wisely. Retorcere, as Ritorcere. Retoricare, to play the rhetorician, to teach
to speak well and wisely. Also to speak eloquently. Retore, a rhetorician.
Retorico, a rhetorician, he which teaches rhetorike. Also belonging to
rhetorike. Retrattare, as Ritrattare. Retrattatione, as Ritrattatione.
Retribuire, buisco, buito, to retribute or reward for merit. Retributione, a
retribution or reward for merit. Retrimento, ordure, dung, excrements. Also
dregs or dross of any thing. Retriuo, late coming, last or lag, slow, slack,
repining, grudging or froward. Retro, back, backward, behind, last, lag,
being put as an adiunct before many words it signifies backward.
Retrocedere, cedo, cessi, cesso, to retire, to recoile or give back.
Retrocessione, a retyring, a recoyling back. Retrocesso, as Retrocessione.
Retrogradare, to retrograde, to go, to recoyle, to give or draw back.
Retrogradatione, a retrogradation, a going, recoyling, drawing or giving back.
Retrogrado, that goes backward. Also that which is to be read backward.
Retroguardia, a rearward or hindwarde of a battle. Retrorso, backward,
akeward. Retrosita, frowardnes, waywardnes, peeuishnes, skittishnes. Retroso,
froward, wayward, peevish, akeward, backward, skittish. Retrouenditione, a
selling back againe^ Retta sphera, that place of the world, where the
inhabitants have the equinoctial and the Tropikes plumbe or perpendicular to
their Horizon. Retta sutura, as Sagitale. Retangolo, euen-cornered, a right
corner, that is when the lines be so joined that no part is longer or shorter
than other. Rettificare, to rectify. Rettile, Rettitio, any thing that
creeps or crauleth, as vermin, roots, plants, etc. Rettilineo, with a
right line, right-lined. Rettina, a wren. Retto, ruled, swaide, reigned,
governed, stood, directed. Also right, direct, upright, straight, not crooked,
just, good and honest. Retto angolo, such an angle or corner wherein the
mangnitudes that by their crossing include the angle, fall plumbe or
perpendicular one upon another. Rettorato, a rectorship, a government or
wardenship of a college. Rettoria, as Rettorato. Rettore, a rector, a ruler, a
governor, a commander, a director. Also a rhetorician* also a warden of a
college. Reuelare, as Riuelare. Reuelatione, as Riuelatione. Reuellino, as
Rauellino. Reuendere, as Riuendere. Reuenduto, as Riuenduto. Reuenditore, as
Riuenditore. Reuerberare, as Riuerberare. Reuerberatione, as Riuerberatione.
Reuerbero, as Riuerberatione. Reuerendo, as Riuerendo. Reuerendissimo, most
reverend, worshipful or venerable. Reuerente, as Riuerente. Reuerentia, as
Riuerentia. Reuerire, as Riuerentiare. Reuerito, as Riuerito. Reuersione, a
returning or coming back again, a reuersion. Reuezuolo, a bird called a
red-taile. Reuificare, to revive, to reuifie. Reuisitare, to visit or go to
see again. Reuma, a rheum, a cartarrhe, a pose, a murre, a distillation of
humors. Reumoso, rheumatike, posie, full of the rheum. Reuolgere, volgo,
volsi, volto, as Reuoltare. Reuolta, a revolt, a turning, an overthrow.
Reuoltare, to revolt, to turn, to put to flight, to ouerturne, to ouerwhelme.
Reuolto, turned, revolted, overthrown, ouerturned, reuolued, pondred,
considered, tossed, overwhelmed, bent, turned, or inclined, addicted, turned up
and down, returned often, rolled or tumbled again, turned over leaves, etc.
Reuoluere, volgo, volsi, volto, to reuolue, to ponder, to consider, to toss,
to turn, to ouerwhelme, to turn up and down, to return often, to roll or
tumble again, to turn over leaves, to turn back to his first place or
point. Reuolutione, a revolution, a reuoluing, a turning back to the first
place or point, a revolution of celestial bodies or spheres. Rezza, a fishing
or fowling net, a haie. Rezzaglio, as Rezza. Rezzare, to ouershade with boughs
or trees. Rezzestolla, as Regestola. Rezzo, a shade or shadowing of leaves,
flowers, or trees. Rezzola, a quoife or caul of fine net work as women use to
wear. Rezzolozo, shadie, cold, cool, full of shades. Rezzere, as Recere.
Rezzuto, as Reciuto. Rha, a precious root used in medicines to purge choler,
some take it for rubarbe. Ria, wicked, bad, guilty, culpable, faulty.
Riaccendere, cendo, cesi, ceso, to kindle or light again. Riacceso, rekindled,
or lighted again. Rialzare, to raise or advance again. Riamare, to reloue, or
love again. Riamazzare, to kill or slaie again. Riandare, to go over and
consider or view again and again. Riaperto, opened again. Riardere, ardo,
arsi, arso, to reburne, to skald, to fry with heat again. Riarso, reburned,
burnt, skalded or fride with a burning. Riassumere, as Resumere. Riassunto, as
Resunto. Riatino, a wren. Riauolo, a cole-rake to make clean an oven with, a
broad slice, a skimmer, a spade, a shouell, a scoope, a ladle, a trowell.
Ribadire, disco, dito, to clinch a nail. Ribalderia, ribauldrie, wickedness,
knauerie, treachery. Ribaldo, a ribald, a knave, a varlet, a lout. Ribaldone, a
great or crafty ribaulde, wagge, knave, or varlet. Ribaltare, to ouerturne, to
ouerwhelme, to overthrow, to destroy, to subvert, to raze, to spoil.
Ribalzare, to toss and retosse, to bound, and rebound as a ball. Ribalzo, a
rebound, or rebounding of a ball. Ribambire, bisco, bito, to dote or become a
child again, to play the fool, to become a dotrell. Ribambito, doted or
become a child again, plaide the fool, become a dotrell. Ribandire, disco,
dito, to revoke from banishment. also to banish again, to proclaim again.
Ribandito, revoked from banishment, proclaimed again. Ribasciare, to kiss
again. Ribattere, batto, battei, battuto, to rebeate, to restreeke. to reject,
to cast by, to refell. Also to clinch a nail. Ribattuto, rebeaten, rejected,
refelled, clinched. Ribattezzare, to rebaptise, to christen again.
Ribattimento, a rebeating, a refelling, a rejecting, a clinching. Ribattuta, as
Ribattimento. Ribe, red go^^seberries, beyond sea gooseberries, bastard corans,
or common ribes. Ribebba, as Ribecca. Also a kind of deep measure in Italy.
Ribecca, a musical instrument so called, a rebeck, or a crowd, or a kit.
Ribeccare, as Rimbeccare. Ribecchino, a little crowd, kit, or fidle.
Ribecchista, a fiddler or player upon a rebeck, or crowd. Ribellare, to rebel
against authority, to rise against, to revenge himself. Ribelle, a rebel.
Ribellione, rebellion, a rising against authority. Ribelloso, rebellious,
stubborn, rising against. Ribes, red gooseberies, bastard corans, or common
ribes. Ribichista, as Ribechista. Riboboli, short witty proverbs, or adages.
Ribolla, a kind of dainty wine in Italy that we call Cuite. Ribollire,
bollo, bollito, to reboile, to reseeth, to heat or skald again. Ribollimento,
a reboyling, a heating, or skalding. Ribombare, to resound, to rebound, to make
a hollow resounding or ecchoing voice, to ring back again. Ribombante,
resounding, ecchoing, rebounding, ringing back again. Ribombo, a hollow
resounding ecchoing noice, a ringing back again. Ribrezzare, to terrify, to
wrong, to astonish, to affright, to injury. Also to quiver, or shiuer, or be
chill for cold. Ribrezzo, fear, terror, wrong, astonishment. Also a
quiuering, a shiuering, a trembling, or a chilnes through cold, a quaking for
fear. Also a humor, a toy, a conceit. Also an outrage, a spite, a shame, a
disgrace done to one. Ribue, as Corribo. Ribuffare, to check, to chide, to
skould at one, to shent, to rate. Ribuffo, a check, a chiding, a taunt, a
skoulding, a rating. Ribuolo, a kind of wine in Italy so called. Ributtare,
as Ribattere. Ricadere, cado, caddi, caduto, to fall again, to escheate, to
fall into relapse. Ricaduto, fallen again, escheated, fallen into relapse.
Ricadia, grief, annoyance, tediousnes, vexation of mind, a fault, or a
trespass, or guilt of conscience. Also a relapse into any fault again.
Ricadimento, as Ricaduta. Ricaduta, a relapse, an escheating, a falling again.
Ricagnare, to play the froward or busy fellow, to shrug or shrink up, to be
doggish, or cursed. Ricagnato, plaide the froward busy fellow, shrugd or
shrinkt up, doggish, currish, cursed, mastiue-like. also flat-nosed as a dog.
Ricalcare, to press, croude, or thrust down again. Ricalcitrare, to kick, to
wince, to strive, contend, or spurn against. Ricamare, to embroder.
Ricamatore, an embroderer. Ricami, all manner of embroderies. Ricamuzzi,
foolish embroderies. Ricambiare, to bartre, to truck, or exchange again, to
coarce. Ricangiare, to re-exchange, to reward, to redeserue. Ricantare, to
recant, to revoke. Ricantatione, a recantation. Ricapare, to get, find, or
make shift for again. Ricapere, to contain again. Ricapitare, to have or
give entertainment, to hap or light upon by fortune. Ricapito, entertainment,
supply, refuge, shelter, covert. Ricapitulare, to recapitulate, or rehearse a
thing over again that was spoken of before. Ricapitulatione, a recapitulation,
a summarie or brief rehearsing of a thing spoken at large before.
Ricapricciare, to affright till ones hair stare and stand. Ricascare, as
Ricadere. Ricauare, to get, dig, make hollow, or pull out again. Ricattare, as
Riscattare. Also to get or shift for again. Riccacciare, to enchase.
Riccacciamenti, enchasings. Ricchezza, wealth or riches. Richinare, to incline
or bend or stoop again. Also to reject. Ricciare, to curle, to crispe, to
frizle. Riccio, curled, crisped, frizled, shagged, bushie, hairie, rough,
curled cipres, crispin, unshorn velvet, the utmost husk or prickles of a
chestnut. Also an hedgehog, or vrchin. Riccio marino, a sea hedge hog. Riccio
porcino, a hedghog or vrchin. Riccio canino, idem. Riccio spinoso, idem.
Riccino di mare. Look Incino di mare. Riccio sopra riccio, the richest cloth
of gold or bodkin that is. Ricciuoli, a kind of disease in a horse about his
legs. Ricciuto, curled, frizled, crisped, hairie, brizly, huskie, shagd,
bushie. Ricco, rich, wealthy. Riccone, a very wealthy rich man. Riccore,
has been used for wealth or riches. Riceputa, a receite or receiving.
Ricerca, an inquiry, an inquest, a search. Also a feeling, a groping, a
fumbling. Ricercare, to inquire, to inquest, to search out, to require, to
feel, to grope, to sue for. Ricercata, as Ricerca. Ricercatina, an easy
gentle feeling, groping, fumbling or searching. Ricetta, a receite, a
receiving, an accepting, a taking. Ricettacolo, a receptacle, a warehouse, a
store house, a place to receive and keep things safely in. Also a refuge, a
comfort, a place of security. Ricettare, to receive or intertaine again, to
harborough. Ricetto, received or entertained. also intertainment. also a lodge,
harborough, rest, abode or place of receite, a receptacle. Riceuere, ceuo,
ceuei, ceuuto, to receive, to take, to accept, to admit. Riceuuto, received,
accepted, taken, admitted. Riceuitore, a receiver, a taker. Also one that
receives and harbors thieves. Riceuuta, a receiving, a receipt, a taking.
Richiamare, to revoke, to reclaim, to call back, to appeal unto, to cry
against, to repugne, to gainesay or deny with a loud voice. Also to answer
with an echo. Richiamatione, a reclaiming or crying against, a gainsaying, an
appealing, a reuoking. Richiamo, an appeal or calling for justice, a reuoking.
Also a fowlers pipe or call to call birds. Richiedere, chiedo, chiesi, chiesto,
or chieduto, to require, to request, to sue for, to ask of or entreat of.
Richieduto, required, entreated, requested, sued for, asked of or entreated of.
Richieditore, an intreator, a requester, a suitor. Richiesta, a request, a
suite, a requiring. Also all manner of giblets or entrails of foul or of
beast that be good to eat. Richiesto, as Richieduto. Richiudere, chiudo,
chiusi, chiuso, as Rinchiudere. Ricidere, as Recidere. Riciso, as Reciso. Also
precise. Ricinio, as Recinio. Ricino, a vermin called a tyke that annoyeth
sundry kinds of beasts as dogs, sheep and oxen, etc. Also an herb in Egypt
called Palma Christie, which has a seed like a tike. Ricinto, a round
encompassing again. Ric^gliere, as Raccogliere. Ricoglitore, a gatherer, a
collector, an assembler. Ricognitione, a recognisance, an acknowledging, a
considering, a calling to remembrance, a reuising, a recognizing, a reuiewing
or ouerlooking. Ricognitore, an acknowledger, a reknowledger. Ricolcare, to lie
down to rest again. Ricolta, as Rac^lta. Ricolto, as Raccolto. Ricomandare,
to recommend. Also to command again. Ricominciare, to recommence, or begin
again. Ricompensa, a recompense, a reward. Ricompensare, to recompense, to
requit, to reward. Ricompera, a purchase or buying again. Ricomperare, to
repurchase, redeem or buy again. Ricomponere, to frame, compose or agree or
settle together again. Ricomporre, idem. Ricompra, as Ricompera. Ricomprare,
as Ricomperare. Riconciare, as Racconciare. Riconciliare, to reconcile, to
atone, to calm, to parifie, to make peace and atonement again, to bring in
favor again, to set at peace. Riconciliagione, as Riconciliatione.
Riconciliatione, a reconciliation or pacification, an agreement that is made, a
peacemaking between them that had bin friends and afterward foes, an
atonement making, a reconciling, a setting at one. Ricondurre, duco, dussi,
dotto, to reconduct, bring, or lead again. Ricondotto, brought, reconducted,
or lead again. Riconfermare, to reconfirme again, to re-establish.
Riconfessare, to confess or acknowledge again. Ricongiungere, giungo, gionsi,
gionto, to reconioyne together, to join together again. Ricongionto,
reconioyned again. Ricongiungimento, a reconioyning together. Ricongiuntione,
a reconiunction. Riconiare, to coin or stamp again. Riconoscere, nosco,
nobbi, nosciuto, to acknowledge, to requit, to be thankful for. Also to
suruay, to reuiew, to mark well, to recognize, to reknowledge, to consider, to
call or bring into remembrance, to know again, to ouerlooke. Riconosciuto,
acknowledged, known, requited, recompensed, bin thankful unto, known
again, suruaide, reuiewde, marked well, recognized, reknowledged, considered,
called to remembrance. Riconoscimento, as Riconoscentia. Riconoscitore, an
acknowledger, a thankful man. Riconoscentia, acknowledgeme^t, thankfulness,
mindfulnes, a suruaying, a considering, a recognizing, a reuising, a reuiewing,
a knowing of one again. Also used for acquaintance. Riconoscente, thankful,
mindful, acknowledging, suruaying, recognizing. Ricontare, to recount, to
relate, or tell again. Ricontrare, to encounter, to meet. Ricontro, an
encounter, a meeting, a shock. Ricoperchiare, to cover again. Ricoperta, a
covering again, a sheltring, a shrouding. Ricoperto, covered again.
Ricoprire, copro, copersi, coperto, to cover again. Ricopiare, to copy or
write over again. Ricorciare, to abridge, to shorten, or curtall again.
Ricordare, to record, to remember, to put in mind, to call to mind.
Ricordantia, record, remembrance, mindfulnes, a recording. Ricordatione, as
Ricordantia. Ricordatore, a recorder, a remembrancer, a remembrer. Ricordeuole,
mindful, remembering. Also to be remembered. Ricordo, an admonition, a document,
a precept, a remembrance, a token, a record, a token or sign to remember by.
Ricoreggere, to recorrect or mende again. Ricorrere, corro, corsi, corso, to
run or have recourse unto, to fly for succor, refuge or help. Also to
return hastily, to come running again, to run back again. Ricorso, run,
fled, or had recourse unto. Also recourse, refuge succor, or help. Also
returned hastily, run back again, etc. Also a returning or recourse back
again. Ricoruare, to make crooked, to bend, to stoop, to bow or bend back
again. Ricoruita, a bending backward. Ricoruo, crooked, bending, bowing, bowed
or bent back. Ricotta, a kind of fresh cheese and cream. Ricotto, sodden,
baked or roasted again. Ricouerare, to recover, to reobtaine, to rescue or get
again what was lost. Also to fly for succor and refuge to any place.
Ricouero, a recovery, or reobtaining, a rescue or getting again what was lost
or taken away. Also a remedy, a help, a redress, a refuge, a shroud, a
shelter, a safety, or a succor. Ricourare, as Ricouerare. Ricourire, as
Ricoprire. Ricouro, as Ricouero. Ricosire, as Ricuscire. Ricreanza, as
Ricreatione. Ricreare, to recreate, to solace, to delight, to sport. Also to
renew, to make again, to make lusty, to recover ones old strength again, to
comfort. Ricreatione, recreation, solace, sport, delight, pastime, pleasure, a
refreshing or restoring, a comforting, a relieuing. Ricreatiuo, full of
recreation, pastime, glee, or solace. Ricreduto, a miscreant, a recreant, a
misbeleeuing wretch. Recremento, any superfluous dross, dregs, or scum of any
thing. Ricrescete, cresco, crebbi, cresciuro, to grow or spring again.
Ricrespare, to curle, to frizle, or wrinkle again. Ricrostare, to harden, or
grow crustie again. Ricucire, as Ricuscire. Ricucito, as Ricuscito. Riculare,
to recoyle, to retreat, to retire or give ground. Ricuocere, cuoco, cocei,
cotto, to boil, roste, or bake again. Ricuperando, as Ricuperabile.
Ricuperare, to recover, to reobtaine, to reget, to rescue, to get again.
Ricuperabile, recouerable, that may be reobtained, to be recovered.
Ricuperatione, a recovery, a reobtaining, a recovering of a thing lost or taken
away. Ricuruare, as Ricoruare. Ricuruita, a bending back again. Ricuruo, as
Ricoruo. Ricusa, a refusal, a renouncing, a recusing, a denial, a rejecting.
Ricusare, to refuse, to renounce, to recuse, to deny, to reject, to repel, to
say nay. Ricusante, a refusant, a recusant, a denier, a reiecter. Ricuscire,
cuscio, cuscij, cuscito, to sow again, or mende a seame. Ricusci^o, sowed
again, or mended a seame. Rida, a kind of country, round, hopping dance.
Ridamare, to love again, to love them that love us. Ridare, to give again.
Ridar la volta, to turn back again. Ridda, as Rida. Riddare, to dance in a
round. Ridere, rido, risi, riso, to laugh, to smile, to simper, to leere. Also
to mock or scoff. Ridente, laughing, smiling, pleasant, that laugheth much.
Ridicolo, Ridiculo, ridiculous, foolish, to be laughed at, that deserves or is
to be mocked and laughed at, foolish, to be scorned, a laughing stock,
pleasant, full of laughter, a toie to mock an ape. Ridicoloso, Ridiculoso, as
Ridicolo. Ridimandare, to redemaund or ask again. Ridire, dico, dissi, detto,
to say again, to recant or revoke a saying, to repeat. Ridetto, said
again, or repeated, recanted or revoked a saying. Ridolere, dolgo, dolsi,
doluto, to smell or savor. Also to grieve, vex, smart, or ache again.
Ridoluto, smelt, or sauoured. also grieved, smarted, vexed, or aked again.
Ridoli, a kind of tool or part about a plough. Ridomandare, as Ridimandare.
Ridondare, to redounde, or return unto. Ridoppiare, to redouble. Ridosso,
Look Caualcare. Ridotto, reduced, brought or led unto. also brought back safe
and sound again, brought or led home again. Also a home, a lodging, a
withdrawing place. Also a company, a knot, a crew or assembly of good
fellows. Also a gaming or tabling house, or other place where good company
does meet. Ridortare, to fear, to dread, to redoubt, to mistrust.
Ridouentare, to become again. Ridrizzare, to make straight again, to stand up
or stiff again. Riducere, as Ridurre. Ridurre, duco, dussi, dutto, to reduce,
lead, or bring unto, to bring back or home again, to rebring home or lead
back safe again, to lead forth again. Ridutto, as Ridotto. Riedere, riedo,
riedei, rieduto, to return or come again. Riedificatione, a re-edifying, a
rebuilding. Riedo, a return, a returning. Rieduto, returned or come again.
Riella, a carpenters square or squire. also a kind of adze or pickaxe.
Riempire, pisco, pito, to fill or replenish, to repleate. Rienfiare, to swell
or puff up again. Rientrare, to re-entre, or come in again. Rientrata, a
re-entrie, a re-entrance. Rienza, a common whore, a stallion ramp. Also as
Renza. Riesca, may sort, issue, effect, or prove. Riescere, as Riuscire.
Rifare, faccio, feci, fatto, to do or make again, to satisfy or make amends,
to make one whole again, to repair, to amend, to make new again, to renew,
to restore, to strengthen, to refresh, to comfort, to recover or gather
strength. also to reuie at play, to set stake upon stake. Rifatto, done or
made again, made whole, satisfied, or recovered, or made amends unto, repaired,
amended, renewed, made new again, restored, strengthened, refreshed, comforted,
recovered, or gathered strength. Also reuide at play. Rife, as Refe. Riferenza,
a reference, or relation, or respect unto, a rehearsing, a declaration, etc.
vide Riferire. Riferire, risco, rito, to refer, to relate, to report, to
rehearse, to make relation, to tell, to vtte^, to declare, to express. also to
direct, to ascribe. also to give again, to render, to bring or bear back
again, to requite, to restore, to say or answer, to bend or apply, to
interpret, to account, to acknowledge, to have reference or respect unto.
Riferito, related, reported, remitted, rehearsed, made relation of, told,
uttered, declared, expressed, referred, directed, ascribed, given, borne or
brought back again, requited, restored, said or answered, bended or applied,
interpreted, acknowledged, had reference or respect unto. Rifiatare, to breath
again, to take breath, to vent. Rificcare, to fasten, to drive or thrust in
again. Rificiare, as Rifare. Rifigliare, to bring forth more children or
young ones. Also to fillie again. Rifinare, to refine. also to cease or give
over Rifiotire, to bloome, blossom or flourish again. Rifiutare, as Ricusare.
Rifiuto, as Ricusa. Also any thing that is cast off and may be spared, as
Cauallo di rifiuto, a cast horse or a spare horse. Riflettere, Fletto, Flessi,
Flesso, to bow, to bend, or turn back again. Also to reflect, to
reuerberate. Riflesso, bowed, turned or bended back again, reflected,
reuerberated. Also a reflection. Riflessione, a reflection, a repercussion, a
reuerberation, a bowing or turning back again. Riflessiuo, reflectiue,
reuerberating, bowing or turning back again. Riflusso, the reflux or flowing
of the sea. Rifondare, to found again, to beat, to ribbaste, to bumbaste, to
swing, to bang. Rifondere, fondo, fondei, fonduto, to melt, to found or cast
again, to dissolve or melt again. Riforbire, to furbish or wipe over again.
Riforma, as Riformatione. Riformagione, as Riformatione, a law or ordinance
made by the consent of the people without the senate. Riformare, to reform, to
redress, to repair, to correct, to control, to mend, to renew, to bring to
the old state again, to fashion as it was before. Riformatione, a reformation,
a correcting, a controuling, a renewing of any thing to his old state again.
Riformatore, a reformer, a controuler, a corrector, he that brings to a new
and better fashion. Riformeuole, that may be reformed or corrected, that may be
brought from an old to a new and better fashion. Rifornire, nisco, nito, to
refurnish, to store again. Riforzare, as Rinforzare. Riforzino, a roape, a
halter, a collar of hemp. Riforso, a reinforcing, a restrengthening. Rifosso, a
double ditch, a double trench or dike. Rifragrantia, a fragrancie or sweet
smelling. Rifrangere, frango, fransi, franto, to break or splitter again.
Rifranto, broken again. Rifratta, rebounded, a rebound. Rifrenare, as
Raffrenare. Rifrenato, as Raffrenato. Rifrescare, to refresh, to cool, to
recreate. Rifrescatoio, as Rinfrescatoio. Rifrigerare, as Refrigerare.
Rifrigeratiuo, as Refrigeratiuo. Rifrigerio, as Refrigerio. Rifriggere, friggo,
frissi, fritto, to fry again. Rifrustare, to beat, to ribroste, to bumbaste,
to swaddle, to cudgel, to bang. Rifrusto, a whipping, a swaddling, a cudgeling,
a beating. Rifuga, as Refuga. Rifuggire, fuggo, fuggito, to fly or run unto
for help. Also to fly away, to run back, to refuse, to eschew, to shun, to
avoid, to fly from, to forsake, to run away again. Rifuggito, fled or run
unto for help or redress. Also fled away, run back, refused, eschewed,
shunned, avoided, fled from, forsaken, run away again. Rifugio, a refuge, a
help or succor. Also a place of help, of rescue or safety, a shelter or
shroud. Rifugo, as Refugo. Rifulgere, fulgo, fulsi, fulso, to shine, to flare,
to glimmer, to glister. Rifulgente, shining, splendent, blazing, bright,
glimmering, flaring, glistring, orient. Rifulgenza, a shining, a brightness, a
glimmering, a glistring. Rifulso, shined, shone, blazed, brightned, glimmered,
flared, glistred. Rifusati, as Refusati. Rifuso, a refusal. A rifuso,
carelessly, refusinglie, heedleslie. Rifutare, to confute, to reject, to
convince, to refell, to deny, to repel the saying of another. Also to refuse.
Rifutatione, a confutation, a replication, a conuincing, a refusing, a denial.
Riga, a line, a streeke. Also a rule or a ruler, as Rega. Rigagno, Rigano, as
Rigagnolo. Rigagnolo, a little stream, brook, gullet, gutter, or river, a
slow of waters, to water and sprinkle fields. Riganello, as Rigagnolo. Also a
kind of foul. Rigano, the herb organie, or wild marierom. Rigare, to rule
paper or books, to mark, to line or struck out. also to draw little streams
or gullets of water into fields, to water grounds or fields, to make wet.
Rigaruolo, a gutter, a furrow or gullet of water drawn by art into any field
or garden to water it. Also a waterpot to water gardens with. Rigatta, the play
that children call at musse. Also a strife or contention for the maistrie, a
coping or bickering together. Rigattare, as Recatare, to wrangle, to shift for,
or play at musse. Also to sell by retaile as hucksters and brokers use, to
pinch, to rake or spare by pinching and saving. to lie and talk craftily, to
proule and shift for by prouling. to contend, to cope or fight for the
maistrie. Rigattiere, a wrangler, a shifter, a player at musse, a huckster, a
fripper, a broker, such as sell old clothes and such trash. Rigattiniere, a
maker of purse-locks or purses. Rigattino, the lock of the iron of a purse.
Also a purse with a lock. Rigelare, to freese again. Rigenerare, as
Regenerare. Rigerminare, as Regerminare. Rigettare, to reject, or resell, or
cast back again, to cast or fling again, to cast or shake off, to neglect, to
refuse. Rigettaglie, things that are abhorred and rejected, as sickness,
poverty, sorrow, etc. Rigettato, or Rigetto, cast away, rejected, cast off,
refused, forsaken, not set by. Rigettione, a rejecting, a casting away, a
refusing or forsaking. Rigidamente, severely, austerely, rigorously, sharply,
stiffely, sternely, cruelly. Rigidezza, severity, roughnes, austeritie, rigor,
cruelty, sturdines, Look Rigido. Rigidire, disco, dito, to grow severe,
cruel, rigorous, fell, austere, or rough. Also to become or grow stiff or
stark or number with cold, to be frosen, and stand stiff upright. Rigidito,
grown or become severe, cruel, rigorous, austere, fell or rough. Also stiff,
stark, or number, or frosen stiff with cold. Rigidita, as Rigidezza. Rigido,
rigorous, severe, austere, stern, fell, cruel, fierce, rough, sturdie,
unmerciful, that can not be bowed or bent, firm and resolute in an opinion.
Also stiff, stark, or number with cold, frozen hard. Rigittare, to reject, to
throw, or cast back again. Riglitare, to tuck up, or plait or fould up a
garment. Riglito, a plait or tucking up of a garment. Rignando, grinning,
snarling, yarring, foaming at the mouth. Rignare, as Rignire. Also to laugh, to
simper, or smile apparantlie. Rignire, gnisco, gnito, to snarle, to grin, to
yarre as a dog, to neigh as a horse. Also to foame at the mouth with anger.
Rignimento, a snarling, a yarring, a grinning, a neighing. Rigno, a dogs
snarling, or yarring, or neighing of a horse. Rigoglio, as Orgoglio.
Rigoglioso, as Orgoglioso. Rigogolo, a kind of rooke, dawe, or chough.
Rigoletto, a country skipping dance, a merry round or hornepipe, or gigge.
Rigolfo, a whirle-poole. Also the eddie of a water. Rigolitia, the wood
licorice. Rigonfiare, to puff up or swell again. Rigonfio, puffed up, or
swollen again. Rigore, rigor, severity, cruelty, fiercenes, roughnes,
extremity, rudenes. Also a very great cold, a vehement cold, which at the
coming of a tertian ague does bring quaking and shaking, a hardness or stifnes,
or numnes with cold or frost. Rigoritia, the wood licorice. Rigorosita, as
Rigore. Rigoroso, rigorous, severe, cruel, fierce, unmerciful, flint-harted.
Rigouernare, to ouersee, to oueruiew, to ouerlooke, to govern again.
Rigressato, regressed or escheated unto. Riguadagnare, to regaine. Riguagliare,
as Raguagliare. Riguaglio, as Raguaglio. Riguardare, to behold, to look, to
view, to regard, to respect, to mark, to consider. Riguardare con sicurta, to
behold assuredly, or steadfastly. Riguardante, beholding, viewing, regardante.
Riguardamento, as Riguardo. Riguardatore, a beholder, a regarder, a viewer, a
respector. Riguardeuole, honorable, regardfull, to be respected. Also
respectingly. Riguardo, regard, look, respect, honor, view. also reference.
Riguardoso, as Riguardeuole. Riguidardonare, to reward, to guerdon again.
Riguo, that may easily be wet or watered, that is watered with water running by.
Also a watrish moist place. Rihauere, ho, bebbi, hauuto, to recover or have
again. Rihauersi, to recover himself again either of sickness or of any
loss. Rihauuto, recovered or had again. Rilasciante, releasing, leaving,
relinquishing. Rilasciante medicina, a medicine that opens those places of
the body, whereby breath is let out, and makes a way for the matter to have
issue. Rilasciare, to release, to abandon, to free, or quit again, to
relinquish, to loose or set at large, to undo, to open, to discharge, to
recreate, to refresh, to begin, to relent or assuage, to have a respite or
release from. Rilascio, a release, a quittance, a freeing, a loosing or setting
at large, an abandoning, a freeing or quitting, a relinquishing, a discharging,
a refreshing, a beginning to relent, an asswaging, a respite. Rilassare, as
Rilasciare. Rilassatione, as Rilascio. Rilasso, as Rilascio. Rilauare, to wash
or laue again. Rileccare, to lick again, to lap as a dog. Rilegare, to bind
again, to fine, to confine, to banish to a place, to remove or sever one from
another, to send away far, to appoint or limit, to refer. Also to tie or bind
fast again. Rilegatione, a banishing, a confining, an exile, a sending away.
Also a tying or binding fast again. Rilegato, banished, exiled, sent away far
off, confined to some place. Also tide or bound fast again. Rileggere, leggo,
lessi, letto, to read over again, to gather together again. Rilentare, to
relent, to wax soft and limber. Rilento, Arilento, leasurely, considerately.
Riletto, read over again. Rileuante, of importance, of worth, of consequence.
Rileuare, to raise, to relieve, to advance, to import, to be of consequence, to
take, to remove or list again, to rise again. to work raised or imbossed
work. to take up again, to assuage, to comfort, to relieve, to cure, to
deliver. Rileuato, not able, high, worthy, special. Rileuato seruigio, an
especial good turn. Rileuo, raising, relief, aduanceme^t, import or
consequence, worth or value. also the remainder, leaving, scraps or od ends of
meat and drink or any thing else. also raised or embossed work. also an
vprising or vptaking. Also that which heirs pay to the King called the
liuerie payment or relief. Also an easing of a man. Rilibo, a flim-flam tale,
a thing of no worth or effect. Rilicuare, as Rileuare. Rilieuo, as Rileuo.
Riligi^ne, as Religione. Riligioso, as Religioso. Rilla, taken for a man's yard
or prick. Also a short truncheon or bat. Rilucere, luco, lussi, luciuto, to
shine or give light, to glister or be very bright. Riluciuto, shined, glistred
or given light. Rilucente, shining, bright, orient, glistring, glaring. Rima, a
rhyme or verse, a desinence of a verse or meter. Rimamaria, as Alliaria.
Rimandare, to send again, to countermaund. Rimando, a countermand. Rimanere,
mango, masi, maso, or masto, to remain, to abide, to dwell, to continue. Also
to cease, to leave of, to give over, to lin, to stay or tarry behind. Rimaso,
Rimasto, remained, abided, dwelt, continued, ceased, left off, lind, staid or
tarried behind. Rimaner con tanto di naso, to have the canuasse in any suit, to
go away ashamed. Rimaner smarrito, to be or remain amazed or affrighted.
Rimaner in secco, to be left on the dry sand, to be in that taking as a fish is
without water. Rimaner in asso, to have no cross or any thing left him, to
loose all. Rimanente, remaining, abiding, dwelling. Also a rest, a remainder,
or remnant of any thing. Rimare, to rhyme or make rymes, to meter. Rimaritare,
to marry, or wed again. Rimasticare, to chawe again. Rimatore, a rymer, a
maker of rymes. Rimbaldera, as Mottozzo. Rimbalzare, as Ribalzare. Rimbalzo, a
bounding, a hopping, a skipping, a running away. Rimbambire, as Ribambire.
Rimbeccare, to feed at the bill, or cram as they do capons. also to strive or
contend, to strike the ball at the first service. also to make one a cuckold
again. Rimbeccarsela, to swallowe a cudgeon, to believe that the moon is made
of green cheese. Rimbombare, as Ribombare. Rimbellire, lisco, lito, to
embellish, to beautify again. Rimbombante, as Ribombante. Rimbombo, as
Ribombo. Rimborsare, to re-emburse, to put into ones purse again. Rimboscare,
to enter into a wood again, to take covert as a dear does, to grow to wood
again. Rimbrencioli, laces, strings, snips or iags about garments. Also little
holes. Rimbrencioloso, all belaced, snipt, cut, iagged, fringed, beiagged,
dangling or full of holes. Rimbrontolare, as Brontolare, as Rampognare.
Rimbrontoli, as Brontoli. Rimbrottare, as Rimbrontolare, as Rampognare.
Rimbrotti, as Brontoli. Rimbrottoli, idem. Rimbucare, to drive, to put, to hide
or lurk into a hole again. Rhyme, rymes, verses, mytres. Rimeare, to return,
to come again, or go back. Rimediare, to remedy, to redress. Remedio, a
remedy, a redress, a medicine. Rimedire, disco, dito, to gather, to save, to
spare, to get by sparing, to remedy. Rimembrare, to remember, or call to
mind. Rimembranza, remembrance, memory, mindfulnes. Rimemorare, as
Rimembrare. Rimenare, to lead or bring again, to stir or wrigle up and down.
Rimenata, a leading or bringing again, Also a tossing, wrigling or stirring up
and down. Rimendare, to mende or dress again. Rimeritare, to remerit or
deserve again. Also to reward. Rimescolare, to blend, to mesh, to shuffle or
mingle together again. Rimescolamento, a blending or mingling together.
Rimescolanza, as Rimescolamento. Rimessa, demisse, remiss, base, abject, vile.
Also remitted or forgiven. Also the beginning of a new speech or of any action
when one has made a stay or pause, faint, mild, lowly. Also a remitting of
any thing from one man or time to another. Rimessamente, remislie, basely,
mildly, gently, faintly, lowly. Rimessione, a remission, a remitting, or
forgiveness. Rimessibile, remissible, pardonable, that may be remitted. Rimesso,
remitted, forgiven, put over, pardoned, acquitted, laid up, referred, set in a
place, restored, replaced, committed. Also abject, remiss, demisse, base,
vile, saint-harted, lowly, crauin, cowardish, timorous, slack, dull,
negligent, nothing vehement. Also sent or given again, let down or slacked
the strings of an instrument. Rimesta, a shaking, a mixing, a hudling or
blending together, a hochpoch. Rimestare, to mix, to mingle, to toss, to
blend, to huddle, or shake, or rattle together. Rimestamento, as Rimesta.
Rimesticare, to bange, to beat, to touze, to tugge or lugge. Rimesticatura, a
banging, a beating, a touzing, a tugging, a lugging. Rimettere, metto, misi,
messo, to remit, to forgive, to pardon, to acquit, to put over to another, to
lay up, to refer, to set in a place. to restore, to replace, to commit. to
defer or put off, to prorogue, to send and give again, to let down as the
strings of an instrument. Riminio. Rimirare, to behold or view diligently, to
aim at, to consider. Rimissione, as Rimessione. Rimissoria, a remitting or
deferring of a cause in law. Rimisurare, to measure again. Rimodernare, to
come to the new fashion again. Rimollire, lisco, lito, to soften, to
mollify, to assuage, or calm. Rimondare, to pare or make clean again. Also
to farm, to cleanse, to clear, or to draine a ditch. Rimondo, pared or made
clean again. Rimontare, to remount or get up, or ascend again. Rimorchiare,
to give a wanton look, to fawn upon, to allure, to entice or draw to
himself. also to towe, to tug, to hale, or draw, or hull a ship, or any
barge. Also to grumble at one and yet not be angry with him. to quip or tant
with words, as Remulcare. Rimorchiato, given a wanton look, fawned upon,
allured, enticed or drawn to himself. Also towed, tugd, hulled, haled or
drawn a ship or barge. Rimorchio, a wanton look or fawning upon one, an
allurement. Also a haling or tugging. Also a grumbling or grudging. Also a quip
or tante. Also as Remulco. Rimordere, mordo, mordci, morduto, to bite, to snip,
to nip or pinch again, to check, to rebuke or skould at, to feel a remorse
or compunction in conscience, to torment, to vex or grieve one that has done
so to you. Rimorduto, bitten, snipt, nipt or pinched again, checked, rebuked,
tanted or skoulded at. felt a remorse or compunction in conscience. tormented,
vexed or gnawne one that has done so to you. Rimordimento, a remorse or
compunction of conscience, a biting again. Rimore, as Romore. Rimoreggiare, as
Rumoreggiare. Rimorso, as Rimordimento. Rimotione, a remoouing or taking away.
Rimotamente, remotely, separately, solitarily, vncouthly, distantly. Rimoto,
remote, separate, solitary, far off, uncouth, unfrequented, out of the way, set
aside, withdrawn, far from. Rimouere, mouo, mossi, mosso, to remove, to put,
set or take away, to set aside, to withdraw. Rimosso, removed, put, set, laid
or taken away, set aside, withdrawn. Rimpalmare, to trim or make smoothe, to
trim or calke a ship. Rimpastare, to paste or knead together again.
Rimpedulare, to shake or shift off. Rimpennare, to have, to recover or store
again with feathers. Rimpetagliare, as Periclitare. Rimpetaglio, hazard,
danger, ieopardie, peril, hab or nab. Rimpetto, foreanenst, oueragainst, on
the other side, right over, in respect, in comparison. Rimpiattare, to hide, to
lurk, to squat, to shroud, to close up, to make flat as a dish. Rimpiumare,
to fludge with feathers again. Rimpolpettarsela, as Rimbeccarsela.
Rimpregionare, to imprison again. Rimpresione, a taint upon a horses foot.
Rimprouerare, to vpbraide, to twit, to hit in the teeth any good turn done to
one, to shame or reproach one, to disgrace one. Rimprouero, ignominy, shame,
disgrace, twitting, hitting in the teeth, a wrong, a fault, a reproach, an
vpbrayding. Rimprouerio, as Rimprouero. Rimugiare, to bellow, to low, to roar,
or resounde again, to answer with lowing. Rimulcare, as Rimorchiare, or
Remulcare. Rimulco, as Remulco. Rimunerare, to reward, to requite, to
recompense, to meed, to guerdon. Rimuneratione, a reward, a requital, a
recompense, a remuneration, a meede, a guerdon. Rimuneratore, a rewarder, a
recompenser, a guerdoner, a meeder. Rimunire, nisco, nito, to refurnish or
munite, to reinforce, to strengthen again. Rimunito, refurnished, munited,
reinforced, strengthened again. Rimu^uere, as Rimouere. Rimurare, to immure,
to wall up, to cloister in. Rimurchiare, as Rimorchiare, as Remulcare. Rimuta, a
remoouing or alteration. Rimutare, to change again, to alter. Rinascente, new
springing. Rinascere, nasco, nacqui, nato, to renew, to be borne, to rise, to
grow or spring again. Rinato, reborne or sprung up again. Rinascimento, a new
birth, a regeneration, a renewing. Rinauigare, to sail or go by sea again.
Rincagnato, crooked, bent, awry, wrested, shrubbie, ill-favored, flatnosed,
doggish, currish, cursed, shreud. Rincalcare, to clinch, to abate the edge of
any thing. Rincalzare, to reinforce, to fortify, to charge anew, to set upon.
Also to restrain or keep in subjection. also to underprop, to underlay, to
vnderlift, to supply with forces. Rincalzamento, as Rincalzo. Rincalzata, a
new or fresh assault. Rincalzo, a re-inforcement, a recharging, a
fortification, a supply of forces, a restraint. an underprop, an vnderlifting.
a thing laid under a barrel to keep it from rouling or falling, or to set on
tilt with. Some call it a joyce. Rincarire, to make or become dear again, to
endeere. Rincarare, as Rincarire. Rincartare, to repair or amend with paper or
paste boordes. Also to put the cards into the stock again, to shuffle the
cards, to play one card upon another, to pack or set the cards, to prick the
cards. Rincastellare, to trusse up, to pack, to ioin to clinch or set any
thing well together. Rincastellato corpo, a body well trust, well framed or
well compacted. Rincastrare, to join, to close, to riuet or clinch together
again. Rincatia^e, to smooth or plain all manner of metals. Rinchiare, to
grin or show the teeth as a dog does. Also to snarle, to ^ar, to bark, to bay
as a dog does. Also to grumble, to grunt, to skould, to rail, to braule, to
wry or wrest the mouth, to make mowes or mouths in sign of anger, to fret and
chase within himself. Rinchiatura, a grinning, a yarring, a snarling, a
barking, a baying, a grumbling, a grunting, a skoulding, a railing, a brauling,
a mowing or wresting of the mouth, an apes face. Rinchio, as Rinchiatura.
Rinchiudere, chiudo, chiusi, chiuso, to recluse, to enclose, to cloister, to
immure, to shut up. Rinchiudimento, a prison, an enclosing, a cloistring, an
immuring, a locking up. Rinchiuso, reclused, cloistred, immured, shut up a
recluse or solitary man, one that lives enclosed or shut up. Rincirconire,
nisco, nito, to turn and become sour as wine, ale and beer does by thunder
or hot weather. Rincontrare, to reincounter, to encounter, to meet with, to
shock, to butte, to front. Also to compare a thing together, to iump in
opinion. Rincontro, an incountring, a meeting, a shocke, a fronting. Also
oueragainst, soreanenst* Also a comparing one thing with another, a iumping in
op^nion. Rincorare, to encourage, to animate, to imbolden, to recover courage.
Rincorrere, to run over a matter again. Rincrescere, cresco, crebbi,
cresciuto, to grieve, to weary or vex in mind, to think the time long, to
be tedious unto. Rincresciuto, grieved, vexed or anoied in mind, thought the
time irksome. Rincrescimento, a grieuance, a tediousnes or irkesomnes of the
mind, wearisomnes. Rincresceuole, grievous, noisome, tedious, irksome to the
mind, wearisome. Rincrescioso, as Rincrescieuole. Rincrespare, to curle, to
crispe, to frounze, to frizle, to pucker, to wrinkle. Rincrespatura, a curling,
a crisping, a frounzing, a frizling, a wrinkling, a puckering. Rincriccare, to
laugh so heartily till one shake, to rejoice till one shuckle, to shrink
together, as Ranicchiare. Rincricciare, as Rincriccare. Rinculare, to retire,
to recoile, to retraite or give ground. Rinculata, a retiring, a recoyling, a
giving back, a retraite. Rinegare, to renounce, to deny, to forsake, to
reneague, to forswear. Rinegato, a renegado, a foresworne man, one that has
renounced his religion. Rinettare, to cleanse or make clean again.
Rinfacciare, to vpbraid, to twit or hit or cast in ones teeth any good turn
done unto him. Rinfaccimento, an vpbraiding, a twitting or casting in the
teeth. Rinfarciare, to satisfy, to make amends, to make whole again.
Rinfermare, to fall sick again. Also to shut or lock in again. Rinfondere,
to infuse or melt or power in again. Rinfoscare, to become dark, mistie,
gloomie, duskie, cloudie or foggie. Rinforzare, to reinforce, to fortify, to
strengthen, to charge again. Rinforzino, a roape, a halter, a horse collar.
Rinfrancare, to refresh, to restore, to redeem or free again, to reincourage.
Rinfrescare, to refresh or cool again, to ease, to rest, to recreate.
Rinfrescamento, a refreshing, a cooling, an ease, a recreation. Rinfrescatoio,
a refreshing or cooling place, a shadie place. Also a vessel to keep or set
pots in used in summer, standing by the cupboordes in noble men's houses.
Rinfusa. Look Alla rinfusa. Ringaluzzare, to cocker or strut or flutter as a
Turkey cock. Ringauagnare, to regaine or recover any losses. Ringare, to be
high in authority, to make one afraid, to speak proudly. as Re^gare.
Ringentilire, lisco, lito, to grow or become gentle, mild or affable again.
Ringhiare, as Rinchiare. Also to neigh as a horse. Ringhi, the opening, yawning
or gaping of the mouth, the snarling, the yarring or barkings of angry curs.
Ringhiera, an orators chair or pulpit, or a seat of declamation. Ringhio, as
Rinchiatura. Ringhire, ghisco, ghito, as Rinchiare. Ringiouenire, nisco, nito,
to become young again. Ringo, a sudden assault, a violent shocke or encounter.
Also as Rinchiatura, as Ringhi. Ringrandire, disco, dito, to become or make
great, stately or haughty again. to enlarge. Ringratiare, to give or yield
thanks unto, to thank. Ringratiamenti, thanks, thankings, gramercies,
thankes-giuings. Ringrauidare, to get with child again. Ringrauidanza, a
getting with child again. Ringuartare, as Rincartare. Rinoceronte, a great
beast or monster called a horn nose, having a horn in his snout bending
upwards, and is a great enemy to the elephant. Rinomanza, as Rinomea.
Rinomare, to renoume, to name again. Rinome, as Rinomea. Also a surname, or a
pronoune in speech. Rinomea, a renoune, or fame, or a great name, a glory.
Rinontia, Rinontiatione, as Renontia. Rinontiare, as Renontiare. Rinotrire,
trisco, trito, to renourish or feed again. Rinottare, to become night or
dark again. Rinouare, to renew or begin again, to refresh, to re-edifie,
repair, or make new again. Rinouatione, a renewing or new beginning, a
repairing. Rinouellare, as Rinouare. Rinquartare, to pack, to set, or prick the
cards in shuffling. Rinsanare, as Risanare. Rinsanire, nisco, nito, to recover
or return to perfect understanding, to grow or become wise again. Also to
dote or grow mad again. Rinsegnare, to teach again. Rinseluare, as
Rimboscare. Rinstiacquare, as Risciacquare. Rintegrare, as Reintegrare.
Rintegratione, as Reintegratione. Rintenerire, risco, rito, to make soft or
tender again, to mollify, to calm. Rinterzare, as Interzare, or as
Rinquartare. Rintonica, as Planipedia. Rintoppare, to fall, stumble, or trip
again* to misplace or set things out of order. Rintoppo, a stumbling block, a
tripping. a misplacing of things out of order. Rintracciare, to examine, to
enquire, to sift out a matter, to search or track out. Rintracciatore, an
examiner, a searcher or shifter out of secrets. Rintralciare, as Intralciare.
Rintronare, as Rimbombare. Rintrosire, sisco, sito, as Ritrosire. Rintuzzare,
to beat down, to suppress, to abate the edge, to make blunt, or dull, to
clinch a nail. Rinualersi, to recover ones health, to wax sound again.
Rinualuto, recovered his health, or become sound again. Rinuenire, to find
out again. Rinuerdire, disco, dito, to become, wax or make green again, to
spring new again, to wax young again, to take heart and wax strong again.
Rinuergare, to find out, to search out, to discover. Also to melt or bring
into ingots as goldsmiths do metals. Rinuersare, as Riuersare. Rinuerso, as
Rouerscio. Rinuertire, to reuert or overthrow. Rinuerzire, as Rinuerdire.
Rinuescare, to entangle or entrap, or ensnare again. Rinuesciare, to tell
tales from one to another, to sow dissension between friends. Rinuesciardo, a
tell-tale, a blab of his tongue whereby unkindness may grow. Rinuiare, to send
again, to set in the way again. Rinuigorire, risco, rito, to reenforce, to
restrengthen, to become or make strong again. Look Vigore. Rinuiliare, to
bring low, to make good cheap, or abate the price of any thing. Rinuitare, to
reuye it again at any game, to drop vye. to bid again. Rinuito, a reuye, a
drop vye at any game. Rinuntia, a renouncing, a refusal. Rinuntiare, to
renounce or refuse. Rinuolgere, as Rinuoltare. Rinuoltare, to reuolue, to
tumble, to toss or turn over again, to re-enwrap, or enfold. Rinuoluere,
volgo, volsi, volto, as Rinuoltare. Rinuolto, reuolued, tumbled, tossed, turned
or enwrapped over again, overwhelmed. Rinuoltura, Rinuolgimento, a reuoluing,
a revolution. Rio, bad, guilty, faulty, culpable. Also a river, a flood, a
stream, a brook, a curre^t, a channel, a gozel or gullet of water.
Riobarbaro, a drug called rewbarbe. Rione, a maine street, a high way, a
market place, a ward. Also a Marshall, a Sheriff, a Sergeant, a Iailour.
Riordinare, to reordaine, to redress, to reform. Riotta, a riot, a braule, a
strife, a contention, an uproar, a hurlieburlie, a rage. Riottare, to riot, to
rage, to braule, to contend. Riott^so, riotous, raging, unlawful, contentious,
lavish. Ripa, a bank, a water-banke, a side, a shore or shore side of sea or
river, a brim, a brinke, a strond of sea or river. Riparabile, that may be
repaired or mended again, that may be recovered, or made new again,
repaireable, that may be warded, defended or shunned. Riparare, to repair, to
bring to his first estate, to restore, to recover, to renew, to refresh, to
make new, to amend. Also to ward, to defend, to shelter, to shroud, to repair
unto, to have access unto, to remedy, to ward a blow. Riparatione, as
Riparo. Riparella, something about a cart or a coache. Riparlare, to reply or
speak again. Riparo, a repairing, a restoring or making new again. Also a
reparation, a fence, a ward, a defense, a shelter, a shrouding, a help, a
redress, a remedy, a supply or help at a pinch. Also a rampire, a fort, a
bank, a fence, a mound, a starting-hole, a couert-barne. Ripartire, parto,
partito, to divide or sunder, or depart again, to subdeuide. Ripartimento, a
compartement, a partition, a division of rooms. Ripassare, to repasse or pass
over again. Ripassata, a repassing, or passing again. Ripatriare, to settle,
place, or dwell in his own native country again. Ripellere, pello, pellei,
pelluto, to put, beat, or thrust back, to repel, to turn away, to resist.
Ripelo, a check or a twitch given with a bridle, in managing, turning, or
making a horse to stop. Ripensare, to think or consider again, to ponder, to
judge. Also to recompense. Ripentaglio, repentance, hazard or danger of
repentance, peril, ieopardie or danger, to be sorry and to repent. Ripente,
Ripentino, as Repent. Ripentire, pento, pentito, to repent, to rue, to be
sorry for some thing said or done. Ripercuotere, cuoto, cossi, cosso, to
restrike or beat again, to strike again, to beat or cast back, to ring
again. Also as Riuerberare. Ripercosso, restriken, or beaten again,
reflected, reuerberated, stricken again, beaten or cast back, rung or sounded
back again. Ripercossa, as Ripercussione. Ripercussione, a reflecting, a
repercussion, a reuerberation, a beating, a striking, a ringing or sounding
back again. Ripercussiuo, reflectiue, or reuerberating, resounding or ringing
back again. Ripertorio, as Repertorio. Ripescare, to fish again, or drag for.
Ripetere, as Repetere. Ripetuto, as Repetuto. Ripetitione, as Repetitione.
Ripetire, as Repetere. Ripetitore, as Repetitore. Ripezzare, to patch, to
piece, to cobble, to clout, to botch any old thing. Ripezzatore, a patcher, a
botcher, a cobbler, a tinkar, a souter, a piecer, a clouter. Ripiantare, to
plant or set again. Ripiegare, to enwrap or fould up again. Ripieno,
replenished, repleate, filled again. Also a replenishing, a stuffing, a
pudding. Ripido, full of rocks, cliffs, or crags. Ripigliare, to take again,
to retake, to catch again, to reprove, to rebuke, to check, to rebegin a
speech, to take at the bound, to bandie to and fro. Ripingere, as Rispingere.
Ripinto, as Rispinto. Ripitore, an Usher of a school. Also a repeater, or
relator of a matter. Riplica, as Replica. Riplicare, as Replicare. Ripolire,
lisco, lito, to repolish over again, to trim and make smooth again.
Riponere, as Riporre. Riporre, pongo, posi, posto, to lay up, to keep, to set
aside, to place again, to put or set again in his place. Riposto, laid up,
set aside, placed again. Riportamento, as Riporto. Riportare, to reap, to
obtain, to get, to recarie, or bring, to bear or carry back again, to
refer, to remit, to report. Riportar partite, to transport rekonings from one
book to another. Riportarsi, to remit or to conform himself to others.
Riportatore, a reporter, an obtainer, a rebringer. Riporto, a report, a
reference, a relation. Also a rebringing, an obtaining. Riposare, to repose, to
rest, to cease, to stay, to settle, to lay up. Riposanza, as Riposo. Riposato,
rested, reposed, eased. a quiet, reposed, or stayed man. Ripositorio. Riposo,
rest, repose, quiet, ease. Ripostiero, a cater, a dispe^der, or steward of a
house, a clarke of a kitchen, one that lays up any thing in store.
Ripostiglio, a corner, a buttrie, a lardrie, a pantrie, or such place in a
house where any thing may be laid or set up, a cubbord or wardrobe, a counter,
a warehouse. Also a starting hole or lurking hole, a storehouse to keep things
in, a place where things are laid up and kept. Riposto, laid up, set by,
settled, placed, laid up to be reserved and kept, used also for Ripostiglio.
Ripregare, to pray, to beseech or entreat again. Riprendere, prendo, presi,
preso, to reprove, to reprehend, to blame, to control, to check, to rebuke.
Also as Ripigliare. Riprenditore, a reprouer, a reprehender, a tanter, a
checker, a rebuker, a controuler, a corrector, a finde-fault. Riprensione, a
reprehension, a rebuke, a check, a tant, a blaming, a controuling, a checking.
Also a shrinking of sinews, or limbs. Riprensiuo, reprehensiue, rebuking, to
be reproved, checked, or controlled. Riprensore, as Riprenditore. Ripresa, a
reprisall or taking again, an answer in music to begin when another leaves
off. Ripresaglia, booties, prays, prizes, prisals, hoardings, or any thing
gotten by prize, bribing, or booty, all fish that comes to net. Also pillage,
or luggage. Ripresentare, as Representare. Ripresentatione, as Representatione.
Ripreso, reproved, controuled, reprehended, rebuked, tanted, checked. Also taken
or begun again. Also withered or shrunk up. Riprezzo, as Ribrezzo.
Ripromettere, metto, misi, messo, to promise again, or bind himself by
promise or covenant. Riprouare, as Riprendere. Also to prove or try again.
Ripruoua, a reproof, or a reproouing. Ripudiare, as Repudiare. Ripudio, as
Repudio. Ripugnanza, as Repugnantia. Ripugnante, as Repugnante. Ripugnare, as
Repugnare. Ripulire, as Ripolire. Ripullulare, to bud, to bloome, to blossom,
to burgen or spring again. Ripulsa, as Repulsa. Ripulsare, as Repulsare.
Riputare, to repute, to regard, to esteem, to respect, to deem, ^o account.
Also to think again and consider diligently. Riputatione, reputation, regard,
esteem, respect. Also a diligent considering or thinking again. Riquadrare,
to square, to fit or set in order again. Risa, smilings, laughings, laughters.
Risada, a kind of meat made of rise. Also a laughing or simpring or leering.
Risa della castagna, the bursting of a chestnut. Risaiuola, a laughter or
smiling. Risaldare, to solder or fasten again. Risagallo, a kind of bitter
drug or poison. Risaia, any laughing sport. a field of rise. Risaldatura, a
resoldring, or refastning. Risalgaio, as Risagallo. Risaltare, to leap, to hop
or skip again. Risalutare, to resalute or greet again, to salute him that
saluteth us. Risaluto, a resaluting or greeting again. Risanare, to recure, to
recover, reheale or make sound again. Risapere, so, seppi, saputo, to know or
wot again, to know that is kept secret and hidden, to hear and understand of
a matter. Risaputo, known or wotted again, etc. Risarcire, cisco, cito, to
patch, to repair, to mend or piece up again, to reform. Risaruolo, a smiler,
a laughing or leering or yerring fellow. Risca, the skale, the shell or finne
of any fish, as Resca. Riscaldagione, an inflammation, a chafing, a heating.
Riscaldare, to incense, to inflame, to chafe, to heat or warm again.
Riscaldare alcuno, to persuade and entreat one earnestly for a god turn.
Riscaldamento, as Riscaldagione. Riscaldatoio, a chafing dish. also a warming
pan. Riscalda viuande, a chafing dish. Riscare, to hazard, to adventure, to
ieopard, to endanger. Riscattare, to redeem, to vngage, to vnpawne, to rescue,
to ransom. Riscatto, a rescue, a ransom, a redeeming. Rischiarare, to
clarify, to purify, to clear, to clear ones voice, to hem, to strain to
cough. Rischiare, as Riscare. Rischiarire, chiaro, chiarito, as Rischiarare.
Rischiarito, cleared, clarified, purified, cleared the voice, hemmed, strained
to cough. Rischieuole, as Riscoso. Rischio, as Risco. Rischioso, as Riscoso.
Risciacquare, to wash, to rence, to cleanse in water, to wash again.
Risciacquatina, a washing, a rencing, a clensing in water. Riscialacquare, to
vilify, to contemn, to despise. Also to consume or waste unthriftily, to
swagger riotously. Risco, hazard, danger, peril, ieopardie, adventure, hab or
nab, hardines. Riscontrare, as Rincontrare. Riscontramento, as Rincontro.
Riscontro, as Rincontro. Riscoso, hazardous, perilous, doubtful, aduenturous,
bold, fool hardy, rash. Riscriuere, as Rescriuere. Riscritto, as Rescritto.
Riscosso, redeemed, rescued, ransomed. Also received or taken money in payment.
Also shaken, stirred or rouzed up. Riscuotere, as Riscattare, to receive money
in payment. to shake, stir, tumble or rouse up violently, to rescue.
Riscuotitore, a redeemer, a ransomer, a rescuer, a receiver of money.
Riseccante parlare, a dry well delivered speech. Riseccare, to dry again.
Risecco, dride again. Risedere, seggo, sedei, seduto, to reside, to abide, to
remain or continue, to stand fast. Riseduto, resided, abided, continued or
remained in a place, stood fast. Risedente, as Residente. Risedentia, as
Residentia. Risegare, to saw in sunder again. Risegatura, a sawing in sunder
again. Also saw dust. Risegna, as Resegna. Risensare, to come to his own
senses again, as it were out of a trance. Risentare, to sit again. Also as
Risciacquare. Risentire, sento, sentito, to recover feeling or sense again, to
hear or feel or smell again. Also to feel or show a motion or effect or
offer or remembrance of revenge for any injury or wrong received, to revenge
or at least to offer to be revenged. Risentito, recovered feeling or sense
again, heard, felt or smelt again, but properly felt or showen a motion,
effect, offer or show of revenge for any wrong received. Also a huffe snuff,
one that will soon take p^pper in the nose, that will revenge every small
matter. Risentimento, a feeling, a motion, a show or effect or offer of
r^^enge. Also a revenge. Risentirsi, to be revenged, to work revenge or at
least to show some desire of revenge. Risentitamente, with a motion, feeling or
action of revenge. Riserbare, to reserve, to keep, to lay up, to ho^r^ up, to
keep for the time to come. Riserba, as Ripostiglio. Riserbanza, a reserving, a
keeping or hoording up, a reservation, a keeping of some thing apart for
another time. Riserbe, as Riserue. Riserrare, to shut or lock up again, to
recluse or cloister up. Riserratura, a locking or shutting up again.
Riseruare, as Riserbare. Riserua, as Ripostiglio. It has been also used for
an aduouson or grant of some living given before it be void. Riseruatione, as
Riserbanza. Riserue, cubboords, shelues, buttries, lardries, pantries,
wardrops, or such offices in a house. Also reseruings, sparings hoordings.
Riseruire, to serve or bestead one again. Riseruo, the rest, the remainder or
leuings of any things. Risguardare, as Riguardare. Risguardo, as Riguardo.
Risibile, subject to laughing, smiling or leering, which can laugh. Risicare,
Risigare, to hazard, to adventure, to ieoparde. Risigo, hazard, adventure,
ieopardie. Risima, a reame of paper. Risimetta, a quier of paper. Risimigliare,
to resemble or be like. Risimigliante, resembling or a like. Risimiglianza, a
resemblance or likeness. Risipila, Risipilla, a disease or swelling or
inflammation full of rednes and heat coming in men's legs. Some take it to be
called saint Anthonies fire. Risistere, as Resistere. Risistente, as
Resistente. Risistentia, as Resistenza. Risma, a reame of paper. Also a knot,
crew or rout of good fellows all alike. Riso, laughed, smiled, leered. Also a
laughter, a laughing or a smile, a mocking, a scorning. Also a grain called
rice. Risolare, to sole, floor, planke, boorde or seele any roof again.
Risoltare, to result or redound. Risolubile, that may be resolved. Risoluere,
soluo, soluei, soluto, to resolve, to determine or deliberate, to dissolve,
melt, thaw or consume away, to loose, to untie, to unbind, to vngirde, to
undo, to frustrate, to disappoint, to make void, to remove, to destroy, to
separate or put asunder, to cut or break off, to confute. Also to absolve of
an ill act. Risoluto, Risolto, resolved, determined, deliberated. Also melted,
thawed, dissolved, or consumed away, vanished. also resolute, wilful, hardy,
bold, or determinate. Also loosed, untied, unbound, vngirded, undone,
frustrate, disappointed, made void, separated, put asunder, confuted, broken
off, absolved, rid from snares. Risolutezza, as Risolutione. Risolutione, a
resolution, a deliberation, a determination, a resolving. Also a fainting, a
dissoluing, or unbinding. Risolutiuo, a suppling or dissoluing salve. Also that
may be dissolved. Risomigliare, as Risimigliare. Risomigliante, as
Risimigliante. Risomiglianza, as Risimiglianza. Risonare, to resound, to sound
or ring again, to echo, to rore. Risonante, resounding, sounding again,
ecchoing, ringing again. Risonanza, a resounding or rebounding noise, that
which we call an echo. Risopino, as Risupino. Risorbire, bisco, bito, to sip,
to sup up, or swallow again. Risorgente, rising, importing. Risorgere, sorgo,
sursi, surto, as Risuscitare. Risorettione, a resurrection, an vprising.
Risorto, risen up again. Risospingere, spingo, spinsi, spinto, to thrust back
again. Risouenire, vengo, venni, venuto, to remember. Also to help or supply
again. Risouenuto, remembered, helped, or supplied again. Rispargere, spargo,
sparsi, sparso, to sprinkle or scatter again. Risparso, sprinkled or scattered
again. Risparagnare, to spare, to save, to pinch, or to hoord up. Risparagno,
sparing, saving, pinching, or hoording up. Rispargnare, as Risparagnare.
Rispargno, as Risparagno. Risparmiare, as Risparagnare. Risparmio, as
Risparagno. Risparmiatore, a sparer, a pincher, a hoorder, a sauer.
Risparmieuole, as Risparmioso. Risparmioso, sparing, saving, pinching,
hoording. Rispegnere, pegno, pensi, pento, to put out or extinguish again.
Rispento, put out or extinguished again. Rispettare, to respect, to regard, to
esteem, to repute, to honor, to have regard of. Rispetto, respect,
consideration, a reason that makes one do some thing. Also esteem, worth,
regard. also in regard, in respect, in comparison. Also a kind of country
song or Iigge. Rispettiuo, as Rispettoso. Rispettoso, respective, regardfull.
Rispianare, to explain again. Rispiarmo, a sparing or saving. Rispignere, as
Rispingere. Rispingere, spingo, spinsi, spinto, to thrust, shooue, or push
back. Rispinto, thrust, shooued, or pusht back. Rispiraglio, a breathing or
venting hole. Rispirare, as Respirare. Rispiratione, as Respitatione.
Risplendere, splendo, splendei, splenduto, to shine, to glister, to be bright,
to be gorgeous, gaie, or brave. Risplenduto, shined, glistred. Risplendente,
shining, glistring, bright, resplendent, orient, gorgeous, gaie, brave.
Risplendezza, brightness, shining, shine, glistring. Rispondente, answering,
respondent. also a surety, a pledge, a warrant, a bail, he that answers,
undertakes, or promises for. Also correspondent. Rispondenza,
correspondencie, answering one to another. Also a dependencie or coherence
together, a conueniencie, a proportion. Rispondere, spondo, sposi, sposo, or
sposto, to answer, to give an answer, to agree, to accord, to consent, to be
like, equal, correspondent, or answerable, to appear, or answer when one is
called, to resemble or be like, to be right oueragainst, to pay or satisfy,
to answer, to undertake, be surety or promise for any body, to be a pledge, a
surety or bail for one. Rispondeuole, answerable, or that may be answered.
Also answering. Risponditore, an answerer, a surety, a bail. Risponsione, an
answer, an oracle. Risponsiuo, answering, answerable. Risposo, answered, given
an answer, agreed, accorded, consented, bin like. also equal, correspondent or
answerable. also appeered or answered, having been called or cited, resembled,
or been like, been right over against, paid or satisfied, answered, undertaken,
been surety or promised for any body, been a pledge, a surety or bail for
one. Risposta, an answer, an oracle. Risposto, Risponso, as Risposo.
Risprangare, to join, or reuet together, to serve together, to mend and make
whole again. Risquadrare, to mark, to settle, to square or fit again.
Risquitto, a respite of time. Rissa, a braule, a contention, a jar, a
iangling, a quarrel, a brabling, a chiding, a scolding, a strife, a squaring.
Rissare, to braule, to contend, to jar, to quarrel, to strive, to square, to
scold, to chide, to rustle, to brabble. Rissoso, quarrellsome, quarrelous,
contentious, brauling, unquiet, scolding full of strife. Ristagnare, to stanch
again. Ristare, to stand or rest or cease again. Ristaurare, as Ristorare.
Ristauratore, as Ristoratore. Ristauro, as Ristoro. Ristituire, as Restituire.
Ristituito, as Restituito. Ristitutione, as Restitutione. Ristoranza, as
Ristoratione. Ristorare, to restore, to comfort, to repair, to revive, to make
whole again. Ristoratione, a restoratiue, or comfort, a restoring.
Ristoratiuo, comfortable, restoratiue. Ristoratore, he that restores, a
restorer. Rist^ro, a restitution, a restoring, a restoratiue, a comfort.
Ristrengere, as Ristringere. Ristretto, restrained, strained or bound hard,
fast bound, strait ^^ced, refrained closed up or shut up, cloistred, recluse,
straightened, narrow. Also a prisoner or one in durance or close. also shrugd,
pinched. Also covetous, niggish, pinching, that will not part with a penny.
Also severe, hard and strait. Ristringarele calcie, to trusse, tie, or point
ones hosen with points. Ristrignere, to restrain, to strain hard, to bind, to
enclose, to refrain, to shut up, to bar of liberty, to immure, to imprison,
to streighten, to pinch or make narrow, to shrugge. Ristringere, as
Ristrignere. Ristringersi nelle spalle, to shrugge or crinch in ones shoulders.
Ristrettiuo, restrictiue, restringent. Ristringimento, a restriction, a
streightning, a shrugging or crinching. Ristrittione, as Ristringimento.
Ristuccare, to glut, to gorge, to cloie, to fill, to tire, to weary, to make
loathsome unto ones stomach. Ristucco, glutted, gorged, cloide, filled, tired,
wearied, satisfide. Risudare, to sweat again. Risuegliare, to awaken, to
rouse up from sleep again. Risuegliato, vigilant, wakefull, awakened.
Risuegliatore, an awakener, a larum in a clock. Risuegliatoio, a larum in a
clock, an awakener. Risueglio, as Risuegliatoio. Risugellare, to seal up
again. Risulta, a redounding, a resulting, a leaping back. Risultare, to
redounde, to result, to rebound and make an echo, to step back. to hop, to
skip, to move and leap. Risuonanza, as Risonanza. Risuonare, as Risonare.
Risuoneuole, that may or will resound or ring again. Risupino, falling or
lying with the face upward again. Risurgere, surgo, surto, as Risuscitare.
Risurettione, a resurrection, an vprising. Risuscitare, to rise up again from
death. Risuscitatione, a resurrection, an vprising. Ritade, has been used for
Verita. Ritagliare, to retaile, to regrate. Also to cut, iagge, or pinke or
snippe as a garment. Ritaglio, retailing, regrating, hucksting. a cutting,
iagging or snip in a garment. Ritagliuzzi, small iags, cuts, snips, or pinks in
garments. Ritardare, to slow, to linger, to put off, to hold off to demur, to
delay, to stay, to defer, to foreslowe, to hold that one go not, to hinder, to
let, to stop or stay. Ritardanza, a demur, a delaie, a stay, a lingering, a
slowing, a foreslowing, a bolding, a hindering, a let or stop. Ritegno, a
withholding, a detaining, a retaining, a bond, a respect, a forbearance,
squeamishnes. Also a holding ^^^op, a hindering or a let, a restr^^^ng or
holding back. Ritenere, tengo, tenni, tenuto, to withhold, to detain, to
retain, to keep or hold again, to restrain or hold back. Also to keep in
remembrance to hold one up that he fall not. Also as Ritardare. Ritenuto,
withheld, detained, retained, kept, hindered, staide, letten, stop^, restrained
or held back, belde up, kept in remembrance, held up that he fall not.
Ritenimento, a wi^^holding, a retaining, a detaining, a respect, a forbearance.
Also as Ritegno. Ritentare, to assaie, to try, or attempt again, to put in
proof again. Ritentione, a detayning, a withholding, a restraining or holding
back. Ritentiua, as Retentiua. Ritentiuo, retentiue, keeping, retaining,
withholding. Ritento, a reattempt, reassaying, or proouing again. Rite^tore, a
holder, a retainer, a restrainer Ritessere, tesso, tessei, tessuto, to weaue,
to twist, to twine, or work together again. Rithmi, rimes, rithmes, verses,
meeter, number, or harmony in speaking. Rithmico, of rithme, made in rithme or
meeter, that speaks in meeter, number, harmony or proportion. Riti, the
plural of Rito. Ritintire, tisco, tito, to ring, to tingle, to clatter, to
clash, to resound, or echo as a bell. Ritintito, rung, tingled, clattred,
iangled, clasht, resounded, ecchoed as a bell. Ritintimento, as Ritintino.
Ritintino, a tingling, a clinging, a iangling, a ringing, a resounding of a
bell. Ritirare, to retire, to withdraw or recoyle back, to retraite, to give
or go back. Ritiramento, as Ritirata. Ritirata, a retiring, a retraite, a
recoiling. a withstanding, a giving or going back. Ritiratezza, a several
withdrawing of himself, a solitarines, a retiring. Ritirarsi, to retire, to
recoyle, or give ground back. Ritmi, as Rithmi. Rito, a rite, a ceremony, a
custom, a course or order, an approved custom, an accustomed manner of doing.
Ritoccare, to touch or feel again. Ritogliere, tolgo, tolsi, tolto, to take
or snatch away again. Ritolto, retaken or snatched away again. Ritondare, to
round, to turn or make round. Also to compass round. Ritondetto, roundish,
somewhat round, Also a roundlet. Ritondita, roundnes. Ritondezza, roundnes.
Ritondo, round like a globe. Ritorcere, torco, torsi, or torcei, torto, or
torciuto, to retort, to cast or wrest backward, to throw or shoot again, to
writhe, or turn back violently, to wreath again, to make crooked again.
Ritorcimento, a retorting, a wresting, a wreathing. Ritornare, to return or
come home again. Ritornare a bomba, to come to himself, or to his own home or
wits again. Ritornata, a return or coming home again. Ritorno, as
Ritornata. Ritorte, withes, wreathes, bands of wood such as they bind fagots
with. Ritortelli, a kind of wrethed or crooked meat made of paste used in
Italy. Also a kind of cake, simnell, or ginger bread. Ritorto, retorted,
wreathed, wrested, made crooked, Look Ritorcere. Ritortola, as Ritorte.
Ritortolare, as Ritorcere. Ritortura, a wreathing, a wresting, a binding, a
haltring. Ritorzere, as Ritorcere. Ritorzolare, as Ritorcere. Ritorzola, as
Ritortola. Ritraimento, an impediment, a withdrawing. Ritrarre, traggo, trassi,
tratto, to retire, to recoile, to give or go away, to go from, to withdraw
back, to shrink in, to wrinkle. Also to draw, to limne, to paint, or
pourtraie. Ritratto, retired, recoyled, given or gone back, withdrawn back.
Also shronken, wrinkled. Also drawn, painted, limned, or pourtraide. Also a
picture, a likeness, a similitude. Ritrattare, to retreat, to treat or handle
again, or often, to speak again of a thing, to repeat or begin a new, to
consider often, to recant a saying, to revoke a thing that is done, to vnsaie
that one has said. Also to reuise, peruse or ouerlooke again. Ritrattatione,
a retraction, a reuoking of ones opinion, a reuising or correcting of ones
work, a handling again. Ritrosia, as Ritrosita. Ritrosire, sisco, sito, to
grow or become fond, peevish, froward, wayward, skittish, or nice. Ritrosito,
become or grown fond, peevish, froward, strange, wayward, skittish, coye, or
fantastical. Ritrosi di vento, boystrous, stormy, tempestuous gales, gusts,
whoors, or berries, or flawes of winds. Ritrosi del' onde, surging, boistrous,
billowings of waves. Ritrosamente, waywardly, frowardly, skittishly, peeuishly,
squeamishly. Ritrosescamente, as Ritrosamente. Ritrosetta, waiward, nice, coye,
squeamish, froward, peevish, puling, skittish. Ritrosita, waywardnes, nicenes,
coins, squeamishnes, frowardnes, peeuishnes, skittishnes. Ritroso, as
Ritrosetta. Ritrotto, as Ritrosetta. Ritrouamento, a finding out, an invention,
a devise. Ritrouare, to re^reeue or find out again. Also to meet again, to
invent, to devise. Ritrouarsi in un luogo, to be or meet in a place.
Ritrouarsi in sul fatto, to be or meet upon the fact or nicke. Ritrouata, as
Ritrouamento. Ritruouo, as Ridotto. Ritta, the right hand, as Ritto.
Rittamente, rightly, straightly, directly, outright, stiflie, standingly. Also
truly, even as it should be, conveniently, accordingly as the custom is,
justly, properly. Ritto, upright, straight, direct, right, stiff standing.
Also true, even, convenient, just, proper. Riturare, to stop again. Riturbare,
to trouble or molest again. Riua, as Ripa. Riualare, to contend, to strive, to
concur or be riuales in love. Riuale, a corriuall, a rival, a competitor, a
fellow lover, he that loves, wooeth and sueth to the self same woman that
another does, a foe-fellow in love. Also of or belonging to a river or bank of
a river. Riuali, riuales, corriuals, fellow-louers, foe fellows in love. Also
they that haunt or dwell by brooks or running waters or they that have their
lands or grounds divided by brooks and bordering upon the same. Riualere,
vaglio, valsi, valuto, to recover or turn to health again, also to restore
the worth again. Riualuto, Riualso, recovered or returned to health, restored
the worth again. Riualita, the envy that is between two persons that love
one self same woman. Riuedere, veggo, viddi, veduto, or visto, to ouersee, to
oueruiew, to see again, to reuiew or see again. Riueduto, ouerseene,
oueruiewde, reuiewd Riuedimento, an ouerseeing, an oueruiewing. also foresight,
warines or heed. Riuederci, Ariuederci, fare-ye-well, till we see or meet one
another again. Riuelare, to reveal, to manifest, to declare to discover, to
disclose. Riuelatione, a revelation, a revealing, a prediction. Riuellere,
vello, velsi, velto, to pluck up by the roots again, to pull away by
viol^nce. Riuellino, as Rauellino. Riuencidire, as Rauincidire. Riuendaglie,
any fripperie or old ware or old trash sold again. Riuendaiuolo, a retailer,
a huckester, a fripper, a regrater, a broker. Riuendere, vendo, vendei,
venduto, to retaile, regrate or sell again. Riuenduto, retailed, regrated or
sold again. Riuendigolo, as Riuendaiuolo. Reuendita, a retayling or regrating
or selling again. Riuenditore, as Riuendaiuolo. Riuendrolo, as Riuendaiuolo.
Riuenire, vengo, venni, venuto, to return or come again. Riuerberare, to
reuerberate or reflect to strike or beat back again. Riuerberatione, a
reflection or reuerberation, a striking back or rebounding, a repercussion.
Riuerberatiuo, reflecting, reuerberating, rebounding or striking back again.
Riuerbero, as Riuerberatione. Riuerdeggiare, as Rinuerdire. Riuerdire, as
Rinuerdire. Riuerditura, a growing green again. Riuerentia, reverence or
worship, honor and reverence done one, a reverend fear or regard. Also a
reverence or a curzie. Riuerentiare, to reverence, to worship, to adore, to
honor, to fear and have in reverence. Riuerendo, reverend, worshipful, grave,
venerable, honorable, worthy of reverence. Riuerente, reverent, he that does
reverence and honor to another, as Riuerendo. Riuerire, risco, rito, as
Riuerentiare. Riuerito, reverenced, worshipped, honored, adored. Riuersa,
arsiuersie, inside outward, by contrary. Look Alla riuersa. Riuersare, to
reuerse, to ouerturne, to overthrow, to turn the inside outward, or topsie
turuie. Riuersciare, as Riuersare. Riuerscia, as Riuersa. Riuerscio, as
Riuerso. Riuerscione, as Riuersone. Riuersicare, as Riuersare. Riuerso, a
reuerse, a backblowe. Also topsie-turuie, arsie-uersie, contrary, inside
outward. Riuersone, a box or whirret on the cheek given with the back of the
hand. Also a back blow. Also one that lies with his face upright.
Riuersamento, an overthrowing, an ouerturning, an ouerwhelming. Riuersata, as
Riuersamento. Riuesciare, as Riuersare. Riuescio, as Riuerso. Riuescione, as
Riuersone. Riuestire, vesto, vestito, to cloth, reuest, attire or apparel
again. Riuestito, clothed, reuested, apparelled or attired again. Also a new
vpstart gentleman, one newly come to worship. It is taken in ill part. Riuiera,
a river, a flood, a stream. Riuincere, vinco, vinsi, vinto, to vanquish,
conquer, get or win again. Riuisita, a reuisiting, a reuiewing. Riuisitare, to
reuisit, to reuiew again or go to see again. Riuisore, a surueyer, an
ouerseer, an oueruiewer, a visitor, a reuisor. Riuiuere, viuo, vissi, viuuto,
to revive or live again, to recover life, to grow again. Riuo, a flood, a
river, a stream, a brook or a gullet of water with a gentle or natural
current. Also a brincke or bank of a river. Riuocabile, that may be revoked or
called again. Riuocare, to recant, to revoke or call back again.
Riuocatione, a reuoking, a recantation, a calling back again. Riuoco, as
Riuocatione. Riuolare, to fly again, to flee back again, to return flying.
Riuolere, voglio, volsi, voluto, to will or desire again. Riuolgere, as
Reuoltare. Riuolto, as Reuolto. Riuolgimento, a revolution, or tossing up and
down, a winding in and out. Riuolo, a little gullet, gutter, brook, river, or
stream of water. Riuoluere, as Reuoluere. Riuolutione, as Reuolutione.
Riuolta, as Reuolta, a winding, turning, or crankling in and out of a river.
Riuoltare, as Reuoltare. Riuomitare, to spue, cast up, or vomit again.
Riungere, vngo, vnsi, unto, to anoint again. Riuscibile, sortable, that may
prove, sort, speed, or come to effect. Riuscire, esco, vscij, vscito, to
prove, sort, speed, or come to effect. Riuscito, proved, sorted, sped, or
come to success. Riuscita, a proof, a sorting, a speeding, an issue, success
or effect. Rizza, a withering, a wrinkle, a wrimple, a puckering in any
clothes. Rizzaglio, a fishing or fowling great net. Also a hay for conies.
Rizzaglietto, a small net, or hay. Rizzappare, to dig, break up sap, or
delue again. Rizzare, to rear up, to heave up, to erect, to streighten, to
stand stiff. Rizzar la cresta, to lift up the comb as a cock does, to take
courage, to be bold, to rouse. Rizzarsi, to stand up, to erect, to grow stiff
standing. Rizzata, a stifnes, a standing up or stiff, an erecting. Rizzo, as
Ritto, as Riccio. Rizzuto, as Ricciuto. Roan, Roano, the color of a horse
called roane color. Robba, a gown, a roabe, a mantle, any long garment. Also
wealth, ware, stuff, goods, gear, merchandise, or a man's stock or wealth. Also
taken for a woman. Also as Robbia. Also trash, or pelf. Robbacchiare, to
filch, to pilfer, to steal, to purloine, to proule, to burglarie, to embezle.
Robbare, to steal, to rob, to pilfer, to filch. Robbamento, a stealing, a
robbing, a robbery, a piracie, a pilfring, a larcenie, a filching. Robbatore,
a robber, a stealer, a thief, a pilfrer, a filcher, a pirate. Rob, Look
Robba. Robbia, an herb to dye red withal called Madder, Cliuers Madder, or
Goslin-weede. Also the herb Wood-roofe. Also a certain measure of corn.
Robbo, a kind of red wheat. Also a bush, a bryer, a shrub, a bramble. Also
red or ruddie colored, as Robbia. Robbone, a great long roabe, gown, or
mantle, a kind of coin of gold in Muskouie. Roba, as Robba. Robacchiare, as
Robbacchiare. Robare, as Robbare. Robalto, a pair of winding or turning
stairs. Robeculo, a robin red-breast. Robertiana, herb robert. Robia, as
Robbia. Robicilla, a bird called a red tail or a bull finch. Robicondo, red,
ruddie, high-colored, blushing, fiery red, a branded red. Robicondita,
rednes, ruddines. Robicone, as Robicondo. Robigaglia, gang-weeke. Robino, a
precious stone called a rubie. Robinetto, a little rubie. also a pillicock, or
dildoe. Also a spigot or cock for a conduit. Robiolo, a kind of dainty cheese
in Italy. Robone, as Robbone. Roborare, to make strong or stiff as an oak.
Robore, an oak, used also for strength and hardines of body and mind, force,
courage, or stoutnes. Roboroso, stiff or hard like an oak. Robrica, red-okre,
or marking stone. Robusto, strong, sturdie, sinewie, lusty, tough, valiant,
hard, forcible. Robustezza, strength, sturdines, toughnes. Rocca, a rock, a
block-house, a fort, a castle, a keep, a strong hold, a cittadell. Also a
distaffe or rock to spinne with. Roccau, a fish, in latin Alphesta. Rocchezza,
roughnes, ruggednes. Roccia, a rock, a cliffe, or crag by the sea side, a grub,
or a clod of earth or stone. Rocchi, crags, or ruptures in any rocks or stones.
Rocchia, as Roccia. Rocchio, a lump, a cob, a mammock, a lunchion piece. Rocco,
as Rocca. Also a rooke to play at chesse with. Rocchello, the wheel about
which the cord of a clock goes. Also a bobbin to wind silk upon. Rochetta,
as Ruchetta. Rochetto, a bishops or cardinals rochet. Also a bobbin to wind
silk upon. Also any kind of squib of wild fire. Also the wheel of a mill
which causes the grinding stones to turn and go. Rochi, a kind of great
monstrous bird in India. Roco, hoarse in speaking. Rocozeni, a kind of wild
haggard hawk. Ro^adafano, as Rododafne. Rodamele, a kind of drug. Rodanto, the
flower of roses. Rodente, a kind of red swelling inflammation. Also gnawing
and fretting. Rodere, rodo, rosi, roduto, or roso, to gnaw, to fret, to
consume, to nibble, to eat and wear away. Also to detract, to backbite, or
speak ill of. Roduto, Roso, gnawne, consumed, fretted, nibbled, eaten or worn
out. also detracted or backbitten. Rodia, a kind of herb, the root whereof
sauoureth of the rose called rosewort. Rodimento, a gnawing, a fretting, a
nibbling. Rodite, a kind of precious stone of a rose color. Roditore, a
gnawer, a fretter, a nibbler. Roditura, as Rodimento. Rodere l'osso, to gnaw a
bone. Rodere il basto, a man to gnaw his own burden, to fret at himself.
Rodere di rabbia, to gnaw or fret with rage or anger. Rodersi le labbra, a man
to gnaw or bite his own lips. Rododafne, a kind of tree in Ca^dia which is so
venomous that it does poison whatsoever it touches, rosteth or seedeth, and
has a flower like a rose, and a leaf like the Laurel or Bay tree.
Rodomontada, a boaste, a brag, a crake, a vainglorious vaunting. Rodora, an
herb which has a stalk with knots and ioints, and a leaf like a nettle,
white in the midst, and in continuance waxes all like a rose. Roffia, darkness,
mistines, foggines, pitchines, densitie or thicknes of vapors, duskishnes.
Also dandraf, scabbednes, scurf or the disease called the scuruie. Roffiana, a
bawd, a pander, a ruffian. Roffianare, to play the pander, bawd or ruffian, to
ruffle, to swash, to hacke as ruffians. Roffianamenti, bawdries or ruffianlike
tricks, ruflings. Roffianeggiare, as Roffianare. Roffianeggiamenti, as
Roffianamenti. Roffiano, a bawd, a pander or ring carier. Also a cutter, a
ruffian, a hackester, a swash-buckler, a swaggrer. Roffianesimo, the art or
trick or bawdrie. Rogale fuoco, a bon-fire. Look Rogo. Rogare, to entreat, to
pray, to request, to ask, to desire, to require, to crave or beg. Rogatione,
a rogation, a praying, a request, a question, an interrogation, a demand. Also
a law or ordinance. Roge, filth of meat sticking between ones teeth.
Rogatore, a prayer, a demaunder, a desirer, a requester, an asker, a beseecher,
a beggar, a crauer, a suter. Rogge, a kind of pear in Italy. Roggia, as
Robbia. Roggio, red, rudding, reddish, ruddy. Also that we call tawnie red.
Roggiola, Rogiola, the disease called the meazels or red gum that children have
when they are young. Rogiada, Rogiadoso, as Rugiada. Rogiti, prouocations,
vrgings, eggings on. Rogna, any kind of scab, itch, tetter or scurffe.
Rognaccia, a filthy scab or scurffe. Rognare, as Rignire. Rognonale, a kind
of ague in a horse coming in the kidneies or lungs, pertaining to the
kidneies. Rognone, the kidneie of any body. Rognoni, the kidneies or raines of
any bodies back. Rognosa frittata, a kind of fride collops and eggs used in
Italy. Rognoso, scabbie, scabbed, scuruie, itchie, full of tetters. Rognuzza,
small scabbes, itch or itching pimples. Rogo, a great fire wherein in old time
they were wont to burn dead bodies of men. Also used for a grave. Roina, as
Ruina. Also a tool that surgeons use. Rolare, Rollare, to role, to file, to
record, to put upon a check roll. Rolo, Rollo, a roll, a checke-roule, a
file or record of names. Rollone, water and branne or froth and foam. Roma e
Toma, Promettere Roma e Toma, to promise Gods cope, woonders, and all the world
besides. Romagnuolo, a kind of course, home spun, sheep russet cloth, called
friars cloth or sheepheards clothing. Also a man borne in Romagna. Romaiuolo,
as Romagnuolo. Romania, a kind of excellent wine in Italy like malmesie.
Romanzate, to write fabulous histories or tales in rhyme. Romanzatore, a romant,
a writer or speaker of fabulous stories in doggrell rhyme. Romanzi, romants,
fabulous tales written in rhyme. Also mountibanks. Romanzina, a kind of dance,
or trick in dancing. Romatico, as Aromatico. Romatizzare, as Aromatizzare.
Rombazzo, a whirle wind, a filthy rumbling noise, Look Rombo. Rombice, the
herb sorrel, or sowre-dock. Rombo, a rumbling, roaring noise, the clang,
sound, or braying of a trumpet, the dubbing of a drum, a clattring or clashing
of armor, a rattling of thunder. Also a fish called a Burt, or a Turbot, a
violent hurling or turning. Also a spinning wheel, or a reele for yarne. Also
a figure fouresquare losanged, having the sides equal, but not right angled or
cornered but like a quarry of glass, whereupon it is used for any thing that
has the like form. Romboide, as Rombo, or like Rombo. Also a countersaite
Turbot, a fish like a Turbot. Rombola, a sling. Rombolare, to throw or cast in
a sling. Also to make a whorring or rumbling noise, taken from the noise that a
stone makes separating the air with violence, as a stone cast out of a sling
does. Also to rumble, to roar, to rattle, to clatter, to clash, to dub, to
clange. Romeaggio, pilgrimage, or roaming about. Romeare, to roame or wander up
and down solitarilie as a palmer. Romeo, as Romitaggio, a roamer, a wandrer, a
palmer. Rometa, a thorneback, or ray, or skeate. Romia, a kind of Scallop
fish. Romice, as Robbia, as Rombice. Romigare, to sail or go by sea, to
roame, to roaue or go up and down solitary and alone as an hermit.
Rominare, as Ruminare. Rominatore, as Ruminatore. Romita, a hermit or solitary
man. Romitaggio, a hermitage, a desert, or solitary place. Romitaio, as
Romitaggio. Romito, as Romita. Romito dalsacco, a begging hermit. Romitoio,
Romitorio, as Romitaggio. Romore, a rumor, a noise, a brute, a report, a
talk, a rumbling, a hurlieburlie. Also a fame, an uproar, a flimslam tale.
Romoreggiare, to noise, to rumor, to bluster, to raise an uproar, tumult, or
sedition. Romoreggiante, tumultuous, seditious, full of noise or vprores,
blustering. Romoreggiatore, a tumultuous, seditious, storming, blustering,
unquiet fellow, a publisher of any noise, sedition, or uproar. Rompere, rompo,
ruppi, rotto, or romputo, to break, to batter, to bruze, to overthrow, to
vanquish, to destroy, to weaken, to abate, to repress, to master, to tame, to
subdue, to confute, to overcome, to tear, to splint, to shiuer, to rent, to
scatter, to totter, to tug, to hauock, to spoil, to defeat, to crush, to
craze. Romputo, Rotto, broken, battred, bruzed, overthrown, vanquished,
destroide, weakened, abated, repressed, maistred, tamed, subdued, confuted,
overcome, torn, splinted, shiuered, rent, scattred, tottred, tugd, hauockt,
spoiled, defeated, crushed, crazed. Rompibile, any thing that may be broken,
overcome, or subdued. Rompicollo, headlong, rashly, desperately,
haire-brained. Also a waghalter, a breakeneck, a rogue, a desperate heedlesse
fellow, a haltersack. Also a breakeneck place, or a downe-fall. Rompidente, a
tooth-drawer. Also a tool that mazons use. Rompimenti, all manner of
breakings, crushings, overthrows, etc. Rompinare, as Rampinare. Rompino, as
Rampino. Rompitoio, a hammer, a mallet, a sledge, a breaker. Rompitore, a
breaker, a tearer, a subduer, a destroyer, etc. Rompotimo, a bush growing in
France, within twenty foot whereof no corn should be sown. Ronca, a hedge
bill, a brown bill, a forest bill, a welsh hook, a boares spear, a
partisane, a bramble siethe. Also a kind of mountain partridge. Roncagino, a
color that painters use to lay upon wood. Roncare, to root up, to grub, to
dig up, to extirp, to grunt up as a hog does. also to cut with a welsh hook or
any such crooked weapon. Also to snort in sleep, to bray as an ass.
Roncatore, a grubber, a digger, a grunter. Also a cutter or lopper of trees, a
snorter, a brayer, etc. Roncamenti, grubbings, gruntings, snortings, brayings.
Roncera, a shell fish called a purple fish. Roncheggiare, as Roncare.
Roncheggiamenti, as Roncamenti. Ronchetta, a little faulchon. Also a shoemakers
knife. also a crooked knife that vine cutters use. Ronchiare, as Roncare.
Ronchiamenti, as Roncamenti. Ronchiatore, as Roncatore. Ronchiggiare, as
Roncare. Ronchiggiamenti, as Roncamenti. Ronchiggione, as Roncatore. Ronchione,
as Roncone, also a great rock, cliffe, cragge, or stone, a rugged craggie
hill. Ronchioso, knobbie, knottie, craggie, rockie, stony, cliffie, desert,
rough as a crab. tree stick. Ronchisuono, that has a hoarse sound, or
imitateth the noise or sound of snorters. Ronciglio, as Roncilio, or as
Rampino. Roncigliare, as Ronciliare. Ronciglione, as Rampino, as Roncilio.
Ronciliare, to graffe or cut with a sickle, faulchon, welsh-hooke or crooked
knife. Roncilio, as Rampino. Also a faulchon, a graffing knife, a crooked
knife, or a weeding hook, or crooked hedge bill to cut hedges or loppe trees
with. Also a sickle. Roncino, a nagge, a pretty horse, a hacknie, a tit.
Roncinotto, a pretty handsome nagge or hackney. Roncito, a bush, a shrub, a
brier, a thorn, a brake, a bramble that has been cut the tops off.
Roncolare, as Ronciliare. Roncolo, as Roncilio, as Ronca. Roncone, as Ronca.
Roncratolo, a bird about the bigness of a goose that brayeth like an ass.
Ronda, a company of certain soldiers and officers that go visiting the
corpse de guard or sentinels at sundry hours of the night to cause them keep
order and see whether they be vigilant. Rondanmi, young swallows or martinets.
Rondella, a sea-bat, or sea-swallow. Also a round target. Rondine, a swallow, a
martinet. Also a kind of fish. Also a tool that Anatomists use. Rondinella, a
swallow, a young swallow. Rondinini, young swallows or martinets. Rondola, as
Rondella. Rondone, a martlet or a swallow. Ronfa, a game at cards called ruff
or trumpe. Ronfare, to snort, to snarle. Also to tuffe as a cat. Also to ruff
or trump at cards. Ronfamenti, snortings, snarlings, or tuffings of a cat.
Ronfatore, a snorter, a snarler, a tuffer. Ronfea, a kind of sling, or a kind
of darting weapon. Ronfeggiare, as Ronfare. Ronfeggiamenti, as Ronfamenti.
Run, a letter, or a breuiation signifying rum, as Amo-rum. Ronzare, to humme
or buzze as a Be, to make a humming noise. Ronzerare, to humme or buzze as a
Be. Ronzero, wild, rammish, untamed, unbroken, haggard, vnmanaged. Ronzino,
as Roncino. Ronzone, a filthy nagge, a jade, an ill favored horse. Ropegara,
as Arpegara. Ropegare, as Arpegare. Rosa, the flower called a rose. Acqua rosa,
rose water. Also gnawne or fretted. Also a rowell of a spur. Rosa bianca, a
white rose. Rosa damaschina, a damask rose. Rosa del monte, the herb pyonie.
Rosa muschiata, a musk rose. Rosa d' herrico, as Coppa di gioue. Rosa marino,
rosemarie. Rosa oltra marina, the flower Holliehocke. Rosa rossa, a red rose.
Rosa secca, a kind of murrie or rose color. Rosaceo, of the color of roses.
Also of or belonging to roses. Rosaio, Rosaro, a rose bryer. Also a rosarie, a
rosier, a garden, a bed, or place where roses grow. Rosaio seluatico, eglantine
or sweet bryer. Also the caper bush. Rosare, to preserve with roses, or to make
to smell of roses. Rosata, a rose cake, rosed, smelling of roses, made of
roses. Rosata, Acqua rosata, rosewater. Rosata radice, the herb rosewoort.
Rosato, preserved with roses, made of roses, smelt of roses, rosiate, of the
color of roses, rose color, murrie, smelling of roses, Olio rosato, oil of
roses. Roscignolo, a nightingall. Rosechiare, as Rodere. Rosegare, as Rodere.
Rosegatura, a gnawing, a fretting, a nibbling, a biting. Rosegone, a gnawer, a
fretter, a nibler, a biter. Roselli, as Grattaculo. Also dride rose cakes. Also
rose leaves. Also a kind of dainty figs so called. Roselline, young little
roses. Look Dare Roselline. Roseo, a kind of rose color, of or belonging to
roses, or wherein roses grow. Rosette, a disease in a horse. Also little roses,
or rowels of spurs. Rosicare, as Rodere. Rosicatura, as Rosegatura. Rosicara, a
mouse, a rat, a nibbler. Rosigare, as Rodere. Rosigatura, as Rosegatura.
Rosigone, as Rosegone. Rosignolo, a nightingall. Rosignolare, to chirpe or sing
as a nightingall. Rosignoletti, young nightingals. Rosmaro, a kind of fish.
Rosmarino, rosemarie. Rosne, Rosnetta, as Picilla. Roso, as Roduto, Look
Rodere. Rosola, a smiths buttris. Rosolaccio, wild poppie. Rosolino, a fish
that lives on land and water. Rosoni, a kind of flawne, egge-pie, custard, or
dowcets. Also a kind of spanish roses. Rospare, to scrape in the dirt as a
hen does. to seek carefully. Also to croke as a tode. Rospatore, a scraper
or seeker in the dirt, a sneaking companion. Rospature, scrapings in the dirt.
Rospini, a kind of musk melon. Rospo, a venomous beast called a toade.
Rospopesce, a fish like a toade. Rospone, a filthy great toade. Rossa, red, a
red-woman. Also a fan of feathers. Rossardo, somewhat red or ruddie, a red
man, reddish. Rosseggiare, to blush or wax red. Rosseggiante, blushing,
ruddie, red, cherrie-lip. Rossetto, somewhat red, ruddie. also russet. Also a
red man or woman, a blush color. Also a fish called a merlane or a dace.
Rossezza, rednes, ruddines, blushing. Rossiccio, reddish, ruddie, enclining to
red, a blush color. Rossigno, as Rossiccio. Rossignolare, to sing or chirpe as
a nightingall. Rossignolo, a nightingall. Rossino, as Rossiccio. Rossire, Look
Arrossire. Rosso, red, ruddie, blushing, tawnie red. Also a red man. Rosso
d'uuouo, the yolke of an eg. Rossore, as Rossezza. Rossume, rednes, ruddines.
Rossola, a kibe or chilblane or any red swelling. Rossolare, to swell red, to
grow to kibes or chilblanes. Rosta, a turning wheel or other impediment in the
way, a style over a hedge, a yate in any hedge or pale, a weier in a river, a
stop in the water. a fan of feathers. Also an instrument or crane to draw out
any thing out of a mine or cole pit. Also a batledar to play at tenis with Also
a dripping pan. Rostare, to hinder, let or stop up the high way, to forray the
country. Also to fan. Rostire, stisco, stito, to roste, to toste, to broile.
Rostito, roasted, tosted, broyled. Also rostemeate Rostita, a toste of bread.
Rostizzana, a steake, a collop, a slice or gobbet of flesh, a piece of roasted
meat called an olife. Rostizzare, to fry in steakes, to parch, to sear, to
singe, to scorch. Rostra, the place of common plea at Rome wherein was a pulpit
made and trimmed with stems or forefronts of ships: out of which place they
were wont to make orarions, so that it may be taken for a pulpit. Rostrata,
vide Corona. Rostrata naue, a ship having her stem shod or pointed with iron or
brass. Rostrato, that has a bill, snout or beak, or a stem, or that is
pointed with iron or brass. Rostro, the bill, beak, or nib of a bird or any
foul, the nose or snout of any beast or fish, the snout or stem of a ship, the
tip, end, point or tongue of iron, brass or horn that is put at the end of any
thing, as of a rouler to roll any thing with. Rostrum gruis, herb storkes
bill, whereof be diverse sorts. Rota, any kind of wheel, a grinding stone, a
millstone. Also a wheeling, turn or turning. Also the turn or wheeling of a
horse. Also a little roll. Also the spredding of a peacocks tail. Also a
kind of monstrous great fish. Rotale, of or belonging to a wheel, or like a
wheel. Rotare, to wheel or turn round, to turn or swing about. Also to
grind, to whet, to sharpen or set an edge upon. Rotato, wheeled about, swinged,
hurled, wheeled or turned about. Also a pie colored horse. Rotatori, two
Apophisis or processes bunching out in the uppermost neck of the thigh,
whereof the uttermost being the greatest process in the whole body is of some
Anatomists called in latin Nates: the innermost is lower and far less then
the other: they seem to be ordained for the turning and wheeling about of the
thigh. Roteggiare, to turn round in a wheel, or round as a horse does.
Rotella, a little wheel or wheeling or turning. a buckler or a target. also a
round mark or spot about a horse. a little roll. Also as Rotola. Rotelletta, a
little wheel, a little target or buckler. Rotellino, the name of a goldsmiths
tool or work so called. Rotola, a wheel. Also a rumbling or a rattling. Also
a roll or bundle of any thing. Also a cracknell writhen like a roape. Rotula
del ginocchio, the whirle bone ordained to cover the joint of the knee, which
otherwise had been to open to harm called, h^e^e-bone, the shield like bone,
the pattle-bone. Rotolare, to wheel or turn round, to tumble, to rumble, to
rattle, to wallow. Also to roll, to wind up, to bundle up or bind up or
trusse up any thing, to trundle. Rotolata, a wheeling, a turning, a tumbling, a
rumbling, a rattling, a wallowing, a rouling, a winding or binding up of any
thing, a trundling. Rotollare, as Rotolare. Rotollata, as Rotolata. Rotolo, a
roll, a bundle, a trusse or fardle or bottom or clue of any thing, a roll or
checkroule of names, a trundling. Rotolon or Rotoloni, rolling, wallowing or
tumbling or rumbling round. Rotondare, to round or make round, to make full
and perfect, to grow up round. Rotondita, roundnes, rotunditie. Rotondo,
round, well compact or fashioned, handsome, full, perfect. Rotta, as Rotto, a
breach, an overthrow, a discomfiture, a route or breaking of a squadron or
troop turning them to flight. Rotta d'un essercito, the overthrow or
discomfiture of an army. Rottame, Rotame, any shiuer, splint or piece of thing
broken, a shard or a bat, as we say fragments, scraps or mammocks, rubble or
rubbish. Rottare, to belch, to raspe, to spue, to break wind upward.
Rottatore, a belcher, a spuer, a rasper. Rotteggiare, as Rottare.
Rotteggiatore, as Rottatore. Rottelino, as Rotellino. Rotti, belches,
belchings, spuings, raspings. Rottiere, as Rottatore. Rotto, as Romputo, a man
that is open or burst in the belly or cods. Also a rasping, a belching or
breaking of wind, a fraction in Arithmetike. Rotto di schiena, backe-broken,
brokenbackt. Rottoio, Rottorio, a plaster to break any swelling, a corosiue.
Also a nutcracker. Rottondare, to round or make round. Rottura, a breaking, a
breach, a rupture, a disease called a rupture, a fraction. Also a burglarie or
breaking up of a house. Rotula, as Rotola. Rotulare, as Rotolare. Rotulo, as
Rotolo. Roua, a kind of great weight used in Italy. Also a measure of corn.
Rouaio, the northren wind, the cold northren wind, a nipping wind. Rouano, as
Roano. Roueia, a kind of peason or sitches. Rouellare, Rouello, as Rangolare.
Rouentare, to neale, to heat red hot. Also to glow. Rouente, glowing red,
fiery hot, red hot. Rouere, the tree called an oak. Also wanscot wood.
Rouerino, wainscot or oak. Also made of oak. Also strong as oak. Also
opinatiue, headstrong, wilful or fixed in some humor. Rouersa, as Riuersa.
Rouersare, as Riuersare. Rouerso, as Riuerso. Rouersone, as Riuersone.
Rouerscia, as Riuersa. Rouersciare, as Riuersare. Rouerscio, as Riuerso.
Rouerscione, as Riuersone. Rouescia, as Riuersa. Rouersciare, as Riuersare.
Rouescio, as Riuerso. Rouescione, as Riuersone. Rouetta, a bryer, a shrub, a
bramble, a brake, a thorn, a bush, a black berrie bush. Rouiglia, a kind of
green peason. Rouigliare, to role, to tumble or toss over and over. Also as
Squinternare. Rouiglione, a kind of peason as our hastings and bowlings are.
Also a scab, a botch, a scurfe, the measels or small pox. Also rolling,
rumbling or tossing over. Rouina, Roina, ruin, spoil, waste, havoc,
consummation, destruction, an overthrow or wrack, extreme decaie, death,
misery, loss, danger, mischief, desolation. Rouinare, Roinare, to ruin,
spoil, waste, havoc, consume, destroy, or defeat. Rouinamento, as Roina.
Rouinatore, a ruiner, a spoiler, a waster, a consumer, etc. Rouinazzo, rubbish
of broken walls, rubble, brick-bats, tyle-shards. Rouineuole, ruinous,
spoiled, subject to ruin and destruction, ready to fall. Rouinoio, as
Rouinoso. Rouinoso, ruinous, spoiled, wastefull. Rouo, as Rouetta. Rouo ideo, a
kind of strange herb. Rouo camino, a kind of tree, shrubbe, bramble, or
brier. Rozza, Roza, a jade or filthy bad horse, Also a filthy whore, a
rampe-stalion. Also rude or barbarous, or rough. Rozzamente, rudely, brutishly,
unmannerly, vnciuily, roughly. Rozzezza, rudenes, brutishnes, vnciuilitie,
roughnes. Rozzino, as Roncino. Rozzo, rude, uncivil, brutish, ignorant, that
knows nothing, untaught, nothing expert, not exercised or traded in any
thing, rusticall, unmannerly, clownish. It is also taken for a branch or bough
full of plums, or other fruit hanging, or a bunch of grapes dangling down
from the vine or tree. Also unwrought, rough, not fashioned, homely, simple,
plain, base, blunt, bunglerlike. Rozzola, a cheesefat, a cheese-presse, a
cherning fat. Rozzone, a filthy ill-fauoured jade or horse. Also a man's privy
member. Ruba, as Rubaria. Rubbacchiare, as Robbacchiare. Rubbare, as Robbare.
Rubaldo, as Ribaldo. Rubaldone, as Ribaldone. Rubalderia, as Ribalderia.
Rubacchiare, as Robbacchiare. Rubare, as Robbare. Rubarie, filchings,
stealings, larcenies, prowlings, purloinings, robberies, theeuings. Rubbi, a
kind of vermin, worm or caterpiller. Rubbia, as Robbia. Also a certain
measure of corn. Rubbone, a kind of golden coin in Muscouie. Rubecchio, red,
reddish, ruddie, sanguine color. Rubellare, as Ribellare. Rubelle, as Ribelle.
Rubellione, as Ribellione. Rubelloso, as Ribelloso. Ruberie, as Rubarie.
Rubesto, strong, sturdie, rigorous, fell, tough, stern. Rubeta, a toade that
is somewhat red, a land toade. Rubicillo, the bird called a bull-finch, or red
tail. Rubicondo, as Robicondo. Rubicondita, as Robicondita. Rubicone, as
Robicone. Rubidezza, as Ruuidezza. Rubido, a kind of dark deep red color.
Rubigine, the blasting of trees, or cankre eating of fruits. Rubinetto, as
Robinetto. Rubino, as Robino. Rubizzo, as Rossiccio. Also hard hearted, or
marble minded. Rubo, as Rouetta. Also a great weight used in Italy. Rubocanino,
the wild eglantine. also the caper bush. Rubore, shamefastnes, rednes,
blushing. Rubrica, vermillion, red oaker, red-leade, red stone, or ruddle. Also
red writing. Rubricare, to mark as they do sheep with ruddle or red oaker.
Rubricoso, full of red earth, ruddle or vermillion. Ruch, a monstrous great
bird in India that will kill an elephant. Ruche, the worms that we call
caterpillars or cankers. Ruchetta, the herb called rocket. Rucula, as
Ruchetta. Rude, as Rozzo. Also a rod or yard that was given to sword players
when they were old in sign that they were set at liberty, and so taken for a
discharge and liberty from labor. Rudere, to braie as an ass. Rudimenti, the
first teachings or rudiments, principles, or instructions, or elements of any
thing. Rudita, rudenes, ignorance, when a man knows nothing. Ruello, a fish
called in latin Bopis. Ruffa, moss or moldings. Also a rifling, a musse, or a
scambling. Also a trull, a harlot, a minx, or a gixie. Ruffare, to rifle, to
skamble, to play at musse. to mould or be mustie. Also to belch. Ruffia, as
Roffia. Ruffiana, as Roffiana. Ruffianamenti, as Roffianamenti. Ruffianare, as
Roffianare. Ruffianarie, as Roffianamenti. Ruffianeccio, as Roffianesimo.
Ruffianeggiare, as Roffianare. Ruffianello, a young little bawd or ruffian.
Ruffianesimo, as Roffianesimo. Ruffianezzare, as Roffianare. Ruffianiccio, as
Roffianesimo. Ruffiano, as Roffiano. Ruffo, a belching, a rasping, or breaking
of wind. Also a darling, a wanton, or a dilling. Also a red color. Also a
ruffling roister or ruffian, a swaggrer. Ruffola, as Ruffa. Also dandraffe in
any bodies head. Ruffola Raffola, by pinching and scraping, by shifting or
scambling, pell mell, in hugger mugger, by hook or crook, biglediepigledie,
helterske^^er. Ruffolare, as Ruffare. Also to get by hook or crook, or any
means. Rufo, used for Rosso. Ruga, a worm called a cancre or a caterpiller.
Also a street, a lane, a causey, or long lane. Also a wrimple or ^rinkle or
crows foot in ones face through age or care, a withering, crampling, or
plaiting. Also the bitter herb called herb of grace. Some take it to be the
herb rocket. Rugare, to wrinkle, to wrimple, to crumple. Also to fumble or
grope, to fould, to plaite. Also to eat with caterpillars. Rugatore, a
fumbler, a deuourer, a caterpiller. Rughetta, a narrow lane, a little street.
Also a little wrimple or wrinkle. Rugghiare, as Ruggiare. Ruggiada, as Rugiada.
Ruggiadare, as Rugiadare. Ruggiadoso, as Rugiadoso. Ruggiare, to roar, to
bellow, to royne as a Lion. Also to grunt, to bray, to baule, to howl.
Ruggiato, roared, bellowed, royned as a Lion. Also grunted, brayde, bauled,
howled. Ruggiatore, a roarer, a bellower, a royner, a grunter, a brayer, a
bauler. Ruggine, rust, rustines, cankre, foulenes or filth in metals. Also a
kind of apple called a russetting. Rugginezza, as Ruggine. Rugginire, nisco,
nito, to rust, to cankre, to be rustie. Rugginoso, rustie, full of rust.
Rugginuzza, as Ruggine. Ruggio, a measure of dry things in Italy. Ruggire,
gisco, gito, as Ruggiare. Ruggito, as Ruggiato. Also a roaring, a bellowing, a
royning of a Lion. Also a braying, a howling, or bauling. Also a rumbling or
croaking of the belly when it is empty. Ruggitore, as Ruggiatore. Rughi,
briars, thorns, brambles. Rugiada, the deaw. Also a sprinkling. Rugiadare, to
bedeaw, to dew, to wet, to sprinkle, to deaw-bedable. Also to drop, to trill,
or fall down like dew. Rugiadoso, deawie, sprinkled, deawbedabled. Rugiola,
as Rogiola. Rugidi, a kind of pears in Italy. Rugione, a good dry bumbasting
blow. Rugire, as Ruggiare. Rugito, as Ruggiato. Rugnire, gnisco, gnito, to
grunt as a hog, to rore, to royne. Rugnito, grunted, rored, royned. a grunting,
a royning, a roaring. Rugimento, a roining, a roaring, a grunting. Rugoso, full
of wrinkles or wrimples, crumples, or plaits, rough, riueled, withered.
Rugumare, to cry or braie out. also to ruminate or chawe the cud, to consider,
to ponder, to reuolue in mind. Ruina, as Rouina. Ruinare, as Rouinare.
Ruinaccio, as Rouinazzo. Ruineuole, as Rouineuole. Ruinoso, as Rouinoso. Rulla,
a teale board to make barrels with. Also the iron or the ploughmans staff,
wherewith he cleanses the culter. Rullo, a rouling piece of timber with holes
at the ends of it to remove or roll timber upon. Also a kind of high head
attire that women use in Italy. Ruma, the dew-lap of beasts, the hollow part
or gorge of the throat, the cud. Rumare, as Ruminare. Rumento, an impostume
that bursteth out in the flesh. Rumice, the herb sorrel or sour docke.
Rumigare, as Ruminare. Ruminare, to ruminate, to chewe the cud as neat do.
Also to call to remembrance and consider with ones self, to ponder, to reuolue
in mind, to study and think upon a matter. Ruminamento, a ruminating, a
chewing of the cudde. Also a considering, a pondring, a calling to remembrance.
Ruminatione, as Ruminamento. Ruminatore, a ruminator, a chewer of the cud. Also
a considerer, a meditator. Rumore, as Romore. Rumoreggiare, as Romoreggiare.
Rumoreggiante, as Romoreggiante. Ruola, a rowler to roll paste with, a rolling
pin. Ruota, as Rota. Ruotare, as Rotare. Ruotata, a kind of round trick in
dancing. Ruotella, as Rotella. Ruotola, as Rotola. Ruotolare, as Rotolare.
Ruotolo, as Rotolo, a kind of great weight in Italy. Ruotolozeroi, idem.
Rupe, a rock, a cliff, a cliue, a crag, a steep, a hill, a stone, a high
downe-fall, so sleep that one may not well climb it. Rupicapra, a wild Goat
or Chamoi^. Ruppe, he brake or did break. Rurale, rural, rusticall, of or
pertaining to the country or village. Rusa, a sallacie, an illusion, a deceit,
a slight, a craft. Also a cankre, or a caterpiller. Ruscare, to get by
pilfring, by shifts, by cosenage, by hook or crook. Ruscellare, to run or
trill, or glide along as a little brook or stream does. Ruscelletto, a very
little brook or gullet of water, a gozell of water. Ruscellino, as Ruscelleto.
Ruscello, a little brook, stream, or running water. Ruschi, thorns, brakes,
brambles, briers, bushes, firres. Ruscignolo, a Nightingall. Rusco, a certain
rough and prickled shrub to make brushes and besoms of, called the herb
knecholme, or butchers broom, or petigre. Also a kind of corn in India, or
the bread made thereof. Also a chimnie-sweepers or butchers broom or sweeper.
Ruse, a kind of worm or caterpiller. Ruspare, to scrape in the dirt as a
hen does. also to shift, to sneake, or prye for any thing diligently.
Ruspatore, a scraper, a shifter, a sneaking companion. Ruspatura, a scraping, a
sneaking, a shifting, a seeking. Russa, a snorting, or a braying. Russare, to
snort. Also to bray as an ass. Russei, a kind of Hearon. Russignolo, a
Nightingall. Russo, a snorting, a braying, a hoarsenes. a snorter, a brayer.
one that is hoarse. Rusticano, of the country or village, rusticall, rude,
clownish, loutish, a husbandman or bind. Rusticare, to play the clown,
swain, or rustike fellow, to live a country life. Rustichezza, rusticitie,
clounishnes, rudenes, inciuilitie, gross manners, churlishnes, homelines,
simple plainenes, foolish bashfulnes. Rusticita, as Rustichezza. Rustico,
rusticall, clownish, vplandish, homely, churlish, plain, loutish, that knows
no good fashions, rude, inciuill, barbarous. Also a clown, a swain, a hind,
a countrieman, a rude fellow, a husbandman, an vplandish man, a rude body.
Rusticone, a filthy gross clown, a hynde, a rude swain, a rustike fellow,
Look Rustico. Rustina, as Rusco. Ruta, the herb rue, or herb of grace.
Rutabulo, a rake. Also a harrow, a colerake to make clean an oven. Ruta
murale, wall rue, or white maiden hair. Ruta saluatica, great Saint John's
wort. Rutare, as Rottare. Rutatore, as Rottatore. Ruticilla, a bird called a
red tail. Rutilante, as Rutilo. Rutilare, to shine or glister, or to make to
shine or glister like gold, to make bright yellow. Rutilo, shining red like
gold, ruddie, or bright yellow, bright, shining, fiery red, bright shining.
Ruttare, as Rottare. Ruttatore, as Rottatore. Rutteggiare, as Rottare. Rutti,
as Rotti. Ruuia, a kind of pulse, as peason or beans. Ruuidezza, roughnes,
ruggednes, rudenes, sharpnes, craggednes, harshnes. Ruuido, sharp, crabbed,
rough, rugged, grettie, gross, barbarous, clownish, harsh, as Rozzo. Ruuina,
as Rouina. Ruuinare, as Rouinare. Ruuinaccio, as Rouinazzo. Ruuineuole, as
Rouineuole. Ruuinoso, as Rouinoso. Ruzza, Ruzzamento, wantonness, daliance,
mocking, jesting, frumping. Ruzzare, to dally, to skoffe, to jest, to frump,
to gibe, to tickle, to wantonize, to dandle, to fumble. Ruzzante, mocking,
skoffing, flouting, frumping, tickling, jesting, fumbling. Ruzzatore, a mocker,
a skoffer, a flouter, a tickler, a wanton, a fumbler. Ruzzetto, a bird called a
Wren. Ruzzo, a tickling, a dalliance, a fumbling, an itching. Ruzzo del capo, a
sudden, toyish, fantastical, humorous conceit, or passion, or toy. Ruzzolare,
as Raspare, as Ruspare, as Razzolare. Also to toss, to tumble, to rumble, to
iumble.
S
SA', he or she knows or wotteth, or can, used also for her, or hirs. Saba,
new wine sodden, which we call cute, which they use to season meats with.
Sabbath, of hosts, of armies, of powers. Sabato, among the Jews was the
seventh day solemnised in remembrance of the rest after God in six days had
made the whole world: it is now taken for the Saturday, and among some for the
Saboth day. Sabatismo, the celebration of the Saboth. Sabatta, as Sauatta.
Sabattino, as Sauattino. Sabattare, as Sauattare. Sabattaro, as Sauattaro.
Sabattarie, as Ciauattarie. Sabba, as Saba. Sabeth, a swouning or sounding.
Sabina, the herb Sauine, whereof there be two kinds, the one has leaves
like the shrub Tamariske or Briarie, the other has leaves like the leaves of
the Cipresse tree. Also a weapon like a borespeare. Sabbia, gross sand, or
gravel. Sabbionaccio, course gravel or sand. Sabbionara, a sand or gravel
pit. Sabbione, course gravel or sand. Sabbioso, full of gross sand, sandy,
grauellie, grettie. Sabrino, a kind of venomous beast. Sabuloso, sandy,
grauellie, grettie. Saburra, lastage or ballace wherewith ships are poised to
make them go upright. Sacalenola, a dart. Sacca, a bag, a sack, a pouch, a
budget, a satchell. Also a fowling net, a pocket. Saccagnare, to tug, to hale,
to touze, to towe. also to crumple, to bag, to pucker. Saccare, to put up into
a sack or bag, to pocket up. Saccardello, a kind of dride salt-fish like poor
John. Also a poor beggarly wretch. Saccaro, a kind of hawke called a Sakre.
also a kind of tree which yields sugar. Saccheggiare, to sack, to ransacke,
to massacre, to destroy, to rob. Saccheggiamento, a sacking, a ransacking, a
robbing, a spoiling. Saccheggiatore, a sacker, a ransacker, a robber, a
spoiler. Sacchero, a fish called in latin Chanadella. Sacchettino, a little
bag, sack, pouch or budget. Sacchetto, as Sacchettino. Sacciare, as Satiare.
Sacciente, as Sapiente. Saccienteria, as Sapientia. Saccente, as Sapiente.
Saccenteria, as Saccienteria. Saccio, I know, I wot, I ken, I can. Sacciuto, as
Foramello, as Sauio. Sacco, a sack, a bag, a pouch, a budget, a wallet, a
pocket. Also a sack, a sacking, a spoil, a massacre, a robbing, a ransacke or
a destruction. Also a pack of wool. Saccoccia, a satchell, a pouch, a budget,
a sack, a pocket, a poke. Saccodi lana, a pack of wool. Saccofrago, a kind
of stone of many colors. Saccola, a sliding knot. Also as Saccoccia.
Saccolare, to pucker or gather or cockle as some stuffes do being wet. Saccolo,
as Sacca. Saccomanare, to ransacke, to rob, to spoil, to shift for with
going a boote-haling. Saccomanno, a free-booter, a boote-haler, a skout, a
common shifting soldier, a spoiler, a pilf^er. Also a soldiers servant.
Saccomano, as Saccomanno. Saccomertere, metto, misi, messo, to ransacke, to
spoil, to sack, to ruin or pillage a town or any thing. Saccomoro, as
Sicomoro. Sacconcia, a pocket, a budget, a satchell, a pouch, a hauking bag.
Sacconaccio, as Saccone. Saccone, a great bag or sack. Also a boulster, a
pillow, a straw bed. Sacculi, little bags, pouches, budgets, pouches or hauking
bags or satchels. Sacello, an oratorie or private chapel. Sacente, as
Sapiente. Sacenteria, as Sapientia. Sacentone, a great, old, notable wise man.
Sometimes taken in ill part. Sacerdotale, of or pertaining to a priest, or
minister or churchman. Sacerdote, a priest or a minister of the church.
Sacerdotessa, a woman priest, a vestall virgin or a nun. Sacerdotio, the
order or function of priesthood or holy ministry. Also a parsonage, an
impropriation, a patronage of some priests living, any ecclesiastical living.
Saciente, as Sapiente. Sacienteria, as Sapientia. Sacodio, a precious stone of
the color of a Iacinth. Sacra, holy, sacred, hallowed. Also a sakre. Also a
consecration or dedication. Sacrafistola, the pipe where-through the marrow of
the back bone runs. Sacra herba, base or flat Veruein. Sacra spina, in
latin Otropygium. Sacramentale, sacramental, mysterious. Sacramentare, to
receive the holy sacrament, to swear or take a corporal oath. Sacramentario,
a distributer of the holy sacraments, a sacramentarie, a professor of holy
mysteries. Sacramento, a sacrament, a sign of an holy thing containing a
divine mystery with some promise annexed to it. Also an oath, a swearing.
Sacrare, to consecrate, to hallow, to dedicate, to make immortal. Sacrario, a
vestrie where holy things be kept, a sextrie Also a private chapel or
oratorie in a house. Sacrato, Sacrado, a churchyard, a holy ground. Also sacred
or hallowed or consecrated, appointed for the service and sacrifice to God.
Sacrestano, a sexton of a church or a vestrie keeper. Sacrestia, a vestrie in a
church. Sacrificare, to sacrifice or to offer sacrifice. Sacrificatione, a
sacrificing, an offering, a consecrating, a hallowing. Sacrificatore, a
sacrificer, a priest. Sacrifico, that is used in sacrifice, or serves
thereunto. Sacrifitio, a sacrifice, or an offering, or an oblation.
Sacrilegiare, to commit sacrilege, to steal sacred things or church goods.
Also to commit any horrible and detestable act. Sacrilegio, sacrilege or
stealing of sacred church things or church goods, theft from some holy and
consecrated place. Also any heinous or detestable offense. Sacrilego, a
sacrilegious man, a pilfrer or stealer of church goods, a church-robber, a
wicked and cursed man. Sacrio, a kind of Amber which comes out of Scythia.
Sacriscrinio, a keeper of princes, or sacred letters and records. Sacrista, as
Sacrestano. Sacristano, as Sacrestano. Sacristia, as Sacrestia. Sacro, sacred,
holy, divine, hallowed, dedicated to God, consecrate, devout, or godly. Also
a piece of ordinance called a Sakre, a kind of hawk called a Sakre.
Sacrofuoco, a swelling full of heat and rednes, with great pain about it, a
sore commonly called Saint Anthonies fire. Sacro osso, as Osso sacro.
Sacromorbo, the salling sickness, the soul evil, or Saint John's evil.
Sacrosanto, most sacred, and holy, or inviolable, that might not be touched
but with reverence. Saeppolo, a kind of bow, tiller, or crosbowe. Saetta, an
arrowe, a dart, a shast, a boult. Also a thunderbolt. Also a sign in the
firmament. Also a certain herb growing in the water, used also for a lancet or
fleame to draw blood from cattle and beasts. Saettare, to shoot, to throw, to
hurl, or dart an arow, a dart, or a shaft, to shoot in any kind of bow.
Also to strike or hit with a thunderbolt. Saettamento, a shooting or shot of
dart or arrowe, as Sacttume. Saettaro, Saettario, a sletcher, or a dartmaker.
Also an archer, a shooter, a bow-man. Also as Sagettario. Saettatore, a shooter
of shafts, a caster of darts, a hurler, an archer, a bow-man. Saettia, a very
speedy pinnas, bark, soyst, brigandine, or barge. Saettipotente, mighty or
strong in shooting, or arrows. Also the sign Sagitarie. Saettume, all manner
of shot to shoot or dart withal. Safico, as Saphico. Saffiro, a precious
stone called a Sapphire. Saffirino, a kind of blue Sapphire color that painters
use. Saffo, a catchpole, a sergeant, a base rascal, a snatcher. Saffranare, to
color, dye, or dress with saffron. Saffrano, Safron. Saga, a wise prudent
woman. Also taken for a witch or sorceresse. Sagace, witty, that perceives
and foreseeth quickly. wise, prudent, skillful, cunning, watchful, heedie,
vigilant, circumspect, wily. Sagacemente, wisely, wittily, circumspectly,
cunningly, prudently, finely, with quicknes of wit, and sharpnes of s^nces.
Sagacita, a sharpnes of wit, a quicknes or liuelines of spirit, or perceiving
of things, wittines. Sagapeno, a gum coming out of the herb Ferula. Also
as Ferula. Sagda, a kind of green precious stone that will draw wood unto
it, which the Chaldees use to make fast to their hands. Sagetta, as Saetta.
Sagettare, as Saettare. Sagettaro, as Saettario. Sagettatore, as Saettatore.
Sagettario, one of the twelve Signs in heaven called Sagitarius, as Saettario.
Sagettia, as Saettia. Sagettume, as Saettume. Saggetta, as Saetta. Saggettare,
as Saettare. Saggettario, as Sagettario. Saggiare, to assay, to taste, to try,
to attempt, to proffer to do. Also to perceive quickly, to smell out a matter
quickly. Saggiata, an assay, a taste, an attempt, a trial, a proffer to do
any thing. Saggiatore, an assayer, a taster, an attempter, a tryer. Saggina,
maste or akehornes for hogs or swine. Also any meat wherewith any thing is
fatned, pampred, or crammed. Also the grain turkey hirse, mill, or millet.
Also superfluous fatnes gathered by overmuch ease. Also filling, stuffing or
cramming. Sagginale, any thing made of Saggina, pampred or crammed, very fat,
or gloarie. Sagginare, to fatten, to pamper, to feed, to cramme, to frank or
feed fat, to mew foul. Sagginario, a place wherein beasts or birds are
fatned, crammed, or mewde fat. Also a coupe, a frank, a pen. Also an
oxe-stall. Sagginatione, a pampring, a cramming, or feeding fat, a mewing of
foul. Saggio, wise, witty, grave, sage, prudent, wary. Also a taste, an
assay, or trial, an attempt, a proffer to do any thing. Also a pattern or
ensample of any thing Also a little weight or measure six whereof goes to
anounce. Saggitta, as Saetta. Saggittare, as Saettare. Saggittario, as
Sagettario. Saggittume, as Saettume. Sagina, as Saggina. Saginare, as
Sagginare. Saginato, as Segenato. Saginatione, as Sagginatione. Sagio, as Saio.
Sagitta, as Saetta. Sagittale, a future or seame that runs strait on the
top of the head, distinguishing the right from the left side of a man's head. It
is also called retta sutura, because it lies straight lengthwise on the head
from Labdoide to Coronale. Sagittare, as Saettare. Sagittaria, the herb
arrow-head. Sagittario, as Sagettario. Sagittatore, as Saettatore. Sagittume,
as Saettume. Saglia, a tool that bricklers use. Sagliente, climbing, mounting,
salliant, ascendent. Sagliere, salgo, salsi, sagliuto, as Salire. Saglio,
Saglione, a long skirted coat. Sagliocca, a great club. Saglioccola, idem.
Saglito, Sagliuto, as Salito. Sagmina, as Sammina. Sagna, flebotomie or letting
of blood. Sagnare, to let blood. Sagogno, a beast like a munkie called a
Sanguine. Sagra, as Sacra. Sagramentale, as Sacramentale. Sagramentare, as
Sacramentare. Sagramentario, as Sacramentario. Sagramento, as Sacramento.
Sagrare, as Sacrare. Sagrato, Sagrado, as Sacrato. Sagrestano, as Sacrestano.
Sagrestia, as Sacrestia. Sagretta, a caske, a helmet, a skull. Also a little
sakre. Sagrificare, as Sacrificare. Sagrificio, as Sacrificio. Sagrilegiare, as
Sacrilegiare. Sagrilegio, as Sacrilegio. Sagrilego, as Sacrilego. Sagristano,
as Sacrestano. Sagristia, as Sacristia. Sagro, as Sacro. Sagrosanto, as
Sacrosanto. Sagu, a kind of dainty fruit growing in India. Sai, thou know
or wottest. Also coats with skirts. Saietta, a kind of fine serge or cloth
for coats, it is also rash. Saietto, a little iacket or coat with skirts.
Saio, a long side coat with skirts or slops. Saione, a great, long, side man's
coat. Saiuppi, a kind of sea crab or lobster. Sal, used for Sale. Look Sale.
Sala, a great hall. Also a dining chamber Sala di giustitia, a guild hall, a
court of justice, a sessions house. Sala regale, a Kings hall, a royal hall.
Salace, leacherous, wanton, lustful, saut as a bitch, hot in lust, much
inclined to leacherie. Salacita, leachery, lust, beastlines, sautnes of a bitch
or rather an instinct or provocation to leacherie. Salaconia, boasting joined
with vanity and pride. Salacone, a boaster who being in poverty will seem to
be rich, as we say a proud heart and a beggars purse. Saladino, a souldane or a
saladine. Salamandra, the serpent called a Salamander, a beast in fashion like
a lizard full of spots; which being in the fire it quenches it and is not
burned. Salamandri, certain fiery spirits which live and are nourished by the
element fire. Salamandria, as Salamandra. Salami, any kind of salt, pickled or
poudred meats or souse, namely bacon, sausages, martlemas beef, salt fish or
whatsoever both fish and flesh. Salamistra, as Salmistra. Salamoia, brine,
pickle or brackisnes, liquor to powder in. Salamora, Salomore, as Salamoia.
Salamuoia, Salamuora, as Salamoia. Salare, to salt, to powder, to pickle, to
souse or season with salt, to lay in brine, to corn with salt. Salariarare, to
hire, to wage, to stipend, to give pay or pension unto. Salario, a salarie,
wages, hire, stipend, pension or pay given to servants. Also a salter, one that
makes or sels salt or salt meats. Salassare, to let one blood. Salassatore, a
letter of blood. Salassetta, a lancet or fleame to let blood with. Salasso,
letting of blood or flebotomie. Salata, a salad of herbs or any thing else.
Salatina, a little dainty salade. Salatoia, a powdring tub. Salato, salt,
powdered, sowsed, pickled, brackish, salted. Salatuccia, a poor, silly salad.
Salatura, any kind of salting or brackishnes. Salce, a willow, withie or sallow
tree, an Osier. Also a flint stone. Salcetto, a grove or thicket of willowes or
osiers, a place planted with willowes. Salci, sallowes, willowes, ofiers.
Salciccia, any kind of sausage. Salcicciaro, a sausage maker. Salciccione, a
great sausage. Salciare, to underprop, to underset hops or vines with willow
poles. Salciatore, an vndersetter or vnderpropper of vines or hops. Salcietto,
as Salcetto. Salcio, as Salce. Salcizza, as Salciccia. Salcizza^o, as
Salcicciare. Salcizzone, as Salciccione. Saldamente, steadfastly, fast, firm.
Saldare, to fasten, to stay, to thicken, to settle, to fix, to pitch. Also to
stop or stanch blood. Also to solder metals. Also to confirm, to strengthen,
to heal, close or cure a sore, a cut or a wound. Saldare ferite, to heal,
cure or close a wound. Saldare metalli, to solder metals. Saldare il sangue,
to stanch blood. Saldare la gente, to settle, confirm or press people.
Saldaretta, as Saldatoio. Saldatoio, a goldsmiths borace box, that they use to
solder with. Saldatore, a solderer of metals. Saldatura, a settling, a
fastening, a soldring, a stanching, a closing or healing of a sore. Saldezza,
stedfastnes, firmnes, fastening. Saldo, fast, steadfast, firm, stiff, tough,
hard, fixed. Sta saldo, stand still, firm or fast. Sale, salt or seasoning.
Also mirth, pleasant wittines in words, merry conceits or witty grace in
speaking. wit, conceit, invention, pleasantnes. Also the hole of a wheel
wherein the axell tree goes. Also the maine sea or the Ocean. Also chambers or
halles. Sale amoniaco, a kind of salt that is medicinable. Sale di gemmo, a
kind of salt so called. Sale ascali, a kind of salt so called. Sale catino, a
kind of salt. Sale natico, idem. Sale elembroth, idem. Sale pietra, a kind of
stony salt. Sale radico, a kind of salt. Sale in banco, a mountibanke.
Salebroso, harsh, unpleasant, hard to understand. Saleggiare, to paue a floor
or a street. Also to be brackish, salt or brinish. Salera, a salt for a table.
Salerno, a kind of dainty wine so called. Saletta, a salt for a table.
Salettina, a little salt, a trenchard salt. Saliare, a princely costly
banquet. Salicare, to paue with stones. Also to plant with willowes, or to
stake about with willow poles. Salicastro, a willow pole or stake. Also a kind
of wild olive running upon willow trees. Salicato, paned. Also a pauement.
Also planted with willowes, or staked about with willow poles. Salicatore, a
pauier. Salice, as Salce. Also a flint or pible stone. Salicetto, as Salcetto.
Salicornia, a certain salt herb, which is a kind of kalie, some call it
sea-grape, and some knotted or iointed kalt. Saligare, as Salicare. Saligato,
as Salicato. Saligiare, as Salicare. Saligiato, as Salicato. Saligastro, as
Salicastro. Salimento, as Salica. Salina, a salt pit where salt is made. Also a
table salt. Salinaro, as Salinatore. Salinatore, a salter, or salt-maker.
Salinetta, a trenchard salt, or little salt. Salio, a kind of stone that
goldsmiths use to burnish gold with. it is good against sore and running eyes
but touching them. Salisatori, certain prophets or soothsayers that judged of
the event of things by the rising or swelling of men's limbs or members.
Saliscende, a rail or bar to stay horses from running, a door, a window, a
trapdore, or any thing that shuts and closes. a bar, a sparre, or stang
to bar a door. Also a step, or ascent of a pair of stairs. Also a threshold
of a door, or foote-step, or a foote-pace of a chimnie. Also a great pair of
stairs. Saliscendere, scendo, scesi, sceso, to rail in, to bar, to boult,
to stang, or to sparre. Also to ascend or step up a pair of stairs, or steps.
Salisceso, railed in, barred, boulted, stanged, spard, ascended, or stepped up
any steps. Salire, salgo, salsi, salito, to ascend, to mount, or climb up.
Salita, an ascent, a mounting, a climing up. Salitore, a mounter, an ascender,
a climer. Saliua, the spettle or water that comes from a man's mouth, used
also for juice. Saliuare, to spet, or gather spettle or clammie foam. Saliuera,
is properly among riders the plate whereat the players that hang in the mids
of a port are fastened. Saliuaria, an oylestone, or barbers whetstone be smeared
with oil or spettle. Saliuaro, clammie and thick like spettle. Saliuoso, full
of spettle or moistnes in the mouth, or that has the smack or taste of
spettle. Sallo, he knows or wots it, of Sapere. Sallo Dio, God he knows it.
Salma, a soame, a load, a burden, a charge, a freight. Also a man's body,
weight, or carcass. Also a kind of weight or measure. Salmandra, a
Salamander. Salmare, to lode, to burden, to freight, to charge. Salmarino, a
Salmon-troute, or Salmon-peale. Salmastra, salt, brackish, or brinish.
Salmatore, a loder, a burthner, a fraighter, a porter. Salmeggiare, to sing,
speak, write or compose Psalms. Salmeria, any carriage, loading, luggage, or
fraighting, namely such as Sumpters carry. Also all horses or Sumpters or
packhorses that carry packs or loades. Salmista, a psalmist, a composer or
singer of psalms. Also a psalter. Salmistra, a prating dame that will teach
and direct the rest. Salmo, a psalm, a song of thanksgiving and praise to
God, a psalm sung to the psalterie, or a song sung by the voice. Salmodia, a
singing or praying together on an instrument, a singing together of psalms.
Salmografo, a writer or composer of psalms. Salmoia, Salmora, as Salmoia.
Salmone, a fish called a Salmon, or a salmon peale. Salmonetto, a little salmon
peale, or a salmon trout. Salmitro, as Salnitro. Salnitro, salt-peeter to make
gunpowder with. Salnitroso, brackish, tasting or full of salt-peeter. Salona,
a great hall, or dining chamber. Also a great weight. Saloide, a hard substance
or body in form like to a bridge with three arches that vpholdeth the
ventricle or hollow of the brain. Salpa, a fish called stock fish or poor
John. Salpare, to way, or heave the ankors of a ship. Salpatore, a wayer or
hea^er of ankors. Salpe, Salpone, as Salpa. Salpego, a kind of worm or
serpent. Salsa, any kind of sauce or seasoning of meats. Also salted,
poudred, pickled, brinish or brackish. Also taken for a gash, a cut, a slash,
or a wound. Salsagine, any kind of salt, brackish, or brinish thing. Also
brimstone. Salsame, as Salame, or Salamoia. Salsamento, as Salame, or Salamoia.
Salsapariglia, the herb saxifrage. Salsare, as Salare. Salsa verde, green
sauce. Salsedine, saltnes, brackishnes. Salsezza, idem. Salsiccia, as
Salciccia. Salsicciaro, as Salcicciaro. Salsicciere, as Salcicciaro.
Salsiccione, as Salciccione. Salsiera, a salt for a board. Salsita, saltnes,
brackishnes. Salsiuo, salt, brinish, brackish. Salsizza, as Salciccia.
Salsizzaro, as Salcicciaro. Salsizzone, as Salciccione. Salso, as Salato, or
Salsiuo. Also witty, sharp, conceited, pleasant, or quick-spoken and with a
grace. Salsume, as Salame. Saltabellare, as Saltellare. Saltabello, a kind of
hopping, or skipping dance. Salta in banco, a mountibanke. Saltamartino, a
foolish gull or ninnie that one may cause to do any thing. Saltambarco, a kind
of garment made of haire-cloth for mariners, a shepherds frock or cloak. Also
a soldiers cassock or mandilion, or a horsemans coat. Saltante, leaping,
iumping, skipping, hopping or springing. Also quicksilver, according to
alchimists phrases. Saltare, to leap, to iump, to skip, to hop, to prance, to
bound, to dance, to trip, to vault, to tumble, to spring. Also to pant and
beat. Also to ride or leap on another as males do on the females in the act
of generation. Saltarelle, grasshoppers. Saltarelli, the iacks of a pair of
virginals. Saltarello, a trick in dancing. Also a dance or a little leap.
Saltarino, a dancer, a tumbler, a leaper, a vaulter, a skipper, a iumper, a
hopper. Saltatione, a leaping, a tumbling. Saltatore, as Saltarino. Saltatoria,
the art of leaping. Saltellare, as Saltare. Saltellatore, as Saltarino.
Saltello, as Saltetto. Saltellone, hoppingly, skippingly, leaping. Salterello,
as Saltetto. Salterio, an instrument of music like a harp of ten strings,
but more pleasant, called a shalme or psaltery to play holy hymns upon, and
to sing unto. Also a veil that nuns use to wear over their heads. Also a
psalter or psalm book. Saltero, as Salterio. Saltetto, a little leap, iumpe,
skip, hoppe, bound, dance, prance, tumbling or vaulting trick, a sault. Salti
aggroppati, Look Un passo e salta. Salticchiare, as Saltare. Salticchiatore,
as Saltarino. Salticchio, as Saltetto. Salto, a leap, a skip, a hoppe, a
iumpe, a prancing, a bound, a sault. Also a laune in a park, a purleie, a
grove, a thicket, or a shadie place. Also a shaking or shiuering of some member
of the body. Salto mortale, a summer sault, or as some of our vaulters call it
the pomado. Saltuzzo, a goldsmiths tool. Salua, a saving, preserving, keeping
or sparing, an exception* also a volie or tire of ordinance. Salua danaio, a
place or chest to keep money in, a merchants counter. Salua guardia, as Salua
robba. Salua d'artegliera, a volie ortyre of shot or ordinance. Saluaggina, any
kind of venison or wild beast or foul. Saluaggiume, as Saluaggina. Salua la
signoria vostra, saving, save, or excepting your lordship or worship.
Saluamento, safegarde, safety, shelter, or security. Saluare, to save, to
escape, to secure, to safe-garde, to keep, to defend, to preserve, to spare,
to except. Saluarobba, a warderobe, a cupboorde, a press, a lardrie, a
pastrie, a pantrie, a shelfe, a buttrie, or such like thing to keep things in.
Saluatella, a vain which being a branch springing out of Cephalica in the
outside of the cubite, at length stretches above the wrist and extreme part of
the hand, between the little finger and the ring finger. Saluaticare, to make
or become wild, savage, strange, or rustike. Saluaticcina, any kind of
venison or wild game gotten by hunting or fowling, all manner of wild meat.
Saluatichezza, wildenes, sauagenes, rudenes, strangenes. Saluatichetto, somewhat
peevish, strange, wild, rude, savage, or fond, as Seluaggio. Saluatico, wild,
savage, untamed, unwieldy, strange, rude, cursed, froward, as Seluaggio.
Saluatione, salvation, safety, saving. Saluatore, a savior. Salubre,
healthful, wholesome, profitable, comfortable. Salubrita, healthfulnes,
wholesomenes, comfort, safeguard, health. Salve, used for all-haile, god speed,
or god save you. Saluezza, safety, custody, assurance. Saluia, the herb
sage. Saluia romana, costemarie, or alecoste. Saluiata, a kind of sauce or
meat made of sage. Saluietta, a napking, a drinking cloth. Salumi, as Salame.
Saluo, safe, secure, saved, sure, whole, sound, in good case, without harm or
danger, not broken. Also except, saving, reserving the truth. Saluo che, except
that, saving that. Saluo il vero, the truth reserved, saving the truth. Saluo
condotto, a passeporte, a conuoie, a safe-conduit. Saluo se, except that,
saving. Saluum me fac, used in common speech for ready money, or money in
hand. Salutare, to greet, to salute, to recommend, to all-haile, to bid good
morrow or god speed, to do reverence, to send commendations. also healthy or
healthful, wholesome, comfortable. Salutatione, as Saluto. Salute, salvation,
health, safety, the good estate of a man's life, saving health. Saluteuole, as
Salubre. Salutifero, as Salubre. Saluto, a greeting, a saluting, a salutation,
a reco^mending, an all-haile, a bidding god speed, good morrow or good even.
Sambuca, a kind of horn pipe or dulcimer. Also an engine of war to battre
walls. Sambucaro, an elder tree. Sambucato, a green color called elder tree
color. Sambuco, the elder tree. also a pipe made of elder. Sambugo, as
Sambuco. Samburchio, a kind of pudding. Sambuzzio, a kind of pudding. Samia,
a kind of medicament or oyntement. Samina, as Sammina. Samio, a white stone
good to polish gold. Also made of earth. Samito, a kind of sleaue, filosell,
feret or course silk stuff. Sammartina, a kind of red toade called a land
toade. Samolo, the marrish whortes or fenne-berries. Sammina, in latin
Sagmina, the herb Verueine. Also grass plucked up with earth, that ambassadors
of Rome did use. Sampogna, a bagge-pipe, an oten-pipe. Also a bell hanged about
sheep or goats, a lowe-bell. Sampognatta, as Sampogna. San, as Sano, as
Santo, used before consonants. Sanabile, curable, that may be cured, recovered
or healed. Sanamente, soundly, healthfully, wisely, considerately. Sanamento, a
healing or a curing. Sanamunda, herb Benet, Sanamunda or Auens. Sanare, to
cure, to heal, to make whole and sound. Sancello, a kind of pudding. Sancito,
ordained, decreed, established, confirmed, or ratified by law. Sancresci, as
Sancresci in mano. San cresci in mano, used for a man's prick, because it
grows in ones hand. Sancresci in valle, used for a man's prick because it
rises in a hollow cave. Sandado, Sandalo, a kind of thin sandall, or
sarcenet. Also a kind of tree. Sandaletti, little sandals, labels or pendents
of taffeta-sarcenet. Sandalide, a kind of date or palm tree. Sandalo, Look
Pezzola. Also a kind of medicinable wood in India, which some take to be a
date or palm. Sandaracca, a bright red color used of painters, and found in
mines of gold and silver, some call it red arsenike, or patis red: there is
another kind thereof made of ceruse burned. Also a kind of burning stone.
Also a kind of gum. Also a kind of honie-suckle having a taste of honey and
wax together. Sandarlo cedrino, a kind of perfume, or sweet gum. Sandas^o, a
kind of precious stone having golden drops in it. Sandastrico, a kind of
crystal having within it golden drops shining like fire. Sandice, patisered
or arsenike, a kind of stone, or color made of ceruse and red okre burned
together. Sandino, as Sandice. Sandisir, used for a name of disgrace. Sandolo,
a little boat, wherrie, skallop or cockboate. Sandonico, a kind of herb
which kills beasts. Sandraccio, a foolish ignorant gull or ninnie. Sangallo,
buckrom cloth. San giouanni bocca d'oro, taken for a man's or woman's priuities.
Sangu, the herb sanikle. Saguaccio, filthy clods of gore blood. Sangue, any
kind of blood. Also a kindred, a stock, or parentage, a race or lineall
descent. It is also taken for life, vigor, force, or strength. Sanguettola, as
Sanguisuga. Sanguigne, a kind of red peaches. Sanguigno, sanguine, bloody,
red, or bloudshotten. Also having blood, blouddie or full of blood.
Sanguinaccio, goare or filthy cloddes of blood. Also a pudding made of blood.
Sanguinare, to blood, to bleed, to stain or sprinkle with blood.
Sanguinaria, swine grass, knot-grasse, or bloudwoort. Sanguinella, as
Sanguinaria. Sanguinello, Sanguigno, as Corniolo. Sanguineo, as Sanguigno.
Sanguineruolo, a barble fish. Sanguinita, consanguinitie, alliance, kindred,
blood. Sanguinolente, bloody, full of blood, merciles. Sanguinoso, bloody,
cruel, fell, full of blood, goarie, bloudthirstie, merciless, sanguine, red,
ruddie, high colored. Sanguisorba, the herb burnet or pimpernell. Sanguisuga,
a horse-leach. Also a bloud-sucker. Sanicula, herb sanicle, prattling parnell,
or bears ear. Sanie, corrupt or mattred blood squized out of a sore. Sanioso,
matterie, bloody, beraide with corrupt blood or matter. Sanio, a kind of
marble stone. Sanita, health, soundnes, good stay of the body, of the wit and
memory. Sannare, to take, catch, or scaze on with t^^kes. Sanne, the t^^kes of
a bore or other wild beast. Sannicola, as Sannicula. Sanno, they know, wot, or
can. Sano, sound in health, healthie, wholesome, healthful, good, comfortable,
advised. Sano e galiardo, safe, lusty, strong, in good plight. Sano e saluo,
safe and sound, in good health. Sano e di buona voglia, safe and merry,
blithe and wanton. Sansuga, as Sanguisuga. Santa, used for Sanita. Santamente,
saint-like, holilie. Santa Nafissa, the name of a woman saint who is the
advocate of whoores and harlots. Santalo, a kind of stone called a sanders.
Santarello, as Santoccio. Santerna, solder wherewith gold is soldered. Santi,
saints, holy, hallowes. Santificare, to sanctify, to hallow. Santificatore, a
sanctifier, a hallower. Santificatione, sanctification, sanctifying, hallowing.
Santimonia, as Santita. Santita, sanctity, holiness, devotion, holidome,
religion, deuoutnes, honesty. Santo, holy, saint, sacred, inuio^^^^le, pure,
vncorrupt, spotless, devout, honest, of entire life. Also a saint. Santoccio,
a simple devout man, a puritan, a precisian, a little saint. Also a godfather.
Santola, a godmother. Santolina, lauender cotton, or field cypres. Santolo, a
godfather. Santonico, a kind of wormwood. Santuario, a sanctuary, a holy
privileged place, a church, a chapple. Santuccio, as Santoccio. Santuzza, a
foolish, simple, precise, fained, holy woman. Sanuro, a fish called in latin
Alphesta. Sanza, as Senza. Sanza che, except that, besides that, saving tha^,
but that. Sanzaro, a messenger, a purseuant, a broker. Sanzaria, the office or
trade of a broker, or of a purseuant. Saorna, balast for ships. Also a common
sink: also the pumpe of a ship. Saornare, to balast a ship. Also to pumpe a
ship. Sapa, a kind of sodden wine or cute, used also for a kind of sauce.
Sapadore, a sillibubbe made of wine and milk. Saperda, a kind of shellfish
that has a very stinking savor. Sapere, so, seppi, saputo, to know, to wot,
to wise, to kenne, to ma^e, to be wise, to have a good wit, to understand
and perceive well, to be perfect in, to remember. Also to taste, to smell, to
smacke, to savor. Also knowledge, wit, wisdom, warines, foresight,
remembrance, heed, discretion, science, skill. Also to grieve, to fecle, to
conceit. Saputo, known, wotted, wist, kend, been able, remembered, tasted,
smelt, smackt. Also a wise, witty, skillful, wary, or discret man. also
grieved, felt, conc^^ted Saper a mente, to know by rote or heart. Saper been,
to know or wot, or ken perf^ctly. Sapere di muschio, to smell or sent of
musk. Saper di buono, to smell or taste well. Saper grado, to kon thanks, to
acknowledge thanks. Saper male, to grieve, to condole or feel sorrow, to know
ill, to smell or taste ill. Sapesmo, specie d'argomento. Saphena, a vein
running above the inner ankle and upon the foot toward the toes, especially the
great toe, where it is diversely bestowed. Saphici, a verse called saphike
verses. Sapiente, wise, sapient, witty, sage, wary, prudent, discreet,
skillful. Sapientia, wisdom, sapience, prudence, warines, wit, discretion,
knowledge of things divine and human. Sapientipotente, mighty in wisdom.
Saponale, an herb with a stalk like a bean, and a leaf like Plantaine.
Saponare, to soap, to lather, to wash in soap. Saponaria, an herb called
Struttie or Sopewoort or Crowsope or wild Rose campion. Also a sope-house.
Saponaro, a sope-maker, a soper. Saponaccio, sudge or sopie water: filthy
soap. Saponata, a soping, a lathring, a washing in soap. Also a flim-flam tale.
a gudgeon given to one. Sapone, soap to wash with. Saponetti, soap bals,
washing bals, such as barbers use. Sapore, a smacke, a savor, a taste, a sm^ll
an inward feeling. Also a sauce or taste that makes the meat to taste well.
Saporetti, pretty, dainty kinds of sauces. Sapori, as Saporetti. Saporire,
risco, rito, to smacke, to taste, to savor, to season, to give a taste unto.
Saporito, smackt, tasted, sauored, se^soned or given a taste unto. also
sauorie, well tasting, tarte, smacking. Saporitamente, sauourly, smackingly,
tastingly, hungerly. Saporosita, sauouring or savor. Saporoso, as Saporito.
Sappia, that I or he may know. Saputa, witting or knowledge. Sapuro* Look
Sapere. Sara, he or she shall be. Saraca, a kind of fish called a sprat. Some
take it to be the pilcher. Saracella, a kind of foul or bird. Saracena, goats
rue or Italian fitch. Saracino, a saracine, a sarcen, a blacke-moore.
Saracinesca, a purculleise over a gate. also a kind of black storke.
Saracinesco, saracin-like, barbarous. Sarba, stock fish. Sarcella, a kind of
foul or bird. Sarchia, a wedding hook or a sickle. Also a rake. Sarchiare, to
weed out with a sickle. Also to pare or to rake. Sarchiatore, a weeder, a
raker, a parer. Sarchero, a weeding hook. Also a weeder. Sarchiello, a weeding
hook or a sickle. Sarchio, as Sarchia. Sarcione, a stone of a carnation
color. Sarcire, to patch, to mend, to repair, to cobble, to clout, to make
whole again, to recompense. Sarcocolla, a gum of a tree in Persia like
incense. Sarcoma, a bunch of flesh in ones nose. Sarcorago, a stone that the
Egyptia^s wont to make tumbes of which in forty days will consume a body to
ashes all saving the teeth. Also as Asio. Sarda, as Sardella. Also a kind of
red soft precious stone much used in seals. Some take it to be the Onix or
Corneoll. Sardanella, as Sardella. Sardella, a little pickled or salt fish like
an anchoua, a sprat or a pilcher, called a sardell or sardine. Sardina,
Sardone, as Sardella. Sardio, an Onix or Corneoll stone. Sardona, an herb like
Smallage, which being bitten causes great laughing and grinning, whereupon
follows death. Sardonico riso, a grinning or laughing without cause, the end
whereof is sorrowful. Sardonica, as Sardona. Sardonio, a kind of stone
resembling in the upper end a man's nail, underneath of the color of the fish
Sarda, called a Sardonix. Sarebbe may, good lord, may it be, is it possible.
Sargalla, a kind of drug. Sarge, curteins for beds. Also serges. Sargia, the
stuff we call say or serge. Also a curtein for a bed. Sargiero, a weauer of
serge or say. Sargietta, a little curtein, fine serge or thin say. Sargo, a
kind of fish so called in Rome, in latin Sargus. Sargoni, a kind of vermin or
worm. some take them to be bristles or stings. Sari, an herb growing in
waters, having a hard root necessary for smiths. Sarissa, a spear, a
iauelin, a forest bill, a long staff with a pike in the end. Sarmenti, twigs,
sprigs, buds or young branches of vines or other trees. Sarmentina, saracens
herb. Also a frail made of twigs or sprigs. Sarpa, a tool to pull out teeth
with Also a vine when it is cut or shred. Sarpare, to pull, to draw, to tug, to
tow, to snatch or drag out. also to cleanse or make very clean, to prune
trees. Sarpatore, a puller, a drawer, a tugger or a dragger, a cleanser or
pruner of trees. Sarpare l'ancore, to weigh or pull up the ankors of a ship.
Sarracinesca, as Saracinesca. Sarta, a woman tailer. Sartagna, as Currucula.
Sarte, the tacklings, cordage, cords or shrouds of a ship. Sartella, a kind of
wild ducke or mallard. Sarto, Sartore, a man tailer. Sartoria, a tailers trade,
shop or street. Sartorino, a little dapper, pretty tailor. Sarza, as Sargia.
Sassafrago, as Sassifraga. Sassare, to stone, to hit with stones. Sassaria, a
quarrie of stones. Sassata, a blow with a stone, a stones cast. Sassaiuola, a
quarrie of stones, a stones cast, a blow with a stone. Sassatile, stony,
rugged, cragged, grettie, of the nature of stones, living among stones or
gravel. Sassetto, a little stone. Sassi, all manner of stones. Sassifraga, the
herb Saxifrage, growing in stony places, and is very good against the stone.
some take it for Goats beard, Star of Jerusalem, Noone-tide or Joseph's flower.
Sassifrago, that breaks stones. Sassifrica, as Sassifraga. Sasso, any kind of
stone. Also a rock, a clif or a crag. Sassolini, little stones or pibble
stones. Sassoso, stony, full of stones, rugged, flintie, grettie, full of
rocks or growing in stony places. Satana, Satanasso, a tempter, a seducer,
the devil, satan, an adversary, an enemy to God. Satellito, a halbardier, a
yeoman of a Princes guard, one retained to guard a man's person. Also a
sergeant, a catch-pole, one that attacheth. Satiabile, satiable, that may be
satisfide. Satiare, to satiate, to glut, to gorge, to satisfy, to fill with
meat, to content. Satiatura, a glutting, a gorging, a full feeding. Satieta,
satietie, content, glutting, cloying, plenty, fulness, so much as one desires.
also wearines, tediousnes or lothsemnes. Satieuole, as Satiabile. Also loathsome
or queasie. Satieuolezza, as Satieta. Satino cagnoletto, a smooth, well-fed,
dainty little dog. Satio, satiate, glutted, gorged, full, satisfide, full fed,
contented. Satira, a satire, a kind of poem rebuking evils and abuses, an
inuectiue, that regards no person. Satireggiare, to write satyrs, to inueigh
sharply. Satiriasi, Satiriasmo, Tentigine, the standing of a man's yard,
lust-pride, pricke-pride or priapisme. Satirico, satiricall, bitter, sharp,
inueighing with speeches. Satirione, the herb Satyrion. Satirisi, as
Satiriasi. Satiro, a satyr, a man that is half a man and half a goat. Also
the herb Satyrion. Satisfare, to satisfy, to please, to content, to pay
that one has lent, to make satisfaction. Satisfatto, satisfide, pleased,
content. Satisfattione, satisfaction, pleasing, content, a purging, an
excusing. Satollare, as Satiare. Satollo, as Satio. Satore, a father, a maker,
a begetter, a creator, a planter, a setter. Satoro, as Satio. Satraperia, the
order, state, or profession of bragging foolish captains. Also a government.
Satrapia, a province, a county, a duchy, a lieuetenantship. Satrapo, a
chieftaine, or captain, taken rather in bad then good part, a governor or
president of a country, a great ruler, a peer of a realm. Sattino, the silk
stuff we call satin. also a kind of smooth little dog. Saturare, as Satiare.
Satureia, the herb wintersauorie. Saturita, as Satieta. Saturnale, as
Saturnino. Saturnino, Saturnine, Saturnall, of the nature of Saturn. Also
certain games used among the pagans. Saturno, one of the planets called
Saturn. Also the metal lead according to alchimists. Saturo, as Satio.
Sauatta, an old broken shoe. Sauattaro, a cobbler, a souter, a mender of old
shoes. Sauattare, to cobble, to mend, or sout old shoes. Sauattino, as
Sauataro. Sauere, as Sapere. Sauiezza, as Sapientia. Sauina, the shrub sauine.
Sauinella, the shrub sauine. Sauino, a duskie stone, which having any stone put
to it waxes bright. Sauio, as Sapiente. Sauiolino, pretty wise, wary, or
witty. Also nice, coy, puling, selfconceited, humorous. Sauiolo, as Sauiolino.
Sauiuzzo, silly wise. Sauonaccio, as Saponaccio. Sauonare, as Saponare.
Sauonaro, as Saponaro. Sauonata, as Saponata. Sauone, as Sapone. Sauonetti, as
Saponetti. Sauorare, as Saporire. Sauore, as Sapore. Sauoretti, as Saporetti.
Sauorire, as Saporire. Sauorito, as Saporito. Sauoroso, as Saporoso. Sauora,
course stony gravel, or sand, ballast or lastage for ships. Sauoreggia,
winter-sauorie. Sauorella, gravel or sand. Also winter-sauorie. Sauoreggiare,
as Saporire. Sauorna, as Sanora. Saura, as Stellione. Sauretto, a pretty
sorell nag. Sauro, the sorell color of a horse. Also a kind of water serpent.
Sauro metallino, a kind of color between a roane and a sorell. Sauro
affocato, a bright sorell. Sauro scuro, a dark sorell. Sbacciellare, to
vnshale, to vngraine, or take out of the cods, as peason and beans. Sbacco,
Gods-plentie, store, enough, to spare, hould-bellie-hould. Look A sbacco.
Sbadacchiare, to gape, to yaune for want of sleep, to loiter. Sbadacchiamento,
a gaping, a yauning, a gasping, a loitring. Sbadagliare, as Sbadacchiare. Also
to gag ones mouth. Sbadaglio, a gag for ones mouth to let him from speaking.
Sbadare, as Sbadacchiare. Sbadigliare, as Sbadacchiare. Sbadigliamento, as
Sbadacchiamento. Sbadigliacciare, as Sbadacchiare. Sbadiglioso, drouzie,
gaping, or yauning for want of sleep. Sbagiaffare, to chat, to prate, to
prattle, to babble, to tattle, to cog, to foist. Sbagiaffone, a chatter, a
prater, a pratler, a babbler, a tatler, a cogger, a foister. Sbagliaffone, as
Sbagiaffone. Sbaiaffare, as Sbagiaffare. Sbaiaffone, as Sbagiaffone.
Sbalancare, as Sbarrare. Sbalcio, the name of an honorable kind of habit that
the ladies of Venice were wont to wear. Sbalestrare, to tell incredible tales,
to thunder out lies, to lie for the whet-stone. Sbaligiare, as Sualigiare.
Sballare, to vnpack, to unload, to discharge any packs. Sbalordire, disco,
dito, as Disballordire. Sbalzare, to bound or rebound as a ball or a horse, to
leap forth, to skip away, to skud out, to burst, to stream or gush ^^t, to
hop, to skip, to bounze. Sbalzo, a bound or rebound of a ball, a bound, a
leap, a hop, a skip, a bounze, a skudding away in haste, a sudden gushing,
bursting or streaming forth. Also an abisse, a precipice, a downe-fall, a crag,
a cliffe, a rock, a steep. Also a kind of roll, or rouler, that women use to
wear on their heads under their quoifes in Italy. Sbanacerare, as
Sbadacchiare. Sbancare, to remove, or unhorse from ones seat, standing or
place, to vnbench. Sbandare, to vnbar, to open wide, to scatter, to disseuer,
to divide. Sbandatamente, scattringly, disorderly, confusedly, in forlorn
manner. Sbandeggiare, to banish, to exile, to publish, to cry or proclaim.
Sbandeggiamento, a banishment, an exile, a proclamation. Sbandeggiatore, a
proclaimer, a public crier. Sbandire, disco, dito, as Sbandeggiare. Sbandito,
exiled, banished, proclaimed. Sbanditore, as Sbandeggiatore. Sbaragliare, to
ruin, to vnbar, to hauock, to spoil, to destroy, to confound, to subvert, to
offer violence, to disorder, to scatter. Sbaraglio, ruin, hauock, destruction,
spoil, confusion, hurlieburlie. Look A sbaraglio. Sbaraglino, a game at
tables like irish-game, or lurch. Sbarattare, as Sbaragliare. Sbarbagliare, as
Sbaragliare. Sbarbare, as Sbarbicare, to vnbeard, to cut off ones beard.
Sbarbato, beardlesse, vnbearded, without a beard. Sbarbazzare, as Sbarbagliare.
Sbarbicare, to loosen, extirp, or pluck up by the roots. Sbarbocciata, a
thump, a blow, a bang, a rap. Sbarbozzare, to refrain, to restrain, to
bridle. Sbarcare, to vnship, to disbarke, to land. Sbarcamento, an vnshipping,
a disbarking, a landing. Sbarcata, as Sbarcamento. Sbardellare, as Sbaragliare.
Also to stare or glote with ones eyes. Sbardellatamente, confusedly, ruinously,
carelessly, in a hurlyburlie. Sbarleffare, to mark, skarre, gash, or cut over
the face. Also to make a mouth in mockery. Sbarleffato, marked, cut, or gasht
over the face, disfigured ones mouth. Sbarleffo, a cut, a mark, a hurt, a
skarre or gash over the face, a mouthing, or looking staringlie. Sbarosole, a
kind of bird. Sbarra, a bar, a barriers, an enclosure of poles or stakes, an
enchaining, a yate, or gate, or style over a hedge, a barring, or a hindrance.
Also a bar borne in some cotes of arms. Sbarragliare, as Sbaragliare.
Sbarraglio, as Sbaraglio. Sbarraglino, as Sbaraglino. Sbarrare, to vnbarre, or
open wide, to riue, or disseuer. Also to bar or cross over with a bar as
some cotes of armorie are. Sbarrattare, to vnbarre, to disorder, to wrack, to
hauock, to confound, to scatter. Sbarratatamente, confusedly, straggling,
disorderly, out of rank. Sbasire, sisco, sito, to faint, to swaune, to be
ready to yield the ghost up. Sbassare, to abase, to suppress, to cast down.
Also to stop. Also to pull down. Sbastare, to vnpacke, to vnsaddle a cariers
horse. also to pare, to shave down. Sbattere, batto, battei, battuto, to
trample, to cross, or vex, to dash, to beat, to shake, to rouse, to strike,
to smite, to tugge, to touze, to toss, to turmoile, to confound, to affright,
to tumble, to drive away, to thrash, to wetherbeate. Sbattuto, trampled,
crossed, vexed, dashed, beaten, shaken, rouzed, stricken, tugged, touzed, tossed,
turmo^led, confounded, affrighted, tumbled, driven away in a quandarie,
thrashed, weatherbeaten, weathershaken. Sbattezzare, to unchristian, to forget
ones proper name. Sbattimento, a beating, a shaking, a rouzing, a tossing, a
trampling, a thrashing, a confusion, a tugging, a vexing, a turmoile, a
dashing, a tumbling. Sbattitura, as Sbattimento. Also a bursting of a horses
hoof. Sbauare, to slauer, or some at the mouth. Sbauigliare, as Sbadagliare.
Sbazzigante, foolish, fond, lavish, skipping, froward. Sbeffare, as Beffare.
Sbeffamento, as Beffa, as Burla. Sbeffeggiare, as Beffare. Sbeffeggiatore, as
Beffatore. Sbellettare, to bedaub or paint as women do their faces* also to
wash away painting. Sbembrare, as Sbranare. Sberettare, to vncap, to put off
hat or cap, to greet or salute with courtesy. Sberettate, cappings, hattings,
courtesies, greetings. Sberleffare, as Sbarleffare. Sberleffo, as Sbarleffo.
Sberlingaccia, as Berghinella. Sberlingacciare, as Berghinellare. Sbernia, a
kind of upper garment which friars use to wear, an Irish rugge or mantle, a
gabardine. Sberrettare, as Sberettare. Sbeuacchiare, to bibbe, to quaffe, to
tipple, to drink, to swill, to hante tauerns. Sbeuazzare, as Sbeuacchiare.
Sbeuecchiare, as Sbeuacchiare. Sbeuecchiatore, a bibber, a quaffer, a tippler,
a drunkard, an alchouse knight. Sbiacca, as Biacca. Sbiaccare, as Biaccare.
Sbiaccamento, a daubing or painting with white. Sbiadare, to make pale, white,
wanne, or sallow colored. Also to deprive of prouender. Sbiadato, made pale,
wanne, or sallowe. Also vnprouendred, unfed, bare, lean. Also an azure or
bright sky color. Sbiagio, Sbiaso, byas, sideline, aslope, awry, bending
wise. Sbiancheggiare, to whiten, or bedaube with white. Sbiancido, pale, wan,
whitish, leaden color. Also straw-colour. Sbiauare, as Sbiadare. Sbiauato, as
Sbiadato. Also an azure or bright sky color. Sbiauo, as Sbiancido. Sbiettare,
to slip, to slide, to glide, to glib. Sbigottire, tisco, tito, to amaze, to
affright, to astonish, to terrify, to daunt, to amate, to confound.
Sbigottito, amazed, affrighted, astonished, terrified, danted, mated.
Sbigottimento, amazement, fright, terror, astonishment, fear. Sbirraglia, the
crew, company, or order of base catchpoles or sergeants. Sbirraria, Sbirreria,
as Sbirraglia. Sbirria cauallo, marshals, satelites, or sergeants on
horseback. Sbirro, a catchpole, a sergeant, a varlet, a marshall, one that
does arrest men. Sbisao, a Venetian word, gashed, or marked over the face as
slaves be. Sbizzarrire, risco, rito, to make or become wise, to vnfantastike, to
obtain ones earnest longing or humorous fancy, to obtain ones longing by
doing some mad pranke or other. Sblisciare, as Sblizzigare. Sblizzigare, to
slip, to slide, or glide upon the ice. Sboccaggine, a mouthing or falling into
the sea of a river. Also impudency, or shamelessness in speaking. Sboccare, to
mouth or fall into the sea as a river does. Sboccato, mouthed, or fallen into
the sea as a river does. Also a shameless fellow, one that will speak and utter
whatsoever comes in his mouth. Also a horse that is false or ouer-hard mouthed.
Sbocconcellare, to mince it daintily, to bride it, to morsel it. Sbollare, to
unseal, to vnstampe, to vnbrand, to vnmarke. Sbollarsi, to be vnplaistred, to
have plasters pulled off from sores. Sbolzonata, a blow or hurt with a bolt, or
arrow. Also a thumpe, a blow, or a stripe. Sbombardare, to shoot off peals of
guns, to bombard. Sbombardamento, a shooting off, or a peale of ordinance and
guns. Sborare, to burst out with violence as water and fire does when it is
kept in by force, to wreake or vent any grief or anger, to unburden ones
anger, to vomit, to spue or cast out, to speak despightfully, and utter
whatsoever one knows. Sborfate, to blow and puff as one does in the water.
Sborrare, as Sborare. Also to full or sheare clothes. Also as Suertare.
Sborratore, a fuller of cloth, a cloth fuller. Also the place of the mill where
the meal being ground falls out. Sborsare, to disburse, to lay out money, to
defraie. Sborsamento, a disbursing, a defraying, a laying out of money.
Sboscare, to ^op trees, to cut down wood or branches, to fell wood, to
vnwoode, to rouse a dear, or drive out of a wood. Sboscatore, a wood-feller,
a cutter down of trees. Sbottare, to empty buts, or any vessels. Also to
swell as a toade. Sbottoneggiare, as Bottoneggiare. Sbozzare, to bungle, or
sluber any work. Sbozzi, bodges, or bunger-like works. Sbracare, to vnbreech,
to make bare. Also to vnstocke any piece. Sbracato, breechlesse, opentaild,
bare arst, naked, shameless. Sbracatamente, as Alla Sbracata. Sbracata, Alla
sbracata, carelessly, wantonly, bare-arst, shamelesly, lauishly, with breeches
down. Sbracciata, a kind of sleeueles garment. Also open or without arms.
Sbraciare, to spend lauishly, or unthriftily, to unbrace. Also to stir up a
fire that is raked up. Sbracciarsi, to unbrace ones self. Sbracerie,
unthriftiness, lauishings, riotous spendings. Also vnbracings. Sbragiare, to put
out the embers or fire. Also to stalk it, to go stately or on tiptoes.
Sbragliare, to rail aloude, to scolde, to braule, to chide, to exclaim.
Sbramare, to have or fill ones longing or desires. Sbranare, to dismember, to
carue, to tear in pieces, to cut up, to slaughter, to mangle. Sbrancamento, a
pulling, halling, tearing, or renting with claws. Sbrancare, to unwrap, to
vntangle, to rid or free from any paws or claws, to vnclinch. Sbrasciare, to
boaste, to brag, to crake, to swagger as one would kill god almighty.
Sbrasgiare, as Sbragiare. Sbrastiare, as Sbragliare. Sbrattare, to make clean,
to rid away, to dress up a house. Sbrauo, a swash-buckler, a swaggrer, a
hackster, a cutter, a tistitostie. Sbrazzare, to unbrace, to open, to disclose.
Sbriccare, to cut it out, to riote, to hacke or swash as ruffians, knaves, or
rascals and sergeants do. Sbriccaria, cutting, hacking, swashing, all manner of
riote or villainy, swashing or swaggring tricks. Sbricchi, hackesters,
swash-bucklers, riotous rascals, ruffianly villains, swaggrers. Sbriccone, a
crafty, false, riotous, cosening, conicatching companion. Sbricciare, as
Sbrisciare. Sbrigare, to rid, to free, to unwrap, to disintangle, to unfold
from out any trouble. Sbrigamento, a ridding, a clearing or freeing from
troubles. Sbrigli, a play called nine pins or keeles or skailes. Sbrigliare, to
unbridle, to vnsnaffle, to set free. Sbrigliata, a twing, a pluck or twitch
given with a bridle unto a horse by his rider. Sbrignare, to creep or sneake
secretly. Sbrisciare, to slip, to slide, to glide as upon use, to craule, to
creep, to glib. Also to sheare or full cloth. Sbrisciatore, a cloth-worker.
also a slider upon the yse. Sbroccare, to vnstud any thing, to peep out as
studs heads. to loosen as one does a nail. Sbrocco, a stub, a stake, a rafter
or a single quarter of timber. Sbrogliare, to vnsnare, to vnnet, to
disintangle, to free, to clear, to rid. Sbroffare, to blow, to puff, to
huffe, to snuff, to pante, to breath, to tuffe as a cat. Also to threaten, to
chafe, to fret angerly. also to sprinkle, to dash, to bedeaw Sbruffa, a
sprinkling, a dashing, a bedeawing, a blowing, a puffing, a huffing, a
snuffing, a panting, a breathing, a tuffing, a chafing, a fretting, a
threatening. Sbruffare, as Sbroffare. Sbruffolare, as Sbroffare. Sbucare, to
peep as out of a hole, to bore or piercefull of holes. to vnden or rouse a
dear, to starte a hare, to spring a partridge, to vnnest, to vnhole.
Sbucciare, as Sbucare. Also to pare or shave or vnbarke or vnrinde trees. Also
to rid, to avoid or make clean. Sbucinare, as Bucinare. Sbudellare, to panch,
to vnbowell, to vngut, to kill and slaie. Sbudellatamente, as we say with heart
and liver or with all the guts. Sbuffare, as Sbroffare. Sbuffante, blowing,
puffing, huffing, snuffing, panting, breathing, tuffing as a cat, chafing,
fretting. Also sprinkling, dashing, bedeawing. Sbuffoneggiare, as
Buffoneggiare. Sbusare, as Sbucare. Also to make hollow. Sbuso, hollow, void,
concaue, full of holes. Sbutta fattore, a foolish factor, a petisogger, a
pickthanke knave, a drudge. Scabbia, a scab, a mangines, a scurffe, an itch or
tetter, a disease in a horse called the scuruie. Scabbiosa, Scabiosa, a weed
called scuruie grass, or scabious. Scabbioso, scabbie, mangie, scuruie,
itching, rude, rugged, grettie, rough, rustie, craggie, filthy. Scabello, a
stool, a foot stool or any little stool. Scabello, d'appoggio, a leaning
stool, a stool with a back. Scabinella, the herb scabious or scuruie
grass. Scabro, rude, rough, craggie, rugged, grettie, rustie. Also a fly
breeding on the carrion of a horse. Scabrosita, roughnes, rudenes, ruggednes,
rustines. Scabroso, as Scabro, Scacaccazzare, as Scacazzare. Scaccario, a
Princes exchequer. Also a checker boorde. Scacazzare, to beraie, to becacke, to
beshite. to blur, to blot, to defile. Scacazzature, blurs, blots, beshitings.
Scacarnicolo, a cheater, a shifter, a conicatcher. Scaccheggiare, to checkie a
cote of arms Also to play at chesse. Scacchi, the chesse-men to play at chesse
with. Also checkie in armorie. Scacchiere, a check-boord or a checker, a
chesse-boord. Scaccia, the mouth of a bit called a scache. Scacciapensiere, a
kind of musical instrument. Scacciare, to expel, to chase, to drive or hunt
away. Also as Sgarare. Scacciamento, an expelling, a chasing or driving away.
Scacciata, as Scacciamento. Scacciatore, a chaser, a drouer, a hunter, an
expeller. Scacco, Scaco, a chesse-boord, a checker. Also a child's rattle. Also
a check. Scaccomatto, a mate, a check-mate. Scadere, cado, caddi, caduto, to
happen, to befall, to chance, to droope, to fade. Scaduta, a hole or hazard at
billiard board. Scaduco, happened, befallen, chanced, drooped, faded. Scafa, a
skiffe, a cock-bote, a whirrie, a scalop. Also young beans or beans in the
cods, the husks or cods of beans. Also a board, a shelfe, or dresser for a
kitching or in a seller to set tubs or barrels upon. It is also used for railes
or latteises before a bakers stall. Also a kind of torture or straight prison.
Also the inner compass or roundnes of the ear. Scaffa, as Scafa. Scafarca, a
bucket, a paile or pitcher to draw water with. Scaffare, to shale or vnhuske
peason or beans. Scaggiale, a kind of country frock or garment that fishers
and sheapherds use to wear. also a broad silken girdle or a woman's apron.
Scaglia, the scales of any fish. Also a splint or shiuer of stones. Also a
worm breeding in horses. Scagliare, to skale or vnskale fish, to splint or
shiuer. also to hurl, to throw or fling with violence. Scaglio, the arm pits
or arm holes of a man. Scaglioni, steps or greeses of stairs or ladders. Also
the teeth of a horse called tusses or tuskes. Scaglioso, skalie, full of
skales, rough, rugged, splintie. Scagnello, the bridge of a lute. Scagno, any
kind of stool, form, bench or seat. Scaia, as Scaglia. Scaiola, a kind of
lome so called. Scaioni, as Scaglioni. Scaioso, as Scaglioso. Scala, a lather,
a skale, a pair of stairs or greeses. Also a mariners word. as Fare scala, to
touch, to land, to board or come to shore. Also to ride at ankore. a port or a
haven or harborough good to land at. Scala a lumache, a winding or turning
pair of stairs. Scala a pij, a kind of narrow upright stairs. Scala celi,
herb Salomons seal, or whitewoort. Scala di corda, a ladder of cords. Scala
da naue, a ladder for a ship. Scalabrone, a hornet, a beetle, a bull fly.
Scalada, an escalado, a scaling of a wall with ladders. Scalappiare, to escape
or run away, to shift away, to break prison, to wind ones neck out of the
halter. Scalappio, a mouse-trap, any kind of trap. Scalare, to skale or mount
by ladder or stairs. Scalata, a skalado given to any town or wall.
Scalcagnare, to seduce, to deceive, to undermine. also to vnbreech, to vnheele,
to vnstock or dismount any kind of great ordinance or artillery. also to
loosen or vnfasten ones teeth. Also to urge, to molest, to vex and bring one
out of patience. Scalciare, to vnhose, to vnshoe, to vnheele, to vnbreech, to
dismount, to vnstock. Also to skale teeth, or make them loose from the gums.
Scalciacane, a base, abject, vile, raskalie, contemptible fellow. Scalciadenti,
a tool that tooth-drawers use to make teeth loose and pull them cut with.
Scalciatore, a puller off of ones hosen and shoes. Scalciatura, an vnshoing,
vnhosing, vnbreeching, vnstocking, or loosing of teeth. Scalcio, Scalciato,
barefooted, barelegged, naked, poor, unshod. Scalcitare, as Scalpestare.
Scalco, a steward, an usher, a seawer of a noblemans house. Scaldare, to heat,
or warm, to skald, to skorch, to parch, to chafe. Scaldaletto, a warming pan.
Scaldapie, a pot to keep cinders in that market women use to keep their feet
warm with. Scaldauiuande, a chafing dish. Scaldatoio, any thing or room that
heateth or warmeth. Scaldatura, a heating, a warming, a chafing, an
inflammation. Scalea, as Scala. Scaleno, a quadrangle with points reuersed.
Scallentia, Scalentia, a kind of impostume in the throat. Scalenzini di
larese. Scaletta, a little ladder or pair of stairs. Also a kind of simnell
or bisket-bread, or wafers. Scalfarotto, a shepherds weed, frock, or such
garment with a hood. Also a kind of boots of felt, rug, or mats that students
use to keep their legs in when they study. Scalini, steps or greeses of
ladders or stairs. Scalmana, a drought, or drynes, the disease called the
Callenture. Scalmanato, burnt with thurst, having the Callenture. Scalmare, as
Scarmare. Scalmato, as Scarmato. Also a disease in a horse. Scalmatoria, as
Scarmatura. Scalmatura, as Scarmatura. Scalmo, as Scarmo. Also as Schelmo.
Scalogna, skallions, young ciues, chibols or oinions. Scaloni, a word that
heralds use in armorie as we say piles. Also great steps of a ladder or
stairs. Scalpedria, figured for a foolish woman, or folly it self.
Scalpeggiare, as Scalpestare. Scalpellare, as Scarpellare. Scalpellino, as
Scarpellino. Scalpello, as Scarpello. Scalpestare, to trample or tread under
foot, to make a trampling noise. Scalpestato, trampled under foot. Also fond,
riotous, or lavish. Scalpestio, as Scalpiccio. Scalpestrare, as Scalpestare.
Scalpiccio, a trampling noise made with ones feet. Scalpire, as Scolpire.
Scalpini, as Scarpini. Scalpitare, as Scalpestare. Scalpitio, as Scalpiccio.
Scalpitrare, as Scalpestare. Scalpo della testa, the skalp of ones head.
Scalpore, wonderment, amazement, fright. Scaltrire, trisco, trito, to discover,
to perceive, to be aware of, to become crafty, wily, and subtle. Scaltrito,
discovered, perceived. Also become crafty, slye and subtle, caute, wary,
crafty, wily. Scaltrimento, warines, foresight, craft, slynes. Scaltro, as
Scaltrito. Scaluna, as Scalogna. Scalzadenti, as Scalcia denti. Scalzare, as
Scalciare. Scalzacani, a base, raskalie dog-keeper. Scalzatura, as Scalciatura.
Scalzo, as Scalcio. Scamaidare, to card, pick, or wind wool. Scamaidatore, a
carder, a picker or wooll-winder. Scamardare, to make ridges in the ground.
Scambiare, to change, to exchange, to barter, to truck. Scambiame^to, an
exchanging, a change, a trucking. Scambiatore, an exchanger, a trucker, a
bartrer. Scambieuole, by exchange, mutual, exchangeablie. Scambiettare, to
barter, to truck, to change ware for ware. also to wrigle, to stir to and
fro. Scambietti, bartrings, truckings, changings. Also wriglings, stirrings up
and down. Also mammocks, scraps, or broken pieces of meat. Some take them to
be chibols or young oinions. Also tumbling tricks. Scambio, exchange, change,
bartring, or trucking. Also stead, lieu, place, or mistaken. Scamonea,
Scammonea, the herb Scammonie or Diagridion, the juice whereof is used in
medicines to purge choler vehemently. Scampamento, as Scampo. Scampana, has
bin used abusiuely for patience. Scampanare, to ring, toll, or iangle bells
disorderly. Scampanate, ringings, peales, knels, tollings, or ianglings of
bells. Scampare, to escape, to shift away, to save or deliver out of trouble.
Scampatura, as Scampo. Scampo, an escape, a shifting away, a refuge, a flight,
a saving, a freedom. Scamuffare, to dant, to droope or hang down the head, to
go away as one amazed. Scamuffo, a drooping, a languishing, a hanging down
the head. Scanale, a kind of fish. Scancellare, as Cancellare. Scancello, as
Cancello. Scancia, as Scantia. Scanciaria, a rank or row of shelues about a
kitchen. Scandagliare, to sound, to level, or fadome the depth of the sea with
a plummet. Scandagliatore, a sounder, a leueller, or fadomer of the sea.
Scandaglio, a plummet, or line to sound with, a leuelling rule. Scandalizzare,
to scandalize, to slander, to offend in conscience, or give occasion to
mislike. Scandalo, a scandal, a slander, an offense, or occasion of sin
given by another. Scandaloso, scandalous, slandrous, offensive. Scandentia, the
squinancie. Scandere, scando, scandei, scanduto, to climb, to mount, to ascend
or get up. Also to scan a verse. Scandescentia, as Scandentia. Also a kind of
blushing for shame. Scanduto, climbed, clambered, ascended, mounted or gotten
up. Scandice, wild cheruile, shepherds needle, or Venus comb. Scandigliare,
as Scandagliare. Scandiglio, as Scandaglio. Scandole, oke-lathes, slates, or
shindles of wood serving instead of tyles to cover houses. Scandolizzare, as
Scandalizzare. Scandolo, as Scandalo. Scandoloso, as Scandaloso. Scanello, a
deske to write upon. Scanfarda, a common strumpet, an ouerridden whore, a
stallion rampe. Scange, changeable colored, as we say changeable taffeta.
Scannagallo, a certain officer in a ship, which some take to be the steward
or victauler. Scannaglio, a shambles, a butcherie, a slaughter. Scannare, to
strangle, to murder, to kill, to cut ones throat. Scannatore, a murderer, a
butcher, a cutter of throtes. Scannellare, to gush or spout forth as out of a
gutter, to vomit or cast forth. Scannetto, Scannello, a foote-stoole, a
little stool. Scanno, any kind of stool, form, bench, or seat. Also a
dominion or state. Scannonizzare, to degrade one when he has bin canonized.
Scansare, to cancel, to blur, or blot forth, to go a slope or a sconce, or a
skew, to go sidelin, to stagger or go reeling* to ward, to avoid or shun a
blow. Also to overthrow, to ouerturne, to subvert or remove any thing away, to
balke by. Scansatura, an overthrow, or ouerturning of any thing, a staggering
or reeling. also a blot, a blur or cancelling, a fall, asconce or a-skewe, a
balking by. Scancione, a kind of cadence or measure or foot in a verse.
Scanso, a blurre, a blot, a cancelling, as Scansatura. Scantia, a shelfe of
boardes about a kitchen. Also a cupbord. Scantiaria, as Scanciaria. Scantietta,
a little shelfe of boords, or little cupboord. Scantonare, to shake a man off
at a corner of a street, to give one the slip secretly. Also to vncorner.
Scantonarsi, to retire, or withdraw into some corner. Scantonata, a slip given
one at a corner. Also without a corner, disordred. Scantoniere, a cosener, a
coni-catcher, one that gives one the slip, and leaves him a corner for payment.
Scantucciare, as Scantonare. Scanzare, as Scansare. Scanzare della via, to
miss, to straie, or go out of the way. Scanzaria, as Scanciaria. Scanzia, as
Scantia. Scapellare, to vnhoode, to vnhat, to vncap. Scapello, a lancet, a
fleame wherewith surgeons let blood. Scapegliare, as Scapigliare. Scaperuccia,
a pouch, a budget, a scrip. Also a hood or a cowle. Scapestrare, to unbridle,
to vnhalter, to disintangle, to draw ones head out of the halter, to disorder.
Scapestrato, unbridled, vnhaltred, disintangled, wound ones head out of the
halter. a dissolute, licentious, riotous fellow. a wag-halter. Scapestrata,
wilfully, headlong, disorderly, riotously, lauishly, furiously.
Scapestratamente, as Scapestrata. Scapezzone, a blow, a clap, a box or
whirret given with the hand. Scapigliare, to desheuell, to disorder, to
undress or untie ones head or hairs. Scapigliata, desheueled, vnkembd,
undressed about the head. Also a tugging of one by the hair. Scapilio, the space
between the shoulders. Scapini, linen socks or pumps. Scapineuole, of, or
pertaining to socks. Scapitare, not to thrive, to loose by the bargain, to
consume a man's stock or wealth. Also to behead. Also to go away from a place.
Also to cut off a debt, to come out of debt. Scapizzare, as Scapitare. Scapola,
as Scapula. Scapolare, to escape, to make an escape, or shift away. also a
friars hood or a monks cowle. Scapoli, soldiers that ouerlooke gallie-slaues.
Also free, loose, or scot-free. Scapolo, haggard, wild, ranging, untamed. Also
a horse that will not easily be taken but will escape away, an escape.
Scappare, as Scampare. Scappata, as Scampo. Scappezzare, to rough hew a piece
of timber or stone. Also to turn a horse round when first he is taught to
trot round, being held by a long rope. Scappino, the upper leather of a pair
of shoes. Also the clock of a pair of hosen. Also a socke or a pumpe.
Scappo, as Scampo. Also a fishing pole or rod. Also sedge or sheare grass.
Scappola, an escape, or a shifting away. Scappolare, as Scapolare.
Scappricciare, to free or rid from toys, humors, or fancies. Scapucciare, to
stumble, or trip by the way, to slip, or fall. Scapuccio, a stumbling or
tripping block, a fall, a slip, a trip, or stumbling, a trestase. Scapuccione,
as Scapuzzone. Scapula, the shoulder blade. Also the hinder part of the
shoulders. Scapulare, as Scapolare. Scapuzzare, as Scapucciare. Scapuzzo, as
Scapuccio. Scapuzzone, a blow, a clap, a box, or whirret given with ones
hand. Also a stumbling horse, or a horse that will run away. Scarabillare, to
squeake as a bagge-pipe, to make an unpleasant squeaking. Scarabo, as
Scarafaggio. Scarabotto, idem. Scarabocchi, a foolish idle word spoken at
randon, and without heed. Scaracchiare, as Sgarare. Scarafaggio, a beetle, a
hornet, an oxeflie, a scarabe-flie. Scaragolo, a kind of sea snaile.
Scaramellare, to play tricks of legier de maine, to iuggle. Scaramelle, legier
de maine tricks, iugling tricks. Scaramuccia, a skirmish, a fight, a fray.
Scaramucciare, to skirmish, to fight. Scaramuzza, as Scaramuccia. Scaramuzzare,
to skirmish, to fight. Scarani, low women's stools. Scarauaggio, Scarauaccio,
as Scarafaggio. Scarbonchiare, to besmeare with a cole, to snuff out a candle.
Scarbottare, to scatter or cast down, to throw or hurl away. Scarcal'asino,
a kind of game at tables with dice, and comes to bearing of men. Scarcare, as
Scaricare. Scarcata, as Scaricata. Scarcatore, a discharger. Scarco, as
Scarico. Scarda, the scale or shell of any fish. Also the cards or teasels to
card wool with. Also as Scardolo. Scardafone, as Scarafaggio. Scardalana, a
carder of wool, a wool winder. Scardare, to card, tease, wind, or dress
wool. also to skale fish. Scardassare, as Scardare. Also to beat, bumbaste,
bange, touze, or bumfeagle. Also to backbite, to detract or rail at one
behind his back. Scardassare il pelo, to bange, beat, or bumbaste, to thumpe
or swaddle o^^. Scardassa lana, as Scardalana. Scardassi, cards or teazels to
card wool with. Scardassiere, as Scardatore. Scardassino, as Scardalana. also
a backbiter, a railer, a detracter of one behind his back. Scardasso, a pair
of cards to card wool. Scardatore, a carder or winder of wool. a skaler of
fish. Scardazzo, a kind of bur, teazell or bryer. Scardola, a very skalie
fish: some take it to be the shad; others the guilt head; others the breame.
Scardone, as Scardola. Scardoua, as Scardola. Also a kind of venomous waspe or
fly. Scarfaccij, foolish, dogrell rimers. Scargagliare, as Sgargagliare.
Scaricare, to discharge, to unload, to disburthen. Scaricamento, as Scaricata.
Scaricata, a discharge, a disburthning, an unloading. Scarico, free, quit,
discharged, disburthened, vnloden. Also a discharge. Scarificare, to lance or
open an incision, to rich, skale or scacrifie. Scarificatione, a scarifying, an
incision, a cutting, a lancing. Scariola, garden endive or broad leaf.
Scarite, a precious stone having the color of Scaro. Scarlatino, the color we
call stammell red. Also scarlet. Scarlato, Scarlatto, scarlet cloth, scarlet
color. Scarmare, to make lean, to take down the flesh. Scarmigliare, to
teaze, to card or pick wool, flax, hemp or clothes. Also to hale, to touze,
to pluck, to tug, to ruffle, to pull by the hairs, to desheuell, to tear
ones hairs, to lug. Scarmigliato, teazed, carded or picked, haled, touzed,
plucked, tugged, ruffled, grizly, vnkemd, desheueled, rent or pulled by the
hairs, lugd. Scarmo, lean, meagre, gant, dry, spinie, out of flesh, lanke,
low as a hawke, bare of flesh. Also the fish we call poor John: some take it
for the stock fish; others take it for the fish Merluzzo. Scarnare, to vnflesh,
to pare the flesh from the bones, to pare raw hides. Scarnato, vnflesht, pared
the flesh from the bones, as Scarmo. Scarno, as Scarmo. Scaro, a fish that
deuours all the small fishes he can come unto, and cheweth like a beast: some
take it to be the guilthead or goldenie. Scarpa, any kind of show. a counter
scarf or curtein of a wall. Also a purse of money in rogues language or
pedlers french. Also a fish with a shining head called a guilt-head. Scarparia,
a street where shoes are made and to be sold. Scarpatore, a shoemaker. a cord
wainer. Scarpezzo, a kind of christmas game. Scarpellare, to grave, cut or
carue with a chizell. Scarpellatore, a grauer, a caruer or cutter with a
chizell, to scarifie any sore. Scarpellinaccio, a bungler, or
botcherlike-grauer. Also a simple gull. Scarpelletto, as Scarpellino.
Scarpellino, a little chizell, a penknife, a caruing tool, a caruer or a
grauer of stones. Scarpello, a chizell, a cutting or caruing or grauing tool.
a kind of ravenous foul. Also a surgeons tool to take away corrupt flesh from
the bones, a Barbers lance. Scarpena, a kind of fish. Scarpigliare, as
Scarmigliare. Scarpette, thin shoes, pumps or socks. Scarpettoni, a kind of
wooden, high or clownish shoes or startops. Scarpinare, to escape or shift
away, to tug for, to snatch or pull up by the root. Scarpini, linen sockes.
Also dancing pumps or little shoes. Scarpioni, a kind of warlike engine of
defense. Look Scorpione. Scarpire, as Carpire. Scarpisatore, a snatcher, a
shifter, a hooker, a pilfrer, a conicatcher. Scarponi, as Scarpettoni.
Scarpone, a hurly burly, a brauling noise, a squaring. Scarriera, a place where
all knauerie, roguerie, and shifts of false dealing is used. Scarsella, a
pocket, a budget, a satchell, a pouch, a faulconers bag. Scarsamente, scarsely,
sparingly, hardly, pinchingly, couetously, niggardly, scantly. Scarsapepe, a
kind of herb. Scarsare, to scarce, to spare, to pinch, to cut off, to scant.
Scarsellare, to pocket up. Scarsellaio, a pocket or pouch maker. Scarselloni,
bases or tases for a horseman. Scarsezza, scarsitie, niggardnes, couetise,
sparing, hardness, miserablenes, scantnes. Scarsita, as Scarsezza. Scarso,
scarce, hard, covetous, sparing, miserable, scant. Also a snudge, a pinchpenie,
a peni-father. Look Parco. Scartabellare, to scribble or toss books and
papers over and over. Scartabello, any skroule or waste paper. Scartacciare, as
Scardassare. Scartaccino, as Scardatore. Scartaccio, as Scardassi.
Scartafacciare, as Scartabellare. Scartafaccio, as Scartabello. Scartapello, as
Scartabello. Scartare, to discard at cards. Scartate, the cards that are
discarded. Look Dare nelle scartate. Scarteggiare, as Scardassare, as
Scartare. Scarteggino, a carder or picker of wool. Scartoccio, a coffin of
paper for spice, as Apothecaries use. Also a charge made ready for any musket
or ordinance. Scartozzo, as Scartoccio. Scaruare, as Scardassare. also as
Scarmigliare. Scaruatore, as Scardatore. Scarupare, to break, to ruin, to
tear, to rend, to throw down. Sarzerino, a bird in latin Serinus. Scassiare,
to squat, to bruise, to crush, to squeese, to break, to make as flat as a cake.
Scassiatura, a brusing, a squatting, a crushing, a squeesing. Scascio,
Scasciato, squat, flat. Scassare, as Cassare, as Scasciare. Scassatura, as
Cassatura, as Scasciatura. Scassinato, broken, bruised, touzed or shiuered in
pieces. Scasso, as Casso, as Casciato. Satafascio, Ascatafascio, pelmell,
confusedly, rashly, hudling wise, at random. Scatapocchio. Scatellare, as
Sgarare. Scatenare, to vnchaine, to vnfetter, to vnshakle. Scatenata, Alla
scatenata, dissolutely, carelessly, wilfully, madly, riotously. Scato del cielo,
or else Scatocello, great peni-woort, wall peni-woort, Venus nauill, peni-wort
of the water or sheepe-killing peni-grasse. Scatola, a flat box, such as
Apothecaries use to put in comfets. Scatola, A lettere di scatola, plainly and
alowd, that all men may hear. Scatolette, Scatolline, little, flat, round
boxes. Scatoliere, a boxe-maker. Scattare, as Riscattare. Scaturiggine d'acqua,
a spring, a bubbling of water, the boiling and rising of water out of a spring.
Scaturire, risco, rito, to bubble, to flow, to purle, to gush, to stream, or
spring as water does. Scaualcare, to unhorse, to dismount, or alight from
horseback. Scaualcatura, an vnhorsing, a dismounting, an alighting from a
horse. Scauardino, a fish called a bleake. Scauare, to dig deep, to pull up by
the roots, to make hollow, or to boar through, to dig up. Scauezzare, to
break or riue in sunder. Also to free from a halter, to break, to splint, or
shiuer. Scauezzacollo, a breakeneck, a haltersack, a wag. Also rashly,
raginglie, furiously, madlie, in headlong manner. Scauigliare, as Scapigliare.
Also to hurl violently* Scauolo, a kind of small duck like our teales.
Scauro, he that has ankles standing and bunching out. Scazzambrello, a
hobgoblin, a robin good fellow. Scazzata, a thrust, a push, a foyne, or iump to
a woman with a man's prick. Scazzellare, to provoke, to prick, to egg on, to
importune. Also to play and dandle with. Scazzonto, a kind of rhyme dogrell so
called. Scazzotto, a gull, a millers thumb, or bull fish. Scazzuto, covetous,
sparing, niggardly, neere-handed. Also purre-blinde. Sceda, Scede, as Modello.
Also ostentation, vainglory, or foolishnes, a trifle, a jest, or vanity in
talk. Sceggiale, as Scaggiale. Scegliere, scelgo, scelsi, scelto, or
scegliuto, to choose, to cull, to elect, to pick out. Scegliuto, Look Scelto.
Sceglitore, a chooser, an elector, a culler. Sceleraggine, treachery,
villainie, knauerie, wickedness, mischief, abomination, lewdnes, an unlawful
act, a desperate wicked attempt. Sceleranza, as Sceleraggine. Sceleratezza, as
Sceleraggine. Scelerato, treacherous, villainous, knauish, wicked, cruel, bad,
lewd, ungodly, unnatural, cursed, mischievous, naughty. Scelerita, as
Sceleraggine. Sceleroso, as Scelerato. Scelesare, to paue a street. Scelesata,
a pauement. Scelesatore, a pauier. Sceleste, wicked, mischievous, lewd,
vengeable, ungracious, etc. Scelmo, as Schelmo. Scelta, a choice, an election,
a culling. Scelto, chosen, picked out, culled, elected, an excellent choice man.
Scemare, to diminish, to abate, to wane, to fall, to defalke, to lessen, to
want, to faint. Scemamento, a diminishing, an abatement, a waning, a lessening.
Scemo, a simple fool or natural idiote. Also want, or lack. Also the wane or
decrease of the Moon. Also waned, abated, as in Scemare. Scempiare, to
afflict, to excruciate, to torment, to torture, to vex, to rack, to molest.
Scempieta, as Simplicita. Scempio, torture, affliction, torment, racking,
vexation, molestation. Also simple, foolish, poor of understanding or shallow
headed. Also single, slight, plain, thin, alone, nothing double, without welt
and guard. Scena, a scene of a comedy or tragedy. Also a stage in a theater or
playhouse whereon they play, a skaffold, a pauillion, or fore part of a
theater where players make them ready, being trimmed with hangings, out of
which they enter upon the stage. used also for a comedy or a tragedy. Also a
place where one does show and set forth himself to the world. Scendere,
scendo, scesi, sceso, to descend, to alight or come down. Scenico, of or
pertaining to a stage or scene, or skaffolds, or to play in comedies. Sceno, an
egyptian measure of threescore furlongs which is seven miles and a half.
Scenografia, a description of skaffolds, scenes, stages, or pauilions. Scepa, a
cuttle fish. Scensa, ascension day. Scergare, to rub, to claw, to wriggle, to
frigle. Scergatura, a rubbing, a clawing, a frigging, a wrigling. Scernere,
scerno, scernei, scernuto, to discern, to perceive, to ken, to know. Scernuto,
discerned, perceived, kenn^d, known a far off. Scernita, a discerning, a
kenning, a distinguishing, a perceiving. Scernitore, a discern^r, a kenner, a
distinguisher, a perceiuer. Scerre, as Scegliere. Sceruellare, to vnbraine any
body, to drive or make one go out of his wits. Scesa, a descent, a coming
down, a downfall, a declining. Also a rheum. Scesa di catairo, a falling of
the rheum. Sce^o, Scenduto, descended, alighted, come down. Scetrigero, a
ruler, a scepter-bearer, a sergeant at arms. Scetra, a target made of leather
without wood. Scetro, Scettro, a kings or princes scepter or mace. Also a
kingdom, rule, or government. Sceuerare, as Sceurare. Sceuola, an herb called
small shauegrasse, or tadpipes. Sceurare, to sever, to sunder, to divide, to
part, to separate. Sceuro, severed, sundred, divided, parted, separated.
Scheda, a sheet or leaf of paper or parchment. Also a skrowle or a schedule.
Schedia, a thing like a bridge with trees pinned together, used in stead of
barges to carry things upon by water. Schedio, a bridge made in haste for a
time. Schedione, a spit or a broach. Scheggia, a splint, a shiuer, a chip, a
flaw. Also as Assicelle. Scheggiale, as Scaggiale. Scheggiare, to splint, to
shiuer, to flawe, to chip. Scheggiette, little splints, shiuers, or flawes, or
chips. Scheggie, splints, shiuers, chips, flawes. Scheggioni, as Scheggie.
Schelentia, a kind of sickness. Schelino, as Schelina. Schelma, Schelmo, a
little piece of wood or peg in a boat whereat the rowers stay their ^ares*
when they row called a thoule pin. Schema, an ornament or figure used in
speech. Schena, as Schiena. Also a kind of long measure. Schenuto, as
Schienuto. Scherano, a murderer, a robber, a highway thief, a man-queller, a
swaggrer. Scherma, fencing, or the art of fence. Schermaglia, as Scherma.
Schermaglio, a screene for the fire. Schermare, as Schermire. Schermatore, as
Schermitore. Schermire, misco, mito, to fence, to fight, to skirmish, to ward,
to defend. Schermitore, a fencer, a skirmisher, a defender, a master of fence.
Schermo, a fence, a defense, a ward, a shelter. Schernire, nisco, nito, to
scorn, to flout, to frumpe, to mock, to despise. Schernimento, a scorning, a
flouting, a frumping, a mocking. Schernitore, a scorner, a flouter, a frumper,
a mocker. Scherneuole, scornful, full of floutes, mocks, or frumps. Scherno,
a scorn, a mock, a flout, a frump, a jest. Scheruole, skirret roots to make
sallads of. Scherzare, to jest, to dally, to dandle, to play or toye withal
in jest. Scherzatore, a iester, a dandler, a dallier, a toyer. Scherzamento, a
jesting, a toying, a dalliance, a dandling or playing withal in jest. Scherzo,
as Scherzamento. Schesi, a figure wherein a multitude of words are hudled up
together. Schiaccia, a squatting or hiding place. Schiacciare, to crush, to
bruise, to squeese, to beat, to batter or make as flat as a cake. Also to
bedash with dirt. Also to beslauer, Look Schicherare. Schiacciato, crushed,
bruised, squeesed, battred or made flat. Naso schiacciato, a flat scotch-saddle
nose. Schiacciata, any kind of broad or flat cake. Schiacciatina, a little
thin, flat cake. Schiacchero, as Scacchiere. Schiaffeggiare, to cuffe, to
beat, to box, to cuffe or streeke, or clap on the ears or cheek with ones
hand. Schiaffo, a cuffe, a box, a clap, a whirret on the cheeks or ears with
ones hand. Schiamare, to cackle or clock as a hen does, to shreeke, to
skreeke, or cry out. Schiamazzare, to make a rumbling or trampling noise, to
tattle, to prate, to scold, to babble, to cackle as a hen. Schiamazzo, a
rumbling or trampling noise, a cackling, a prating, a babbling, a scolding.
Schiamo, as Schiamazzo. Schiantare, to cleave wood, to burst, to riue, to
splint, to shiuer, to rend in sunder, to rap, to chap. Schiantatura, a
cleaving, a bursting, a riuing, a splinting, a shiuering. Schianteuole, that
will or may be cleft, burst, splinted, shiuered, riued, chapt. Schiantoncella,
a pretty less, a wanton, sly, subtle wench. Schiantolo, a scantlin, a scrap,
a mammocke, a little piece, a splint, a shiuer, a shiue. Schianze, the scurffe,
the scald or scab, that comes to childrens heads. Schiappalegne, a
wood-cleauer, a woodfeller. Schiappare, as Schiantare. Schiappatura, as
Schiantatura. Schieppe, chips, billets, or pieces of wood Schiappeuole, as
Schianteuole. Schiara, a kind of iron that carpenters use. Schiarare, to
clarify, to clear up, to declare, to expound, to make clear. Schiarazza, a
kind of flat-bottom ship, or hulke. Schiarea, the herb Clarie. Schiarire,
risco, ^ito, as Schiarare. Schiarro, a squirrell. Schiatta, a race, a family, a
stock, a pedigree, or blood of a house. Schiattinare, to pollute, to defile,
to spot, to sullie. Schiattiscere, tisco, attei, attuto, to bark, to baie, to
houie, to baule. Schiattoncella, a close, sly, crafty, subtle wench.
Schiauare, to unlock, to unshut, to pull the keye out. Schiauina, an irish
rugge, a sea-mans gown, an irish mantle or course couerlet. Schiauo, a slave,
a bondsman, a bond slave, a gallie-slaue, a for sat. Schiauone, one borne in
Sclauonia, but abusiuely taken for a bondsman or slave. Schiazza, as Schiatta.
Schiazzare, as Schizzare. Schiazzi, as Schizzi. Schiba, a kind of boys play
used in Italy. Schiccherare, to blot, to blur, to scrible, as children do
learning to write. Also to beslime as a snaile does when she creeps. Schicchera
carte, a blotter, a blurrer, a scribler of books, a foolish poet. Schiccheri,
dashings, dashes, blurs, blots, scriblings, slimings. Schiccherone, as
Schicchera carte. Schicchizzare, as Schiccherare. Schidione, Schidone, a broch
or a spit. Schidonare, to broch or to spit. Schidonata, a spit-full, a
broch-full, a blow with a spit. Schiembacci, baudy-houses, stews, brothels.
Schiembecci, idem. Schiena, the back or chine of ones body, the ridge bone.
also the back of a knife, a ridge of any thing. Schienale, a chine or back
bone of beef or porke. Also a piece of armor for the back. Schienuto, well
or strongly backed, rigged. Schiera, a troop, a squadron, a rank, a band, or
a cornet of men. Schierare, to marshall, to order, to rank, to araie, or set
in troops. Schierati, marshalled, ordered, ranked, set in araie or troops.
Schiericato, vnshauen, one that has forsaken his convent, an vnfriered
fellow. Schiettezza, neatenes, purity, cleanlines, plainenes, slightnes.
Schietto, neat, pure, single, clean, slight, plain, unfeigned, unspotted,
without welt or guard. Schifare, to shun, to avoid, to eschew, to disdain,
to abhor, to d^spise. Schifeuole, to be avoided or shunned, odious, heinous,
hateful, filthy. Schifezza, coins, quaintnes, peeuishnes, fondnes
frowardnes, queasines. Schiffe^to, a little cockbote, skiffe, whirry or
scallop. Schiffo, a skiffe, a whirrie, a cockbote. Schifilta, as Schifezza.
Schifo, coie, quaint, disdainful, nice, skittish, fond, froward, puling,
queasie, a^eward. Also filthy, ugly, odious, detestable, to be avoided or
eschewed. Also a cockbote, a skiffe, or a wherrie. Schille, a kind of sea-crab
or lobster. Schimbiccherare, to blurre, to blot, to bedaube, to slabber as a
snaile in creeping or as ill painters do. Schinale, a kind of salt fish.
Schionato, Look Sedia schionata. Schinchimurra, a filthy great stinking
turde. Schinciare, to stagger, or go reeling as a drunken man. Schincio* Andare
a schincio, to stagger, to reele, to go as a drunken man Schinchi, the shinne
bones or smals of the legs. Schinelle, as Schinchi. Also the disease in a
horse called a splint. Schinieri, greaues or armor pieces for the legs. Also
gamashes. Schiodare, to vnnaile, to make loose. Also as Suertare. Schionata,
backed, having a back to lean upon. Schioppare, to burst, to crack, to snap,
to pop of as does a gun. to burst forth in laughing. Schioppettare, to shoot
off with dags or handguns, to crack or snap, to pop. Schioppata, a crack, a
bursting, a pop, a snap. Schioppettata, a blow or shot with a dag or handgun.
Schioppettaria, all manner of shot. Schioppettini, little dags or potguns. Also
a kind of Augustine friars so called. Schioppetto, a little dag, pistol or
handgun, a potgun. Schioppo, a dag, a pistol, a hand-gun, a pot-gun, a
snaphance, a harquibuse. Also a crack, a bursting, a snap. Also a sound made
with puffing of ones cheeks. Schirantia, the squinancie. Schiraso, a kind of
barge, boat, whirrie or pinnace. Schirattolo, a squirrell. Schirazzo, as
Schiraso. Schiriuolo, a squirrell. Schiro, a kind of ring worm or tetter.
Schirone, the bird called a field-fare. Schi^are, as Schifare. Schiuetto,
somewhat coy, quaint, niece, peevish or dainty. Schiu^uole, as Schifeuole.
Schiuezza, as Schifezza. Schiuo, as Schifo. Schiudere, schiudo, schiusi,
schiuso, as Schiauare, to shut or lock out. Schiuma, skum, foame or froth.
Schiumaccia, filthy froth, foame or skumme. Schiumare, to skum, to foame, to
froth. Schiumato^o, a skimmer. Schiumoso, foamie, frothie, skummie. Schiuso,
locked or shut out, unlocked, unshut. Schizzare, to spin or gush forth violently,
to fly, sparkle or sprinkle abroad, to crush or squease, to squirt, to bedash,
to beblur to bemire, to dash with mire, to draw the first draught or
ingrosement of any work or writing. Also to mute as a hawk does. Also to
siringe, to purle or bubble as water does. also to hop, to leap, to friske, to
skip, to spurt. Also to skummer as a dog. Schizzata, the mute or muting of a
hawk, a gushing or spinning forth. Also a squirting. Schizzatoio, a squirt or
siring. Also a vintners forset. Schizzatore, a squirter, a siringer, a muter.
Schizzinoso, selfe-weening, peevish, froward, skittish. Schizzo, a sparkling, a
sprinkling, a spinning or gushing out, a squeasing or crushing, a purling, a
bubbling of water. an ingrosement or first rough draught of any thing. the mute
or muting of a hauk or any other bird. a squirt or squirting of any thing. a
spot or dashing of dirt or mire upon ones clothes. Also a hop, a skip or a
leap. Scholia, as Scolia. Sciabordo, foolish, fond, sottish, senceles,
gullish, a meacocke. Scia, the place where the sciatica does breed. Sciaccare,
as Schiantare. Sciacquare, to bedable in water, to wash or rence as a glass.
Sciagrafia, a description of a whole frame and conueiance of every room, a
model or plat form of every part of a building. Sciagura, a mischief, a
mishap, an ill luck, an ill chance, a misfortune. Sciaguraggine, as Sciagura.
Sciagurato, mischievous, unhappy, unlucky, treacherous, villainous.
Sciagurezza, as Sciagura. Scialacquaggine, lauishnes, riot, unthriftiness,
wastefull consuming, foolish prodigality. Scialacquare, to waste, to consume
or spend lauishly, riotously or prodigally, to play the unthrift.
Scialacquamento, as Scialacquaggine Scialacquata di parole, a huddle or tittle
tattle of idle words lauishly and foolishly spoken. Scialacquatore, a riotus,
wastefull, lavish or prodigal consumer, spender or waster, an unthrift, a
waste good. Scialacquio, as Scialacquaggine. Scialassare, as Salassare.
Scialbo, pale, wan or sallow colored. Scialmatore, in latin, Psylus.
Schiamachia, a counterfeit fighting. a shadow or image of contention.
Sciamannata, Alla sciamannata, topsituruie, vpside-downe, helter-skelter,
pell-mell. Sciamarro, an axe, a battle axe, a hatchet. Sciamito, a kind of
sleaue, feret or filosello silk. Also a kind of thin stuff half silk, and
half wool like burato. Sciamare, to swarm together as Bees. Sciamo, a swarm
of Bees. Sciamunito, unsavory, watrish or wallowish in taste. Sciancare, to
halt, to go sideline, to reele, to stagger, to lame, or maime. Sciancato, as
Scianco. Scianco, halting, lame, cripple, limping, hiples, lame legd. Sciapito,
as Sciamunito. Sciare, to cut or furrow the sea with a ship. also to cry all
with one voice or consent, as mariners do when they hoise sails or heave
ankre. Also to know, to wit, to kenne. Sciaria, the herb Clarie or Cleere-eie.
Sciarpellone, a grossly, an unlucky tale, as we say a gudgeon or lying for
the whetstone. Also as Farfallone. Sciarra, a brawle, a iar, a vie, a
contention a fraie, a buzling, a strife. Sciarrero, a brauling, iarring,
contentious, striving fellow. Sciate, an instrument used in choosing the
situation of cities. Sciatica, the disease called the sciatica or hip-gout.
Sciatico, one that has the sciatica. Sciauro, Sciaurato. Look Sciagura.
Scibile, that may be known. Scibilmente, wittingly, for the nonce, expressly,
with knowledge. Sciede, Scede, mockes, frumps, scorns, jests, gibes, flouts,
follies, illusions or vaine-glories, derisions, selfe-conceits. Sciegliere, as
Scegliere. Scielinguare, as Scilinguare. Scielta, as Scelta. Scielto, as
Scelto. Sciemare, as Scemare. Sciemato, as Scemato. Sciemo, as Scemo.
Sciempiare, as Scempiare. Sciempio, as Scempio. Sciempiezza, simplicity.
homelines. Sciena, as Schiena. Sciente, one that knows, that is skillful and
has understanding, and is full of sciences and knowledge, knowing, witting,
cunning, skillful. Scientia, knowledge, science, wit, skill, understanding,
learning, knowledge. Scientiale, scientiall, full of knowledge, skillful,
pertaining to knowledge. Scientiare, to teach or instruct, to make skillful.
Scientiato, as Scientioso. Scientemente, wittingly, skilfully, with knowledge,
for the nonce, of purpose. Scientifico, as Scientioso. Scientioso, skillful,
full of knowledge and sciences. Scienza, as Scientia, Sciepare, to vnhedge or
pull up hedges, to pluck up by the roots. Scierpellone, as Sciarpellone.
Scierre, as Sciogliere. Sciferare, to decipher. Sciglia, the root of the white
lilly. Scilinguare, to stutter, to stammer, to maffle or faulter in speech, to
lispe. Scilinguato, stutted, stammerd, maffled, or faultred in speech. Also a
stutter, a lisper, a stammerer, a maffler. Also one that is toong-tide.
Scilinguagno, as Scilinguato. Scilinguagnolo, the string under the tongue, which
if it be not cut in young children, will hinder their speech when they come once
to speak. Scilla, a kind of herb with a root like an onion, growing both in
the sea and on the land, called the sea oinion, or squilla. Also a kind of fish
like a shrimp. Also a gulf or dangerous place in the Sicilian sea. Scilocco,
the south-east wind. Sciloma, as Andiriuieni. Sciloppare, to drink sirops, to
put in sirops. Also to pull, gall, or flea the skin off. Also to skald with
skalding water. Also to minister sirops unto. Sciloppiare, as Sciloppare.
Sciloppo, a scirop. Scima, a disease in a horse called the crick. Scimare, to
sheare cloth, to pare or cut off the top. Scimatore, a cloth-shearer.
Scimatura, a shearing of cloth. Scimia, a munkie or an ape. Scimietta, a little
munkie or ape. Sciminesco, a pish, foolish, munkish. Scimionate, a pish tricks,
munkish toys, foolish conceits. Scimione, a great ape or munkie. Scimiotto, a
good, fair, handsome ape or munkie. Scimitara, Scimitarra, a turkish or
persian crooked sword, a Simitar. Scimoniere, a foolish, fond, apish fellow.
Scimonito, apish, foolish, simple, doting. Also a fool, a gull, a ninnie, a
patch, a coxecombe. Scimunito, as Scimonito. Scinco, a kind of land Crocodill
along the river of Nilus. Scindere, scindo, scisi, sciso, to cut or riue in
sunder, to cut off, to tear, or rent. Scingere, scingo, scinsi, scinto, to
vnguirt, to vncompasse. Scinto, vnguirt, vnguirdled, vncompassed. Scintilla, a
spark or sparkle of fire, a twinkling. Scintillante, sparkling, or twinkling.
Also sprinkling as new wine leaping in a cup. Scintillare, to spark, to
sparkle, to twinkle. Scintilletta, a little sparkle, or twinkling.
Scioccheggiare, to play the fool or noddie, to rave or play the mad man.
Scioccheria, as Sciocchezza. Sciocchezza, folly, foolishnes, simplicity,
rauing. Sciocco, a fool, a noddie, a gull, an idiot, a meacock. Also foolish,
or simple, or sottish. Scioccone, as Moccicone. Sciogliere, sciolgo, sciolsi,
sciolto, to loose, to free, to vnsnare, to quit, to discharge, to dissolve, to
untie, to vntangle. Sciographia, a description of a whole frame and conueyance
of every room. Sciollare, to spoil, to mar, to waste, to ruin, to flawe,
to splint, to shiuer, to riue. Sciollo, spoiled, mard, wasted, ruined, flawne,
splinted, shiuered, riued. Scioloppare, as Sciloppare. Scioltezza, loosenes,
liberty, freedom, nimblenes, licentiousnes. Sciolto, loose, free, quit,
discharged, vnsnared, at liberty, nimble, quick, untied, vntangled,
licentious. also a kind of loose verse so called in Italian, a blanke verse.
Scioltura, as Scioltezza. Sciomante, a soothsayer by shadows. Sciomantia,
divination practiced by shadows. Scioni, whirlepooles in the sea.
Scioperaggine, idleness, retchlesnes, lazines, fondnes, lithernes. Scioperare,
to loyter, to be idle. Scioperataggine, as Scioperaggine. Scioperato, idle,
retchlesse, fond, lazy, doing nothing. Scioperio, as Scioperaggine.
Scioperone, an idle, lazy, loitring fellow. Sciorare, as Sciorinare, as
Sciornare. Sciorinare, to hang out clothes in the air, to air, or cool in
the wind. also to burst forth in laughter, to pour, to stream, to purle, to
bubble, to gush or piss forth as water does, to piss or make water. Also to
soar in the wind as a hawk does. Sciorre, as Sciogliere. Sciorrere, sciorro,
sciorsi, sciorruto, to sweep with a broom, to brush clean. Sciorro, a
Squirrell. Sciosciare, to blow with a pair of bellows. Sciosciatore, a pair
of bellows, a blower. Scioterio, an instrument to cast a shadow. Sciouere,
sciouo, sciouei, sciouuto, to break up the ground after it is dungd, to let it
lie fallow. Sciouuto, broken up the ground to let it lie fallow. Scipa, a
sheep. Also a gull, a noddie, an idiot, a silly fellow. Scipare, to play the
gull or noddie, as Stirpare, as Scialacquare. Scipidezza, as Insipidezza.
Scipignate, blows, stripes, thumps, bangs, claps. Scipire, pisco, pito, as
Scialacquare. Also to ripen till it be mellow or rotten. Scirico, a color mixed
with Sinoper and ruddle, a blunket or light watchet. Scirignate, as Scipignate.
Scirio, a kind of stone, which being whole swimmeth upon the water, and broken
sinketh down. Sciro, a hard swelling in the flesh, caused by cold and fleame.
Scirocco, the south-east wind. Sciropare, as Scilopare. Sciroppate, all manner
of wet suckets. Sometimes used for dry suckets. Sciroppo, any kind of scirop.
Scirpi, captious and subtle sentences. Scirro, an hard swelling without pain
grown in the flesh within the skin, caused through choler, or through thick,
cold, and clammie fleame. Scirroma, hardness in any part of the body, namely in
the liver. Scirrosi, a disease in the eye having flesh grown in or about them
somewhat blue. Scischiare, to blow with a pair of bellows. Scischiatore, a
pair of bellows, a blower. Scisma, a schism or division in church matters.
Scismatico, schismatic, or dissentious in matters of religion. Scisso,
divided, sundred, separated, or cut in sunder. Also a division, a sundring or
separation. Scissura, ruin, spoil, havoc, slashing, sundring or confusion.
Scitala, certain letters or characters in ciphers used among the Grecians.
Also a kind of darting weapon with wild fire in it. Also a kind of song
among the Grecians. Also a kind of serpent that has a back of a marvelous
glistring color. Some take it also for a kind of mouse. Scitalca, as Scitala.
Scitale, a serpent, which being very slow in creeping, staieth those with the
marvelous variety of the speckes of his back, whom otherwise he cannot
overtake. Scitamento, a pleasantnes, or any witty invention to adorn ones
talk. Scitare, to despair, to fall in desperation. Used also for to ask or
demand things secret and unknown. Scito, an ordinance, a decree, or statute.
Also an apophthegme or sentence. Also wise, pretty, quaint, feate, trim,
skilful, cunning, gaie, gallant, proper, goodly, iollie, fair, beautiful.
Sciugamano, a wiper or hand-towell. Sciugauiso, a headcloth, a face or
head-towell. Sciugaggine, drines, drought, or parching heat. Sciugare, to dry,
to rub, or wipe dry. Sciugatoio, a hand-towell, a wiper, a rubbing cloth.
Sciugulare, as Sciugare. Also to slip, to slide, to slicke, or smooth.
Sciugulatoio, as Sciugatoio. Also a slickstone. Sciumazzo, as Schiamazzo.
Sciuro, a kind of wild beast. Sciutto, dry, wiped dry, dride. Sclarea, the
herb Clarie. Sclerocefalo, a kind of vermin or worm. Sclinite, a precious
stone which upon white shines yellowe, and has the image of the moon in it,
which increases and waneth as the moon in the firmament. Sclopendra, as
Scolopendra. Sclusa, a water-sluce. Scocca, the bit of a bridle or snaffle.
Scoazze, all manner of sweepings or filth. Scobbia, a kind of iron tool that
carpenters use. Scocatolo, a squirrell. Scoccare, to snap or loose an arrow out
of a bow, to clap, to snap, to poppe, to clicke, to smite, or burst forth.
Scocchi, a kind of soldiers or outlawes upon the mountains of Sclauonia,
continually warring upon the Turks. Scoccolato, huge, immense, boundles,
unmeasurable great. Scoccoueggiare, as Galeffare. Scodato, shaken or wagd the
tail. Also without a tail. Scodella, a dish, a porenger, a treene-dish, a
little platter. Scodellaio, a dish-maker. Scodellare, to dish, to keech up, or
put into dishes, either meat or potage. Scodellino, a little dish or sawcer.
Scodolato, as Scodato. Scoffione, a quoife, a biggin, or a caul, a kercher.
Scofole, as Scrofole. Scoffoni, gamashes worn in winter, or vpper-stockins.
Scogliare, to geld or splaie any creature. Scoglio, a rock, a cliffe or
shelfe in the sea. Scoglionare, to gelde, or splaie any creature, to cut off
ones privy members. Scoglionato, gelded, splaide. Also a gelding, without his
privy members. Scoglioso, rockie, cliffie, stony, or full of shelues.
Scoiatolo, a squirrell. Scoio, as Scoglio. Also an apron. Also a shaking or a
shiuering. Scoiuolo, a squirrell. Scola, a school, or college. Also the sect
or opinion of any sect of philosophers. Also a lesson or disputation between
the master and the scholar. Scoladura, has been used for the running of the
reins, any dripping, trilling, or dropping. Also a running out, or a leake in
a ship. Scolaio, has been used for a scholar or a disciple. Scolamento, as
Scoladura, as Scolatione. Scolare, a scholar, a disciple. Also to run, to
trill, to strain or drop through a colander, to vnglue, and properly to leake
as a ship does. Scolaresco, as Scolastico. Scolasterio, a school, a
schoole-house. Scolastico, scholasticall, or scholler-like, of or belonging to
a scholar, or schools. Scolatione di reni, the running of the reins.
Scolatione di occhij, the running or dropping of the eyes. Scolatoio, a
colander, a gutter, a sink or any conueiance of water, a strainer. Scolatoio
di vna citta, a common sink, gutter or shore of a city. Scolecio, a kind of
worm. Scolature, droppings, runnings, or trillings. Also the skirts of a long
garment. Also ise-sickles. Scoletio, a kind of noisome worm. Scolia, Scolio,
a close, short, and compendious exposition. Scoliare, as Glosare.
Scoliantidatilo, a foot of a verse of six syllables. Scolio coreo, a foot of
a verse of six syllables. Scolimo, a kind of sow-thistle. Scolo di latte,
butter-milke or whaie. Scolopendra, an eare-wigge, or long ear creeper. Also
stone-ferne, spleenewoort, miltwaste, or skale-ferne, finger-ferne,
stone-woort, or Ceterach. Scolopendro, a fish that casts out his bowels
until the hoo^e wherewith he is taken be out, and then sucketh them up again.
Scolopomacherio, an instrument serving to cut out the roots of ulcers or
sores, called of our surgeons the incision knife, or gammot. Scoloramento, a
discoloring, a growing pale or sallowe. Scolorare, to discolor, to wax pale
or wanne. Scolorarsi, to become suddenly wanne or pale. Scolorire, risco, rito,
as Scolorare. Scolpare, to excuse, to acquit, to clear from any blame.
Scolpeuole, vnguiltie, clean, vnfaultie, blameles. Scolpire, pisco, pito, to
carue, to engraue, to cut in, to enchase. Scoltore, a caruer, a cutter, a
grauer, a sculpter. Scoltura, the art of caruing, cutting, or engrauing or
sculpture. Scolturesca art, the art of caruing or engrauing. Scomagnare, to
compass or go round, to encircle. Scombauare, to beslauer, to driuell, to
sniuell. Scomberello, as Haustorio. Scombiccherare, as Schiccherare.
Scombicchiare, as Schiccherare. Scombigliare, as Scompigliare. Scombiglio, as
Scompiglio. Scombro, the fish called a makrell. Scomigliare, to uncover, to
vnhill. Scomiglio, an uncovering, an vnhilling. Scomina, a sentence spoken in
mirth that sounds otherwise then it is meant by the speaker. Scommessa, a bet,
a lay, a wager. Scommettere, metto, misi, messo, to lay a wager, to wage, to
lay or bet in game or play. Also to disorder, to confound, to remove away, to
misplace. Also to commit to ones charge, or to inoine* also to offend or
trespass, to bring to contention, to provoke or stir. Also to confiscate or
forfeit. Scommesso, laid a wager, laid or betted in play. disordered,
misplaced, confounded. loose, disiointed, ready to fall. Scommettitore, a
better or layer of wagers, a confounder, a disordrer. Scomodare, as Incomodare.
Scomodita, as Incomodita. Scomodo, as Incomodo. Scomouere, muouo, mossi, mosso,
to disorder or put out of joint, to misplace. Scomosso, disordred, moved,
misplaced or put out of joint. Scompagnare, to sunder, to sever, to divorce, to
disaccompanie. Scompagnato, sundred, severed, divorced, alone, without
company. Scompagnatura, a separation, a diuorcing or division. Scomparire, to
vanish out of sight. Scompartire, tisco, tito, to divide, to sunder. Also to
compart used in armorie. Scompigliare, to confound, to disturb, to disquiet,
to trouble with a hurly-burly or uproar. Scompigliatamente, confusedly,
disorderly, pell-mell. Scompiglio, uproar, hurly-burly, pell-m^ll, confusion.
Scompisciamento, a bepissing. Scompisciare, to bepisse, to beraie with piss.
Scomunica, an excommunication. Scomunicare, to excommunicate. Scomunicatione,
an excommunication. Scomuzzolo, as Boccata. Sconcacare, to beray, to becacke,
to beshite. Sconcertato, disordered, out of ^une, confused. Sconcerto, rashness,
inconsideratenes, folly, disorder, pell-mell, confusion. Sconchiuso, broken,
vnconcluded, uncertain. Sconciamente, ugly, greatly, monstrously, hugely,
beyond measure, disorderly, confusedly, unhandsomely, ^unger-like. also
untimely, abortiuely, as when a woman is brought a bed before her time.
Sconciare, to miscarie as a woman does when she is brought a bed before her
time, to put any part of the body out of joint, to mar, to spoil, to
disorder, to trouble, to incommode, to molest, to vex, to distress.
Sconciatamente, as Sconciamente. Sconciatura, a mischance or abortiue delivery
before time. Sconcio, miscarried, commen abortiuely, untimely, unjointed, put out
of joint, ill used, ill handled, ill dressed, spoiled, mard, unhandsome, foul,
ilfauouredly, ugly, lubber-like. trouble, vexation, tediousnes, molestation,
disorder. absurd, foolish. Also a mishap, an ill luck. Sconcordanza, a
discord, a discordance. Sconcordare, to disaccord, to disagree. Scondaruole, a
play that children use as we say at hoodman blind or fox in the hole.
Sconficcare, to break up by force, to break open. Sconfiggere, figgo, fissi,
fitto, to discomfite or overthrow in fight, to vanquish, to confound.
Sconfitto, disconfited, put to flight, vanquished, overthrown, broken,
confounded, disordered, wasted. Sconfitta, an overthrow, a disconfiture.
Sconfondere, fondo, fondei, fonduto, to confound, to put to confusion.
Sconfonduto, confounded, put to confusion. Sconfondimento, a confounding, a
confusion. Sconfortare, to disconfort, to dissuade. Sconforto, a disconfort, a
disswasion. Scongiura, a coniuration, a conspiracy. Scongiurare, to conjure,
to conspire, to urge. Scongiuratore, a conspirer, a coniurer, an vrger.
Scongiuro, a coniuring. Sconoscere, nosco, nobbi, nosciuto, to disacknowledge,
to forget, to be unthankful. Sconosciuto, disacknowledged, forgotten, become
unthankful. Also disguised, or unknown, uncouth. Sconoscente, forgetful,
unthankful, ungrateful. Sconoscenza, forgetfulness, unthankfulness,
ingratitude, vnacknowledgement. Sconquassare, as Conquassare. Also to rumble.
Sconquasso, a tossing, a tumbling, a hurly-burly, an uproar, a commotion.
Sconquazzare, as Squaccarare, to toss, to hauock, to break, to crush, to
dash, to bruise, to riot, to waste, to confound. Sconscientiato,
conscience-lesse, without conscience. Sconsertare, to disorder, to bring out of
frame, tune and order. Sconsideraggine, indiscretion, inconsideration.
Sconsideratione, inconsideratenes, indiscretion. Sconsiderato, in considerate,
indiscreete, rash. Sconsigliare, to dissuade, to discounsell. Sconsolare, to
discomfort, to dissuade. Sconsolato, discomforted, dissuaded, afflicted.
Sconsolatione, a discomfort or disswasion. Scontare, to reckon, to cast up
reckonings, to defalke or abate in reckonings. Scontentare, to discontent, to
displease. Scontentezza, coffeehouse. Scontento, coffeehouse,
displeasure. Also discontent. Sconto, an abatemement in reckoning. Scontorcere,
torco, torsi, torto, to shrug, to wriggle, to turn or stir about, to writhe.
Also as Nicchiare. Scontorto, shrugd, wriggled, turned or stirred about,
wreathed. Scontorcimento, a shrugging, a wriggling, a turning, stirring or
tossing. Scontrafatto, counterfeite, deformed, mangled, defaced. Scontrare, to
encounter, to meet, to shocke, to butte. Scontro, an encounter, a meeting, a
shocke, an affront. Sconturbare, to disturb, to vex, to molest. Sconueneuole,
unmeet, inconvenient, uncomely, unbeseeming. Sconueneuolezza, disconuenience,
vnseemelines, vncomelines. Sconueniente, as Sconueneuole, an inconvenience.
Sconuenire, vengo, venni, venuto, to mubeseeme, to be unmeet. Sconuenuto,
misbeseemed, unmeet, vnseemed. Sconuersare, to disaccompanie, to vnfrequent.
Sconuersatione, a disaccompanying, an vnfrequenting. Sconuiene, it is
inconvenient. Sconuolgere, volgo, volsi, volto, to tumble, to toss, to
ouerwhelme, to ouerturne. Sconuolto, turned, tossed, overwhelmed, ouerturned.
Sconuolgimento, a turning, a tossing, an ouerwhelming, an ouerturning. Sconza,
a kind of leaven used to leaven bread. Scopa, a broom, a beesome, a brush to
sweep withal. Scopare, to sweep, to b^esome, to brush, to whip, to scourge
or beat with rods. Also to rouse, to vndenne, to vnkenell, or fetch forth from
any corner. Scopare il cannone, to skoure a cannon. Scoparegia, a kind of
bramble, shrub, or brier that they make broomes with. Scoparo, a broome-maker,
a brush-maker. Scoparola, a brush, or little broom. Scopatore, a sweeper, a
brusher, a whipper, a scourger. Also a skauenger. Scopazzara, a place where all
sweepings and filth is cast. Scopazze, sweepings or filth, or rubbish.
Scopazzo, as Scopazzara. Scoperchiare, to discover, to uncover, to vnhill.
Scoperchiatura, a discovery, an uncovering. Scoperto, Look Scoprire.
Scopetta, any kind of brush or little broom. Scopettare, to brush or to
sweep. Scopettaro, a brush-maker. Scopettiere, a brush-maker. Scopo, a mark
or but to shoot at* a scope, purpose, intent or room, the end or mark
whereat ones purpose is directed, or aimed at. Also a kind of tree or wood.
Scopola, any kind of brush, namely such as painters or pargetters use. Also as
Scopule. Scopoladore, a kind of iron tool that smithes use. Scopolare, to
sweep or brush. Scopolo, as Scopulo. Scopoloso, as Scopuloso. Scoppa, a
Wesell. Scoppare, to until, to vnslate, to uncover a house. Also to brain, to
knock out ones brains, to knock one on the head as a butcher does an ox.
Scoppetta, as Scopetta. Scoppettare, as Scopettare, as Schioppettare.
Scoppettina, as Scopetta. Scoppiare, as Schioppare. Scoppiare dalle risa, to
burst out with laughing. Scoppettata, as Schioppettata. Scoppettiere, as
Schioppettaro. Scoppietto, as Schioppetto. Scoppiettare, as Schioppettare.
Scoppettaro, as Schioppettaro. Scoppio, as Schioppo. Scoppione, a great
handgun, caliuer, musket or mortare. Also any great crack or violent bursting.
Scoprire, copro, copersi, coperto, to discover, to disclose, to reveal, to
uncover, to vnhill. Scoperto, discovered, disclosed, revealed, uncovered,
vnhild. Scoperta, Alla scoperta, manifestly, openly, in view. Also a
discovery. Scopritore, a discouerer. Scopule, the shoulder blades, two broad
bones coming from the neck to the shoulders on both sides. Scopulo, a rock, a
danger, a sea mark. Also a bunch, a knob, a knot. Scopuloso, full of rocks,
shelfs, flats, or dangers by sea. Scorare, to discourage, to vnharten.
Scorbacchiare, as Sgarare. Scorciare, to shorten, to abridge, to abate, to
curtall. Scorciatura, a shortning, a curtalling. Scorcio, as Scurzo. Scordare,
to forget, to put out of tune, to vnstring, to disagree. Scordato, forgotten,
put out of tune, vnstrung, disagreed. Scordanza, forgetfulness, oblivion, a
discordance. Scordeuole, forgetful, obliuious. Scordio, the herb called
water-germander, or Scordion, having leaves like common Germander but larger,
and the stalk fouresquare, having somewhat the taste like garlike.
Scoreggiare, to whip, or to scourge, to stripe. Scoreggiata, a whip or a
scourge. Also a whipping or a scourging, a stripe. Scorfanello, a fish called
in latin Scorpena. Scorfano, as Scorfanello. Scorfoglio, the rind of a
pomegranate. Scorgere, scorgo, scorgei, scorgiuto, or scorto, to perceive or be
aware of, to guide, to lead, to direct, to show. Scorgiuto, Scorto, perceived
or bin aware of, guided, lead, directed, showen. Scorgimento, warines,
foresight, conceit, a direction or a guiding. Scorgitore, a perceiuer, a
guide, a director, a leader. Scoria, a scourge, a whip, a rod. also dross,
dregs, froth, or skum of any metal tried by fire. Scoriada, as Scoria. Also a
whipping or a scourging. Scoriare, to whip, to scourge. also to skum any
metal being moulten. Scoriata, as Scoriada. Scorlare, to shake, to toss, to
tug. Scorlatura, a shaking, a tossing, a tugging. Scorliere, a ladle or a
spoone, a melting ladle. Scorlo, as Scorlatura. Scornacchiare, as Sgarare.
Scornare, to skorne, to vilify, to abhor, to mock, to deride. Scorneuole,
skornefull, to be skorned. Scorno, skorne, a mock, a flout. Scorodo, Garlike or
Cresses. Scorodopraso, an herb like a leeke or scallion, and having the
qualities of them. Scoroma, a disease in the head when all things seem to be
round. Scorpacciata, a good full feeding, a panch full, a belly full.
Scorpare, Scorpacciare, to make good cheer, to glut ones gorge, to make ones
belly his god. Also to vnbody. Scorpena, a kind of fish about Marseilles in
France, where they call it Scorpena. Scorpione, a venomous worm called a
Scorpion, having seven feet, and strikes with his tail, ever seeking
occasion to strike. Also one of the twelve Signs in the Zodiake. Also an
instrument of war like a Scorpion that shoots small arrows and quarrels.
Also the name of a tool that tooth-drawers use ordinarily to pull out teeth
with. Also a kind of sea fish. Also a kind of herb having seeds like a
Scorpions tail, and very few leaves, which is forcible against the sting of
that venomous worm. Also a kind of whip having plumments of lead at the ends
of the cords to whip slaves and offenders with. Scorpioide, scorpion woort, or
scorpion grass. Scorpion herba, turnesole, or wart woort. Scorraria, as
Scorreria. Scorreggiare, as Scoreggiare. Scorreggiata, as Scoreggiata.
Scorreggere, reggo, ressi, retto, to mar, disorder, or vncorrect. Scorrere,
corro, corsi, corso, to ouerrun, to peruse, to run here and there, to gad,
to wander, to roue or roame to and fro. also to slide or glide upon the ise.
Scorrenza di corpo, a la^ke, running flux, or loosenes in the body. Scorreria,
an excursion, an outrode, a running to and fro. Scorrettione, an incorrection
or marring of any thing. Scorretto, uncorrected, unpolished, rude, rough.
Scorrettore, a spoiler, a marrer of any thing, a disor^rer. Scorribanda, a
sidewalke, about, a walk, a turn, a turn and away. Scorritore, an outrunner,
a gadder to and fro. Also running, sliding, loose. a running up and down.
Scorrompere, rompo, ruppi, rotto, to break, to corrupt, to break forth.
Scorrotto, corrupted, polluted, defiled. Scorrubbiare, to chafe, to fret, to
curse, to ban, to huffe and snuff, to swear, to dodge, to wrangle, to chafe
aloude that all may hear. Scorsa, as Scorreria. also a course in running.
Scorso, ouerrun, perused, run here and there, gadded, wandered, roaued,
roamed. Scorta, a guide, a direction, a leading, a conuoie, a conduct.
Scortare, as Scorciare. Scortatura, as Scorciatura. Scortegianato, vncourted,
vnfauned upon, left off the habit of a courtier. Scorrese, discourteous,
uncivil, barbarous. Scortesia, a discourtesie, an unkindness, an vnciuilitie.
Scorticare, to flea the skin off, to rub or gall off the skin.
Scorticaporcelli, a fleaer of hogs, a base rascal. Scorticato, fleade, rubd,
or galled the skin off. Scorticatore, a fleaer of the skin off. Scorticamento,
a gall or fleaing the skin off. Scorticatoio, a kind of tool that women use to
rub and make their skin smooth with. Scorticatura, a fleaing or a gall.
Scortigianare, to forsake, or renounce to be a courtier or a curtizan. Scorto,
perceived or bin aware of, guided, lead, brought, directed. Scorrucciare, to
anger, to fret, to rage. Scorrucciato, angry, fretted, raged, wroth.
Scorruccio, anger, wrath, rage, ire, fretting. Scorruccioso, angry, wrathful,
raging, irefull. Scorsa, a running, a gadding. look Scorrere. Scorza, the
bark or rind of any tree, the paring of any fruit. also any outward
garment. also the exterior part or mortal veil of mankind. also an egg shel,
a husk, or any other shell or shale, or pilling or paring, a skale of any
thing, any skin. Also taken for a base alehouse, tipling-house, or such
pot-house. Scorza di san Pietto, a cloak in rogues language or pedlers french.
Scorzare, to pare, to shave the bark of trees, of fruit or any thing else.
Also to deprive or bereave of life. Also to flea the skin off. Scorzetta, a
thin rind, bark, shale, shell, paring, etc. Scorzo, as Scorza, as Scorzone.
Scorzo di serpe, the skin of a snake. Scorzone, a snake, an adder, a serpent
that is very venomous and has a square head. Scorzonera, an herb against
poison, called in latin Hiperbaton. Scorzoso, rugged, rough, hard, full of
bark or rynde. Scosagna, any kind of lurking or hiding in hugger-mugger, a
lurking hole. Scoscendere, scendo, scesi, sceso, ^o tumble or rumble, or come
down a hill ruinouslie. Also to break, to riue or burst, or cleave a sunder.
Scosceso, tumb^ed, rumbled, or come down a hill ruinously, broken, riuen,
burst, or cleft a sunder. Also rugged, steepie, stony, rockie, ruinous.
Scoscesamente, ruggedly, ruinously, steepely, craggily, rockily. Scoscesi,
rocks, steepes, cragges, cliffes, ruins. Scoscientiato, inhumane, without
conscience. Scoscio, as Scosceso, and as Scosso. Scossa, a shaking, a rouzing,
a tossing, a trembling, a rumbling, a tottring, a ruin, an overthrow.
Scossale, a woman's apron. Scossalino, Scossaletto, a little apron. Scossare, to
shake, to toss, to rumble. Scossatoio, a sieue, a crib, a winnowe, a fan to
fan or winnow corn with. Scosso, shaken, tossed, rumbled, redeemed, rescued,
ransomed, or levied money. also a shaking or a tossing, tottred. Scostare as
Discostare. Scostarsi, to separate, to eslonge, or go far off. Scostio, a
quick, a sudden or hasty moving. Scostumare, to disaccustome or loose a
wont or fashion. Scostumato, disaccustomed, unmannerly, untaught, uncivil,
rude. Scotano, a red wood called brasill or fernanbucke. Scotello, as Scodella.
Scotellino, as Scodellino. Scotenare, to flea or vnskin. Scotere, as Scuotere.
Scotie, a kind of fruit in Italy. Scotolare, to shake, to toss, to rumble.
Scotoma, a disease in the head which makes all things to seem round.
Scotonato, bare, threadbare, without a nap or cotton. Scothonia, a dimnes or
inflammation in the eyes. Scotta, a chough or a dawe, a rooke. Also the name of
a roape in a ship. Scottare, to scalde, to burn, to parch, to sing.
Scottatura, a scalding, a burning, a parching, a singing. Scotteggiare, to
flutter as a bird before it can fly well. Scotto, a shot, or rekoning for
meat and drink. Also a kind of course woollen stuff. Scoua, as Scopa.
Scouare, as Scopare. Scouaro, as Scoparo. Scouatore, as Scopatore. Scouazzara,
as Scopazzara. Scouazze, as Scopazze. Scouazzo, as Scopazzara. Scouetta, as
Scopetta. Scouettare, as Scopettare. Scouerchiare, to discover, to uncover.
Scouiglie, all manner of kitchen stuff, filth or sweepings. Scouola, a brush or
little broom. Scouolare, to brush or sweep. Scouerta, as Scoperta. Scouerto,
as Scoperto. Scourire, as Scoprire. Scozzare, to separate, to sunder, to
disioyne, to scatter. Scozzonare, to break a coult. Also to coarse or change a
horse. Scozzonato, broken a coult, coarsed a horse. also as crafty, as
knauish, as subtle, or as sly as a horse-coarser, broken to all knauerie.
Squerro, the tool of a shipwright. Scranna, a low stool. Also a close
stool. Screare, to strain ones throat to spit, or to fetch up fleame from the
stomach. Scredente, unbelieving, a miscreant. Scremire, as Schermire.
Scremitore, as Schermitore. Scretiati panni, ragd, rent, tottred, torn
clothes, iagged, cut, party colored. Scretio, as Scritio. Scriba, a scribe, a
writer, a scriuener, a clarke, a secretary, a notarie. Scribattare, as
Scriuacchiare. Scricciolare, to schreeke, or shrik, to pule, to chirpe.
Scricciola, a little bird called a wren. Scrignare, to make crooked, bunchie,
or knobbie. Also to vnchest, to pull out of coffins, to vnshrine. Scrignata, a
blow or whirret on the nose. Scrignetto, a little coffin, shrine, chest, trunk
or deske, a little bunch or croope upon ones back. Scrigno, a shrine, a
coffin, a standard, a chesi, a trunk, or a deske, a casket or other such thing
wherein jewels and secret things are kept. Also crooked, lame, halting, maimed.
Also a bunch or croope upon ones back as a camel has. Scrignolo, as
Scrignetto. Scrignuto, crookt-backe, croopt, bunch-backt, as camels be.
Scrignuto naso, a camoset, a flat-nose, a nose like a scotch-saddle. Scrima,
the art of fence or fencing. Scrimaglia, as Scrima. Scrimatore, as
Schermitore. Scrimare, as Schermire. Scrimaruolo, a fencer, a master of fence.
Scrimia, as Scrima. Scrimiare, as Schermire. Scrimiatore, as Schermitore.
Scriminale, the seares or nares of a hauk. Also a pin or bodkin that women use
to divide and shed their hairs with when they dress their heads.
Scriminatura, the shedding or dividing of a woman's hairs of a head. Scriptolo,
a kind of weight so called in Italy. Scristianare, to forsake or renounce ones
christendom. Scritiare, to spot with diverse colors. Also to lace, fringe or
guard garments. Scritiati, Look Scretiati. Scritio, Scretio, a braule, a
hurly-burly, a breach, a squaring, a rupture. Scritta, written, a writing, a
writ, a bill, a schedule, a manuscript. Scrittarello, a writ, a scroule, a
schedule, a bill, a band writing or note of ones hand. Scrittarino, as
Scrittarello. Scritto, as Scritta. Scrittoio, a standish, an inke-horne. Also a
counting house or writing house. Scrittore, a writer, a scriuener, a scribe, a
secretary, a cleark. Scrittoria, a scriueners shop. the art of writing.
Scrittorista, as Scritturista. Scrittura, scripture, a writing, a writ, the
writing or making of a book. the style or manner of the writing of any author.
Also any kind of indenture, evidence or handwriting. Scritturale, of or
pertaining to scriptures or writing. Scritture, scriptures, writings, writs,
evidences, records. Scriturista, a great reader of holy scriptures or professor
of them. Scriuacchiare, to scribble, to write foolishly. Scriuano, a scriuener,
a writer, a scribe, a clerk, a notarie, a secretary. Scriuere, scriuo,
scrissi, scritto, to write, to scribe, to scribble. Scrizzotto, as Gonfiatoio.
Also a reed that cooks use to blow the pudding guts before they fill them.
Also a funnell or fil-bole to fill puddings. Scroba, a kind of bird that digs a
hole under the ground to lay her eggs in. Scroccante, a tall trencherd man, a
smell feast, a good feeder, a babbler, a pratler, a bold, presumptuous, saucie
shifter for his victuals. Scroccare, to strike suddenly as the clock does, as
Schioppare. Also to feed carelessly, as one that paies nothing for his commons,
to shift for. Scroccatore, as Scroccante. Scrocchetto, a shifting for meat and
drink. a little scrocco. Scrocco, a snap, a clicke, a pop, a snaphance of a
caliuer. Mangiare a scrocco, to feed scot-free at another man's charge, a shift
or shifting for. Also as we say a shift, a robbing of Peter to pay Paul, a
shift for belly cheer. Scroccolare, to crack, to clicke as the ioints of some
men's fingers will do. Scroccone, a foolish, idle, loitring fellow, a babbler, a
pratler, a good feeder, one that loves to hear none speak but himself, as
Scroccante. Scrofa, a sow, a farrowing sow, a piggesow. Scrofano, as
Scrofanello. Scrofetta, a little sow. Scroffa, a sow, a farrowing sow.
Scrofola, idem. Scrofolare, to farrow or to pig. Scrofole, a disease called the
Kings evil, a wen or swelling in the neck. Scrofularia, the herb blind
nettle, fig-woort or water betonie. Scrofule, as Scrofole. Scrollare, to shake
down, to toss, to wagge. Scrollatura, a shaking, a tossing, a wagging.
Scrollo, as Scrollatura. Scropolo, as Scrupolo. Scropoloso, as Scrupoloso. Also
rugged, grettie, harsh. Scrostare, to pare off the crust of any thing. Scroto,
the outward skin of the cods wherein be the stones of a man. Scrouola, a
farrowing sow. Scrouole, as Scrofole. Scrouoloso, one that has the Kings
evil. Scrunata, without an eye, as some needles are. Scrupolo, any little
sharp stone. Also a doubt, a scruple of conscience, spicednes of conscience, a
difficulty, a care, a trouble, a me^nes or precisenes upon strickt points.
Also a little poise or weight called a scruple, and is twenty grains of
corn, the third part of a dragme. Also used for a measure of ground containing
an hundred foot square. Scrupolosita, curiousnes of conscience, scrupulositie,
anxietie, spicednes of conscience. Scrupoloso, scrupolous, doubtful, curious
in trifles, of a spiced conscience, ^^ll of doubts. Also hard, grettie, harsh,
rugged, full of little gravel stones. Scruposo, full of little gravel stones.
Scrutatione, a searching. Scrutatore, a searcher, a scrutatore. Scrutinare, to
scrutinie or search out by scrutinie, to seek and inquire out diligently, to
bolt out, to trace out, to follow by sent as hounds do. Scrutinio, a scrutinie,
a searching. Scuarcoia, filthy, grizly, ghastly, horrible and horride to look
upon. Scucherare, to burst forth in laughing. Scuccione, an escutcheon of
arms. Scudaia, a beast creeping called a tortoise. Scudare, to shield, to
shelter, to cover or hide with a buckler. Scudella, as Scodella. Scudellaio, as
Scodellaio. Scudellare, as Scodellare. Scudellino, as Scodellino. Scudellone, a
great ill-favored dish, boule or traie. Scudetto, a little shield or buckler.
Scudiere, Scudiero, a squire, an esquire, a servant, a groom, a waiter, a
quirie of a stable, a noble man's master or gentleman of the horse. Scudisci.
Scudiscire, scisco, scito, to rip or seame-rent. Scudo, a shield, a target, a
buckler, a scutchion. Also a defense, a shelter, a shroud. Also a coin called
a crown. Scudo del sole, a french crown, a crown soll. Scudone, a great
shield or target, etc. Scuffia, a coife, a caul, a biggin, a hood or other
woman's head attire. Scuffiare, to coife or caul a woman's head. Scuffine, a
goldsmiths tool or file. Scuffione, a great coife, caul, hood, couer-shef or
biggin. Sculacciare, to clap on the buttocks. Sculacciate, claps, clappings or
strokes on the buttocks. Sculpire, as Scolpire. Scultore, as Scolpitore.
Scultura, as Scoltura. Scuoiare, to vnskin, to flea or galle the skin off.
Scuola, as Scola. Scuolare, as Scolare. Scuotere, scuoto, scossi, scosso, to
shake, to toss, to tumble, to totter or clatter. Also to receive, to rescue.
to levy money. Scuotere il pelliccione, to ginicomtwig or occupy a woman.
Scuoter il pelliccino, to shake out all, to empty the bag even to the little
ears or corners of sacks, to utter all, to tell all one knows. Scuotare il
pesco, to follow leacherie, especially boys. Scuotitore, a shaker, a tosser. a
redeemer, a res^uer. Scuotimento, as Scossa. Scuraccio, a skouring cloth, a
dish-clout, a skourer, a rubber. Scuraccino, a little skouring cloth,
dish-clout, or skourer. Scuradenti, a tooth-pick, a rubber for the teeth.
Scuralo, a Squirrell. Scurapola, a dawe, or a chough. Scurare, to darken, to
obscure. Also to skoure dishes, to rub or cleanse harness. Look Oscurare.
Scuratore, a skourer, a rubber of harness. Scurcio, Scurzo, a word common to
architects. Scure, an axe, an adze, a hatchet. Scurechetto. Scuriada, Scuriata,
as Scoriata. Scuriare, as Scoriare. Scuriato, a Squirrell. Also whipped or
scourged. Scuriatolo, a Squirrell. Scurino, a little hatchet. Scuriscioso,
dark, darkish, obscure. Scurita, obscurity, darkness. Look Oscurita. Scuro,
obscure, dark, darkish. also darkness, obscurity. Look Oscuro. Scurolo, a
tabernacle or place in a church to put and keep holy relics in. Scurrile,
scurrill, skoffing, saucie, unclean, railing, belonging to scurrilitie.
Scurrilita, immoderat jesting, or skoffing, or scurrilitie. Scurzo, something
or part about a building. Scusa, an excuse. Scusare, to excuse. Scusabile,
excusable, that may be excused. Scusatione, an excuse. Scuseuole, as Scusabile.
Scuscire, scisco, scito, to rip, to seame-rent, to vnsow. Scuscito, ripped,
seame-rent, or vnsowen. Scuscitura, a ripping, a seame-rent. Scusire, as
Scuscire. Scusitura, as Scuscitura. Scutica, a whip, a rod, a scourge.
Scuticare, to whip, to scourge. Scuticata, a whipping, a scourging, a stripe or
print of a whipping. Scutice, a ripping, or a seame rent. Sdebitare, to come
out of debt, to vndebt, to free or quit one. Sdegnaiuo^o, a nice, coy, homorous
fellow, that for a straw will take pepper in the nose. Sdegnare, to disdain,
to detest, to abhor, to shun, to skorne, to be or make angry, to vex.
Sdegnato, disdained, detested, abhorred, shunned, skorned, angry, vexed, wroth,
moodie, irefull. Sdegnarsi, to be angry, moodie, or vexed. Sdegno, disdain,
contempt, skorne, anger, wrath, ire, mood, fury, rage. Sdegnoso, angry,
disdainefull, irefull, moodie, furious, wrathful, skornefull. Sdenaiato,
moni-lesse, without coin, poor, bare. Sdentato, toothlesse, without teeth.
Sdigiunare, to break ones fast, to feed. Sdimenticanza, forgetfulness,
oblivion. Sdimenticaggine, forgetfulness, oblivion. Sdimenticare, to forget.
Sdimenticheuole, forgetful, obliuious. Sdilinguito, unsavory, taste-lesse,
wallowish in taste. Sdogato, a barrel or such vessel whose side boords be out
or broken. Sdogliarsi, to remove or be free from aches, griefs, or sores.
Sdogliatiuo, that will remove aches and griefs. Sdorare, to vnguild. Sdorato,
vnguilt. Sdossato, broken backed, broken hipt. Also alighted from ones back.
Sdrau, used for Esdrau. Look Esdrau. Sdrauizze, pretty, strange, cunning,
slye, knauish tricks. Sdrizzato, vnstiffned, bent, crooked. Sdrusciolante, as
Sdrusciolo. Sdrusciolare, to slide, to slip, to glide, or run smoothly as upon
ise. Sdrusciolatiuo, as Sdrusciolo. Sdrusciolo, slipperie, sliding, glib,
gliding, isie. also a kind of s^^^th running blanke verse. Sdruscioloso, as
Sdrusciolo. Sdruscitura, as Sdruccitura. Sdrusciolare, as Sdrucciolare.
Sdrusciolante, as Sdrucciolante. Sdrusciolina, as Sdrusolina. Sdruscio, as
Sdrusciolo. Also split, broken, riuen, cleft, shiuered, ripped. Sdruscire,
scisco, scito, as Sducciolare. Also to split, to riue, to shiuer as a ship that
suffers shipwreck. Also to rip or seame rent. Sdruscito, slided, slipped,
glided, glibd. Also riuen, splint, or shiuered. Also ripped, seame-rent.
Sdruscitura, a sliding, a gliding, a glibbing Also a splinting, a riuing, or
shiuering, a flawing. Also a seame-rent, a ripping. Also a leake in a ship, a
splitting of a ship upon the rocks. Sdrusolina, a pretty wench, pug or fine
less, a nimble, subtle, pretty whore, a trull. Sdrusire, as Sdruscire. Se,
if, if that, if so be that, whether. Also him, to him, himself, to himself,
or them, to them, themselves, to themselves. Also of Essere, thou art, thou
be. also unless. Se alcun altro, if any body else, if any other.
Sebellini, sable skins or furs. Se been, albeit, although, howbeit.
Sebesten, a kind of plum or damsin, but smaller. Seca, a saw to saw with.
Secare, to saw in sunder. Secca, a sheife, a quick-sand, or shallow in the
water. Also dry. Seccacapo, a busy importunate fellow that tyres one with
talking. Seccaggine, a drought, a drynes, a barrennes, a shelfe, a shallow, a
flat or quick-sand in the sea or any river. Also importunity, tediousnes,
foolishnes, or vexation with words. Seccagna, as Secca. Seccare, to dry up, to
make dry. Also to importune, or weary one with talk. Seccatelli, fagots or
ba^ins of dry wood to kindle the fire with. Seccaticcio, dry, saplesse, burnt,
barren, parched, scorched. Secchezza, as Seccaggine. Secchia, a bucket, a
paile, a milking paile. Also a pan for a close stool. Secchiaro, a
bucketmaker. Also a place to set buckets upon. Secchiella, a little bucket or
paile, or pitcher. Secchio, as Secchia. Secchione, a great paile or hucket.
Secco, dry, parched, barren, meagre, lean, saplesse, gaunt, withered, without
moisture, or juice, spinie, also importunate, tedious, foolish in talk,
barren, void or poor of wit, invention, or conceit, shallowe witted. also a
shelfe, a rock, a dry sand, a shallow, a flat, or quick-sande in any sea or
water. Seccura, as Seccaggine. Secedere, cedo, cedei, or cessi, ceduto, or
cesso, to go apart, to go back, to go from company, to play or cease from
labor. Secernere, cerno, cernei, cernuto, to divide, to separate or put
asunder, to cull or choose from among other. Secespita, a cutting knife or
hatchet that painims were wont to cut their sacrifices with. Secessione, a
departing from other, a separating of ones self from other. Secesso, a
departing in some solitary place, a vacation from business, a solitary and
secret abode, a ceasing from labor. Secludere, cludo, clusi, cluso, to seclude
or shut apart from other. Secluso, secluded or shut apart from other.
Secomedesimo, with, or between himself. Seco, with him, with himself, among
or between them or him. Secodagnolo, a wadde, or wispe of haie or straw.
Secolare, to perpetuate, to eternize, to make eternal. Also a temporal or
secular man, a lay man. Also of or belonging to the space of an hundredth
years. Secolaresco, wordly, following the vulgar, or temporal or secular.
Secolo, an age, or space of time, containing a hundredth years. Some take it
for a thousand, and some for thirty. Seconda, a seconding, a following, a
soothing or smoothing up. Also as Secondina. Seconda. A seconda, following the
natural course or inclination of the stream. Also as Secondina. Secondamente,
secondly, secondarily. Secondare, to second, to prosper, to follow course, to
sooth or smooth up. Secondariamente, secondly, secondarilie. Seco^dario, of the
second sort, the second. Secondatione, a seconding or making prosperous.
Secondina, the secondine or afterbirth, or bag wherein a child lies in the
mothers womb. Also the second string of any instrument of music. Also a
surgeons instrument to cut out little bones. Secondo, second, next to the
first, inferior, next after. Also according, concerning, or after a man's
desire, will, or inclination, as, after as, even as, as for, thereafter, that
comes after our own desire, good, acceptable, meet, and agreeable,
seasonable, quiet and calm. Also prosperous, favorable, luckie. Secondo che,
according as, thereafter. Secondo il tempo, according to time and season.
Secondo me, as for me, according to my opinion. Secondo ragione, according to
reason, right or equity. Secrestare, as Sequestare. Secrestano, as Sagrestano.
Secrestia, as Sagrestia. Secreta, a thin steel cap, or close skull, worn
under a hat. Also the name of a place in Venice where all their secret records
and ancient evidences be kept, as hell is in westminster hall. Secretario, a
secretary, a secret keeper. Secretezza, secrecy, secretnes. Secreto, secret,
close, hid, concealed, privy, separate, solitary, all alone, privy and
unknown. Also a secret, a priuitie, or a receite in physic. Seculare, as
Secolare. Seculo, as Secolo. Securare, as Sicurare. Secure, an axe, an adze, a
hatchet. Securita, as Sicuranza. Securanza, as Sicuranza. Securta, as
Sicuranza. Securo, as Sicuro. Secutione, execution. Sedacciare, as Setacciare.
Sedaccio, as Setaccio. Sedare, to assuage, to mittigate, to allaie, to appease,
to order, to pacify, to qualify, to quench, to stint. Sedatione, as Sedatura.
Sedatiua medicina, a medicine that does presently ease and in time cure the
pacient. Sedato, mittigated, qualified, appeased, sober, quiet, temperate.
Sedatore, he that appeaseth or qualifieth, or asswageth. Sedatura, an
asswaging, a mittigation, an appeasing or qualifying. Sedazzare, as Seracciare.
Sedazzo, as Setaccio. Sede, a seat, a chair, a stool, a sitting place, a
place to abide or dwell in, a cuntrie, a resting place, a mansion house. also a
situation. Sedeci, the number of sixteen. Sedello, a pan, a pot, a posenet, a
paile, a bucket, a pitcher. Sedere, seggo, sedei, seduto, or siso, to sit, to
sit down. Also a seat or sitting place. also a man's bum, arse, fundament,
tail or sitting place, all that part of the body whereon one sits.
Sedetto, a graffe, a set, a plant, a syen. Sedia, a seat, a sitting place, a
chair. Sedia regale, a roial seat or seat of justice. Sedia schionata, a
chair with a back, a leaning chair. Sedibile, that may be sitten with or
upon. Sedici, the number of sixteen. Sedile, an imminent seat or sitting
place. Sedime, some part about a bell. Seditione, a sedition, a rebellion, a
mutiny, a breach or variance between people, strife or debate. Seditioso,
seditious, rebellious, mutinous, factious, loving discord. Seditoio, any kind
of seat, stool or sitting place. Sedo, houseleeke, or sengreene, Sedola, the
name of a disease in a horses foot. Sedonia, a kind of root used in salads.
Sedrarsi, to fall in a sudden swoune or trance. Sedulita, care and great
diligence. Sedulo, a kind of cart or tumbrell. Also careful, diligent,
painful, earnest. Sedurre, duco, dussi, dutto, to seduce, to lead away, aside
or apart, to mislead, to deceive. Seduttione, a seducing, a misleading, a
leading aside or apart. Sedutto, seduced, mislead, deceived, lead away or
aside. Seduttore, a seducer, he that seduceth, a misleader. Sefirod, a kind of
cabalisticall practice or practike cabala. Sega, a saw to saw withal. Also a
sithe or a sickle. Segala, the grain we call rye or winter corn. Segare, to
saw. Also to mow or cut. Also to cut or furrow through the sea. Segarino, a
sawier, a little saw. Segatore, a sawier, a mower, a cutter. Segatura, a
sawing, a mowing, a sickling, a cutting* sawings, sawdust. Segenato sopra nero,
black, full of silver hairs. Segesta, the goddess of harvest. Segeta, a
little saw, sickle or syethe. Seggiaio, a chaire-maker. Seggietta, a kind of
chair used in Italy to carry men and women up and down in. Seggio, a seat, a
stool, a form, a chair, a bench or sitting place. Also I sit down. It has
been used for the heavens. Also for a place of justice or a tribunal.
Seggiola, a little low chair, stool or seat. Seghetta, as Segeta. Segiamai,
if ever, if at any time. Segiorasi, an inflammation in the head. Segnacolo, a
mark, a sign or token, a seal or branding iron. Segnalatamente, famously,
notably, notoriously. Segnale, a signal, a mark, a sign, a token, a
meare-stone, a signet, a seal. Segnaluzzo, a little mark, seal or token.
Segnalare, to make notable, renowned, famous or notorious, to mark, to sign,
to note, to brand, to betoken, to skar. Segnalato, made notable, famous or
notorious, marked, signed, noted or branded, betoken or skarred. Also famous,
notable, renowned, notorious. Segnare, to mark, to brand, to seal, to sign,
to note, to skar, to coin, to make a sign or put on a sign. Also to betoken,
to signify or show by sign or token. Segnatamente, by signs, marks and
tokens. Segnatura, a marking, a branding, a sealing, a signing, a brand, a
mear-stone. Segnetto, a seal, a signet, a small mark, sign or token. Segni,
marks, signs or tokens. Segni celesti, the twelve signs in heaven. Segnita,
as Segnitie. Segnitie, slownes, lazines, slothfulnes or negligence, barennes.
Segno, a sign, a mark, a token, a goal, a mear-stone, a skar. a butte, a
mark, a white or aim or blanke to shoot at. a pawn or pledge. Also a man's
water for the physicians to cast or judge by. a sign that hangs at men's
doors. Also a banner, a streamer, a flag. Also a sign of stars, a token of
things to come. Sego, tallow or grease to make candles. Segollo, a vein of
earth in mines declaring that gold may be found there. Segoso, tallowie,
fattie, greasy. Segregare, to lay a part, to sever, to cull out, to separate,
to put from out off. Segretario, as Secretario. Segretezza, as Secretezza.
Segretiere, a secretary, a secret keeper. Segreto, as Secreto. Segrestano, as
Sagrestano. Segrestia, as Sagrestia. Seguace, following, ensuing, a follower,
an attendant, that follows easy, clammy, pliant. Hedera sequace, Iu^e
growing and spreading every way on the walls. Seguente, following, succeeding,
ensuing, that follows or comes after. Seguentemente, consequently,
followingly, succeedingly, in order. Seguentia, a sequence. Also a play at
cards so called. Seguire, seguo, seguito, to follow, to ensue, to succeed, to
chance, to happen, to come to pass, to pursue, to go after. Seguito,
followed, insued, succeeded, come to pass, happened, come after. Seguito, a
train of followers, waiters, attendants or servants, company or friends.
Seguitare, as Seguire. Segurta, as Sicuranza. Sei, the number of six. Also
thou art of Essere. Seicento, six hundredth. It is also used for the finite
number of all the devils in hell. Sell, if the* it to himself. Selagine, a kind
of herb much used of the Druides for all eie-sores, called hedge-hysop.
Selbastrella, as Serbastrella. Selce, a flint or hard pibble stone. Selciare,
to paue with flint stones. Selciato, paued. Also a pauement. Selciata, a
pauement. Also a causey of hard stones. Selciatore, a pauier. Seleno, the herb
parsely or smallage. Selenite, a precious stone wherein is a white which
decreaseth and increases as the moon does. Seletto, selected, picked or
chosen out from among others. Seleueide, a kind of bird that deuoures
locustes. Selfo, a warte in a horse called an auburie. Selice, a flint or
pibble stone. Selinusia, terra medicinale. Sella, any kind of saddle or pad.
Used also for a seat or sitting place. Sellare, to saddle. Sellaro, Sellaio, a
sadler. Sellecchia, the husks, shales or cods of any pulse as of beans and
peason. Selletta, a kind of foot stool or little saddle Selua, a forest, a
chase or a wood full of great trees and timber wood. Seluaggina, any kind of
venison, wildegame, foul or hunting. Seluaggio, savage, wild, vplandish,
homely, of the field or country, rural, clownish, rude, rusticke, swainish
or siluane. Also fell, cruel, fantastical, untamed, strange, fond,
unsociable. Seluaggiume, as Seluaggina. Seluareccio, as Seluaggio.
Seluastrella, an herb called in latin Herba trallis. Seluaticcina, as
Seluaggina. Seluatico, as Seluaggio. Seluestrella, as Seluastrella. Seluestro,
as Seluaggio. Seluietta, a napkin or drinking cloth. Seluoso, wooddie,
forest-like, full of woods, desert, wild. Selze, as Selce. Se may, if ever, if
at any time. Sembiante, a semblance, a seeming, a likeness, a similitude, a
countenance, a show, an appearance. Also seeming, showing, appearing,
resembling, doing as if. Sembianza, a semblance, a seeming, a likeness, etc.
Sembiare, to seem, to resemble, to show, to appear. Sembieuole, semblant,
seeming, appearing. Sembola, as Semola. Sembolato, as Semolato. Sembolelli, a
kind of simnell or sugar-bread. Semboloso, as Semoloso. Sembranza, as
Sembianza. Sembrare, as Sembiare. Seem, any kind of seed, offspring, or
beginning. a kernel of fruit. seed, or corn. a graff or set of a young tree,
a nource gardine. kind or generation. Also a chief auctor, beginner or causer
of a thing. that whereby a thing is nourished or maintained. Se medesimo,
himself. Sementa, Semenza, as Seem. Sementella, the small touch-pouder that a
gunner does use. Sementina, Semenzena, wormeseede. Also any kind of small
seed. Also small haileshot. Sementine, a kind of pear so called in Italy.
Semi, a word much used in composition for half. Semestre, of six months.
Semiaperto, half open. Semi breue, a semibriefe in music. Semi capro, half a
goat, demygoated, semie-goated. Semicinto, a garment coming lower then the
belly. Also half guirt, as we may say a half kirtle. Semicirculare, half
circled. Semicotto, half sodden, baked, or roasted. Semicrome, a semie crochet
in music. Semi dei, demy-gods, half gods, semie-gods. Semidiametro, half the
diameter of a figure, a line drawn from the center to the circumference.
Semi-foras. carattero diabolico. Semidotto, half or meanly learned.
Semifatto, half made, half done. Semigraue, half heavy, grave, drousie, or
half a sleep. Semihuomo, half a man. Semi hora, half an hour. Semimarino,
belonging partly to the sea, and partly to the land. Semiminima, a semiminime
in music. Semimorto, half dead. Semituono, a semitune, half a note in
music. Semiditono, a kind of tune in music. Semidente cauallino, an herb
so called. Seminare, to sow any seed, to skatter, to disperse. Also to charge
as a field in armorie is. Seminale, of or pertaining to seed, or sowing. Also
knotgrasse, or swinegrasse. Seminali vasi, the seed vessels. Seminato, sown,
scattered, dispersed. Also any ground that is sown. charged as a cote of
arms. Seminario, a seminary. Also a spring-gardine, or a seede-plot, or a
place where plants be set to be removed: a nource-gardine, a tree whereof
plants or graffs be taken. Also the first beginning or chief cause of any good
or evil. Seminatione, the art of sowing, sowing, generation, or breeding by
seed. Seminatore, a sower of seeds, a disperser, a scatterer, a breeder, an
ingendrer, an auctor or procurer of some thing. Seminudo, half naked. Seminio,
all the gain or profit of seed, or sowing. Semipedale, half a foot in
quantity or height. Semiperfetto, half perfect, half finished. Semipieno,
half full. Semiraso, half shaven. Semisepolto, half buried. Semistante, a
word of derision for a brave fellow, as we say as good as George a green.
Semitertiana, a shaking ague so called, because the greatest part of the fits
thereof is spent in shiuering, on that day specially that the tertian and
quotidian do meet together. Semitono, a demitune, or half note in music.
Semitrito, half bruised, half brayed, or ^ounded. Semiuiro, half a man, a
womanish fellow, an imperfect man, an eunuch, one that is guelded. Semiuiuo,
half alive, between dead and alive. Semiuocale, six consonants so called,
because they have half the sound of vowels. Semma, powder grown from brass
melted, or golden sand. Semola, the branne of corn. Semod, a kind of
cabalisticall speculation. Semolato, a kind of course vnboulted bread, full of
branne. Semolella, fine branne. Also a kind of meat or pudding so called.
Semoloso, brannie, course, full of bran. Sempieta, as Semplicita. Sempio, as
Semplice. Sempiternare, as Secolare. Sempiternita, eternity, sempiternitie.
Sempiterno, sempiternall, ayeduring, everlasting, continual, perpetual,
endless, immortal, always during. Semplice, simple, single, slight, not
double, of one sort, not compounded, unmixed, sincere, pure, unfeigned,
harmless, plain, without welt or guard, unlabored, not curious. Also
foolish, simple-witted, shallow-headed, homely, mean. Semplicemente, simply,
singlie, slightlie, sincerely, homely, purely, unfeignedly, without
dissimulation, in good faith, unwittingly. Also foolishly, simply, plainly.
Semplicetto, somewhat simple, foolish, or shallow witted. Semplicita,
simplicity, singlenes, slightnes, homelines, sincerity. Sempliciotto, as
Semplicetto. Semprana, as Sempr^uiua. Semprano, perpetual, ayeduring,
everlasting. Semprare, as Secolare. Sempre, ever, for ever, ever and ever, aye,
continually, from time to time. Semprelenita, accustomed gentleness, continual
mildenes. Sempremai, for ever and ever, for ever, ever and a day. Sempreuina,
the herb houseleeke, sengreene, or prickmadam, or euergreene. Sen, as Seen,
as Seno. Sena, an herb or spurge much used in physic called Senie, it is a
low plant having leaves like Fenigreeke, bearing small, flat, and crooked
husks, wherein is a flat and brounish seed. Senacolo, a counsell-house or
chamber, a Senate House. Senape, madness, rashness, fondnes, rage, folly, pepper
in the nose, teene, a toyish humor. Senario, of or pertaining to the number of
six, that contains six. Senato, the Senate or Parliament house. Senatorio,
of or pertaining to a Senate. Senatore, a Senator, a magistrate, or chief
counselor, a counselor, an alderman, a borough-maister. Senatus consulto, a
decree, an act, an ordinance or deliberatiue made by the whole Senate.
Senauro, as Senape. Seen, old, aged, or eld. Also himself thence, himself
thereof, themselves thence or thereof. Seneccione, the weed groundeswell or
groneswell. Senepe, as Senape. Senescente, waxing old, growing in age, wearing
away, decreasing, drawing to the wa^e. Senesciallo, a Seneshall, a Marshall, a
Bailife, a Sheriff, or Governor. Senestra, the left hand, or side, as
Senestro. Senestramente, sinisterlie, strangely, against the hair. Senestrare,
to miscarie, to stray, or put any lim or joint out of joint. Senestro, a
sinister chance, an ill luck, an ill hap, a box, a blow, or whiret on the
ears, given with the back of the hand, or with the left hand. Senetio, an
herb. Senettu, ouldage, agednes. Senezone, as Seneccione. Senice, a kind of
disease in a man. Senile, old, aged, eld, aged-like, of or belonging to age.
Also ripe. Senio, as Senile. Seniore, elder, more aged. Also a senior, or a
predecessor. Senita, age, eldnes, agednes. Senno, wit, reason, sense,
knowledge, discretion, wisdom, warines, judgment, earnestnes, good sooth. Da
senno, in good earnest. Sennuto, witty, sensible, discreet, endued with
reason, sense, or knowledge. Seno, a bosom, a lap, the turning or hollownes of
a water-banke, a creek, a nooke, an angle, a haven, a gulf, or arm of the
sea, or any river. Also the bending, the hole or hollownes of the eyes. Also a
lap, a plait, or fold in a garment. Also a net, or the hollownes and enfolding
of a net, taken also for the mind or inward and priuiest part of a man's heart
or affections. Also the hole or hollow winding of a stalk whereat the branches
do sprout and shoot. Also an aporne, a lap. Also a twinding or round circle in
hair. Also the hole or foul hollow corner of an impostumation or sore. a
crinkle crankle of any thing. in mathematikes, if from the ends of any arch
there be drawn two strait lines meeting, one of the which be a piece of the
Diameter, and the other perpendicular to the former: the said right lines have
the name of Seno. Seno, if not, but that, were it not, if it were not. Senoche,
as Senonche. Senon e che, as Senon. Senon, only, but only, except, if not,
unless, if it were not, but, saving, but that, unless, save. Senonche, if it
were not that, but that, except that, if not that, unless that, save that.
Senonne, as Senon. Senonse, Senonne che, as Senonche. Senopia, as Senape.
Sensa, ascension day. Sensalaggio, the money given to a broker for his pains,
brokage money. Sensalare, to play the broker, to bargain by brokers. Sensale,
a broker, a dealer between party and party about making of bargains.
Sensaria, the art, profession, trade, or company of brokers. Also brokage.
Sensaro, as Sensale. Sensato, as Sennuto, as Sensibile. Sensi, the five senses
of man. Sensibile, sensible, feeling, that may be felt or perceived. Sensitiuo,
sencible, having sense and feeling. Senso, the sense of man. Also wit, reason,
conceit, or understanding, feeling, sense, p^^ceiuing, judgment, knowledge,
opinion, that which one has conceived in mind, that which is known by sense.
Also the sense or meaning of any writing. Sensuale, sensual, licentious,
obeying, and pleasing his senses. Sensualita, sensuality, licenciousnes,
content and pleasing of senses. Sentacchiare, to cowre, squat, or sit down as a
goose or a ducke does. Sentacchio, all manner of squatting, cowring, or sitting
down close. It has bin taken for one that is quick of hearing. Sentacchione,
a cowring, idle, lazy companion, that will always keep home. Sentare, to sit
down. Sentata, a session, a sitting. Sententia, a sentence, an awarde, a
decree, a verdict, a judgment, an opinion, advice, meaning, or counsel, a
witty or wise sentence vttred upon any thing, a golden saying. Sententiare, to
awarde, to sentence, to adiudge, to cast, to condemn, to give judgment.
Sententiato, awarded, sentenced, adjudged, cast, condemned, given judgment.
Sententiere, a judge, a censurer, a sentence giver. Sententioso, sententious,
instructiue, pithie or full of golden saying or sentences. Sentenza, as
Sententia. Sentiero, a path, a high-waie, a tracke, a tracing, or a causey.
Sentieruolo, a little way, a narrow path or track. Sentimento, sense, feeling,
conceit, opinion. Sentinare, to pumpe in a ship. Sentina, a sink, a iakes, a
privy, a common shore, a heap of filth, or any such conueyance of filth. also
a company or filthy pack of lewd base rascals, a pack or heap of
mischiefs, a place where rascals and whores meet. Also the pumpe of a ship.
Sentinella, a watch, a sentinel, a soldier which is set to watch at a
station. Sentire, sento, sentito, to feel, to hear, to smell, to taste, to
conceit, to understand, to perceive. Sentito, felt, heard, smelt, tasted,
conceited, understood, perceived. Also wary or wise. Sentita, a wary, sly,
fine conceited or apt to understand woman. Sentore, a sent, a smell, a savor,
a taste. Senza, without, besides, sanse. Senza che, besides that, without that.
Senza dubbio, sanse-faile, without doubt. Senzale, as Sensale. Senzaria, as
Sensaria. Senza riseruo, without sparing, boldly. Sepa, a cuttle fish, or
cuttle bone, whose blood is as black as ink, and therefore some have taken
Sepa for ink. Separare, to separate, to divide, to sunder, to sever, to
disioyne, to part, to divorce, to put apart, to put one from another.
Separabile, separable, that may be divided or sundred. Separatione, a
separation, a seuering, a division, a divorce, a putting one from another.
Sepe, a hedge, a quick-set hedge, a fence, a mound, a closure of grounds.
Sepellibile, buriable, that may be buried. Sepellire, lisco, lito, to bury, to
enterre, to entombe the dead, to lay in the earth. Also to abolish clean and
cause to be forgotten. Sepellitore, a burier, a digger of graves to bury the
dead, a burier of the dead. Sephisma, a decree, a statute, a law, an
ordinance. Sepia, as Sepa. Sepietta, a little cuttle fish, or cuttle bone.
Sepolcro, a tomb, a grave, a sepulcher, a vaulte. Used also for a churchyard.
Sepolto, Sepellito, buried, laid in the ground, interred, intombed. Also as it
were dead, altogether forgotten, utterly undone and cast away, or clean
abolished. Sepoltura, as Sepolcro. Sepositione, a putting apart, a setting
aside. Seposo, fat, fattie, full of tallow, sewet, or seame. Seppia, Seppa, as
Sepa. Seppi, seppe, seppero, I, he, or they knew, of Sapere. Septo, a sluice, a
flud-gate, a watergap. Sepur, sepure, if, if so be, if so be that, if yet.
Sequela, a sequel, a consequence, a following, a chance. Sequentia, as
Seguentia. Sequestrare, to arrest, to stop, to stay, to attache, to sequester,
to sue, to arbitrate, to put into ones hands as indifferent. Sequestratione, a
sequestration, a putting a part, an attachment, an arrest, an action, a suit,
an arbitration, an arbitrament. Sequestratore, a sequestrator, an attacher, a
sergeant, an arbitrator, an under judge. Sequestre, indifferent to both parts,
a reconciler of parties in controversy, an arbitrator. Sequestro, as
Sequestratione. Ser, Sir, a name given to priests, and also to lords and
masters. Sera, the eeue or evening, the last part of the day, toward night.
Bona sera, good evening. Sera, he, or she, or it shall be. Serafo, a coin in
India worth four shillings sterling. Also a kind of serpent that the
Egyptian worshipped as a god. Seraphino, a seraphin, an angel. Serapica, the
herb called dogs-stones, or raggewoort. Serapino, a kind of gum or drugge so
called. Serbabile, that may be kept. Serbanza, a reserving, a keeping. Serbare,
to keep, to reserve, to hold, to guarde, to preserve, to save. Also to
observe, to take heed. Serbatoio, a cupboord, a lardrie, a pantrie, a keep, a
place to keep or preserve any thing in. Serbastrella, a kind of herb called
dogs-stones or ragwoort. Serbaticcio, any fruit or other thing that will last
and be kept. Serbo, a reserving or keeping, a sparing or store. Sercontraponi,
as Foramello. Sere, sir, a title given to lords and masters and to priests.
Serena, a sirene or a mermaide. Serenare, to clear up, to make clear, fair
and lightsome, to look cheerfullie and merrily. Serenata, music given under
gentlewomens windows in a morning or evening. Serenezza, as Serenita.
Serenissimo, most clear, very fair, excellently beautiful and calm. Also a
title only given to kings and great princes, as we say most renowned, most
famous, most glorious, most excellent, and sovereign. Serenita, a title given
now a days to kings and chief dukes, as we say soueraintie, highness, or
renown. Also fair and clear weather, quietness or calmenes. Also brightness,
cleerenes, cheerefulnes, or excellency. Sereno, bright, clear, fair, calm,
quiet, appeased, cheerful, merry, gentle, peaceable. also whaie, or
clarified whaie. Also without clouds or rain. Also clear and fair weather.
Sergente, a sergeant, a catchpole, a bedle or such officer under a magistrate,
or such a one as is commanded by any superior magistrate. It has also been
used for a groom or a squire, or other servant. Sergente maggiore, a sergeant
mayor of a band. Sergozzone, a blow, a stroke, a bang or rap given upon the
neck. Sergiolo, a catchpole, a sergeant. Seria, an earnest, grave, or sad
word. Serie, an order, a succession, a row, an issue, a race, a beade-role, a
pedigree, a descent. Serica, a kind of stuff called fine serge or say with
silk in it. Serico, of silk, silken, made of silk, or like silk. Serifalco,
Sirifalco, a kind of shot, bumbard, or ordinance. Seriffo, a title given to
princes in Barbary, as much to say as king. Serifia, a kind of red toad or
frogge. Serifio, a kind of wormwood growing in the sea. Serino, a bird called
in latin Serinus, some take it for the Siskin. Serio, earnest, grave, of great
importance, serious. Seriosita, seriousnes, earnestnes. Serioso, serious,
earnest, in sooth, of consequence, in earnest, without mocking. Sermargollo, an
old doting wizard or wise man, a nickname for a gull or fond fellow. Also a
kind of sport or play that children use to play at in Italy with beans or
nuts. Sermenti, buds, sprigs, springs, sprouts, or young branches of a vine.
Also flags, sags, or reeds growing by the water side. Sermentina, has bin
iestingly taken for the good liquor wine. Sermolina, the herb wild Betonie,
or wild marierome. Also it is taken for a woman's privy parts. Sermonare, to
speak, to reason, to discourse, to preach. Sermon, a sermon, a preaching, a
lecture a discourse, an oration. Also the speech talk, or communication, or
language of mankind. Sermoniere, a preacher, a discourser, a speaker. Serole,
as Serrole. Serotino, late, lagge, latewarde, in the evening. Serpa, the name
of a wheel or spring in a clock. Serpare, as Serpere, as Serpeggiare. Serpe,
any kind of serpent or venomous creeping beast or vermin that creepes upon
his belly and not upon their feet as snakes or adders. Also a limbecke or
serpentine, called of our distillers a double SS. Serpedine, as Serpedo.
Serpedo, a rednes in the skin with pushes or pimples. Serpeggiare, as Serpere.
Also to go winding or crankling in and out. Also when a horse does gallop
writhing like a serpent or a snake. Serpentare, as Subillare. Also as Serpere.
Serpentaria, vipers grass. Also the herb Dragon, wild buglosse or borage.
Used also for monie-woort or herb two-penie. Serpentaria maggiore, the herb
dragon woort or serpentine the greater. Serpentauro, a kind of serpent and bull
together. Serpente, as Serpe. Also proceeding forward, augmenting, creeping,
spreading abroad by little and little. Serpentella, the herb dragon, buglosse
or borage. Used also for vipers grass. Serpentello, a little serpent.
Serpentina, as Serpentella, a kind of ordinance, bumbard or artillery called a
serpentine, sakre or a base. Also a kind of stone. Also a kind of winding
limbecke or still called a serpentine or double SS, in English. Also as
Serpentella. Also a kind of ring worm or fashions in a horse or such creeping
disease. Serpentino, serpentine, viperous, like or of the nature of a serpent.
a kind of arrow head made like an adders tongue. a kind of tool or instrument
that anatomists and grauers use. a kind of very hard stone or marble.
Serpere, serpo, serpei, serputo, to creep or craule or slide upon the belly
without feet as a serpent or worm. Also to spread abroad by little and little
as herbs do growing closely by the ground. Serputo, crept or crauled. Also
spread abroad. Serpire, pisco, pito, as Serpere. Serpega, as Serpedo.
Serpettipmale, a venomous serpent. Serpicella, a kind of crossing of books or
reckonings so called among merchants. Serpicolato, turning, winding, crankling
in and out like a serpent. Serpillo, the herb wild time, creeping time, or
our ladies bedstraw. Serpolina, a woman's quaint or priuities. Serpolina, an
herb or weed. Also a pretty wench, babie, less or girl. Serpollo, as
Serpillo. Serra, any secluse or shut up place or cloister, an enclosure. Serra
serra, a kind of march sounded in war. Serraglio, an enclosure, a close, a
padocke, a park, a cloister or secluse. Serrame, a lock or any thing that
pertaines to locking or shutting. Serrare, to shut, to lock, to enclose, to
cloister, to rail in. Serrata, when the soldiers in squadron do join and
lock close together thereby to become more strong, a locking, a shutting.
Serratile, that may be shut. Serratula, the herb called he Betonie. Serratura,
a lock, a bolt, a locking or a shutting. Serre di fassi, cliffes, rocks, crags
or rugged stones, shiues. Serrette, sharp points or buttons to make the curb
of the bit extreme hard. Serriuola, a spring or fountain hedged or closed
about that the cattle shall not mar it. Serrole, a kind of wild ducke or
malard. Ser sac ciuto, as Foramello. Serta, a chap^et, a coronet, a circlet or
garland or wreath. a tuzzie-muzzie, a sweet poesy of flowers. Sertico, a
sweet smelling herb called Melilot. Also any thing made chap^et, circlet,
coronet, garland or wreath-wise. Serticella, as Serta. Sertola, as Sertico.
Sertula, as Sertico. Ser tutte salle, as Foramello. Serua, a maid or woman
servant. Seruabile, as Serbabile. Seruaggio, bondage, servitude, thraldom,
service, subjection, slavery. Seruare, as Serbare. Seruatoio, as Serbatoio.
Seruente, a man or woman servant. Also serving or fitting any thing. Seruiale,
as Seruigiale. Seruidore, as Seruitore. Seruigiale, a glister given to the
sick. Also any household servant. Seruigietto, a little service, a good turn,
an errand, a business. Seruigio, a service, a good turn, an errand, a business.
Servile, servile, base, abject, submisse, slavish, of or belonging to a servant
or bondage. Seruilita, seruilitie, baseness, slauishnes, subjection, thraldom,
servitude, drudgerie. Seruilla, the root of the herb skirwort or skirret. Ser
vinciguerra, as Foramello. Seruire, seruo, seruito, to serve, to attend, to
wait upon, to do service unto. Used also to fit ones turn. Also to use or
employ in or for any purpose. Used also to deserve. A che vi seruite di questo,
for what purpose do you use this? Seruirsi, to make use of, to use, to employ,
to serve ones turn with any thing. Seruito, served, pleased, content,
attended, waited upon, done service unto, etc. Esser seruito, to be pleased and
content. Seruitosi, made use of, employed, served ones turn with. Seruitore, a
servant, a seruitor, a serving man, an attendant, a thrall. Seruitrice, a maid
or woman servant. Seruietta, a napkin or drinking cloth. Seruitiale, as
Seruigiale. Seruitietto, as Seruigietto. Seruitio, as Seruigio. Seruitu,
service, servitude, bondage or thraldom, slavery, subjection. Seruo, any kind
of servant, one that owes service or that is in bondage and subjection, a
slave, a drudge, a bondsman. Sesama, as Sisamo, and Sesamino. Sesamele, a kind
of simnell bread made with honey and spice. Sesamini, ossi sesamini, certain
little round bones under the ioints of the fingers and toes, created of nature
as well to fulfill the void places left to those ioints where they grow, as
also in the hands to strengthen them to the apprihending and holding of any
thing, and in the feet to the equal passing on the ground. Sesamino, a white
grain or pulse in India, whereof they make oil, called Sesam^. Sesamoide, an
herb that purges melancholy. Sescuplo, six fold, six times as much, the
whole and the half part. Sesino, a kind of small coin. Sesquipedale, a foot
and a half in measure. Sesquialtera, half so much again, a proportion of one
and a half. Sesquiterza, as much as another, and a third part more. Sessanta,
the number of threescore. Sessagerario, as Sessagesimo. Sessagesimo, the
sixteeth in number. Sessangolare, six cornered, having six corners.
Sessangolo, six corners, a form of six corners. Sessantesimo, the sixtieth
in number. Sessantina, an old beldam, an old trot, an old woman past threescore
years. Also a kind of fine lawne, cambreke or fine linen cloth. Sessione, a
session, a sitting, a sises, a meeting place. Sesso, a kind or sex or man or
woman. Sessola, a kind of great basket to carry hay, straw or stubble in.
Sesta, a compass or pair of compasses. A sesta, in order, fadging, in due
form, by line and measure, by compass. Sestario, a measure whereby all other
may be made (after Budeus) and certain trial by weight and measure. It is of
our measures a pint and a half or 18. ounces weight. Sestale, orderly,
formally, according to compass or a man's mind. Sestertio, a certain veil or
loose garment that men used to cast about them like a sheet, and was so wouen
that every third thread was bigger then the other two. Also a kind of coin
among the Romans, a thousand of them were worth five pound sterling. Sestile,
the month of August. Sestina, a kind of song or verse riming six times to one
word. Sesto, a compass or pair of compasses. also order, rule, form,
fadging, due byasse, plight, method or handsome fashion. also the sixth in
order or number. Sesterno, the sixth in number. Sestesso, himself. Sestiero, a
ward or street or quarter in a town or city. Also a kind of measure. Seta,
any kind of silk. Also a disease in a horse called a quitterbone. Seta
cauallina, the herb Alisander or Louage. Setacciare, to sift, to search, to
bolt spice or meal. Setaccio, a sieue, a search, a bolting cloth or strainer
made of the hairs of a horses tail. Setaiuolo, a silke-man, a merchant of
silk. Setalia, a brizlie, bushie, brakish, hairie, gloomie, cloudie, duskie
place. Bocace does use it for a woman's privy parts, saying Valle setalia.
Setanino, a kind of thin velvet called refusados. Setanio, a kind of corn
that lasts three months, called march or summer wheat. Setazzare, as
Setacciare. Setazza, as Setaccio. Sete, all manner of silks. Also thou art, of
Essere. also thirst or desire to drink* greedines, covetousness, thirstines,
drought or great appetite of any thing. Setino, a kind of thin silk stuff
like burato or mokado, silken, made or wrought of silk. Setola, any kind of
brizzle such as the make head brushes of. also a brush, head brush or comb
brush or beard brush. Also a disease in a horse called the quitterbone.
Setolare, to brush with a brush made of hogs brizles. Setole, brizles or
brushes. Setolina, a little fine head, comb or beard brush. Setoloso, brizly,
hairie, grizly, rough, rugged, shaggie. Setoluto, as Setoloso. Setoso,
thirsty, greedy, ravenous. Used also for Setoloso. Setta, a sect, a faction
or company of one opinion, a manner of life, ones doctrine. Also a school or
manner of teaching, a diverse consent in sundry wilful opinions. Settanta, the
number of seauentie. Settario, a sectarie or factious man, a follower, one that
imitateth to the end to learn. Also the seventh. Settatore, as Settario.
Set, the number of seven, or seven upon the cards. sects or factions.
Settembre, the month of September. Settenario, containing seven in number, of
or belonging to seven. Settenne, of seven years space. Settentrionale, of or
belonging to the north, northren. Settentrione, the north or northren wind, or
north part of the world, right against south. Also the seven stars of Charles
wane. Settepedale, seven foot long, or belonging to seven foot. Setteplico,
seven fold, seven times double, running seven ways. Settezzoni. Settico,
putrifactiue or corosiue, that rotteth as matter in a sore. Settifoglio,
setfoile, tormentill, ashweed, herb Gerard or wild imperatorie. Settiforme,
seven fold. Settile, that is or may easily be cut or cleaued. Settimana, a
week, the space of seven days. Settimanaro, a week or weekly workman.
Settimo, the seventh in number. Settione, a section, a cutting, a dividing or
parting. Also the forfaite or confiscation of ones goods in penalty. Settore,
the name of a mathematical instrument. Also he that cutteth, divides or
loppeth. Also one that by false complaints seeks to make others forfaite
their goods. Settura, as Settione. Setro, a Kings or Princes scepter or mace.
Seudo, as Pseudo. Seudisodomo, as Pseudisodomo. Seudographia, as Pseudographia.
Seudologo, as Pseud^logo. Seudomartire, as Pseudomartire. Seudomeno, as
Pseudomeno. Seudonimo, Pseudonimo. Seudopropheta, as Pseudopropheta.
Seueramente, severely, rigorously, sternly, austerly, cruelly, roughly.
Seuerare, to continue or persist severely, obstinately or rigorously. Seuerita,
severity, rigor, obstinacy, sharpnes, cruelty, austeritie, roughnes,
hardness, straitnes, gravity or constancy in ministering justice. Seuero,
severe, cruel, hard, rigorous, obstinate, stern, austere, rough, sharp,
straight, grave, and constant, inexorable. Seuitia, rage, fiercenes, cruelty,
fury, rigor, tyranny. Seuo, tallow, fat, sewet or grease to make candles.
Also cruel, fell, raging, fierce, moodie, furious, horrible, terrible,
rigorous, unkind. Seuoso, tallowie, fat, greasy, full of tallow or sewet.
Seuro, separated, divided. Sezzaia, at last, the last, lag or latest. Also the
sixth. Sezzaio, the last, lag, lated or hindmost of all. Sezzano, as Sezzaio.
Sezzente. Sezzo, as Sezzaia, as Sezzaio. Sfacchinarsi, to forsake or leave off
the degree of a porter or base knave, to become from a jack to a gentleman.
Sfacciataggine, impudency, shamelesnes, boldness, saucines, malapertnes.
Sfacciare, to deface, to spoil, or overthrow. Sfacciato, defaced, spoiled,
overthrown, impudent, shameless, saucie, malapert, ouerbold, blushlesse.
Sfacciatamente, impudently, shamelesly, saucily, malapertly. Sfacciatezza, as
Sfacciataggine. Sfaccimento, a defacing, a ruin, a spoil, or wasting, a
deseasance, an undoing. Sfaccitudine, as Sfacciataggine. Sfacelo, a disease
when any part by inflammation is mortified. Also an herb called wild sage.
Sfacendato, idle, lazy, fond, loitring, without business. Sfagianare, to
phesant, to peacocke, or wantonize it, to cut or hoite it out, to revel.
Sfagianato, phesanted, peacockized, or wantonized, or reuelled. Sfagitide, two
great veins appearing on each side of the throat, and nourish all the parts of
the head and neck. Sfagumato, a gull, a ninnie, that will easily be cosened,
or fetched over the coals. Sfamare, to glut, to gorge, or quench hunger, to
fill. Sfamato, glutted, gorged, vnhungred, filled with meat. Sfamatura, a
quenching of hunger, a good feeding. Sfangare, to rid clear, and make clean
from mudde, mire, or dirt, to vnmyre. Sfardellare, to strip, to spoil, to
rob, to untruss, or disburthen. Sfare, as Disfare. Sfatto, as Disfatto.
Sfasciare, to vnswathe, to unbind, to vnbandle. Sfasciume, birds dung or such
filth and ordure. Also a disordred, confused, compassing about. Sfatata,
ill-sauoured, roynish, uncomely, unhandsome. Sfauellare, to gainsaie, to
unsay, to speak against. Sfauata, a kind of meat of beans. Also a
flimflam-tale. Sfauilla, a spark, a sparkle, or twinkling. Sfauillante,
sparkling, twinkling. Sfauillare, to spark, to sparkle, to twinkle.
Sfeducciato, faithless, treacherous, trustlesse, deceitful. Sfegatato,
vnliuered, whiteliuered, weak hearted. Sfendere, fendo, fendei, fesso, or
fenduto, to cleave, to chap, to riue, to shiuer, to splint, to slit, to gape,
to flawe. Sfenduto, cleft, chapt, riuen, shiuered, splinted, gapt, chinkt,
flawd, slitted. Sfendimento, a chap, a chinke, a cleft, a cranie, a gap, a
splinting, a flawe, a slit. Sfenditura, as Sfendimento. Sfera, a sphere or a
globe, a figure in all parts equally round, a circle, a howl, a rundle, any
thing that is round. Sfereale, round, sphericall, of, or like a sphere.
Sferebrare, to tear, to rent, to tottre or break in pieces. Sfericare, to
build or frame round like a globe, or a sphere, to make round. Sferico,
sphericall, round like a globe or a sphere. Sferra, an old cast suit of
apparel, or any thing cast and left off. Sferra caualli, as Etiopide.
Sferramento, an vnshooing of a horse, a delivering out of bonds or irons.
Sferrare, to vnshooe a horse, to free or deliver out of bonds or irons.
Sferro, a kind of strong hard chest. Sferza, a whip, a scourge, a staile, a
rod. Sferzare, to whip, to scourge, to beat with a whip, to lash, or slash, to
yerke. Sferzata, a ierke, a yerke, a lash or slash with a whip or a scourge.
Sfesso, as Sfenduto. Sfesso, slit. Also a slit. Sfessura, a slit, a cleft.
Sfessura, as Sfendimento. Sfettonare, is by Grison taken for the opening or
cutting of the frush of the horse away to cure the disease called Formella, or
Fettone. Sfiancare, to make one lean, lanke, or gant. Also to vnflanke or
vnhanche. Sfiatare, to breathe and rebreathe. Also to breath ones last.
Sfiatatoio, a vent or breathing hole. Sfibbiare, to unbuckle, to unlace, to
vnlatch. Sfibbiatura, an vnbuckling, an unlacing. Sfida, a challenge, a cartell,
a defiance. Sfidare, to challenge, to defy, to distrust. Sfidato, challenged,
defide, mistrusted. Sfidatore, a chalenger, a prouoker, a defier. Sfigurare, to
disfigure, to deface. Sfigurato, formelesse, shapelesse, disfigured. Sfilaccij,
lint, such as Surgions use to make tents for sores. Sfilare, to rauell any
cloth or silk. Also to put out of rank, or out of joint. Sfilata, out of
rank, out of order, dispersedlie. Sfilato punto, a kind of stitch in
seamestrie so called. Sfilatura, the name of a disease in a horse. Also as
Sfilazza. Sfilazza, any kind of raueled stuff or sleaue silk, or lint that
surgeons use. Sfinga, a beast called a Sphinx, having a face and voice like a
woman, and hand and feet as a lion. Sfinge, a kind of Apes very hairie,
having long teates, who are easily taught to forget their wildenes. Sfinire,
nisco, nito, to end, to finish, to accomplish. Also to swoune, or faint, to be
in a trance. Sfinimento, a swouning, a fainting, a qualme, an apoplexy.
Sfintro, the round compassing muscle of the straight gut, ordained to prevent
untimely excretion. Sfiorire, risco, rito, to vnflowre, to deflowre, to
vnblossome. Sfirena, a kind of long fish. Sfocare, as Sfogare. Sfoderare, to
vnsheath or draw forth. Sfodrare, as Sfoderare. Sfogare, to wreake, to vent, or
rage forth as fire does being closely rakte up. Sfogato, wreakt, vented, or
raged forth ones grief or anger. Sfogamento, a wreaking, a venting, a raging,
easing or puffing of ones anger. Sfogatamente, earnestly, raginglie. Sfogare
la rabbia, to wreake or vent forth ones rage. Sfoggiamento, a flanting, a
lauishing, a rioting, a reuelling. Sfoggiare, to lavish, riot, revel, or flant
it out of all measure and fashion, to bring out of order or fashion, to mar a
fashion, to commit any excess. Sfoggiato, lauished, rioted, reuelled, or
flanted it out of order and fashion, brought out of fashion, fashion-lesse, out
of fashion, ill favored, unhandsome, huge, big, great. Sfoggiatamente,
carelessly, riotously, lauishly, out of order and fashion, flantinglie.
Sfoggiatore, a riotous, lavish, flanting fabian, a careless fellow, an
unthrift. Sfoglia, Sfogliata, a kind of pye-crust which we call puff-paste.
Sfogliare, to pull off the leaves, to vnlease. Sfoglio, a flat fish called a
sole. Sfoia, Sfoiata, a sole fish. Sfoiato, glutted, cloide or cooled or tamed
with leacherie. Sfondare, to sink down, to break out the bottom, to splint a
ship. Sfondata, an ouerridden whore, a stallion rampe, an old strumpet.
Sfondato, bottomless. Sfondillo, a kind of great oyster. Also a kind of herb
the juice whereof makes hair to curle, called the holy-ghosts-roote.
Sfondolare, as Sfondare. Sfondrare, as Sfondare. Also to founder a horse.
Sfongio, a kind of stone that is very light and spongious. Sforare, to boar,
prick, or pierce full of holes. Sforato, boared, pricked, or pierced full of
holes. a disease in a horse called the laxe. Sforgiare, as Sfoggiare.
Sforicchiare, to tickle, push, or provoke out. to rouse, to vndenne. to start a
hare, to boar full of holes. Sformare, to disfigure, to deface, to deforme, to
mis-shape. Sfornire, nisco, nito, to unfurnish, to disaray, to deface.
Sfortunato, unfortunate, unhappy, dismal, hapless, unlucky. Sforzamento, an
enforcement, a constraint, a compulsion, a rauishing. Sforzare, to force, to
enforce, to constrain, to compel, to ravish. Sforzati, gallie-slaues,
prisoners perforce. Sforzatamente, enforcedly, by compulsion, or force. Sforzo,
force, power, strength, utmost ability or endeavor, compulsion or constraint.
Sfracassare, to break, to bruise, to hauock, to spoil, to ruin, to destroy.
Sfracasso, hauock, ruin, spoil, destruction, ransack, hurly burly. Sfrage,
Sfragi, a green stone, not transparent, and printeth perfectly. Also a kind
of vermillion. Sfranciosato, cured or healed of the french pox, vnfrenchifide.
Sfrangellare, as Sfracassare. Sfrangere, frango, fransi, franto, as
Sfrantumare. Sfrangiare, to vnfringe, to disadorne. Sfranto, as Sfrantumato.
Sfrantumare, to break, splint or shiuer in small pieces, or mammocks.
Sfrascare, to rid or free from boughs, leaves, or sprigs. Sfratato, vnfriered,
become an apostata, forsaken ones order. Sfreddamento, a cooling, a cold, a
pose, a murre, a rheum. Sfreddare, to cool or take cold. Sfreddire,
Sfreddisco, Sfreddito, as Sfreddare. Sfreddimento, as Sfreddamento. Sfregiare,
to vngarnish, to vndeck, to disadorne. also to gash, to cut, to mangle or mark
one over the face. Sfregiato, ungarnished, vndeckt, disadorned. Also gasht,
cut, mangled or skard over the face. Sfregio, a gash, a cut, a skarre or mark
over the face. Sfregolare, to crum, or crumble. Sfrenare, to unbridle, to
vnsnaffle. Sfrenata voglia, unbridled lust. Sfrenatamente, loosely, wildlie,
vnbridledlie, furiously, riotously, ragingly, vntamedly. Sfrisare, Sfriso,
Look Sfregiare and Sfregio. Sfrogiato, a nose that has no nares or nostrils.
Sfrondare, to vnbranch or pull off the leaves, to vndeck, to vngarnish, to
vnblossome, to make leauelesse. Sfrontare, to affront with some shameless
trick. Sfrontato, a fronted. Also a shameless, saucie, impudent blush-lesse
companion. Sfrosare, to prowle, to powle and pill by hook or crook, to break
good orders. Sfrosatore, a powler, a prowler, a breaker of good laws or
orders. Sfuggire, fuggo, fuggito, to shun, to avoid, or fly from, to escape.
Sfuggiasca, Look Alla sfuggiasca. Sfulignare, to sweep a chimnie, to wipe
away sut. Sfumante, fuming, steaming, smoking, venting forth. Sfumare, to
euaporate, to fume, to besmoke or smoke out. Also to dry in the smoke.
Sfuriare, to rage or be furious. Sgaio, a bird called a Huhole. Sgagliardare,
to weaken, to enfeeble, to vnstrengthen. Sgagliardire, disco, dito, as
Sgagliardare. Sgaglioffare, to forsake and leave all knauish and cheating
tricks. Scagnolire, lisco, lito, to bark, to yelp, to baule or cry like a dog.
Sgallinare i pollai, to steal, remove, or take poultrie from their roost or
nests. Sgalfarone, a kind of broad brimd hat used in Italy. Sgamaiti,
certain tools that woollwinders use. Sgamaitare, to beat or full woollen
clothes in a fulling mill. Sgambare, to vnleg. Also to play gambols, as
Sgambettare. Sgambettare, to skip, to hop, to leap, to shake the legs, to play
gambols. Sgambettate, gambols, skippings, or shaking of legs. Sgambo, crooked,
stump-legd, unhandsome, improper, roynish. Sgangare, to shread, to mince or
slice into mammocks or small pieces. Sgangherare, to set wide open, to loosen,
to disorder, to pull off from the hinges. Sgangherato, wide-open, disordred as
a door from off the hinges. Sgangheratamente, disorderly, widely, without form
or order. Sgangheritudine, disorder, confusion, open widenes. Sgangotada, a
trip, a tripping, a stumbling. Sgannare, as Disingannare. Sgannazzamenti,
fopperies, fooleries, fond tricks. Sgarare, to vanquish, to quell, to overcome,
to outchide, to outskould, to make ones enemy give over and yield, to strive
and contend. Sgarato, quelled, vanquished, outchidden. Also treacherous,
miscreant, faithless. Sgarbatamente, vnhandsomlie, without order, form,
manners, grace, or fashion. Sgarbatezza, vnhandsomnes, gracelesnes,
ill-fauourednes, slouenlines. Sgarbato, unhandsome, improper, graceless,
fashionlesse. Sgarbugliare, to garboile, to trouble, to subvert, to turn
topsie turuie. Sgargagliare, to gargarise, to gurgle. Also to blab or prattle
carelessly. Sgargareggiare, as Sgargagliare. Sgargarizzare, as Sgargagliare.
Sgargarizzo, a gargarise, a gurgling. Sgarrire, as Garrire. Sgarzo, the name of
a tree. Sgattigliare, to clinch or snatch fast as a cat does a mouse.
Sgauonare, to catterwall, to meaw as a cat. Sgherrettare, to cut off under the
knee, to cut off horses legs. Sgherro, a pratler, a blab of idle words, a
catchpole, a sergeant, a base rascal, a slasher, a cutter, a swashbuckler.
Sghiribizzato, freed or loose from humors, toys, or sudden passions.
Sglanare, to pare, to flea, to pill, to gall the skin off, to vnshale, to
vnhuske. Also to vnbarke a tree. Sgocciolare, to drop, to trill, to drizle, to
mizle. Sgoleggiare, to gluttonize, to gormandize, to devour, to riot in
gluttony. Sgolizzare, as Sgoleggiare. Sgoluppare, as Sgominare. Sgombrare, to
avoid, to clear, to disincombre, or rid away from a place. Sgombro, the fish
called a Makrell. Sgomentare, to astonie, to dant, to mate, to fright, to
terrify. Sgomento, astonishment, terror, fright, danting, amazement.
Sgominare, to unfold, to vntwinde, to disintangle, to vnreele yarne. Sgommare,
to vngum, to vnplaister, to vnglue. Sgonfiare, to vnswel, or alay any swelling.
Sgonfietto, as Gonfiatoio. Sgonfio, Sgonfiato, vnswolne, alayde any swelling.
Sgorbare, to blurre, to dash, to blot, to scrible. Sgorbia, a tool that
grauers use. Sgorbij, blurres, blots, dashings, scriblings. Sgorbiare, as
Sgorbare, to scrape, tear, gall, or scratch the skin off. Sgorbiate, as
Sgorbij. Sgorbio, a scratch, a gall, or tearing of ones skin, a mark, a
skarre, or print of any hurt or scratch, as Sgorbij. Sgorgare, to gurgle, to
purle, to g^sh, or power forth as water does. Also as Suertare. Sgorgolare, as
Sgorgare. Sgoruietta, a carpenters ruler, squire, or plummet. Sgozzare, to pull
out ones throat, to take one a hole lower, to wring off ones neck. Sgraffare,
to scratch, to claw. Sgraffiare, to scratch, to claw. Sgraffignare, to scratch,
to claw. Sgraffo, the name of a goldsmiths tool. Sgraffoni, scratches.
Sgramaticare, to play the foolish grammarian, or pedante, to dispute
grammaticallie. Sgramfo, a fish called a crampfish, which has the nature to
make the hands of them that touch it to be astonished, though it be with a long
pole. Sgranare, to vngraine, to pick or shale peason. Sgrandire, disco, dito,
to become less or little, to decline or fall. Sgrasio, a kind of goldsmiths
work used in chains so called in Italy. Sgratia, a disgrace, a gracelesnes
or vnhandsomnes. Sgratiare, to disgrace, or disable. Sgratiato, disgraced,
graceles, disabled. Sgrato, ungracious; nothing acceptable. Sgrattare, to
scratch, or scrape. Sgrauare, to ease, or to disburthen, to discharge.
Sgrauamento, an easing or disburthening. Sgrauidanza, a delivery of a child,
a mischance in childbed. Sgrauidare, as Disperdere. Also to be brought abed.
Sgrauio, as Sgrauamento. Sgretolare, to break, to tear, to shiuer, or splint.
also to melt, to thawe, or consume. Also to mince into small pieces or powder.
Also to crumble or to moulder. Sgricciolare, to cry or skreech as an owl.
Sgriccioli, owls, or screech owls. Sgridare, to chide, to braule, to scould
at, to cry out, to shent, to rate as we do dogs. Sgrido, a chiding, a brauling,
or scoulding. Sgriftare, to scratch, to gripe, to clawe, to disfigure ones
face. Sgrignare, to laugh aloud immoderately. Sgrignuto, ill-fauoured, crompt
backed, crooked shouldred. Also one that gnasheth his teeth. Sgrillare, to make
a noise as a cricket, to play cricket-a-wicket, and be m^rry. Sgrinzare, to
wither, to wrinkle, to shrink up, or become lean. Also to hop, to skip to
friske. Sgroppare, to untie, to vnknot, to vncrooper. Sgrossare, to vnswell, to
allay, to grow small, to cut small, to pare a piece of timber. Sgrugnare, to
beat or mark one over the face. Sgrugnata, a whieret, a box, or clap over
the face, a slash or gash over the face. Sgrugnone, Sgrugnolo, as Sgrugnata.
Sguaglio, inequality, difference, ods. Sguainare, to vnsheath, to draw any
weapon. Sgualdrina, a scondrell, a strumpet, a whore, a harlot. Sgualembrato,
Sgualembro, a sidlin right hand blow. Sguanciata, as Sgugnata. Sguardare, to
look, to behold, to view, to note, to mark. Sguardo, a look, a view, a
beholding. Sguattaro, as Guattaro. Sguazzare, to make good cheer, to fare
well, to lead a merry life, as Guazzare. also to spend and lavish
vnthriftilie. Sguazzo, all manner of water or washed colors. Sguerro, as
Sgherro. Sguerzo, squinted or bleare eied, crooked looking. Sguinzaglio, as
Guinzaglio. Sguinzare, to slide, to slip, to glide as fish does in the water,
as one does upon the yse. Also to squirt water with a squirt. Sguizzatoio, a
squirt or siring. Sguizzo, a sliding, a gliding, a slipperines, a squirt. Also
childish sport. Sguizzoso, slipperie, glib, smooth as yse. Sgu^bia, a tool
that shooe-makers use. Sgusciare, to sha^e, to vnshale, to vnhusk, to pick.
Also to crush. Sguscia lumache, a shaler of snailes, an idle-fellow, a foolish
gull. Sgustare, to mislike, to distaste, to disguise, to vex or anger one, to
conceive an ill opinion, to give or take cause of unkindness, or dislike.
Sgusto, disgust, distaste, unkindness, dislike. Sgustoso, unsavory, unpleasant,
yrkesome, intolerable, subject to anger. Sguzzare, to vnsharpen, to abate the
edge, to blunt. also to foyne or prick at. Si, yea, yes, as well, even as, as
much, so, thus, such, even thus, so as, a yea or an oath of affirmation, but if
it be joined with a verb, it is a pronoune, singular and plural, him, to him,
himself, to himself, them, themselves, to them, to themselves, namely
speaking of persons. But if it be of things, then it makes the verb passive,
as Si dice, it is said. Si fa, it is done. Also it stands for man, men, the
world, or every man, or they, as Si dice, it is said. they say, men say, the
world reports, etc. Sia, be it, it be, he be, or shall be. Sia come si voglia,
be it as it will, be it howsoever. Sia dove si voglia, be it where it list,
wheresoever it be, be he where he will. Si been, as well, as much, so well. Also
yea indeed, very well. Siare, to make a horse or ox stay or go back with
the carters voice, as our clownes use to say, hay, who, hait, etc. Sibbiare,
to hiss, to whistle. Also blow as the wind does. Sibbio, a hissing or
whistling with the mouth by keeping the teeth close together. Also the blowing
of winds. Sibbiolo, a hissing, or a whizle. also a kind of oten pipe or horn
pipe. Sibilla, Sibbilla, a sibill, a prophetess, or foreteller. Sibillare,
Sibilare, as Sibbiare. Sibillo, as Sibbio. Sicamoro, a kind of shadie tree
with broad leaves like a fig tree, whose fruit comes not out of the tops
of the boughs as figs do, but of the very mids of the boughs, and is never
ripe: there be many of them in England, and are called Sicamore trees, or
mulberrie figtrees. Sicario, a privy murderer, one that goes with a short
sword to kill. Siccare, as Seccare. Also to proceed or issue out of. Sichetto.
Siccita, drines, drought, thirst, thirstines, greedines, barrennes, lack of
moisture. Sicco, as Secco. Si certo, certes, yea certainly, yes verily. Si che,
so that, so as. Siciliana, the water-cheine of a bit. Sicilico, a kind of
weight about a quarter of an ounce. also a measure of ground twenty foot
broad, and thirty long. Sicilizzare, to speak the language of Sicilie, to
play the Sicilian. Sicinnina, or Sicimina, a kind of tree or briars bringing
forth berries. Siclo, a kind of coin or maight, worth, or waying four
groates. Si come, even as, like as, so as, as well as. Sicofante, Sicofantia, as
Sicophante. Sicom^ro, as Sicamoro. Sicomantia, as Psicomantia. Sicophante, a
sicofant, a deceiuer, a parasite, a bearer of tales, a false accuser.
Sicophantia, deceit, false-dealing, sicophancie, a false accusation. Sicosi, a
disease in the fundament making a wart like a fig. it is called in latin
Ficus Marisca. Some take it to be certain little warts coming in eyes.
Sicumera. Sicuramente, safely, securely, certainly, assuredly, sickerly.
Sicuranza, safety, security, certainty, assurednes, surety, warrantise, trust,
confidence, or honesty. Also troth or faith. Also a pledge, a warrant, a
bail, a surety, or a maine-prize. Sicurare, to secure, to warrant, to pledge,
to bail, to assure. Sicurezza, as Sicuranza. Sicurita, Sicurta, as Sicuranza.
Sicuro, sure, certain, secure, sicker, assured. also safe, fast, negligent,
fearing nothing, not in danger, quiet, careless, sance care. Sidere, the stars
or celestial signs which have the course of the year in regiment. Siderale,
as Sidereo, of, or belonging to stars or planets. Siderare, as Assiderare. Also
to blaste. Sideratione, as Assideratione. Also blasting in trees with great
heat and drought. Also a taking or benumming, when one is suddenly deprived of
the use of his ^^ms and of all sense. Also a total and absolute putrefaction
and destruction of any member so taken. Sidereo, of, or like the stars, bright,
shining, twinkling, starrie, sunnie, of the sun, heavenly, high, or expert,
wonderful Siderione, an herb having a thin stalk four fingers high, a red
flower and leaves like coriander, growing by rivers and meeres, and cures all
cuts and gashes. Siderite, the herb wall sage, or stone sage. Also a kind of
precious stone having power to cause variance betwixt men. Siderite Achillea,
Mill-foyle, or Yarrow. Siderite Heraclea, herbe-Robert. Sidero, the sky, or
firmament of the stars. Sideroso, he that is planet stricken. Sido, a star, or
rather a sign in heaven consisting of many stars. Sidracia, a kind of pain
in the head, but properly as Psidrasia. Sie, as Sia, Dante has used it for Si,
yea, yesse, so. Si e, it is, is it. Sienita, a kind of marble stone about
Thebes heretofore in great request. Siepa, Siepe, a hedge, a mound, a fence, a
quick-set-hedge, a trench or closure of grounds. Siepare, to hedge, close,
fence, or trench about with hedges. Siepe, as Siepa. Siero, whaie, or
butter-milke. Sieue, as Siepa. Sieuo, as Seuo. Si fattamente, so, in such
manner, made in such sort. Si fatta maniera, in such manner, fashion, or sort.
Si fatto, so made, such, like, thus. Sifinite, as Galatide. Siggello, a kind
of pouncer goldsmiths use. Siggillare, to seal, to sign, to mark, to print,
to close and shut, to confirm. Siggillaro, a grauer or maker of seals, a
sealer. Siggillata, a kind of earth that is found in Lemnos, good against
poison. Siggillatura, a sealing, a signature, a mark, or branding. Siggillo, a
seal, a signet, a mark, a print, a branding iron. Siggillo di Salomone, an
herb called Salomons seal. Sigillare, as Siggillare. Sigillatura, as
Siggillatura. Sigillo, as Siggillo. Sigimno, a kind of shield, target, or
buckler. Siglo, a kind of Persian coin worth about seven pence. Signacolo,
as Segnacolo. Signalare, as Segnalare. Signalato, as Segnalato. Signale, as
Segnale. Signare, as Segnare. Signatura, as Segnatura. Signifero, an ensign or
standard bearer. Also the zodiake or circle wherein the 12. signs are.
Significante, signifying, meaning, significant, plainly declaring.
Significanza, a signification or meaning, a declaring, a notifying, an
advertisement, a sign or token. Significare, to signify, to mean, to show,
to give a sign, to give knowledge or warning, to betoken, to notify.
Significatione, a meaning or signification, as Significanza. Significato, as
Significanza. Also signifide. Significatiuo, that does signify. Signora, a
lady, a dame, a madame, a mistres. Signore, a lord, a sir, a master, a sire.
Signoreggiare, to swaie, to rule, to govern, to dominere. Signoria, signorie,
lordship, worship, herie, ladyship, swaie, government, dominion, Also a state,
a dominion, a seignorie, a commonwealth, a mannoyr. Signorile, lord-like,
stately, princely. Signozzare, as Singhiozzare. Signozzi, as Singhiozzi.
Signorto, thy Lord, Sir, or Master. Signuzzo, a little sign, mark, or token.
Sigurare, as Sicurare. Siguro, as Sicuro. Sigurta, as Sicuranza. Silaba, a
syllable of any word. Silabizzare, to syllabize, pronounce or distinguish
distinctly. Silaceo, of yellow color. Silagine, the herb called crowfoot.
Silarano, a disease in a hawk. Sile or Sili, a kind of yellow earth, which
being burnt makes vermillion or red color for painters. Also an herb called
Sicelis, with the root or seed whereof they were wont to season that wine
which they drunk before noone. Silenite, a kind of stone with many colors in
it. Silente, silent, whosht, quiet, still, keeping silence, without noise or
trouble, fair and calm. Silentiare, to silence, to still, to quiet, to
appease, to pease, to put to silence. Also to keep silence, to speak nothing,
to hold his peace, to make no noise, to calm. Silentio, silence, quietness,
stilnes, no noise. Silero, Osier or small withie or spert. Silibo, an herb so
called. Siligo, raw, untwisted silk. Silio, spert, osier, or small willow
tree. Also wicker. Siliqua, a kind of measure in Italy. Also the husk or cod
of a bean, pease or such. Also the fruit of the Carobe tree. Siliquastro, an
herb with a leaf like alecost, called Pepper of India, or Pepper-woort.
Sillaba, a syllable of a word. Sillabare, as Silabizzare. Sillepsi, maniera di
construttione. Sillio, as Psillio. Silo, he that has a nose crooked upward, a
flat chamoy nosed fellow. Also he that has a skowling look, lowering visage or
hangingeie-browes. Silogismo, a syllogism or perfect argument of three parts
inferring a necessary conclusion. Silogizzare, to argue, dispute or make
syllogismes. Sil^po, a syrup, a potion, a drench. Silua, a wood, a forest or
a chase. Siluano, wooddie, forestlike. Also a forrester, a woodman, a forest
man. Also of, or pertaining to the woods* siluane, wild, rusticke, like a
swayne. Also a wild and savage man living wholly in woods and desert places.
Siluatico, as Seluaggio. Siluestre, as Seluaggio. Siluoso, as Seluoso. Siluro,
a kind of fish. Simboleita, sympathy or agreement in quality and nature.
Simbolizzante, symbolising or agreeing, or sympathising in nature.
Simbolizzare, to symbolise or agree in nature and quality. Simbolo, a sign, a
token, a badge or note to know one by, a token given to one upon certain
covenants, a secret and privy note signifying some mystery. a short and
intricate sentence or riddle or mystery. Also an vniformall consent of sundry
opinions. taken also for the creed of the twelve Apostles. Also a kind of coin
in Greece. Simetria, as Simmetria. Simia, an ape, a munkie or a babuine. Also
he that counterfeiteth another. Simiaria, an apes den or lurking hole. Also
any apish trick or condition. Simietta, a little munkie or ape. Simigliante,
resembling, like, semblable. Simiglianza, resemblance, likeness, a similitude.
Simigliare, to resemble, to be like, to appear. Simiglieuole, as Simigliante.
Similare, resembling, like. Simile, like, semblable, resembling, alike. Also a
simile. Similissimo, most like. Similmente, likewise, semblably. Also alike,
after the same fashion. Similitudine, a similitude, a likeness, a resemblance,
likelihood. Simiotica. giudiciale medicina. Simiotto, a little pretty ape or
munkie. Simmetria, due proportion of each part to other in respect of the
whole. Simo, flat-nosed, camoiset, having a flat nose. Also a kind of fish.
Simolacro, an image, a figure, a statue, a picture, a counterfeit, a likeness or
resemblance or pattern of any thing. Simolare, as Simulare. Simolatione, as
Simulatione. Simolatore, as Simulatore. Simonia, simonie, buying and selling of
spiritual livings. Simoniaco, a man that offends in simonie. Simonidei, a
kind of verses called so because Simonides invented them. Simonioso, of or
pertaining to simonie, full of simonie. Simpathia, a sympathy or natural
combination of things natural in the operation of the powers, nature and
qualities, as water in coldness does participate with the earth, in moisture
with the air, a natural passion of one to the other. Simpathizzare, to
sympathize or agree in nature and disposition. Simphonesi, a collision of
vowels. Simphonia, an accord or consent in tune time or harmony, a tunable
singing without iarring. Simphoniaca, the herb Henbane. Simphoniaco, of or
belonging to consent or harmony. Simphisi, a joining together of the bones
without moving. Simphito, the herb Camfrey or Wall-woort. Simplicista, a
sympler, an herbalist. Simplice, Simplicita, as Semplice. Simposio, a banquet or
drinking together. Simptoma, a sencible grief joined with sickness, or headache
with an ague, an accident or affect following sickness. Simulacro, an image of a
man or woman, the proportion of any thing, the shadow, figure, likeness,
semblance, counterfeite, picture or pattern of a thing. Simulare, to feign, to
dissemble, to counterfeite, to make a resemblance, to set a countenance or a
face on a thing, to pretend or make as* though a thing were not, to play the
hypocrite. Also to be like to one or to resemble. Simulatione, simulation,
faining or hypocrisy, a counterfeiting, a dessembling, a color or pretense.
Simulatore, a dissembler, a fainer, an hypocrite, a counterfeiter, a pretender
of that which is not. Simulta, privy displeasure, grudge, hatred, breach of
love with a dissembling countenance. Also dissimulation. Sinagoga, an assembly,
a synagogue or congregation. Sinagro, a kind of broad flat fish. Sinaleffe,
figura nel parlare. Sinanca, Sinanche, the sickness called the squince or
squincie. Sinape, senuie seed whereof mustarde is made, mustard seed. Also
mustard. Sinapismo, an ointment made of mustard to raise blisters upon the
skin. Sinarosi, a coarticulation with obscure moving as in the bone Talus with
the boat like bone. Cyboides with the heel bone, and the wrest bones among
themselves. Sincerita, vprightnes, true meaning, sincerity, truth, honesty,
purity, plainnes, integrity, neatnes. Sincero, sincere, upright, plain
meaning, true, honest, pure, just, unfeigned, perfect, unmixed, without mixture,
whole, entire, sound, uncorrupted, simple, without dissimulation. Sinchiozzare,
as Singhiozzare. Sinchiozzi, as Singhiozzi. Sincierita, as Sincerita. Sinciero,
as Sincero. Sinciputo, the forepart of the head, or the upper part of the head
forward nigh to the coronall suture, which in late-borne sucklings is so soft
and tender, that under it the construction and dilatation of the brain called
Sistola and Diastole is plainly perceived, the bones of Sinciputo close their
future called Sagittale between Labdoide and Coronale. Sincodrosi, an union of
the bones made by a cartilage, as is seen in Osso Pube the breast bone and
Ilio, when it is knit to Osso Sacro. Sincopare, to cut off, to diminish, to
sincopate, to cut away. Sincopatione, a sincopation, cutting off, or
diminishing. Sincope, as Sincopatione. Also a swouning, or sounding, or dead
trance, a faintnes at the heart. Sincrisi, a comparison of things contrary, or
persons. Sincrisma, a thin and spreading ointment. Sindesmosi, a composition
of bones by the means of a ligament, as appears in the joints. Sindicare, to
judge, to araigne, to convince, to detect, to condemn, to cast by law, to
plead for, to be tried by law. Sindicato, judged, araigned, convinced,
detected, condemned, cast, tried by law, a chief court of magistrates, a
general sessions. Also a judge or an advocate. Sindicatore, as Sindico.
Sindicatura, a judgment, a sessions, a condemnation, an araignement or trial
by law. Sindico, an advocate or attorney for the common wealth, or for the
comminaltie of the city or country, one that has the charge or commission to
deal in affairs of the common wealth, and also used for a judge, a
magistrate, a iusticer, or a ruler. Sinedocche, a figure in speech when part is
understood by the whole, or the whole by the part. Sinera, a fish that swimmeth
through all storms. Sineressi, a contraction of two in one. Sineri, a digger
or worker about minerals. Sinfonia, Sinphonia, a concordance or consent in
music. Singolare, one, one alone, singular, peculiar, without company,
excellent, peerless, passing, or exceeding others. Singolarita, singularity,
excellency. Singhiozzare, to sob, to throb, to groan, to blubbre, to yexe, to
hichecocke. Also to clock as a hen does, to gasp. Singhiozzi, sobs, throbs,
groans, blubbrings, yeaxings, hichecocks, gaspings, sobbings. Singoltare, as
Singhiozzare. Singolti, as Singhiozzi. Singoltire, tisco, tito, as
Singhiozzare. Singozzare, as Singhiozzare. Singozzi, as Singhiozzi. Singultare,
as Singhiozzare. Singulti, as Singhiozzi. Singular, as Singolare. Singularita,
as Singolarita. Singultire, as Singhiozzare. Siniscal^o, a seneshall, or
marshall, a stuard, comptrouler, or chief or seawer of a noble man's house.
Sinistra, the left hand or side of any thing. Also a mischief, or cross ill
luck. Sinistrale, a left handed man. Also an ill fortune or mishap.
Sinistramente, sinisterly, against the hair, contrary to expectation,
vnluckilie, unhappily, unfortunately, not in good sort. Sinistrare, to
miscarie by ill chance, to put any limme out of joint. Sinistrezza,
sinisternes, contrariety, opposition, crosse-luck, ill chance, bad fortune.
Sinistro, a left handed, man pertaining to, or that is on the left hand. Also a
mischief, a mischance, or ill luck. Also a box, blow, or clap on the ear
given with the left hand or with the back of the hand. Also contrary, against,
or opposite to a man's desire or expectation, unprosperous, unhappy, unlucky
or unfortunate. Sino, until, so far as, even till, even from, even unto.
Sino alla bocca, until, or even to the mouth. Sino a che, until that, till
that, till when Sino a quanto? how long? until when? Sino a qui, hitherto,
even to this place. Sino a che tempo? until what time? till when? Sino a
tanto, till that, until that, so far as. Sinochitide, a kind of stone that
sorcerers use much to call up ghosts. Sinodale, pertaining to the council or
assembly. Sinodia, a meeting together, or excommunication. Sinodo, an
assembly of men, a general council. Also a kind of fish with a precious
stone in his head. Sinomino, a sinonime, or word of one signification. Sinonia,
or Sinophia, a white and gluish matter lying in the joints of man's body much
like unto the white of an eg, wherein if any gravel chance to grow the gout
is caused thereby. Sinopico, of or belonging to the red stone sinoper or
ruddle. Sinopio, sinoper, red lead, ruddle, red okre, or redding. Sintassi,
construction, or order of construction. Also a volume of diverse works.
Sinterice, a consumption wherewith a man pineth away. Sintomato, troubled with
Syntome. Sintesi, a figure when a noune collectiue is joined with a verb
plural. Sinteresi, the pure part of a conscience. Sintessi, weakness,
feeblenes, a consumption, wherewith first the soft flesh pineth away, and then
the faster parts. Sintettico, one that is weak and brought low, or one that
takes no food. Sinthema, a watchword given to soldiers when they should
fight. Also an intricate sentence or riddle. Sintome, Sintoma, an affect,
accident or passion following any sickness, a sensible grief joined with
sickness, as one would say an headache with an ague. Sinuare, to turn or
wind in the form of a serpent, making hollow bosoms or furrows, to bow or
bend. Also to pleit as garments do. Also to crankle in and out as some rivers
do. Sinuato, gathered into hollow bosoms, enbosomed, crooked, bent. Sinuosita,
intricatenes, crankling in and out, making of bosoms, or creekes. Sinuoso,
that has or is full of bendings, turnings, windings, that is indented, that is
full of creekes, bosoms, or crinkle-crankles. Sinuta, an herb which tasted
makes one drunk. Sipa, Dante has used it for Sia, or Fia, be it, be he, as
Scipa. Sipario, a curtain or veil drawn when the players come upon the
stage. Siper, as well, as well because. Si perch, as because. Siphara, the
adders dry skin that he casts. Siphio, a kind of stone very soft, but
being heat in oil it waxes hard. Siphita, a disease called S. Vitus his
dance. Sippa, a great bone fire. Sirasi, a disease in children proceeding of an
inflammation of the brain. Also a fault in trees when by exceeding heat they
be starued, and burnt. Sire, a title given only to Kings, as we say Sir.
Sirena, a Siren, a Mermaide, a sea monster. Also a kind of serpent in Arabia
that runs so swift that he seems to fly, and is very venomous. Siriasi,
as Sirasi. Sirico, a color mixed with sinoper and ruddle. Also a kind of stone.
Siringa, a syringe or a squirt. Also a reed, a pipe, a flute or a recorder.
Siria, the star Canicula, of which the Canicular or dog days are called.
Sirite, a stone found in the bladder of a wolf. Sirocchia, a sister.
Sirocchiare, to play the sister. Sirocchieuolmente, sisterlike, sisterly.
Sirocco, the south east wind. Siroppo, a syrup, a potion, a drench. Sirte,
quickesands, or shelfes in the water made by the drift and sand and gravel.
Siruolo, a kind of wine so called. Sisa, a kind of syse or glue that painters
use. Sisach, some part about a man's stomach. Sisamini, little bones about the
ioints of hands and feet. Sisare, to syse, to glue, to stiffen. Sisamo, a
white grain, corn or pulse, whereof oil is made growing in India. Sisara, as
Sisera. Sischiare, to hiss or to whistle. Sischio, a hissing or a whistle.
Sisembro, a kind of tree. Sisera, the skirret root used in salads. Sisigia, a
conjunction or coupling. Also the conjunction of the moon with the sun. Also
the new moon. Sisimbro, Water-mint or Balamint. taken also for Watercresses.
Sisone, a small seed growing in Syria like to Parsely. Sissarcosi, a
conjunction of the bones by the apposition of the flesh coming upon them as is
seen between the teeth and the jaws: as also in those ioints which muskles
do inuiron. Sissietieride, as Protomedia. Sisto, an open gallorie, terrace or
walking place. Sistola, the shortning of a vowell that is long. Also the motion
or panting of the heart and arteries. Sistro, a kind of musical instrument of
brass, much like a horn. Sitabondo, Sitibondo, thirsty, dry, greedy,
coveting or desiring. Sitiente, as Sitabondo. Sit^re, tisco, tito, to thirst or
long after, to be thirsty, to covet and desire earnestly. Sito, a site, a
situation, a seat or foundation, the seating or standing of any place. Situare,
to seat, to site, to situate, to found, or lay the standing of any place.
Situatione, as Sito. Situra, thirst, thirstines, drought. Also barrennes.
Slacciare, to untie, to unlace, to vntangle, to vnsnare. Slancato, broken-hipt,
back-broken. Slanciare, as Lanciare. Slandra, an old whore, an ouer-ridden
jade, a roynish rampe. Slargare, to enlarge, to free, to extend, to spread, or
stretch out. Slattare, to weane from sucking, to vnmilke. Slauacciare, to shake
up and down and dable in the water. Slauato, unwashed. Also a kind of bright
douncolour of a horse, a wash color. Sleale, disloyal, false, faithless.
Slealta, disloyalty, falsehood, untruth. Slegare, to unbind, to untie, to
free. Slicciare, as Sbrisciare. Sliuidita, flappie, withered, faded in feeling,
lanke. Slizzigare, as Sbriscicare. Slocare, as Slogare. Slocatura, a remoouing
or putting out of joint. Slodare, to dispraise, to discommend, to blame.
Sloffa, a fizzle, a fiste, a close farte. Sloffare, to fizzle, to fiste, to
farte. Slogare, to displace, to remove. Also to put out of place or joint.
Slombare, to weaken, to infeeble, to mangle, to cut up the carcass of any
thing, to disioyne as a butcher does a sheep. Slongare, to prolong, to
prorogue, to defer, to lengthen, to stretch out. Slontanare, as Alontanare.
Slordare, to cleanse, to farm, to vnpollute. Smaccare, to break, to bruise, to
crush, to batter, to tug, to tread under ones feet, as Sgarare* to beat flat.
Smacchiare, to vnspat. Also to rouse a dear from out his shelter or hold or
bushes. Smacco, an overthrow, a battring, crushing or brusing, a check or tant
in a word or deed. Also made flat. Smagare, to trouble, to vex, to annoy or
bring one out of his wits. Also to transform or misshape. to part, to sever,
to sunder, to shiuer, to flaw, to splint, to quell or put to flight. to charm,
to forespeake or bewitch. Smagliare, to break mailes, to vnmaile, to disarme,
to break, to crush, to batter, to bruise. also to possess, or ravish with
delight. Smagonare, to dismay, to affright, to astonie, to swoune. Smagrare, to
extenuate, to make lean, to take down ones flesh, to grow lean. Smagrire,
grisco, grito, as Smagrare. Smagro, lean, gante, meagre, poor in flesh.
Smaltare, to enamell gold, to plaster, to parget, to belome, to bedaube, to
ouercast with mortar or loame. Smaltire, tisco, tito, to digest, to brook, to
put over as a hawk does her meat. Also the tewell of a hawk. Smaltitura, a
digesting or putting over of a hawk. Smalto, plaster, parget, loame, mortar.
also amell for goldsmiths. Smalzare, to butter, to dress with butter. Smalzo,
Smalza, butter. Smammire, Smammito, as Suanire, and Suanito. Smancerie, any
kind of fine apparel, rayments or ornaments about women rather worn for
pleasure then need, any trimming, lacing, fringing or such ornament to make up
any apparel besides the outside. Smanciera, a woman that loves and wastes much
to go finely and gaie in apparel, and deuiseth daily new fashions. Smania,
rashness, fondnes, madness, folly, rage, fury, fretting, chafing, rauing or
such foolish humor or passion, brainesicknes, rising of too much abundance of
good blood in the head, whereby the party falls into such raging passions.
Smaniare, to be light brained, to rave, to be fond, to be toyish, to fret, to
chafe with anger, to be passionate, raging and brainsicke. Smanicare, to
vnsleaue, to vnhaft, to vnhilt, to vnhandle. Smaniglie, bracelets about the
arm. Smantellare, to vnmantle, to vncloke. also to raze, to batter down the
walls of a town, to strip naked. Smantellare le mura, to raze or batter down
the walls. Smarginare, to take away the scurffe or skars of any wound, cut or
sore. Also to take away the margin or side of any thing. Smarrare, to pare or
shave down. Smarrigione, as Smarrimento. Smarrire, risco, rito, to err, to
straie, to gad, to miss, to roame or wander out of the way. also to affright,
to mate, to amaze, to astonie, to faint for fear, to straggle, to fade.
Smarrito, erred, straide, gadded, mist, roamed, wandered out of the way,
affrighted, amazed, straggled, lost, miscarried. Smarrimento, an error, a stray,
a straggling, a fright, an astonishment. Smartellare, to batter, beat, or forge
with a hammer. Smartellato, freed from jealousy, or passions of love.
Smascarare, to unmask, to open, to discover, to reveal. Smascellare, to
vniawe, or burst ones chaps or cheeks. Smascellare dalle risa, to laugh
heartily, to burst ones cheeks with laughing. Smascherare, as Smascarare.
Smattare, Smatteggiare, to play the fool or mad man. Smattonare, to vnpaue, to
vnbrick, to pull down bricks. Smembrare, to dismember, to carue, to break up,
to sever, to separate, to disioyne limme for limme. Smemoraggine, oblivion,
forgetfulness, vnmindfulnes. Smemoramento, idem. Smemoranza, oblivion,
forgetfulness, vnmindfulnes. Smemorare, to forget, not to remember.
Smemorataggine, as Smemoranza. Smemorato, forgotten, not remembered. Also a
forgetful, obliuious, or unmindful man. Smemoreuole, forgetful, obliuious.
Smemoro, forgetful, obliuious. Smenticanza, oblivion, forgetfulness.
Smenticare, to forget. Smenticheuole, forgetful, obliuious. Smentire, smento,
smentito, to confute, to reuert, to make one say tongue thou lie. Smentita, a
confutation of a lie. Smeraldino, a little emeraulde. Also a kind of green
called sea-grasse green. Smeraldo, a precious stone called an emerauld.
Smerdamento, a beraying, a beshiting, a bedawbing. Smerdare, to beraie, to
beshite, to becacke, to bedaube. Smerdolare, as Smerdare. Smergo, a bird
called a diuer, a didapper, or arsefoote. Also a cormorant or a sea-gull.
Smergolo, as Smergo. Smeriglio, a kind of long wingd hawk called a merline.
Some take it for a sparowe hawk: and some for a ringtaile. Also a kind of
hard stone that will cut glass, armourers use to scour armor with Also a
kind of small shot or artillery like unto a base or robinet. Smerlare le mura,
to pull off the battlements of any wall, to raze walls, to deface. Smerlo, as
Smeriglio, as Smergo. Smetriare, to vnmytre, to vnbishop, to degrade from a
mytre. Smiagolare, to meaw like a cat. Also to mumble as a toothlesse woman.
Smilace, an ewe tree. Also the herb ropeweede, or weedebinde. Smilza, the milt
or spleen of any body. Smizlare, to vespleene a man. Smilzo, bare, spinie,
gant, lean, lanke, meagre, pretty, thin, fine, withered, drooped, without
spleen. Sminu^^are, as Sminuzzare. Sminuire, isco, ito, to diminish, to make
less. Sminuzzare, to mince, to shred, to cut, to slice, to crum into small
pieces, to mammocke, to moulder. Sminutamente, mincingly, slicingly,
distinctly, in small pieces. Sminuzzoli, mincings, mammocks, shreds or small
pieces. Smiracolare, to wonder, to admire, or marvel at any thing, to do
woonders. Smirice, a stone that glasiers cut glass withal, called an emerod.
Smiriglio, as Smeriglio. Smirro, Smirno, a hard stone that glasiers use to cut
glass with. Smirnio, louage, or parslie of Macedonia. Smisuratamente,
vnmeasurably, excessiuely, beyond all measure. Smisuranza, hugenes,
vnmeasurablenes. Smisurato, unmeasurable, boundless, excessive, huge.
Smoccare, to snuff or top a candle, to snuff or blow ones nose. Smoccatoio,
a pair of snuffers. Also a mucketter. Smoccolare, as Smoccare. Smoccolo, a
snuff or candles end. Smoderato, immoderate, intemperate, mimodest. Smoglia, a
washing tub, or a tub to lay clothes in water. Smogliare, to lay clothes in
water before they be washed. Smognere, smongo, smonsi, smongiuto, or smonto, to
milch, suck, or draw dry. Smongere, as Smognere. Smongiuto, milched, sucked,
or drawn dry. Smontare, to dismount, to alight, to descend, to supplant, to
decline. Also to go a land from a ship. Smontare da cauallo, to dismount, to
alight from horse. Smontare di barca, to come out of a boat, to land. Smontare
l'artegliaria, to dismount or vnbreech, or vnstock any ordinance. Smontare le
scale, to descend or come down a pair of stairs. Smontata, an alighting, a
dismounting, a descending, a landing place, or a landing. Also a block to
light from horseback. Smonto, as Smongiuto. Smordere, smordo, smordei,
smorduto, to unbridle, to vnsnaffle, to untwine, to vntangle. Also to rid or
free from trouble, to bite in sunder. Smorduto, unbridled, vnsnaffled,
vntangled, vnbitten, rid from trouble. Smorbare, to disinfect, to cure, to
heal, to cleanse. Smorfia, a mowing, a mocking, or pish with ones mouth, a
mumping, a blurting. Smorfire, fisco, fito, to mock or make mouths at one.
Also to devour greedily, to parboyle. Smorsare, to unbridle, to vnsnaffle, to
nibble or bite in sunder. Smortaccino, somewhat pale, wanne, or
sallow-coloured. Smortarello, as Smortaccino. Smorto, pale, wanne, grizlie,
gastlie, deadly, or sallow-coloured. Smorzare, to extinguish or put out any
light. Smorzo, Smorzato, extinguished or put out. Smouere, smouo, smossi,
smosso, to remove, to stir, to disioyne, to put any joint out of joint.
Smosso, removed, displaced, moved, stirred, or put out of joint. Smossa, a
putting out of joint, a moving, a stirring. Smouitura, as Smossa. Smouimento,
as Smossa. Smozzare, to curtall, to cut off. Smozzicare, as Smozzare.
Smucciare, as Sdrucciolare. Smugnere, as Smognere. Smungere, as Smognere.
Smuccire, as Sdrucciolare. Smunto, as Smongiuto. Smuouere, as Smouere. Smurare,
to vnwall, to raze or pull down any walls. Smusso, a goldsmiths tool.
Snamorarsi, to disinamour, to fall in dislike. Snamoratosi, disinamored, fallen
in dislike. Snasato, without a nose, vn-nosed. Snellamente, swiftly, nimbly,
fleetlie, tricksie, light-footed, quick in motion, speedily. Snello, swift,
fleet, nimble, speedy, light footed. Sneruare, to vnsinew, to weaken ones
body, to make lean. Snidare, to rouse, to remove from out a nest, to vnnest,
to displace, to vndenne. Snocciolare, to crack nuts, to shale nuts, to unloose,
to resolve, to find out a doubt, to pick or cull out, to rid, to vntangle.
Snocciolato, cracked nuts, shaled nuts, unloosed, resolved, found out a doubt,
picked, or culd out. Snodare, to vn^not, to untie, to loosen, to vntangle, to
put any limme out of joint. Snodatura, the knitting of any joint. Also an
vnknitting. So, is used for Suo, his, his own. Also of Sapere, I wot, I know,
I ken, I wisse. Also joined to words in composition, it signifies under, as
Sossopra, for Sottosopra. Soaue, sweet or pleasant in taste, hearing or
smelling, that has a pleasant smack or relish, soft in touching, delectable,
delicious, soote. Also courteous or pleasant. Soauidico, one that speaks
pleasantly or uses a sweet manner of speech. Soauiloquentia, sweet or
pleasant language. Soauiloquente, that speaks sweetly, that has a sweet
sound. Soauiloquio, a kind of sweet and pleasant speech. Soauita, sweetness,
pleasance, softnes, deliciousnes. Soauitudine, as Soauita. Soazza, as Cornice.
Sobattere, to surbaite as a horse does. Sobattuto, surbaited. Sobattitura, a
surbaiting. Sobbarcare, to drown, to drench, to diue, to plunge. Sobbollire,
to soften, to mollify, to supple, to boil under. Sobbollito, softened,
mollifide, suppled. Also a kind of wine so called. Sobborghi, the suburbs or
boroughs of a city, out streets. Sobero, the light wood called cork.
Soblimare, as Sublimare. Soblimato, as Sublimato. Soblime, as Sublime.
Soblimita, as Sublimita. Sobole, stock, issue, succession, generation,
offspring. Sobolire, lisco, lito, to increase a stock or lineage. Sobornare, to
suborne, to debauch, to allure or entice to evil. Sobornatione, a subornation,
debauching or intisement to evil. Sobrieta, sobriety, sobernes, temperance.
Sobrino, a cousin germain. Also a sisters child. Sobrio, sober, modest,
temperate, well advised, not drunk, well in his wits. Soccato, that wears
sockes, startops or bagging shoes. Socchi, a kind of socke, startop or bagging
shoe used in old time, a woollen socke. Soccingere, to vndergirt. Socchiudere,
Socchiuso, to vndershut, to shut or lock under. Soccinto, as Succinto.
Soccido, Soccidezza. Look Succido. Soccino, as Succino. Soccolare, to go
stalking, to go on stilts. Soccoli, stilts, such as they use to go with in
sens, or startops. Also wooden pattins or chopinos. Soccombere, combo, combei,
combuto, to lie or fall down under, to fail for feeblenes, not to be able to
sustain, to be overcome or charged with any thing, to be subdued. Soccorrere,
corro, corsi, corso, to succor, to assist, to help, to aid any man, to run
under. Soccorso, succored, assisted, helped, vnderrunne. Also succor, help,
aid, assistance. Socero, a father in law, that is a man's wives father.
Sociabile, Socialita. Look Sotiabile or Sotiare. Sociare, Societa, Socio.
Look Sotiare. Socido, Socidezza. Look Succido. Socordia, sluggishnes,
idleness, luskishnes. Socrotio, the name of a drug. Soda, a disease or giddines
in a hauks head. Also a kind of fearne ashes whereof they make glasses. Sodale,
a companion or fellow at meals and pastime. Also of one fraternity, company
or society. Sodalita, a fellowship, a society, a brotherhood or a company.
Sodalitio, company, fellowship or society. Sodare, to bail, to pledge, to
answer for. Also to make stiff or tough or solid, to fasten or make fast.
Sodatore, a pledge, a bail, a surety, a warrant. Sodezza, stifnes, toughnes,
hardness, soliditie. Sodisfare, to satisfy, to please, to content. Sodisfatto,
satisfide, pleased, contented. Sodisfatione, Sodisfacimento, a satisfaction.
Sodo, solid, tough, fast, hard, stiff. Sodo al macchione, stiff, resolute,
undaunted, that will not come out for knocking. Sodomia, the natural sin of
Sodomie. Sodomita, a sodomite, a buggrer. Sodomitare, to commit the sin of
Sodomie. Sodomitarie, sodomiticall tricks. Sodomitico, sodomiticall. Sodona,
some kind of herb or drug good in physic. Sodotto, seduced, deceived,
mislead. Soette, a kind of fish. Sofferenza, suffrance, toleration, bearing.
Sofferire, risco, fersi, ferto, to suffer, to endure, to tolerate, to bear.
Sofferto, suffered, endured, tolerated, borne. Soffiare, to blow, to puff, to
gasp, to breath, to blast, to pant. Soffiante, blowing, puffing, panting,
breathing. Soffiatore, a blower, a puffer, a breather. Sofficiente, sufficient,
able, enough, worthy, apt, learned, well-deseruing. Soffice, pliable,
yielding, gentle, limber, that will not stretch. Sofficienza, sufficiency,
ability. Soffietto, a box, a buffet, a whirret on the cheek, a kirimirie
buffe. Also a satchell, a wallet, a budget, a pouch. Also a little blast or
puff of wind. a pair of bellows. Soffio, a puff, a blast, a blowing, a
breath, a gale or gust or flaw of wind. Soffione, a musket, a caliuer, a
petronell or such piece, a shooting trunk. a great puff, blast, gale or gust
of wind, a great pair of bellows. Also a squib of wild fire. Sofista, a
sophister, a subtle disputer. Soffisterie, sophistries or sophistical
matters. Sophisticare, to sophisticate, to adulterate, to corrupt, to play the
sophister. Soffita, a garret, a loft or room in the top of a house, a room or
chamber with a cross beam in it. Soffitare, to build bending wise like the
rouse of a garret. Soffituto, build rouse or bending wise. Soffitto, pressed or
fixed under. Soffocare, to smoother, to stifle, to suffocate, to strangle, to
stop the breath, to choke, to kill. Soffocatione, a stifling, a smoothering, a
strangling, a choking, a killing with stopping the breath. Soffogare, as
Soffocare. Soffogatione, as Soffocatione. Soffolcire, cisco, cito, to stay, or
hold up, to sustain, to maintain, to underprop, to uphold, to bear up, to
assist, to bolster up. Soffolgere, folgo, folsi, folto, as Soffolcire.
Soffolto, underpropped, staide up. Soffomentatione, a fomentation. Soffondato,
vnderlaide or laid under, as a foundation is at the bottom of a thing.
Soffondere, fondo, fondei, fonduto, or fuso, to cast or power down liquor on a
thing, to spread over and over, to cast abroad, to bewet, to stain or dye.
Also to trouble and confound. Soffonduto, or Soffuso. Look Soffondere.
Soffosso, an vnder-ditch, dike or trench. Soffragano, a suffragane or a Bishops
vicegerent. Soffragare, to speak in ones part favorably, to favor or help
with his voice or suffrage, to choose by voices, to give ones word, favor or
voice in any election. Soffragatione, a declaration of consent or favor, a
giving of ones voice in election. Soffragatore, one that helps with his good
word or voice, a supporter or maintainer, an abettor. Soffragatorio, of or
belonging to him that helps one with his good word or voice at any election.
Soffraginoso, as Suffraginoso. Soffragio, a suffrage, a word, voice, consent,
help, opinion or good word about any election, the voice of men in giving
their consent, help or succor. Also a wrack in the sea. Soffrago, the joint
of the hinder leg of a beast called the bough. Also the pastern of a horse.
Also one whose thighs are broken. Soffranta, the hinder part of the thigh.
Soffratto, a defeature or overthrow. Also ruthe or pity. Soffrenare, as
Suffrenare. Soffrenata, as Suffrenata. Soffrenatione, a binding or fast joining
together of stones in a wall. Softriggere, friggo, friggei, fritto, to fry in
a frying pan. Also to broile. Soffrimento, sufferance, toleration, suffering,
bearing, abiding. Soffrire, as Sofferire. Soffritto, fride in a frying pan,
broiled. Also a kind of pan pudding. Also a kind of sauce or minced meat.
Soffrutice, any manner of vndershrub. Soffumicare, as Suffumicare.
Soffumicatione, as Suffumicatione. Soffumigare, as Suffumicare. Soffumigatione,
as Suffumicatione. Soffumigij, as Suffumicatione. Soffusione, as Suffusione.
Soffuso. Look Soffondere. Also endued, sprinkled, that has spread over it,
interlaced and mixed with, wetted with. Soga, a roape, a cable, a cord.
Soggettione, subjection, bondage, thraldom. Also a casting or putting under.
Soggettire, tisco, tito, or getto, to subject, to subdue, to inthrall, to
vanquish, to constrain, to bring or drive under, to conquer, to make subject.
Soggettito, Soggetto. Look Soggettire. Soggetto, a subject, a vassal, a
servant, a thrall, a ground or subject of any matter to speak or write of.
Also put or lying under, in subjection, in danger to. Soghignare, to smile, to
leere, to simper. Soghigno, a smile, a smiling, a leering, a simpring.
Soggiacere, to underlay, to subject, to lie under, to be subject. Soggiacciuto,
vnderlaide, subject, laid under. Soggiogare, to subdue, to vanquish, to yoke,
to submit, to tame, to make subject. Soggiontione, an vndersetting or ioining
underneath. Soggiongere, giongo, gionsi, gionto, as Soggiungere. Soggionto, as
Soggiunto. Soggiornanza, a soiourning, an abiding place, a soiourne, a delay.
Soggiornare, to soiourne, to abide, to won, to dwell or delay in a place.
Soggiornatore, a soiourner, a dweller, a delayer, a remainer. Soggiorno, a
dwelling place, an habitation, a mansion, a delay or deferring of time.
Soggiugnere, as Soggiungere. Soggiungere, giongo, giunsi, gionto, to add, to
join, or set unto or under. Also to reply, to say more, to answer.
Soggiungimento, an addition, a reply, an answer. Soggiuntiuo, the subiunctiue,
joining or adding mood of a verb. Soggiunto, added, joined unto or under,
replide, said or answered moreover. Soggola, a part of piece of a yoke so
called. Soglia, the transome or lintell over a door, a threshold or hanse of a
door. Also for a house or mansion it self. Also a sole fish. Sogliarda, a
slut, a driggle-draggle, a piskitching, a flurting drudge. Sogliardo, a mocker,
a scoffer, a quipper, a flouter, a frumper, a iester. Also slouenly, sluttish,
or hoggish. Also a lubbard, a loggerhead, a gull, a fool, a flattrer, a
cogger. Sogliare, to mock, to scoff, to quippe, to floute, to frumpe, to
jest, or gibe. Also to sully, defile, or pollute. also to flatter or to cogge,
or to foyst. Soglio, a place or seat of state where a king sits, an
imperial seat, a seat of majesty, a throne or seat royal made of whole
stuff without any piece. Also a transome, a lintell, a sill, a threshold, or
ha^se of a door, or entrance. Also of the verb Solere, I am wont, I am
accustomed. Sogna, tallow, grease, fat, sewet or larde. Sognare, to dream, to
rave in sleep. Sognatore, a dreamer or rauer in sleep. Sogniolo, a kind of
creuise, or crab-fish. Sogno, a dream, or rauing in sleep, a vision in ones
sleep. Also a vain trifle not likely to be true. Sognoso, dreaming, rauing,
full of dreams, that dreameth often. Sogozzone, as Sorgozzone. Soia, Soiata, a
mock, a jest, a flout, a scoff, a quip, a frumpe, a flattering, a cogging, a
foysting. Soiare, as Sogliare. Soiardo, Soiatore, as Sogliardo. Sol, a note of
music. Also the sun. Also alone. Sola, the sole of a shoe. Also a sole
fish. Solach, a kind of beast in Tartarie somewhat like a sheep with a
precious horn in his head, which at the sound of a drum will dance round so
long till he fall down, and so they be taken. Solaio, Solaro, a sollar, a
loft, a seeling or floor of a house. Solame, comfort, solace, consolation.
Solamente, only, but, but only, alone. Solana, a great broad hat to defend
one from the sun. Solano, the herb nightshade, morelue, or banewoort, or
deaths-herbe. Solare, sunnie, of, or pertaining to the sun. Also to sole a
pair of shoes. Herba solare, the herb turnesole or wartwoort. Also a sun
dyall. Solari raggi, the sunnie rays or beams. Solaro, as Solaio. also a
canapie carried over the host when they go in procession, in latin Perculum.
Also a sun dyall. Solato, as Solatro. Solatro, a weed called wild fetches,
choke-weede, or broome-rape. Solazzare, to solace, to sport, to pastime, to
blyth it, to comfort. Solazzeuole, sportefull, pleasant, blythe, buckesome,
full of pastime, comfortable. Solazzo, solace, sport, pastime, glee, comfort,
consolation. Solazzoso, as Solazzeuole. Solbastrella, pimpernell or burnet.
Solcare, to furrow or make furrows. Also to till, to plough or break up the
ground. Also to row, to cleave, to divide, to cut the waters or waves. Solcar'
il mare, to row, cut, cleave, or furrow the sea with the keele of a ship. Also
to sail or pass the seas. Solcato, furrowed, made in furrows, tilled,
ploughed, or broken up the ground. Also rowed, cut, cleft, or divided the sea
with the keele of a ship, sailed or past through the sea. Also the place
wherein the streake of a cart wheel is printed. Solcatore, a furrower, a
plougher, one that makes furrows. Also one that roweth in a vessel on the
water, a seaman. Solchi, furrows, streakes, plowings, tillings. Also gullets
or gozels of water. also wrimples, as Solco. Solcio, the name of a kind of
fish, as Polpo. Solco, a furrowe, a streake, a wrimple, a gullet or gozell of
water. Also tilling or laboring of the ground. Also a range or trench like a
furrow to plant or set vines in, like a ditch. Soldana, as Soldanella.
Soldanatico, the office or dignity of a soldier, a souldiership. Soldanella,
sea solefoote, scuruie-weede, dogs-caule, sea with-binde, seabels, or sea
coals. Soldare, to press soldiers into pay. Soldatesco, soldier-like, like a
soldier. Soldato, pressed with pay as soldiers are. Also a soldier or man of
war. Soldo, a coin called a shilling, the pay due to soldiers and men of
war. Sole, the sun, the eye of heaven, the planet Sol. Also of Solere, he
is wont. Also gold according to Alchimistes phrases. Solecchio, a glimmering
or glimppes of the sun. Also a little sun. Also a fan or canapie, or
shade against the sun. Solecismo, incongruitie, solccisme. Solecitare, to
solicit, to follow, to hie, to speed, to hasten, to procure, to pursue, to
disquiet, and make careful, to vex, to trouble, to make heavy or solicitous,
to provoke and lie instantly upon or be earnest with one, to entice one to do a
thing. Used also to tickle. Solecita, a solicitation, a pursuit, a hastening,
an enticing or moving to do a thing. Solecitatione, as Solecita. Solecitatore,
a solicitor, a purseuant, also an egger or enticer to do a thing.
Solecitamente, diligently, carefully, vigilantly, speedily, pensiuely.
Solecito, diligent, speedy, careful, hasty, wary, watchful, sollicitous,
pensive, sad, that never rests, timorous and fearful, full of carke and
care, busy, much occupied. Solecitudine, diligence, haste, care, speed,
warines, pursuit, carke and care. Also heaviness, pensiuenes, trouble, vexation
or anguish of mind. Solecophano, whatsoever has a show of solecisme, which
may in some sort be excused. Sole d'in India, as Coppa di Gioue. Solenne,
solemn, grave, annual, yearly, public, accustomed, used or done at a
certain time. Solenneggiare, as Solennizzare. Solennita, solemnity, a
celebration. Solenizzare, to solemnize, to celebrate ordinarily.
Solenizzatione, a solemnity, a celebration. Solere, soglio, solsi, soluto, to
be wont, to use, to accustom, to be accustomed. Soluto, wont, used,
accustomed. Solere, diligent, heedie, watchful, vigilant, witty, crafty,
subtle, cunning. Solertia, diligence, heed, watchfulnes, vigilancie,
wittines, craftines, skill, cunning, subtilitie in practicing good or ill,
quicknes or sharpenes of wit or sense. Soleticare, to tickle. Soletico,
ticklish. Soleticatione, a tickling. Soletta, a shooe-sole. Soletto, alone,
all-alone, solitary. Solfa, prick-song. Solfanelli, matches of brimstone to
kindle a candle with. Solfareita, sulfring, or quality of brimstone. Solfaria,
a place where sulfre or brimstone is made. Solfarini, as Solfanelli. Solfaro, a
brimstone maker, a sulfurer. Solfeggiare, to sing, prick-song, to solfa it.
Solfo, sulfre or brimstone. Solforare, to sulfre, to touch with brimstone.
Solforeo, of, or belonging to, mixed with, or of the color of brimstone.
Solforini, as Solfanelli. Solfro, sulfre or brimstone. Solicciuolo, as
Solecchio. Solicuria, curiousnes in every thing. Solidagine, the herb
wall-woort, or comfrie or camfrie. Solidare, to consolidate, to make firm,
whole, sound, massiue, fast, solid, tough, or hard, to stiffen. Also to
solder metals, to strengthen. also to heal up a wound. Solidezza, as
Solidita. Solidipiedi, whole footed, without toes. Solidita, soliditie,
toughnes, firmenes, soundnes, stiffenes. Solido, solid, fast, firm, tough,
stiff, hard, sound, whole, continual, fully and wholly, strong, pithie, not
hollow, not broken, full and perfect, firm and constant. Look Insolido.
Soligeno, begotten of the sun. Solimato, sublimate, or mercury, or
quicksilver. Solingo, as Soletto. Solio, as Soglio. Solipungia, a pysmyre or
fly, that pricketh and stingeth most vehemently in the sun. Solistimo, a
kind of dancing among the Augures, or a divination taken by the falling of the
bread to the ground which was given to chickens. Solitamente, woontedly,
according to wont. Solitario, solitary, alone, all-alone, without company.
Solitario passero, a bird somewhat bigger and blacker then a sparrow, going
alone on the tops of houses, and singing sweetly. Solito, wont, used,
accustomed, woonted. Solitudine, solitude, solitarines, a living alone, an
hermitage, a desert or wilderness, where no man dwells. Soliuago, that goes
here and there all alone, and shunneth company, solitary, wandering all
alone. Solla, a flawe in any iron work. Solla neue, soft, tender, pliable,
that is not hard, half melted snow, thawing snow. Sollazzare, as Solazzare.
Sollazzeuole, as Solazzeuole. Sollazzo, as Solazzo. Sollecismo, as Silogismo.
Sollecitare, as Solecitare. Sollecito, as Solecito. Sollecitudine, as
Solecitudine. Sollenda, a kind of wild ducke or moorehen. Some take it to be a
kind of long shellfish, or a kind of muscle. Sollenne, as Solenne.
Sollennita, as Solennita. Sollennizzare, as Solennizzare. Solleticare, to
tickle. Solletico, ticklish. Solleuamento, a stirring up, a provoking, an
insurrection. Look Solleuare. Solleuare, to stir up to any commotion or
insurrection. Also to raise up, to rear up, to eleuate, to rise up, to lift or
hold up. Also to help, aid, or succor, to defend, to ease, to lighten or
lessen. Solleuatione, as Solleuamento. Sollecitare, as Sollecitare.
Sollicitatione, as Solecitatione. Sollicitatore, as Solecitatore. Sollicito, as
Solecito. Sollicitudine, as Solecitudine. Sollione, a beer or coffin for dead
bodies. Also a kind of vessel. Sollo, as Suollo, soft, tender, smooth, or
limmer in feeling. Sollucherare, to remember with pleasure things past.
Sollucheramento, a pleasant remembrance of things past. Solo, alone, only,
sole, several. Also so that, but, only that. Solo che, so that, only that.
Soloe, as Psoloe. Solpo, as Polpo. Solsequio, the marigold or turnesole. Also
following or turning with the sun. Solstitiale, of, or belonging to the time
when the sun is at the highest, and farthest. Used also for that which
continues but a little time. Solstitiale morbo, a sickness killing within one
day, or a short space. Solstitio, the stay of the sun when he can go neither
higher nor lower, which is in winter the 8. calends of January, and in summer
the 8. calends of Iulie, at what time the days be shortest and longest, called
in English the sun-stead. Solubile, loose or soluble, any thing that may be
dissolved or unloosed. Soluere, soluo, soluei, soluto or solto, to loose, to
dissolve, to free, to clear, to quit, to discharge, to resolve, to release, to
dispense, to deliver, to undo, to pay or recompense, to acquit, or purge.
Also to melt. Soluto, solto, loosed, dissolved, freede, cleared, quit,
discharged, absolved, resolved, released, delivered, set at liberty, dispensed
with, exempted, etc. Solutamente, absolutely, freely, clearly, resolutely.
Also loosely, wantonly, dissolutely. Solutile, that will or may be loosed or
undone. Solutione, a solution, an absolution, a discharge, a loosenes, a
resolution, a paying, a loosing or releasing. Solutiuo, soluble, that may be
resolved. Soma, a load, a burden, a fraught or charge that a beast does
carry. Also man's body. Somaco, Somacco, a wood to die black withal called
sumach, diers sumach, or leather sumach. Somare, to load, to burden or charge
a horse, to carry burdens. Somaro, Somaio, a sumpter horse. Also a sumpter
man. Somata, as Sommata. Someggiare, as Somare. Someggino, a carier or driuer
of horses. Also a sumpter horse or man. Somessione, submission. Somesso,
submitted, submisse. Look Sommesso. Also a measure about the length of a span
or hands breadth. Somiere, a sumpter horse, a sumpter man. Also a carier or
driuer of horses. Somigliante, as Simigliante. Somiglianza, as Simiglianza.
Somigliare, as Simigliare. Somiglieuole, as Simiglieuole. Somina, a multitude
of any thing. Somma, a collection of things or words, the principal or chief
point of a matter, an end, a sum, a conclusion or issue of any thing, the
height, top or fulness of any thing. a sum of money, consummation; perfection,
accomplishing, the end of an account, the whole principal or total sum.
Sommamente, exceedingly, greatly, in great sum or quantity. excellently,
chiefly, passing, so much as is possible. Sommare, to sum or cast up account,
to bring to a final conclusion. Look Somma. Sommariamente, summarily, in
conclusion, breefly, totallie, altogether, compendiously, by the tops or
highest parts. Sommario, a summarie, an abridgement, an epitomie, a chief or
principal above others. Sommata, a kind of meat made of the paps of a sow,
powdered and broyled. Sommati, great personages or men of dignity, the chief
persons of a city, the pieres of a realm. Sommato, Empire, dominion, chief
rule, sovereignty. Sommergere, mergo, mersi, merso, to drown, to diue, to
ducke, to plunge or ouerwhelme in the water, to sink in the water.
Sommersione, a drowning, a plunging in the water. Som^^rso, drowned, dipped,
plunged, diued, duckt, dipped, sunk or overwhelmed in the water. Sommessa, the
length of a span or handbreadth, a hand shaft so called of our drapers.
Sommessamente, submissiuely, humbly, lowly, mildly, basely. Sommessione,
submission, humblenes, lowlines, demisnes, faintnes, an humbling, a putting
under. Sommesso, submitted, subdued, brought or put under, subjected, brought
in subjection. Also submisse, submissiue, humble, mild, meek, demisse,
temperate, faint, abject, base minded, lowly. Also low or base in voice. Also a
kind of measure about a handful or a spans length, which our Drapers of London
call a shafts-man. Also a heap, a lump or mass of any thing close compact
together. Sommettere, metto, misi, messo, to submit, to subject, to subdue, to
put or bring under, to bow down, to humble, to debase, to give place.
Somministrare, as Sumministrare. Somministratione, as Sumministratione.
Somministratore, as Sumministratore. Sommissimamente, as Sommamente.
Sommissione, as Sommessione. Sommissiuo, submissiue, humble, lowly, demisse.
Sommista, a summer, a caster or keeper of accounts. Sommita, the tip, top or
height of any thing, the utmost top. Sommo, highest, greatest, extreme,
utmost, principal, passing, excellent, chief, notable, so much as more cannot
be, beyond compare, important, noble, especial or sovereign. Also the top or
height of any thing. also a kind of great weight in Italy. Also a kind of
coin. Sommo been, the chiefest or highest felicity of man. Sommouere, mouo,
mossi, mosso, to remove, take away, lay aside or take from under, to remove
or carry sarre off, to drive out of place, to cause to avoid, to lay apart.
Sommosso, removed, taken away, laid aside or taken from under. Sommozzare, as
Sommergere, but properly when a horsed does thrust down his head at the stop or
in any other action of riding. Sonabile, that sounds or ringeth shrill, that
may be roong or plaide upon. Sonagli, little hawks bells. Also taken for a man's
stones. Also bubbles in the water. Sonaglia, a kind of serpent in India, which
going makes a iangling as if it were of bells. Sonagliera, hathbeene used for a
man's privy parts. Also a set of bells as morris dancers dance with.
Sonaglietti, little hawks bells or childrens rattles. Sonaglio, a little bell,
a hawks bell, a rattle. Sonare, to sound, to resound, to ring bells, to play on
any instrument, to wind a horn, to sound a trumpet, to make a noise, to
rustle. Sonato, sounded, resounded, roong, played, wound, etc. made a noise.
Sonanza, a sound, a resounding, a noise, a ringing. Sonare le campane, to ring
the bells. Sonare di tamburo, to dub or sound upon a drum. Sonare di lauto, to
play upon a lute. Sonare d'instrumento, to play upon any instrument. Sonare la
trombetta, to sound, to clange a trumpet. Sonare il corno, to wind, or sound
a horn. Sonata, a sounding or fit of mirth. Sonatiuo, any thing that sounds,
or giving a sound, resounding. Sonatore, a sounder, a minstrell, a fiddler, a
musition, a plaier upon instruments. Sonci, there are, are there? Sonco, an
herb called sowthistle, whereof be two kinds, the one prickled, the other not
prickled. Sonettare, to compose, write, or sing sonnets. Sonettiere, a composer
of sonnets. Sonetto, a sonnet, a canzonet, a song. Soneuole, that yields a
sound, sounding, full of noise, resounding. Songia, tallow, fat, grease, sewet,
larde or seame of hogs. Songiare, to tallow, to larde, to grease. Songioso,
fattie, lardie* greasy, tallowish. Sonacchiare, to slumber, to be drouzie.
Sonacchione, a sluggard, a slug, a sluggabed, a heavy, drouzie, lumpsh fellow.
Sonacchioso, drouzie, slumbring, sleepie, sluggish, heavy, lumpish, a
sluggabed. Sonito, a sound, a rustling, a crash, a blustering, a roariu^ noise.
Sonnacchiare, Sonnachioso, as Sonacchiare. Sonniferare, as Sonacchiare.
Sonnifero, that brings or causes sleep. Sonno, sleep, slumber, a nap of
sleep. also rest, calmenes, or quietness. Used also for night. Sonnolente, as
Sonacchioso. Sonnolenza, sleep, slumber, drouzines. Sono, a sound, a
resounding, a voice, a speech, a noise, a word, a tune, a note Also the first
person singular of the present tence, and the third person plural of the same
tence of the Indicative mood of the verb Essere, I am, I appertain unto, and
so soorth. Also they are. Look Essere. Sonorita, shrilnes, a clear
resounding, loudnes. Sonoro, shrill, clear resounding, clear voiced, loud,
roaring, ringing. Sonocchiare, as Sonacchiare. Sonocchioso, as Sonacchioso.
Sontici, a kind of disease or infection, or rot that comes to cattle. Sontico,
noisome, hurtful. Sontico morbo, a continual and extreme sickness that
hangs long upon a man, and is ended within no certain time. Sontuoso,
sumptuous, stately, costly, prodigal^, lavish, outrageous in spending, pr^fuse.
Sontuosita, sumptuousnes, statelines, costlines, prodigality, profusenes.
Sopalco, a lofte, a sollar floor, a stage. Soperchiare, to vanquish, or
overcome with superfluity, to exceed. also to misuse or offer wrong with
odds or advantage, as to take one pissing against a wall. Soperchiaria, a
superchierie, a wrong or injury offered with ods or advantage. also
superfluity, an affront. Soperchiatore, one that wrongeth or misuseth another
man having ods or advantage of him. Soperchiatura, as Soperchiaria.
Soperchieria, as Soperchiaria. Soperchio, superfluous, overmuch, more then
needs. Soperstitione, as Superstitione. Soperstitioso, as Superstitoso. Sophia,
flixweed, flixwoort, or laskewort. Also wisdom or sapience. Sophismo, a true
seeming argument, a syll^gisme, a fallacy in disputation, a deceitful
sentence, an oration or sentence seeming to be true, but false indeed, a
cavil or sophistication. Sophista, a sophister or subtle disputer, he that
professes philosophy for lucre or vaineglorie, a deceiuer under an eloquent
or crafty speaking. Sophisticare, to sophisticate, to adulterate, to
counterfeit, to argue subtily, to deceive. Sophisticarie, sophistries,
sophistications, deceits. Sophisticatione, a sophistication, an adulterating, a
counterfeit, a deceit. Sophistico, sophistical, deceitful. Sophrone, a
temperate person. Sophronisteri, the two teeth which grow last of all, when a
man is about twenty years old. Sophrosina, taken for the virtue temperance. a
bridling of carnal appetites and lust. Sopi, a kind of great cuttle fish.
Sopire, pisco, pito, to bring or lull a sleep, to appease, to still, to whosht,
to set at rest. Sopito, brought or luld asleep, appeased, stild or whosht, set
at rest. Sopore, a dead swoune, deep sleep or drousie sickness. Soppa, a sop,
a toste in drink, brows. Also used for broth or pottage with bread in it.
Sopanno, Sopano, under ones clothes, closely, under hand, vnderboord. Soppare,
to sop, to steep or lay in sops. Soppediano, as Soppidiano. Sopperimento, as
Suplimento. Sopperire, as Suplire. Sopperito, as Suplito. Soppiantare, to plant
underneath, to under plant and set up a thing bending to the ground, as vines
or hops, to supplant. Soppiare, to blow, to puff. Soppiatone, a huffe-s^uffe,
a puffing fellow, a blower, a pursie broken winded jade, a sneaking lurking
companion, a gull, a fool. Also a close, sly, secret fellow. Also a cuffe or
box given on the cheek, a clap, a whirret. Soppidiano, a press or wardrop to
lay roabes or clothes in. Also a settle before a beds side. Sopplica, as
Suplica. Sopplicante, as Suplicante. Sopplicare, as Suplicare. Sopplicatione,
as Suplicatione. Sopplicheuole, as Suplicheuole. Sopplimento, as Suplimento.
Sopplire, as Suplire. Sopplita, a supply, an assistance, an help at a pinch, a
subsidy. Sopponere, Sopporte, as Sottoporre. Sopportare, to tolerate, to
bear, to suffer, to endure, to support, to vnderbeare, to conuaie under.
Sopportatione, a toleration, a bearing, a suffering, a supporting, an
vnderbearing. Supportabile, tolerable, that may be-borne or endured.
Sopporteuole, as Sopportabile. Sopportico, an vnderporch. Sopposta, a kind of
plaster for a horse, or a poultis. Also a pessarie, or suppositorie. Sopposto,
as Sottoposto. Soppozzare, as Sommergere. Soppressa, a press for clothes. Also
a pillorie. Also pressed under. Also a cheese fat. Soppressada, a kind of meat
used in Italy. Soppressare, to suppress, to ouertread, to presse-downe or
under, to keep down, to keep secret, or in silence. Also to dull and
suffocate. Soppressione, a suppressing, a pressing down, a keeping down, a
stopping or staying, suppression. Soppresso, suppressed, trodden or pressed down,
kept under or down, staid, stopped, hid, concealed, beaten under, drowned,
boulged, vnder-printed. Soppressore, a suppressor, an ouertreader. Sopprimere,
primo, primei, primuto, as Soppressare. Sopra, above, over, upon, before,
aloft, on high, on the top, besides, more then, beyond, moreover, over and
above. Soprabondante, superaboundant, exceeding, excelling. Soprabondanza,
superaboundaunce, store, plenty. Soprabondare, to superabound, to
ouer-exceede, to leave overplus, to be superfluous, or overmuch.
Soprabondeuole, as Soprabondante. Sopra calcie, upper hosen, bootehosen,
drawing slops. Sopra caricare, to surcharge. Sopracarico, a surcharge. Sopra
cibo, any thing or meat, besides ordinary meat and drink. Sopra castaldo,
the name of a magistrate in Venice. Sopra cielo, a canapie, a cloth of estate,
a testerne of a bed. Also a kind of fish. Sopra ciglio, the eie-browes of any
creature, as Superciglio. Sopra cinghi, a surcingle or long guirt. Sopra
cinghiare, to sursingle, to ouerguirt. Sopra cigna, as Sopra cinghia. Sopra
cignere, as Sopra cinghiare. Sopra cinto, sursingled, ouerguirt. Sopra comito,
a master, a mastersmate, or boteson of a ship. Sopra correre, corro, corsi,
corso, to run upon or above, to ouerrun. Sopradatio, the name of a magistrate
in Venice, over the custom, and custom house. Sopradetto, spoken and said
before, above said, fore-saide, fore-aleaged, fore-spoken, aboue-named.
Sopradire, dico, dissi, detto, to say moreover, to add in words or speaking.
Sopradurre, duco, dussi, dotto, to bring moreover and above them that be
brought already. Sopra essere, sopra sono, sui, stato, to remain, to be left,
to be, to survive, or be alive after other, to be superfluous or more then
enough, to be over or upon. Sopra fabricare, to build or frame over or upon.
Soprafare, to ouer-do, to overcome, to exceed. Also to insult upon, to wrong.
Soprafatto, ouerdone, overcome, exceeded, insulted upon, wronged. Soprafodro, a
false scabberd of a rapier. Sopra giudicare, to oueriudge, to ouerdome.
Sopragiuditio, an oueriudgement, an ouerdoome. Sopragiugnere, as Sopragiungere.
Sopragiungere, giongo, gionsi, gionto, to add moreover, to overtake one by the
way, to come over one, to go beyond one, to ariue or come to any place on a
sudden, as Soprauenire. Sopragiunto, added or replide moreover, overtaken by
the way, come over one, gone beyond another, come upon, arrived or come to a
place by chance, as Soprauenuto. Sopragiunta, an addition, an ouertaking, a
vantage over and besides any bargain. Soprahumano, more then humane, above
humane, super natural. Sopra insegna, an outward sign, token, or garment, an
upper garment, a superscription. Sopraintendente, a suruayer, an ouerseer, a
controuler, a superintendent. Sopraintendenza, a suruaying, an ouerseeing, a
superintendencie. Sopra letto, any thing to cover or lay over a bed, a testern
of a bed. Also a kind of great male. Sopraligare, to bind upon another thing.
Sopraliminare, a transome or a lintell over a door. Sopralto, highest, or high
above others. Also a chief treble in music. Sopramano, ouer-hand,
aboue-hand, a blow given aboue-hand, an advantage. Sopramercato, advantage
given in buying and selling above the bargain. Sopramettere, metto, misi,
messo, to ouerlay, to put or set upon. Sopra messo, ouerlayde, put or set upon.
Sopramodo, aboue-measure, exceedingly. Soprana, an upper garment, a sauegard,
a kirtle. Also the treble string of any instrument. Sopranatare, to ouerswim,
to swim over. Sopranaturale, supernatural. Soprandare, vado, andai, andato, to
ouergo, to outgoe. Also to climb or go upon, to climb or pass or go over.
Sopranita, soueraintie, eminency, supremacy. Soprano, sovereign, chief,
eminent, supreme. Also the treble in music. Sopranomare, to surname, to
nickname. Sopranome, a surname, a nickname, a byname. Soprapagato, ouerpaide,
surpaide, more then paid. Soprapartitori, the chief feathers of a hawk.
Soprapendente, ouerhanging, hanging over. Soprapendere, to hang over.
Soprapeso, ouerhangd. Also ouerwaight, or more then measure. Sopraporre, pongo,
posi, posto, to lay, set or put over upon or above, to ouerlay. Sopraposto,
laid, set, or put above or over, ouerlaide. Sopraposta, as Souraposta.
Sopraprendere, to surprise, to overtake, to ouerreach. Soprapreso, surprised,
overtaken, ouerreacht. Soprapiu, an overplus, or advantage given above the
bargain. Soprare, as Superare. Soprariccio, pile upon pile, the ritchest
velvet or cloth of gold that is. Soprarogare, as Superarogare. Soprarogatione,
as Superarogatione. Soprascritta, a superscription, an inscription, a writing
upon. Soprascrittione, as Soprascritta. Soprascriuere, to write over or upon.
Soprascritto, ouerwritten, written upon, written before, abouewritten.
Soprasedenza, delay, deferring, suspense, consideration, a stay of time, a
demurre in law. Soprasedere, to sit upon, to sit over, to consider, to ponder,
to muse upon, to suspend, to stay, to demur, to omit or leave to do a thing,
to leave off, to cease, to spare, to let pass. Sopraseduto, sitten upon or
over, considedered, paused, pondred, mused, suspended, staide, demurred,
omitted or left to do a thing, left off, ceased, spared, let pass. Soprasedie,
a supersedies. Soprasegnale, as Soprainsegna. Soprasello, a burden, an
ouerlading of ones heart. Soprasoma, an upper burden, a surcharge. Sopraspalle,
a hood or garment over ones shoulders. Soprastante, a superintendent, a
surueier, an ouerseer, a comptrouler. Soprastanza, an upper lodging.
Soprastare, as Soprasedere, to stand upon. Also to remain. Soprastrare, to
paue with stones, to cover or ouercast with perget, to fret any floor or
roof. Sopratenere, tengo, tenni, tenuto, to hold in delay, to hold off, to
keep in suspense, to suspend. Sopratitolare, to surname, to surtitle.
Sopratutto, above all, chiefly, namely, especially. Soprauagare, to wander
abroad more them needs, and in trees to have greater boughs or more then
needs, to extend or grow abroad superfluously. Soprauanzare, as Soprabondare.
Soprauanzo, as Soprabondanza, an overplus. Soprauedere, to surueie, to ouersee,
to ouerpeere, to see over, to look over, to ouerlooke. Sopraueduto, suruaide,
ouerseene, ouerpeered, seen over, looked over, ouerlooked. Also wise, wary or
circumspect. Sopraueditore, a surueier, an ouerseer, a comptrouler, an
ouerlooker. Soprauedimento, a surueying, an ouerseeing, a comptrouling.
Soprauegnente, succeeding, imminent, at hand, coming, happening, coming upon or
over. Soprauenimento, a succeeding or coming to pass, a hap, a coming upon
or over, a coming or arriving unlooked for, etc. Soprauenire, vengo, venni,
venuto, as Sopragiungere, but properly, to come unlooked for, to come upon or
after another thing, to come upon suddenly. Also to overcome. Soprauenuto, as
Sopragiunto, commen unlooked for, commen upon or after another thing. Also
overcome. Soprauenuto, as Soprauenimento. Soprauento, to have the wind and
weather of one, to have one under the lee, a mariners word. Sopra vest, any
kind of upper garment. Sopra vestito, covered over, ouerclad. Also any kind of
upper garment. Soprauia, above hand, over and above, besides. Also an upper
way. Soprauolare, to fly over or ouer-flie. Soprauso, ouercustome, above use,
beside the common fashion. Soprauoluere, volgo, volsi, volto, to roll, to
tumble, to reuolue, or wallowe upon or over. Sopre, as Sopra. Sopresciare, to
press, to suppress, to keep down. Sopressione, a suppression, a
suppressing. Sopresso, suppressed, pressed, kept down. Soprimere, as
Sopresciare. Soprosso, a disease in a horse called a ringbone. Soprusi, as
Bischenchi. Sor, in composition used for Sopra, as we say Sur, as Sormentare,
to surmount, to surpass, etc. Sora, as Suora. Soraglio, a mark of the
feathers upon the breast, whereby a long winged hawk is known from a short
winged. Soracchiare, to play the sister. Also to spit or spaule. Sorare, as
Soiare, to hollow or make void. Also to play the gul or shallow pate. Also to
soar in the air. Sorbelle, as Sorbole. Sorbile, which may be supped up as an
eg. Sorbire, bisco, bito, to sip or sup up any drink or broth. Also to receive
in. Sorbibruodo, a greasy, slouenly feeder, a sipper of broth, a swiller.
Sorbita, a supping, a sipping. Sorbitello, a sip or supping draught.
Sorbitione, a sip or supping. Sorbito, sipped or supt up any broth. Sorbitore,
as Sorbibruodo. Sorbitico, sour, sharp, or tarte in taste. Sorbo, a sippe, or
draught of any drink, Also a service tree. Sorbola, the fruit called service,
or service berrie. Sorca, a great she mouse or rat. Sorce, Sorcio, a mouse or
a rat. Also a kind of fish. Sorcera, Sorciera, a mouse trap. Sorcero,
Sorciero, a mouse or rat catcher Sorcetto, Sorcietto, a little mouse or rat.
Sorcigno, a mouse dun color of a horse. Sorcione, a great rat or mouse. Sorco,
the eddie of a stream, the bubling of the water. Also a whirle-poole. Sordeta,
deafenes of hearing. Sordetto, somewhat deaf in hearing. Sordidezza, as
Sordita. Sordidire, disco, dito, to be or make foul, unclean, sluttish or
filthy. Sordido, absurd, filthy, corrupt, unclean, beastly, sluttish, vile,
dishonest, alberaide, foul, ill-fauoured. Also a niggard, a paltrer, a dodger,
a pennie-father, a mizer, a pinch-pennie, a covetous wretch. Sordita,
absurdnes, filthiness, corruption, sluttishnes, absurdity, filth, corrupt
matter, uncleanness, the sweeping of houses and channels. Also avarice,
covetousness, corruption by bribes, niggardlines. Also the dregs of the people,
the rascal and vile sort of men or women, the sink of a city, the scum of
the earth. Also deafenes in hearing. Sordina, a sordine to put in a trumpet to
make it sound low. Sordire, as Assordire, to be or wax deaf, to make deaf.
Sordimento, as Assordimento, a deafenes. Sordito, as Assordito, made deaf.
Sordo, deaf or hard of hearing, that cannot hear. Also he that speaks not,
or he that marketh not what is said or spoken, that makes no noise, that is
not heard, that which is insensible, that perceives nothing. Sorella, a
sister. Also a nun. Sorellina, a little sister or nun. Sorge, a mouse or a
rat. Also he rises. Sorgera, a mouse trap. Sorgetto, a little mouse or rat.
Sorgere, sorgo, sorsi, sorgiuto, or sorto, to arise, to rise, to grow, to
spring, to rise up, to appear. Also to grow in height, to mount, to get up,
to surge. Also to purle, to bubble or flow forth as a spring. Also to mount,
rise or to billowe as the surges of the sea. Sorgiuto or Sorto, risen up,
grown, sproong up, surged. Also purled or bubled as the water of a spring.
Also billowed or mounted as the sea, Look Sorgere. Sorgeuole, surging, rising,
purling, mounting, billowing, bubling. Sorgij, all manner of mise or rats.
Sorgimento, a rising, an ascending, a mounting, a purling, a billowing, etc.
Sorgio, a mouse or a rat. Sorgiera, a mouse trap. Sorgione, a great mouse or
rat. Sorgitore, a riser. Also a rising of a hill, a high ascent, a promontorie.
Sorgiuo, rising, flowing, raising up. Sorgozzo, as Sorgozzone. Sorgo, the
grain called turkey hirse mill, or millet. Sorgozzone, a blow, a thumpe, or
clap given upon the neck or throat. Sori, a kind of fish. Soricaria, the herb
Mouse-eare. Sorite, a kind of subtle argument that proceeds by diverse
probations, and after a heap of arguments is in the end concluded of the
first and the last. Sormontare, to surmount, to excel, to exceed. Sornuotare,
to ouerswim. Soro, a sore hawk. Also a young lad that begins to have hairs on
his chin. Also the first hairs that appear in a young man's face. Also a
foolish gull, or shallow headed ninnie, a hallow pate, or dotrell. Also a kind
of tree like a chestnut tree. Sorocchia, Sorore, a sister. Sorprendere, as
Sopraprendere. Sorpresa, a surprise. Sorpreso, as Soprapreso. Sorra, a kind of
dainty sauce. Also a fish eaten in lent that is like flesh, called Tunnie.
Sorridere, rido, risi, riso, to smile, to leere, to laugh, to smile or laugh
privily. Sorridimento, a smiling, a leering, a laughing, a privy laughing.
Sorriso, smiled, leered, laughed, a smile, a leering, a laughing, laughed
privily. Sorsata, as Sorso. Sorso, a draught, a sip, or sipping, a whiffe
Sort, chance, fate, fortune, lot, destiny, casualtie, hazard, luck. Also the
state, quality, function, calling, kind, vocation or condition of any man.
Also a portion in an inheritance. Also an oracle or the roll wherein the
answers of idols were written. Sorteggiare, to cast lots, to draw cuts, to put
it to fortune as lottries are. Sortilegio, a divination by lots or cuts.
Sortilego, a fortune teller by lots or cuts. Sortimento, a proouing, sorting,
issuing, or coming to effect, a salie or issuing out, a lotting, or casting of
lots, an allotting by lots. Sortire, tisco, tito, to sort, proone, issue, or
come to effect, to salie or go forth. Also to make or cast lots for, to take
or have any thing allotted or given by lots or chance. Also to dispose or
order, to lot or choose out plattes. Sortito, sorted, proved, issued, or come
to effect, salied or gone forth. Also made or cast lots, taken or had any
thing allotted, disposed, or ordered, lotted or chosen by lots. Sortita, an
out-rode, an excursion, an outsalie, an issue, an event, a salie, also an
alotting, a lotting or coming by chance. Sortitamente, by lots, cuts, hazard,
fortune, chance, or hap. Sortitione, as Sortimento. Sortiua, that may or can
prove, chance, sort or come to pass. Also a bubling, flowing, purling or
springing of any water. Sortitoio, the name of a goldsmiths too^e. Sorto, as
Sorgiuto. Look Sorgere. Soruenire, as Sopragiugnere. Soruenuto, as
Sopragiunto. Soruolo, an ouerflight, a surflight. Sorze, a mouse or a rat.
Sorzera, a mouse trap. Sosamele, a kind of sugar bread or cake. Soscriuere,
Soscrittione, as Sottoscriuere. Soscritto, a subscription. Sosina, a prune, a
plum, a slow, or bulleise. Sosinaro, a plum, prune, or slow tree. Sosino, as
Sosinaro. Soso, used by Dante for Suso. Sospecciare, as Sospettare.
Sospeccione, Sospeccioso, vide Sosperto. Sospendere, pendo, pendei, peso, to
defer, to suspend, to delaie, to keep one in suspense and doubt, to pause or
rest, to put in doubt. also to hang up or upon. Sospeso, deferred, suspended,
put in suspense. Also uncertain, doubtful, fearful, careful, hanging in
doubt or suspense, that cannot tell what to do, irresolute. Also hanged up.
Sospesa, a suspense, a doubt, a suspending, an entermission of time, an
uncertainty of mind. Also a hanging up. Sospensione, as Sospesa. Sospettare,
to suspect, to mistrust, to misdeeme, to doubt, to distrust, to suppose, to
deem, to conjecture. Also to behold above, to look upon. Also to see beneath
or look down. Sospettione, suspicion, mistrust, doubt, suspect, diffidence,
distrust. Sospettiuo, suspicious, mistrustfull, doubtful, diffident. Also that
may be suspected, full of suspicion, to be feared. Sospetto, as Sospettione,
used also for admiration, or looking upward. Sospettoso, as Sospettiuo, that
suspecteth, or mistrusteth, or fears. Sospicare, as Sospettare. Sospiciare,
as Sospettare. Sospicoso, as Sospettiuo. Sospicioso, as Sospettiuo. Sospignere,
pingo, pinsi, pinto, to compel, to urge on, to thrust on, to enforce, to
provoke, to induce, to push out. Sospingere, pingo, pinsi, pinto, as
Sospignere. Sospinto, thrust on, compelled, urged, enforced, provoked, induced,
lead unto, pusht on. Sospinta, a push, a thrust, an urging, a forcing or
compelling. Sospirando, sighfull, wailefull, monefull, sobbing. Sospirare, to
sigh or draw a weary breath, to sob, to gasp. Also to desire fervently, or
sigh after any thing. Sospiro, a sigh, a weary breath, a sob, a gasp, a
throb. Sospiroso, sighefull, sighing, sobbing, gasping, throbbing. Also pursie,
that fetches wind painefullie, short-winded, much-blowing. Sospitale, that is
cause of health, that drives from danger. Sospittione, suspicion, mistrust,
suspect. Sossidiare, as Sussidiare. Sossidiario, as Sussidiarij. Sossidio, as
Sussidio. Sossiego, compliments, ceremonies, obserua^ces, nice points of
honor, respects, points, punctos of behauiours. Sossopra, as Sottosopra.
Sossistentia, Sossistere, Look Subsistentia. Sosta, loss or loytring or
lingering of time, delay, or lingering. Also quiet, ease, or leisure. Sostantia,
substance, or matter, goods, riches, wealth. Sostantiale, substantial,
material, full of substance, rich, wealthy. Sostantiuo, a substantive, that
may stand by it self. Sostare, to linger, to delay, to loyter, to trifle the
time idly away. Also to sustain, to stand under, to subsist, to stand.
Sostegno, a prop, a supporter, a stay, an upholding, a sustaining, a
sustenance, Look Sostenere. Sostenere, tengo, tenni, tenuto, to hold or stay
up, to sustain, to maintain, to support, to uphold, to abes. Also to
withstand, to have the charge. Also to bear or represent. Also as Sostentare.
Sostenuto, sustained, vpheld, maintained, propt, supported, abetted, brookt,
suffered, endured, Look Sostenere, or Sostentare. Sostenimento, a sustenance, a
maintenance, an abetting, an enduring, an upholding, a staying up.
Sostentacolo, that which sustaineth or bears up, an underprop, an vpholder.
Sostentare, as Sostenere. Also to sustain, to bear up, to uphold, to
underprop, to aid, to favor, to defend, to help, to back, to countenance, to
nourish, to abet, to comfort, to feed, to find, to maintain. Also to endure,
to suffer, to abide, to bear, or tolerate with patience, to forbear.
Sostenitore, as Sostentatore. Sostentamento, as Sostenimento. Sostentatore, a
sustainer, a maintainer, an vpholder, an abettor, he that helps.
Sostentatione, as Sostenimento. Sostento, as Sostenimento. Sosternare, to
strewe, to lay or put under, or in the bottom, to cast into, to abandon
himself to, to make all things inferior or subject unto, to subdue. Sostillo,
Sostillio, the dropping of rain from penthouses. Also a ryme or falling mist.
Also the strangurie, which is when one pisseth by drops and with great pain.
Sostituire, isco, ito, to substitute, to appoint, to depute, to delegate in
ones place. Sostituito, substituted, appointed, deputed for an other. Also a
substitute, a deputy, a delegate, a viceg^rent, a lieutenant, a commissarie.
Sostitutione, a substitution, a delegation, a deputation, an appointing or
ordaining in place of another. Sostituto, as Sostituito. Sostrarre, to
substract. Sostrattione, a substraction. Sostratto, subtracted. Sostro, a
phisicions fee, a reward given to him that does one good. Sotadei, a kind of
verses so called. Soteria, salvation or health. Sotiabile, sociable, that a man
may keep company with, that may be joined in fellowship. Sotialita,
fellowship, company, society. Sotiare, to associate, to accompany, to join,
to match, to confederate, to coup^^, to fit, to make partake of. Sotieta, a
society, a fellowship, partaking or alliance. Sotio, a companion, a fellow, a
make, a complice, a partaker, an allie, a confederate. Also that helps,
aydeth, or takes part, that is a fellow or companion. Sott'acqua, vnder-water,
secr^tlie, out of sight, in hugger mugger. Sottana, a peticote, or such
vndergarment. Also the string next to the mean string of an instrument.
Sottacqueo, that lies or lives under water, of under water. Sottalpino, of or
under the alps. Sottandare, to undergo. Sottarare, to ear or till the ground
under. Sottascoltare, to listen or harken under or privily. Sottecchij, as
Sottocchij. Sott'entrare, to enter or go under, to undergo. Sotteranco, of or
pertaining to things underground, of underground, that is underground.
Sotterfugio, an escape privily, a sly avoiding of danger. Sotterfuggire,
fuggo, fuggij, fuggito, to avoid slilie under hand, to give the slip, to wind
ones neck out of the halter, to escape away privily, to eschew or escape the
danger of. Sotterra, under the earth, or under ground, buried. Sotteramento, a
burial, an entombing, an enterring. Sotterrare, to bury, to enterre, to
entombe. Sottigliare, to make fine, small, thin, or little, to sharpen, or to
subtilize, to make slender, to refine, to make keen. Also to argue subtilie.
Sottigliezza, subtilitie, subtilnes, finenes, smalnes, littlenes, thinnes,
slendernes. Also slynes, craftines, sharpnes, keenenes, quicknes of wit or
reason. Sottigliumi, all manner of small trifles, trash, odd ends, or shreads.
Sottile, subtle, subtle, fine, small, little, thin, slender, rare, light,
delicate, keen. Also slye, wily, crafty, witty, learned. Sottilita, as
Sottigliezza. Sottilizzare, as Sottigliare. Sottilmente, subtillie, craftily,
thinlie, slenderly, sharply, keenely, wittily, finely. Sotto, under,
beneath, underneath. Sottocchi, leering under the eyes, prying under hand.
Sottocenturione, a petty captain, a lieutenant over a hundred. Sottocingere,
to vndergirt. Sottocinghia, an vndergirt. Sottocinto, vndergirt. Sotto coda, a
crupper serving for a horse. Sottocomito, a boteswaine in a ship. Sotto cuoco,
an vnder-cooke. Sottocuratione, the charge of any thing under another.
Sottocuratore, he that has the charge of a thing under another. Sotto custode,
an vnder-keeper. Sottocutaneo, between the skin and the flesh.
Sottodelegare, to commit any matter to another that was committed to us by our
superiors. Sottodiacono, a subdeane, or subdeacon. Sotto distendere, to spread,
strew, put, or lay under. Sottodistintione, an vnder-distinction, or
subdistinction. Sottodiuisione, a subdiuision. Sotto entrare, as Sottentrare.
Sottofibulo, a white, long, fouresquare ornament, which vestall virgins were
wont to wear on their heads. Also a tache, or claspe. Sottofuggire, to
steal, or escape secretly, or from under, as Sotterfuggire. Sottogiacere,
giaccio, giacqui, g^aciuto, to lie or be under, to be subject, to be situate at
the foot. Sottogiaciuto, laid or been under, been subject, situated under.
Sottogiugnere, giungo, giunsi, gionto, to come, to arrive or reduce under.
Sottogiunto, come or arrived under. Sottogola, the curb of a bridle. Also the
throat band of a head stall. Sottoguattaro, an under scullion of a kitchen.
Sotto hastare, to sell any thing under a long pole or iauelin set up as a mark
in the open field, as they use in time of war or at least were wont to sell.
Sotto legare, to vnderbinde, to tie under. Sottolinguio, the weazell of the
throt. Sottolucere, luco, lussi, or lucei, luciuto to shine under, to shine
somewhat, to give a little light. Sottolunette, the name of a gold-smithes
tool. Sottomaestro, an under master, an usher of a school. Sottomano,
underhand, closely, secretly, slily, in hugger-mugger. Sottomettere, metto,
misi, messo, to submit, to subdue, to conquer, to put, bring, lay or set
under, to put into the place of another. Sottomesso, submitted, subdued,
conquered, put, brought, laid or set under. Sottomonire, monisco, monito, to
warn privily underhand, to give one warning or put in mind. Sottomordere,
mordo, mordei, or morsi, morso, or morduto, to bite softly or privily.
So^tomouere. Look Sommouere. Sottonascere, to be borne under, to grow or
spring up under, to bud or bloom under. Sottonato, borne under, grown up or
sprung up under. Sottonodare, to vnder-knit, to make a knot under a thing.
Sottonotare, to note or mark under, to subscribe, to note after a fashion.
Sotto ornare, to adorn underneath. Sotto piantare, to vnder-plant, to
vnder-set, to underprop. Sotto ponere, as Sottoporre, or Sottomettere.
Sotttoporre, pongo, posi, posto, as Sottomettere. Sottoposto, as Sottomesso.
Sottopriore, a subprior. Sottoridere, rido, risi, riso, to smile or laugh
privily, to make a countenance of laughing. Sottoscaglio, the arm pits or
holes of a man. Sottoscriuere, scriuo, scrissi, scritto, to subscribe, sign or
vnder-write, to write under. Also to favor a matter, to assign a cause why,
to assent or yield unto, to agree with one, and to be of his mind and opinion,
to join or take part with other in accusation, suite or variance against
another, to write, note or register. Sottoscritto, subscribed, signed or
underwritten. Look Sottoscriuere. Sottoscrittione, a subscription, a signing,
an vnder-writing. Look Sottoscriuere. Sottosedie, benches or seats wherein men
sat in the Theaters to behold, or whereon judges sat in courts.
Sottoseminare, to sow under, to scatter privily. Sottosentire, sento, sentij,
sentito, to vnder-heare, to perceive somewhat or have some inkling of a matter.
Sottoseruire, seruo, seruij, seruito, to serve, to accord, to agree, to help
forward, to serve under. Sottosopra, topsie-turnie, pell-mell, vpside down,
confusedly, helter-skelter. Sottosopramettere, to turn topsie-turnie, to
confound pell-mell. Sottosopramesso, turned topsie-turnie, confounded
pell-mell, Sottostringere, stringo, strinsi, stetto, to bind strait
underneath, to strain hard, to under gui^d, to ^ye or trusse up, to hale in.
Also to repress or restrain. Sottotagliare, to vnder-cut. Sottoterra, as
Sotterra. Sottoterrare, as Sotterrare. Sottotessere, tesso, tessei, tessuto, to
weaue or join to after or under. Sottoudire, odo, udij, udito, to vnder-heare,
or as we say to ouerheare, to perceive. Sottouenire, vengo, venni, venuto, to
help, to aid, to succor, to relieve or come at a pinch under. Sottouento,
under the lee or wind, a term that mariners use. Sottraggere, as Sottrarre.
Sottrarre, traggo, trassi, tratto, to withdraw, free or deliver from under, to
substract, to take away, to diminish, to bring out of, to eschew. Sottratto,
withdrawn, freed, or drawn from under, subtracted, taken away, eschewed.
Sottrattione, a substraction. Souagge, a goldsmiths tool. Souatta, an old
shoe or the leather of a whip, or a strap. Souatto, a strap or leather of a
whip. Souazza, as Co^nice. Souenimento, aid, help, assistance, succor or
supply. Souenire, vengo, venni, venuto, to succor, help, aid, assist or
supply ones needs or wants. Also to remember or call to mind. Souenuto,
succored, helped, aided, assisted or supplide. Also remembered or called to
mind. Souente, often, oftentimes, many times. Souerchianza, excessiuenes,
superfluity, over much store. Souerchiare, as Soperchiare. Souerchiaria, as
Soperchiaria. Souerchieuole, as Soperchio. Souerchio, as Soperchio.
Souerchioso, as Soperchio. Souero, the wood or tree we call cork. Souerino, a
cork or made of cork. Souertire, as Souuertie. Souersione, as Souuersione.
Souesciare, as Souuertire. Souige, a kind of little bird. Soura, as Sopra, and
note what word soever begins with Sopra, may begin with Soura. Sourac^mito, as
Sopracomito. Souracuoco, a master cook. Sourafodro, a false upper scabbard.
Souranita, as Sopranita. Sourano, as Soprano. Souraposta, are properly hurts
upon the cronet of the horses hooses with setting one foot upon another. Also
a double stake at any game or play. Also an ouerlaying. Sourascritta, a
superscription. Sourauanzare, as Soprabondare. Sourastante, as Soprastante.
Sourastanza, as Soprastanza. Sourastare, as Soprastare. Souretti, slippers,
pantofles or chopinos made high with soles of cork. Souuenire, as Souenire.
Souuentione, a help, a supply, an assistance, a relief. Also remembrance.
Souuertire, to subvert, to overthrow, to turn vpside down, to destroy.
Souuertito, subverted, overthrown, turned topsie turuie Souuersione, a
subversion, or overthrow, a destroying, a turning vpside down. Souuertiuo,
that may be subverted, or overthrown. Sozzare, to pollute, to sullie, to
defile. Sozzezza, foulenes, ill sauordnes. Sozzo, foul, filthy, sluttish, ill
sauored, ugly, lothesome. Sozzopra, topsie turuie, pell mell, confusedly.
Sozzura, filth, pollution, illfauerdnes, filthiness. Spaccare, to cut, to
cleave, to chap, to riue, to flaw, to splint, to splitter, to divide, to burst,
to nocke, to dent. Spaccatura, the nocke of an arrowe, a chap, a flawe, a dent,
a chinke, a cleft. Spacchiare, as Spaccare. Spacchino, a butchers chapping
knife, a cleauer. Spacciare, to dispatch, to hasten, to speed, to rid away, to
free, to dissolve. Spacciatiuo, quick, dispatching, hasty, nimble. Spacciato,
has been used for a mad man. Spaccio, a dispatch, a hastening, an
expedition, a riddance. Also a packet or pleeke of letters. Spada, any kind of
sword, rapier, or blade, or glaiue. Spadaio, Spadaro, a cutler or maker of
swords. Spada a due mani, a long sword, or two hand sword. Spadaccino, a
cutter, a fencer, a hackster, a swashbuckler, a ruffian. Spadaromana, that
mark which some horses have about the head or neck called the feather.
Spadapesce, a fish called a sword fish, having a beak like a sword. Spadaria,
a cutlers trade or shop. Spadaruolo, a cutler. Spadetta, Spadina, a little
sword or rapier, or glaiue. Spadette, the imped feathers of a hawk. Spadice,
as Spadico. Also a kind of musical instrument. Spadico, a scarlet or red
color. Also a bright baie color of a horse. Spadoletta, an apothecaries
little slice. Spadone, a long sword, a two hand sword. Spaga, rosin of the
pitch tree. Spaghetto, a small thread, or whipcorde, a twine thread. Spagliera,
as Spalliera. Spagnolata, a spanish trick. Spago, any kind of pack-thred,
twine or twisted cord. Spaiarda, a bird called a yellow hammer, or yowl-ring.
Spalagio, a kind of poisonous fly. Spalancare, to open wide, to set wide
open. Spalco, a gall^rie, a terrace, a stage, a scaffold, a leads, an open
walk, a floor. Spaldo, the ewes or penteise of a house, an out-butting baie
window, as Sporto. Spalla, a shoulder of any creature. Spallacci, the
pouldrons or shoulder pieces. Also a disease in a horse called the galling of
the shoulders. Spallare, to vnshoulder, to put ones shoulders out of joint, to
shoulder, to thrust, to back, to splaite. Spallato, shoulder-pitched or out of
joint, called also a dislocation. Spallata, a thumpe, a iogge or thrust with
ones shoulder. Also a shoulder pitching. Spallatura, as Spallata. Spalleggiare,
to back, to help, to support, to second or to shoulder. Spalliera, any kind
of garment or furniture spread on the ground, bed, tables, or walls, as carpets,
hangings, couerlets, or tapestrie, or sparuis. Also a kind of stuff made for
hangings called Darnix. Also a shoulder arming. Spallone, a great broad
shoulder. Spalluto, shouldred, having great and broad shoulders. Spalmare, to
calke or trim a ship, to make smooth or slicke, to rigge a ship. Spalmatura,
the calking of a ship. Spalto, a manor with the demaines about it, a farm,
lands or fields. Spampanare, to brag with idle words, to make much ado about
nothing. Spampanata, a bragging, a loud craking, great boast and small roste.
Spampinare, to pull off superfluous leaves, buds, or branches of a vine.
Spandere, spando, spansi, spanso, spanto or spanduto, to sheade, to spread, to
waste, to power forth, to skinke. also to consume prodigally. also to air or
bleach abroad. Spanduto, shed, spread, wasted, powered forth, skinkt, consumed,
aired or bleached. Spanso, Spanto, as Spanduto. Spanna, a span or hand-bredth.
Spannacerare, to gape or yaune for want of sleep. Spannare, to span, or
measure by spans. Spano, smooth, slicke. Spampanate, flaring, boasting,
vanting, riotous shows or tricks. Spanto, amazement, a woonderment. Spara, a
wad of clouts, or wispe of straw on the head to carry upon as our milkmaides
use. Sparacina, a stalk of Sparagus. Sparadrappo, a kind of salve or
ointment. Sparagagno, the name of a disease in a horses foot. Sparagnare, to
spare, to save, or pinch for gain. Sparagno, sparing, saving, pinching,
thrift. Sparagnatore, a sparer, or thriftie sauer. Sparagi, an herb called
Sparagus. Sparanga, a sprange or stange, or such wooden bar. Sparapetto, a
breast plate, a parapet, a ward-brest. Also a qualme over the stomach. Look
Parapetto. Sparare, to disadorne, to vngarnish, to vndecke, to divide, to
sunder, to open, to unlace. also to empty, to panche or pull out the guts, or
garbish of any creature, to shoot off, to snap off, or discharge. Also to
vnpaire, or to uncouple. Also to rid or take away a table. Sparato,
disadorned, ungarnished, vndeckt, divided, sundred, opned, unlaced, emptied,
panched or vnbowelled. Also shot off or snapt off any ordinance or artillery,
vnpaired or uncoupled. Sparare arteglieria, to shoot off or discharge any
ordinance or artillery. Sparauagno, as Spauano. Sparauiere, any kind of
hawk. Also a sparuise of a bed. Sparcina, the name of a rope in a ship.
Sparecchiare, to vngarnish, to vnprepare, to vndecke, to take away.
Spargadollo, a kind of little bird. Sparesi, as Sparagi. Sparganio, sedge, or
sword-grasse. Some take it for bur-reede. Spargere, spargo, sparsi, sparso, to
shed, to disperse, to publish, to scatter, to spread, to sow, to cast abroad,
to cast here and there, to straw, to sprinkle, to power out, to divide or
run into diverse parts. Spargesi, a swelling in women's breasts after their
travel. Spargimento, a sheading, a dispersing, a publishing, a scattring, a
spredding, etc. Spargo, as Sparago. Spargolare, as Spergolare. Spargolo, a
sprinkling brush, such as they sprinkle holy water with. Sparire, risco, rito,
to vanish out of sight, to fade away. Sparitione, a vanishing out of sight.
Sparlare, to mispeake, to rail, to detract or speak ill of another.
Sparlatore, a railer, a detracter, or misspeaker of others. Sparlo, a fish
called a purple fish. Sparmiare, as Sparagnare. Sparnazzare, to cast, or
sprinkle, or scatter, to flutter. also to waste riotously. Sparo, a kind of
sea fish so called in Rome. Also odd or uneven. Also a kind of darte used in
war among the Moors which is bowed and crooked. Sparpagliare, to desheuell,
to vnkembe, to touze a woman's hair, to look grisly or ugly, to confound, to
waste, to disorder, to bring out of frame, to scatter it self as hail shot,
and break through violently. Sparso, Sparto, shead, spread, dispersed,
scattered, published, sowed, spread abroad, sprinkled here and there,
speckled, full of, loose and hanging abroad. Also broad and wide. Spartare,
as Spartire. Sparta pareglia, the root of roughbinde weed, which is reputed
very medicinable. Spartimento, a separation, a dividing a partition, a
sundring, a compartement. Spartire, tisco, tito, to separate, to sever, to
sunder, to divide, to part. Sparto, as Sparso. Also a partition, a division.
Also a kind of broom wherewith they make cables for ships, or to tie their
vines in India. Some take it for a kind of grain or corn. Spartura, a
spokesshaue, a bing or maund for bread. also a kneading tub. Sparuierato,
pearched. Also peart as a hawke. Sparuiere, any kind of hawk. Also a kind of
fish. Sparulo, a purple fish. Sparutezza, vglines, deformity, vnhandsomnes,
illfauorednes. Sparuto, ugly, deformed, unhandsome, illfauored, disfigured.
Spase, a long and narrow fish, called in latin Taenia. Spasimare, to fall into
a swoune for want of blood, or by a conuulsion. Spasimatissima voglia, a very
earnest or hearty desire, list, or longing. Spasimeuole, dreadful, horrible,
frightfull, able to strike a man into a swoune. Spasimo, a cramp, a conuulsion.
Also a hartes-griefe or swouning, a shrinking or plucking together of the
sinews, rising either of too much fulness, or overmuch emptines. Spasimo
cinico, a kind of cramp when the nosthrels are pulled and drawn awry like a
dogs mouth when he snarreth. Spasimoso, as Spasimeuole. Also full of
conuulsions, or swouning, or cramps. Spasmare, as Spasimare. Spasmo, as
Spasimo. Also a kind of dart used in war. Spassare, to pass the time away,
to sport or solace. Spassa martello, a fellow that will talk with a wench for
fashion sake, to forget some other love, or to pass the time away in loving
talk. Spassa tempo, as Spasso. Spasseggiare, to walk for sport, solace or
recreation. Spasseggiatoio, an allie, a walk, or pleasant walking place.
Spasseuole, gamesome, sportfull, pleasant, full of pastime. Spasso, sport,
delight, pastime, recreation, or glee. Spastare, to vnpaste, to take away the
paste or crust of any thing. Spastico, one that has the cramp or conuulsion of
the sinews. Spata, Spatha, a kind of tree resembling the date tree or palm
tree. Also a branch of a date tree. Spatagio, a kind of sea hedgehog.
Spatella, a flat skummer, a ladle or slice to turn fride meat. Also a masons
trowell. also a slice that Surgions use to spread their salues with, an
Apothecaries spatter. Spatiare, as Spasseggiare, to walk abroad, to travel,
to wander or iet up and down. Spatio, space, room, distance, time, leisure,
largenes. Also a way, a voyage or journey. Also a walk, a course or sway in
walking. Also the length of a place. Also a place of exercise or running, or a
race. Also time, age, length, delaie or continuance. Also the measure or
quantity in a foot or meeter. Spatioso, spacious, wide, large, ample, broad,
romie. Spatola, as Riauolo, a poticaries slice or spattre. Also a
shoulder blade. Spatulimantia, a kind of divination by marks upon beasts and
men's shoulders. Spaualdo, a fond, selfconceited, strange, humorous pouting
fellow. Spauanella, a kind of spauin, cramp or conuulsion in horses. Spauano,
a disease in horses called a spauin. Also a cramp or stiffnes of sinews.
Spauentaglio, a bugbeare, a skarrecrowe, a swaggrer, a terrible huff-snuffe, a
swashbuckler. Spauentare, to terrify, to astonish, to affright, to make
afraid, to afflight, to trouble in spirit, to possess with fear and horror.
Spauenteuole, terrible, horrible, frightfull, fearful, dreadful, astonying.
Spauentacchio, a terrible huff-snuffe, a bugbeare, a swaggerer, a swashbuckler,
a skarre-crowe. Spauento, terror, horror, fear, fright, astonishment, dread.
Spauentoso, as Spauenteuole. Spaurire, risco, rito, as Spauentare. Spauroso, as
Spauenteuole. Spazzacamino, a chimnie-sweeper. Spazzaforno, a wispe, a maukin
or skouell to sweep the oven with. Spazzare, to sweep, to brush. Also to
dispatch. Spazzatoio, a brushing place. a chimnie-sweepers broom or rake. Also
as Spazzo. Spazzatore, a sweeper, a scauenger. Spazzature, any dust, filth,
rubbish or sweepings. Spazzo, as Spaccio. Also a floor or plain seeling. also
a corner where sweepings are cast, a sluts corner, a dunghill. Specchiaro, a
looking glass maker. Specchiarsi, to look or view himself in a looking
glass. Specchiera, a looking glass, a mirror. Specchio, a looking glass, a
mirror, an example. Speciale, an Apothecarie or such as sell spice. also
special, proper, peculiar, chief particular. Also namely, in especial,
chiefly, in particular. Specialita, a specialtie, a president, a particular.
Specialmente, specially, namely, chiefly, particularly, peculiarly, properly.
Speciaria, a spicerie or an Apothecaries shop. Speciaro, an Apothecarie or a
spicer. Specie, a figure, image, form or shape, portraiture, similitude,
likeness, semblance, phisnomie, beauty or savor, a color, shadow, pretense,
appearance, outward face or show, goodlines to see unto. Also a kind, a spice, a
species, a generation or brood, affirmed of many particulars in number, a
quality or nature. Also any kind of spice or spicerie. Specieria, as
Speciaria. Specificare, to specify, to declare, to denote, to particularize.
Specificatamente, especially, particularly. Specificatione, a specification, a
declaration. Specioso, beautiful, fair, goodly to see, fair in show or
appearance, welfauoured, honest, worthy, honorable. Speco, a den, a cave, a
hole, a cauerne, a grot, a lurking hole, a dungeon. Speculare, to watch in a
high tower, to see far. Also to epsy, to contemplate, to premeditate, to
observe, to consider diligently. also a kind of transparent stone like glass,
and was used heretofore in stead of glass. Also a looking glass maker.
Speculatia art, the art of speculation. Speculatione, speculation,
contemplation, watching or spying. Speculatiuo, speculatiue, contemplative,
watchful. Speculatore, a speculator, a contemplator, a watcher, a scoutwatch,
a considerer, an obseruer. Speculo, a tool that surgeons use. Spedale, an
hospital, a spittle house. Spedaliere, a proctor of a spittle, an hospital
keeper. Spedare, to spit or broch any thing upon a spit. Spedetto, a little
spit or broch. Spediera, a range or rack for spits in a kitchen. Spedire, as
Spacciare. Spedito, as Spacciato. Also nimble, ready, quick, sly, full of
agilitie, prone, sudden, prompt. Speditamente, nimbly, quickly, readily, with
agilitie. Speditione, an expedition, a dispatch, a quicknes, a nimblenes or
speed. Spedo, a spit or a broch. Also a gleaue, a partizan, a boares spear, a
iauelin. Spedonare, to spit or broch a piece of meat, to beat with a spit.
Spedonata, a spit-full, a broch-full. Also a blow with a spit or broch.
Spedone, as Spedo. Spegazzare, to dash, to blur or blot any papers or books
with ink. Spegazzoni, blots, blurs or dashes of ink or dirt. Spegliarsi, as
Specchiarsi. Speglio, as Specchio. Spegnare, to vnpawne, to vngage, to redeem.
Spegnere, spengo, spensi, spento, to extinguish, to put out. Spelagare, to
flote or wander up and down the sea. also to become all as a sea. Spelare, to
pull or pluck off the hair, wool, skin or feathers of any creature. Also to
make or wear thredbare. Spelato, thredbare, worn, plukt, vnskind,
unfeathered. Spelaruola, as Pelaruola. Spelato^a, any kind of brush or rubber.
Spellare, as Spellicciare. Spellicciare, to vnskin, to vnsur, to pull off the
hair or skin, to tug or touze. Spellicciata, a tugging, a touzing, a shaking.
Also an vnsurring. Spellicciatura, idem. Spellicciosa, a kind of herb.
Spelonca, as Speco. Spelorcieria, as Spilorcieria. Spelorcio, as Spilorcio.
Spelta, a grane, of some called spelt; of some formentie; of some oat-meale,
spelt or zea. Spelucare, as Snocciolare. Speluco, a heap, a moate, a hoar.
Speluiere, a kind of chough with red feet. Spelunca, as Speco. Speme, hope,
trust, affiance. Spendacchiare, to spend, waste or consume thriftily. Spendere,
spendo, spesi, speso, or spenduto, to spend, to waste or consume, to dispend.
Also to vnbang. Spenduto, Speso, spent, wasted, consumed. Spenditore, a
spender, a waster, a consumer. Also a steward, a treasurer, a clark of a
kitchen, a cather of a noblemans house, etc. Spendola, the name of a wheel of
a clock. Spendolare, to hang down dangling, to slide down, to empty, to
void, to swing in a halter, to let down by a roape. Spendolone,
dingle-dangle, dangling down. Spene, hope, trust, or affiance. Spennacchiare,
to stretch out the wings as a haukdoth when she takes her flight. Also to
vnfeather, to vnfledge, to vnplume, to pull bare. Spennacchino, a tool that
carpenters use. Spennare, as Spennacchiare. Spennuto, Spennato, unfeathered,
vnplumed, vnfledgd. Spennocchia, a kind of disease in a horses foot. Spensero,
as Spenditore, also, they extinguished. Spensieraggine, rechlessenes,
carelessenes, fondnes. Spensierato, careless, retchles, thoughtles, headstrong,
mad, hair-braind. Also an idle gazer or careless loytrer about. Spensolare, as
Spendolare. Spensoloni, as Spendoloni. Spentacchio, a bug-beare, a skar-crow, a
huffe-snuffe. Spento, extinguished or put out. Spenzolare, as Spendolare.
Spenzolone, as Spendolone. Spera, Sphera, a sphere or a globe. Sperabile, that
may be hoped for, hopeful. Speranza, hope, trust, affiance. Speranzale,
hope-full, full of hope. Speranzeuole, idem. Sperare, to hope, to trust, to
affie. Sperdere, as Disperdere, to loose or stray. Also to poch eggs.
Sperdimento, as Disperdimento. Sperdute vuoua, potcht eggs. Sperduto, Sperso, as
Disperso. Sperga, as Mergone. Spergere, as Spargere. Spergiurare, to forswear,
to swear falsely. Spergiuro, a perjury, a false oath, a perjured forsworn
man. Spergola, an herb which for the property it has to fat cattle, is
called Frank or Surrey. Spergolare, to sprinkle as they do holy water.
Spergolo, as Spargolo, as Pergamo. Spericato, vnperched, out of order and
proportion. Sperientia, experience, practice, trial proof, knowledge.
Sperimentare, to try, to prove, to experience, to put in practice.
Sperimento, a proof, a trial, an experience, an experiment. Sperma, natural
seed whereof things be engendered. Also spaune of fishes. Also quicksilver,
according to Alchimists new phrases. Sperma ceti, the flower of the sea,
Parmaceti or whitish Amber. Spermatico, spermaticall, spaunie, of or pertaining
to ingendring seed. Spermologo, a kind of bird called also Frugilega. Also a
vain tatler, a foolish pratler. Spernace, that contemns or despises.
Spernere, sperno, spernei, spernuto, to despise, to disdain, to make no
account of. Sperola, a little globe or sphere. Spernozza, a kind of sea crab.
Spernozzamento di parole, a huddle or hotchpotch of idle words, a flim-flamme
tale. Speronaglia, kibes or chilblanes that come upon folks heels. Speronare,
to spur or prick forward, to adorn with spurs. Speronaro, a spurrier or spur
maker. Speronata, a blow or prick with a spur. Sperone, a spur or prick to
make a horse go. Also the beak, snout, nose or stem of a ship. Also herb
larkes-spur, munkshood, larkes-heele or larks-claw. Speronella, goose-grasse,
gooseshare, cleuer or clauer-grasse. Speronelle, a brazen tool with a spoone
at one end, and a rowell or little spur at the other, that cooks use to cut
out or mark their paste meats, called a iagging iron. Spertamente, expertly,
skilfully. Speronzola, a bird in whose neste the cuckoo lays her eggs, which
hatcheth them as her own. Sperse, dispersed, scattred, forlorn. Also potcht
eggs, Vuoua sperse. Sperticare, to vnperch, to vnbranch, to pull from a perch.
Sperticato, vnperched, vnbranched. Also huge, great, or monstrous. Also smug or
pampred. Sperto, expert, skillful, experienced. Sperula, a little sphere or
globe. Spesa, expense, charge, cost, spending. Spesacchiare, as Spesare.
Spesare, to defray ones charge, to spend for one, to find one all necessaries.
Speso, spent, wasted, or consumed. Spesolarsi, for a horse to advance or raise
himself from the ground, attending the will of the horseman. Spesseggiare, to
dispatch, or frequent often, thick, or threefold. Spessezza, thicknes,
spissenes. Spesseuolte, oftentimes, many-times. Spessire, to thicken, to make
thick, to enspisse. Spesso, thick, spisse, gross, massiue, firm, hard and
sound. Also standing thick and close together. Also often or many times.
Spetiale, as Speciale. Spetialita, as Specialita. Spetiaria, as Speciaria.
Spetiaro, as Speciale. Spetiare, to spice, to dress with spices. Spetie, as
Specie. Spetieria, as Speciaria. Spetile, the fleshie part without bones,
beneath the middle of a sow. Spetioso, as Specioso. Speto, a toil, a net, a
hay to hunt foul or conies with. Spetonare, as Spedonare. Spetonata, as
Spedonata. Spetone, as Spedo. Spetrare, to soften, to mollify, to vnstone, to
rid stones away. Spettabile, worthy to be respected, renoumed, notable,
worthy to be regarded or viewed, goodly, fair, well favored, of goodly
favor or personage. Spettacolo, a spectacle, a fight, a show, a pageant, a
play, a thing to be seen and looked on. Spettante, belonging or appertaining.
also beholding, gazing, attending, staying, expecting. Spettare, to behold, to
view, to look on, to see, to regard, to gaze. Also to stay, to expect, to
attend, or tarry for, to belong or appertain unto. Spettatina, an
expectation, an expecting. Spettatore, a spectator, a beholder, a looker on, a
viewer. Spettezzare, to despise, to contemn, to scorn. Spettezzamenti,
despisings, contemnings, scornings. Spetto, a iauelin, a borespeare, a forest
bill. Also a fish called a pike or pickrell. Spettro, a ghost, a spirit, a
fantasy or vision, an image seen, or imagined to be seen. Spezzabile,
frail, brickle, that will or may be broken. Spezzami, broken pieces,
fragments, scraps, mammocks, shiuers, splints, pieces. Spezzare, to break, to
shiuer, to rende, to splint or riue in pieces. Spezzata lancia, a demie-lance,
a light horseman. Spezzatura, a breaking, a splinting or shiuering in pieces.
Spezzazocchi, a wood or log-cleaner. Sphacelo, as Sfacelo. Sphagidite, as
Sfagitide. Sphenoide, Look Osso. Sphera, as Sfera. Sphereale, as Sfereale.
Spherico, as Sferico. Sphinge, as Sfinge. Sphintro, as Sfintro. Sphondillio, as
Sfondillio. Sphrage, as Sfrage. Spia, a spy, an espiall, a scout, a pryer, an
ewes dropper. Spiacente, unpleasant, displeasing. Spiacere, to displease, to
mislike. Also displeasure or misliking. Spiaceuole, unpleasant, displeasing.
Spiaceuolezza, vnpleasantnes, displeasure. Spiacimento, a dislike, a
displeasure. Spiaciuto, displeased, misliked. Spiaggia, a shore or strond of
the sea. Spiaggiare, to coaste along the sea strond. Spianacciata, an
explaining, a razing, a plaining. Spianamento, an explaining, an expounding, a
razing, a ruin. Spianare, to explain, to express, to declare, to expound,
to make plain, or smooth, to plain, or to sleeke. Also to level, to raze or
ruin any building. Spianata, a p^aine path, a high way, a razed place, a
razing. Spiantare, to vnplant, to vns^t, to remove. Spiare, to epsy, to
peer, to pry, to watch or scout with diligence, to ask or enquire for.
Spiattellare, to set out in full dishes, to displaie or set to view, as cooks
do their meat upon their stals. Also as Suertare. Spica, an ear of corn.
Also a cloue of garlike. Also a sign in heaven, namely a bright star in the
left hand of Virgo. Spica celtica, a kind of moss called woolfes-claw. Spica
nardo, lauender-spike, spike-narde. Spicare, to grow to ears as corn does, to
shoot out in an ear as corn does. Spicato, a kind of excellent ointment used
in Rome among women. Some take it for oil of spike. Also eared, or in an ear,
as corn grows. Spicardino ingegno, a foolish, loose, skipping wit. Spiccare,
to vnhang, to free, to loosen, to rid, to vnfasten, to disioyne, to separate.
Spiccatamente, distinctly, choisely, smelie. Spiccate parole, distinct, loose,
choice, wrested words. Spicchiare, to bud or sprout as flowers do, to peep out
as the sun beams do, to cull or choose out, to spinne, to gush, to purle, to
bubble, to spirte, to spout, or squirt out as blo^de out of a full vain, or
wine out of a spigot hole. Also to spread abroad. Also to reuerberate.
Spicchio, a bud, a sprout or peeping forth, a spinning, a gushing, a spouting
or squirting, a little part, crum, or jot. Spicchio d'aglio, a cloue of
garlike. Spicchio del sole, a glimps, a glimmering or peeping out of the sun
beams. Spicchione, as Spicchio. Spicchiuto, Spicchiato, budded, sprouted,
peeped, gushed, spun, or purled out. Spicciare, as Spicchiare. Spiccio, as
Spicchio. Spicciolare, as Spicchiare. also to scatter, to disperse, to spread.
Also to make little or less. Spicciolo, as Spicchio. Spico, as Spica, as
Spigo. Spicolo, as Spicchio. Spidocchiare, to louse, or to vnlouse.
Spidocchione, a lousie companion. Spiedare, as Spedonare. Spiedo, as Spedo.
Spiedonare, as Spedonare. Spiedone, as Spedo. Spiegare, to displaie, to
explain, to expound, to unfold, to spread abroad. Spiegatura, a displaying, an
unfolding, an explaining. Spiegazzare, as Spegazzare. Spienza, the spleen or
milt of any creature. Spieta, cruelty, fude, inexorablenes, impiety,
ungodliness, fiercenes, unmercifulness. Spietanza, as Spieta. Spietatamente,
without mercy, cruelly, ungodly, impiously. Spietato, cruel, fell, ruthlesse,
unmerciful, fierce, impious. Spiga, as Spica. Spigare, as Spicare. Spigaro, a
cackrell fish. Spignere, as Spingere. Spigo, the herb spike, or Spikenard.
Also the iro^ of a helm or caske wherein the plume of feathers is set and
fastened. Spigola, a base fish. Spigolare, to gleane or lease corn. Also to
play the dissembling hypocrite. Spigolistra, a gleaner, a leaser of corn.
Also a nice, strickt, dissembling, ouerweeling hypocritical woman.
Spigolistrarie, gleanings or leasings of corn. Also nice, ^oie, foolish,
strickt, or hypocritall gleaning or prying into other men's matters,
hypocritical tricks. Spigolo, gleaning or leazing. Also any sharp pricking
point or sting. Also a cloue of garlike. Spigoli della tauola, crumbs, scraps,
or broken pieces of meat left at a table. Spigonardi, the herb spike or
spikenard. Spillare, as Spicchiare. Also to find out with diligent search.
Spilletta^e, to pin, to prick, to stinge, to stabbe. Spilletto, a small pin,
a sting, a prick, a bodkin, a poynado. Also a small hair. Spillo, a prick, a
pin, a sting, a needle, a pricking thorn or bryer, a bodkin, a sharp poynado,
as Spicchio. Spilluzzico, as Spizzico. Spilunca, as Spelunca. Spilorciare, to
grudge or dodge or play the niggardlie slouin or pinch-pennie wretch.
Spilorciarie, pinching, slovenly, base, dodging, grudging, ^iggardiy tricks.
Spilorcio, a pild, hald, filthy, snudging, snuffing, miserable, pinching,
sparing, base-minded companion, a chuffe, a snudge, a niggard, a covetous
pinch-pennie father, a losell, a borell. Spiluzzicare, to pick here and there
by little and little. Spina, a spigot, a gimblet, a forcehead, or tap to draw
drink with, a cock of a conduit. also a prick, a prickle, a sting, a thorn, a
bramble, a bryer. Also the sting of a be, a bristle of a hedgehog. Also sharp
fish bones. Also goose beries. Look Vna spina, because it grows upon pricking
thorns. Also the streeke or line that runs along a horses back. Also the
chine-bone of any body. Also a f^sse engrayled borne in some cotes of arms.
Also a quiditie or subtlety. Spina bianca, a white-thorne, a white-bryer, a
hawthorne. Spina alba, the white thistle, or our ladies thistle. Spina acuta,
the white thorns or hawthorne tree. Spinacchia, the herb called Spinach.
Spinacciare, to hatchell flax. Spinaccio, the bung hole of a barell. Also a
hatchell for flax. Spinace, the herb Spinach. Spina del dosso, the backbone.
Spina di ceruo, waythorne or buckthorne. Spina di mezzo, the very pith of the
back. Spina di pesce, the chine of a fish. Spinale medolla, the marow that
runs along the back bone, the pith in the backbone. Spina pesce, a kind of
tack or tentrehooke. Spina peregrina, globe-thistle, or ball-thistle. Spinare,
to prick with a thorn. Also to pearce or set a vessel of drink abroch. also
to engraile, a word used in armorie. Spina regia, the white thistle, the wild
artichock, or our ladies thistle. Spinaro, a bush of brambles, briars or
thorns. Spinaruolo, a sharpling, or shaftlin fish. Spina sacra, the sharp end
of osso sacro, the rumpe. Spinato, a kind of striped work in silk or linen
cloth. Also engrailed. Spinella, a splint in a horses leg. Spineo, of or
belonging to thorns, bushes, or brambles, thornie, bushie. Spineolo, a plumme
called a sloe. Spine puccie, a kind of white thorn or bramble. Spinetta, a
pair of virginals. also a little tap, forcehead, spigot, or gimblet. also a
prick, a thorn, a bramble, a bryer, a thornie brake. Also Eglantine. Spinetto,
as Spinetta, a bush, or thicket of brambles, thorns, or briars. Spinerute, a
kind of white thorn. Spingarda, Spingerda, a kind of ordinance, great gunne,
mortar, or chamber. Spingere, spingo, spinsi, spinto, to thrust, to push, to
shoulder, to shooue, to prick, provoke, or drive forward, to move, to urge, to
instigate, to press or egg on. Spino, a sloe tree, a black-thorne, a snag
tree, any kind of prickle, prick, bramble, bryer, or sharp prick. Also the bird
Ligurie or a Siskin. also such sharp pricks as poor countriemen thrust in
their shoe soles to make them last the longer. Spino ceruino, as Spino merlo.
Spinola, a fish called in latin Spigola. Also a little sharp thorn. Also a
sharp bone of a fish. Also a pin that fastneth the hat or cap under the
chinne. Spino merlo, buckthorne, waythorne, or laxatiueram. Spinose, a kind of
pear in Italy. Spinoso, thornie, full of brambles, thorns, prickles, or
briers, thornie, pricklie, crabbed, difficult. Also a porpentine, a hedgehog.
Also a fish full of bones. Spino zerlino, as Spino merlo. Spinta, a thrust, a
push, a iusting, a punch, or shoouing forward. Spinto, thrust, pusht,
shouldred, pricked, provoked, urged, pressed, or driven out. Spintrie, places
where were practiced, or men which devised all manner of unnatural and
beastly, or monstrous lust, leacherie not to be spoken of. Spinturnice, a bird
wont to come to the altar and carry away a burning cole as a token of ill luck
or burning to the house where it alighted. Spinula, as Spinola, a little
bramble or thorn, or bryer. Spinzago, a kur-lu^. Spinzaurino, the name of a
color that painters use. Spionare, as Spiare, to play the spy, to sneake, to
much, to prye. Spione, as Sp^a. Spiouere, to shower or raynt violently.
Spippola. Spira, a sphere, a circulation, a circling, a rundle, a turning or
winding. also the little pillars of a clock. Also a certain attire of pearl
that women use to wear on their heads made coronet wise called a chaplet. Also
a cracknell or cake made like a trendle, or writhen like a rope. Also a
quadrant or square of a pillar below which may serve to sit upon. Also the
round making up of a rope properly called the coyling of a cable, used also for
a pillar. Spirabile, lively, that wherewith we live and breathe. Also that can
or may breathe. Spiracolo, as Spiraglio. Spiraglio, a breathing place, a vent,
a hole out of the which breath, air, smoke or wind passes and issues. Also
a loope-hole a spike-hole, or any little think through which air may pass
and breathe. Also the nosthrils. Also a cave or hole which breaths out a
strong and pestilent air, a dampe hole^ it has also been used for a chimnie,
or the tunnell of a chimney. Spiraglij del' anima, the lungs or lights.
Spiramento, as Spiraglio. Spirante, breathing, or casting out a breath or
savor, a smelling. Also blowing, living, that is alive. Spirare, to breath, to
pant, to blow as wind does, to sigh, to draw breath. also to cast a savor or
smell. Also to enspire, to expire, to vent or breath forth, to live. Also to
aspire or endeavor to obtain. Also to sigh. Spirato, as Spiraglio. Spiratione,
an inspiration, an in-breathing. Spirillo, a goats beard. Spiritale, as
Spirituale. Also a kind of engine. Also the vital or breathing parts.
Spiritato, mad, raging, f^rious, out of bin wits, possessed with some evil
spirit. Spiritelli, the birds called night-bats or rear mise. Used also for
hobgoblins. Spirito, spirit, breath, wind, air or savor Also the soul, the
life, the heart, or ghost of man. Also a ghost or a spirit. Also smell, air,
noise, fiercenes, heat, stomach or hanghtines of courage. Also a sigh or a
gasp. Vltimo spirito, the last gasp. Spiritocco, a foolish, dissembling,
hypocritical, busy, pickthanke fellow. Spirito santo, the holy Ghost.
Spiritoso, full of spirit or life, lusty, li^ely, strong as aquanite is.
Spirituale, spiritual, ghostly, lively, breathing. Spiritualita,
spiritualitie, ghostlines. Spirtale femina, a witch, a hagge, a sorceres.
Spirto, as Spirito. Spirtocco, as Spiritocco. Spirula, a little round compass.
Also the base or foundation of a pillar. Spitama, a Greek measure of twelve
inches or a span. Spitiale as Speciale. Spito, a spit or a broch, as Spedo.
Spiumacciare, to vnfeather, to shake a feather bed. Spiumaccio, a mattrasse, a
flockbed, a boulster. Spiumare, as Spennacchiare, as Spiumare. Spizzicare, as
Pizzicare. Spizzico, a whit, a jot, a crum, a small deal. Spizzicore, as
Pizzicore. Splebeiare, to become from a base clown or common ra^kall gentle or
noble. Splena, the spleen^ or ^il^. Splendente, shining, bright, glittering,
glistring, clear, resplendent, gorgeous. Also being of great fame or renoune.
Splendere, splendo, splendei, splenduto, to shine, to glister, to glitter, to
be bright and beautiful. Also to have a very good grace or become passing
well. Splendidamente, gloriously, excellently, bountifully, sumptu^^sly,
shiningly, brightly, glistringly, glittringly, liberally, clearly, gaily,
gorgi^^sly, beautiful, richly, honorably, goodly, notably, bravely.
Splendidezza, gloriousnes, excellency, bounty, sumptuousnes, liberality,
splendore, brightness, shining, glistring, glittering, magnificence, etc.
Splendido, glorious, excellent, bountiful, magnificent, liberal, sumptuous,
shining, bright, glittering, (...), famous, noble, notable, great, honorable,
of great bruit, name, fame, and renoune. Also one that has his house gorgeous
and richly decked with abundance of all things, goodly, beautiful, gaie.
Splendore, splendour, brightness, cleerenes, light, beauty, elegancie, honor,
renoune, glory, noblenes, bruit, bounty, excellency, glitter, glister. Also
the gloss, varnish or shining of a color. Splenetico, that is sick of the
spleen or has a great spleen. Splenio, a long plaster made like a swath for
one that is sick of the spleen. Also the herb Spleenwort or Miltwaste.
Splueaboue, a bird so called. Spodestare, to remove or degrade from office,
power or authority. Spodio, a kind of soote rising of the trying of brass.
Spoetato, dispoeted, degraded from a poets being. Spoglia, a spoil taken from
the enemies, a pillage, a pray, a booty, a prize, a reprisall. Also a
spoiling, a robbing or stripping. Also a raiment, a clothing or weed. Also a
man's body. Also the cofin of paste made for a pie or a tarte or a custard.
Also the skin that a serpent leaves off. Spogliamento, as Spoglia. Spogliare,
to strip, to spoil, to rob, to pray, to disaray, to vnrobe, to unfurnish, to
be reaue, to steal or deprive a man of any thing, to pull off ones clothes, to
ransacke. Spogliato, stripe, spoiled, robbed, deprived and bereaft of that he
had, stolen, unfurnished, disaraide, ransackt. Spogliaro, a place where common
spoils are kept, a place where men and women strip themselves before they go
into a bathe. Also a place where men be spoiled and robbed. Spogliatore, a
spoiler, a robber, a pirate, a thief, a stripper. Spogliatura, a dispoiling, a
stripping. Spoglio, a dispoiling, a spoil, a ruin, a depriving, the skin that
snakes cast. Spogna, as Sponga. Spola, a weauers shuttle, a weauers role,
spoling wheel or quill turn, as weauers call it. Also a kind of cockbote,
scalop, skiffe, whirrie or barge. Spoladora, a weauers warpe. Spolare, to weaue
with a shuttle. Also to roll upon a role. Spoletta, a long kind of shellfish
like a pipe, taken for a muscle fish. Spolpare, to take away the braune or
flesh from the bones, to make lean. Spoltrare, to shake off cowardice or
sloth, to become lusty or valiant, to rise out of a bed. Spoltrire, trisco,
trito, as Spoltrare. Spoluerarsi, to bathe hir-selfe as a hawk does.
Spoluereggiare, as Spoluerizzare. Spoluerino, a dust box. Spoluerizzare, to
reduce to ponder or dust, to bedust or cast dust upon. also to speckle* as
poudred ermines be, to open, or unfold a doubtful matter. Sponcioni, the
sarcels of a hawk, the principal feathers of a hawk. Sponda, a shore, a
bank, or side of any thing, namely of a bedstead. Spondare, to coaste or go
along the side, coaste, bank or shore. Spondaruolo, a carpenters tool.
Spondeopiede, a foot of a verse consisting of two long syllables in the last
word, it is so called of drawing the voice in singing at divine service.
Spondili, as Spondolo, the knuckles or turning ioints of the backbone or
chine. Also small bones. Also a kind of serpents. Also a wheru^ of wood or
stone to put on a spindle. Also a kind of shellfish. Spondio, a kind of oar
to draw metals out of. Spondolo, a kind of great oyster like an asse-hoofe.
Sponere, spongo, sposi, sposto, to expose, to expound, to lay forth, to
declare, to interpret. Sponga, a sponge. Also a fish called a lump or sponge
fish. Spongare, to sponge, or wipe with a sponge. Sponghettiere, a lump or
sponge fish. Spongia, as Sponga. Spongiare, as Spongare. Spongioso, as
Spongoso. Spongioterra, a lump or sponge fish. Spongite, a kind of stone
found in a sponge. Spongoso, spungie, puffie, light, or that will suck up,
thirsty, like unto or resembling a sponge, light and full of small holes, or
eyes like a sponge. Sponsaglie, as Sposaglie. Sponsale, of, or pertaining to
marriage, the time of betrothing. Sponsalitio, a marriage, a wedding, a
spousall. Also belonging to marriage. Also a token of afflancing or betrothing
or contract of a marriage intended. Spontaneamente, willingly, naturally,
without compulsion, of himself, of his free will, for its own sake.
Spontaneo, willing, voluntary, natural of his free will and choice, that does
or is done willingly, naturally, or without constrain or help. Spontare, to
bud, to sprout, or peep forth. Also to abate the edge or point of any weapon,
to vnpoint or make blunt. Also to part or clip. Spontare le onghie, to pare or
clip ones nails. Spontonare, as Spontare. Also to foyne, to prick, to thrust,
to iuslie, or push at. Also to urge or provoke, or egg on. Also to hit or
beat with any staff, weapon. Also to pinch, to twing. Spontonata, a foyne, a
prick, a thrust, a iusling, a pushing, a provoking, a blow with any staff,
weapon, a pritching, a twinging. Spontone, a small long instrument of iron,
sharp at the end to thrust through any thing, to prove if any soldiers lie
hidden therein. Spontone, the prick, needle, or sting of any serpent. Also a
forest bill, a blackbill, a gleaue, a iauelin, a partisan. Also a thrust, a
push, a thumpe, etc. Sponzole, a kind of mushrum or toadestooles. Spopolato,
unpeopled, disinhabited. Sporcamente, fil^hily, fo^ly, stinkingly, uncleanly,
dishonestly, dur^ily, villanously, bawdily. Sporcare, to foul, to pollute, to
defile, to sullie, to durtie, to beraie, to corrupt, to make unclean, to
dishonest. Sporcaria, as Sporchezza. Sporchezza, filth, dirt, stink,
impuritie, foulenes, lothsomnes, uncleanness, all manner of filthiness,
dishonestie or villainy. Sporcidico, that speaks dishonestlie or uncleanly,
or utters bawdie and filthy talk. Sporcifico, that makes unclean or
filthy. Sporcitia, as Sporchezza. Sporco, filthy, foul, durtle, sullied,
impure, loathsome, stinking, unclean, defiled, vnpure, dishonest, vile,
corrupt. Sporgere, as Porgere. Sporgiuto, as Porgiuto. Sporre, as Esporre.
Sporta, a great basket, maunde, or panier, a flaske^ or a hamper. Also a kind
of great weight. Sportaro, a basket maker. Also a carrier or a porter.
Sportata, an out-butting, or ietting of a house, as Sporto. Sporteglione, a
bat, or reremouse. Sportella, a little basket, a hand-basket, a little hamper.
Also a small banquet or drinking that the rich Romans made to them that came at
extraordinary hours, to visit and salute them. Sportello, a wicket or
posterne door, a little out-ietting porch or window. Sporti, porches of houses
that but or iettie out farther then any other part of the house. Sportiglione,
a night-bat, or a reremouse. Sporto, a porch, a portall, a baie window, or out
butting, or iettie of a house that ietties out farther then any other part of
the house, a iettie or butte. Also the eaues or penteis of a house. Also as
Sporgiuto. Sportola, as Sportula. Sportoncella, as Sportella. Sportoglione, a
night-bat or rearemouse. Sportone, a great basket or flasket. It is also taken
for a trunk or a hamper. Sportula, was anciently taken for money or meat
distributed by Princes to the people as an alms. Also the plaintifes and
defendants money paid by both ordinarily for judgment in law, a counselors
or sargeants fee. But it is now taken in Rome for a certain f^e which every
man that has any suite in law paieth to the Pope or saint Peter if he obtain
his suite by law. They call it in Venice il Caratto di san Marco, for every
one pays so much the hundred. Also a little panier, maund, or basket.
Sporzana, a kind of little bird. Sposa, a spouse, a bride or new wedded wife,
a woman spoused or affianced. Sposaglie, the spousage or betrothing or
affiancing of a man or woman before full marriage, a contract. Also the gift
which the w^oer gives to his affianced wife as a pledge of his unfeigned good
will. Sposale, as Sponsale. Sposalitio, as Sponsalitio. Sposare, to espouse, to
wed, or marie. Also to affiance, to betroth, or make sure to be married.
Sposarie, bride tricks, puling nice tricks, bridings. Spositione, an exposition
or expounding. Spositore, an expositor, an expounder. Sposo, a bridegroom, a
new married man, he to whom a woman is affianced or betrothed. Spossato,
weakened, deprived of force. Sposto, exposed, expounded, laid forth, declared.
Spouerire, to disinpouerish. Spranga, a bar, a sprange, a cross beam. also a
flat slate, or plate, or blade. Also a moaning, a wailing, or lamenting.
Sprangare, to bar, to sprange, to stang, to make whole again. Also to wail
or lament. Sprazzare, as Spruzzare. Also to bedeaw, to shower. Sprazzo, a
sprinkling, a deaw, a shower. Also a poole or puddle of water. Also heap of
filth and dirt or sweepings. Sprecare, to consume or waste riotouslie.
Sprecamento, a wastefull or riotous consuming. Spregionare, to free, deliver,
or discharge out of prison. Spregnare, as Disperdere. Spregiare, to despise, to
condemn, to disparage, to disgrace, to dispraise, to contemn, or set naught
by. Spregio, contempt, spite, disgrace, skorne, dispraise. Spremere, to wring,
to squease, to press or crush out, to wring wet clothes. Also to express.
Spremuto, wroong, squeased, crushed, or pressed out, expressed. Spressamente,
expressly, apparently. Spretare, to vnpriest or degrade from priesthood.
Sprezzabile, contemptible. Sprezzare, as Spregiare. Sprezzatore, a despiser, a
contemner, a dispraiser. Sprezzatura, a despising or contemning. Sprezzo, as
Spregio. Sprigionare, as Spregionare. Sprimacciare, to shake, to touze, to tug,
to roll, to turn, to toss, or rumble up and down. Sprimere, as Spremere, or
Esprimere. Springare, to kick, to winse, to spurn. Springere, springo,
sprinsi, sprinto, as Springare. Sprinto, kicked, winsed, or spurned. Sprizzare,
as Spruzzare. Sprofondare, to break out the bottom of any thing. Also to
sink down. Sprolongare, as Prolongare. Spromettere, metto, misi, messo, to
vnpromise, to break promise. Spromesso, vnpromised, broken promise. Spronare,
as Speronare. Spronaio, as Speronaio. Spronata, a prick with a spur, a
spurring. Sprone, as Sperone. Sproportionale, shapelesse, without proportion.
Sproportionare, to disproportion, to disorder, to confound. Sproportione, a
disproportion, a confusion. Sproposito, against purpose, discretion, or reason,
a thing or tale to no purpose. Sprouedere, veggo, vidi, visto or veduto, to
vnprouide, to unfurnish. Sproueduto, unprovided, unfurnished. Sproueduta, Alla
sproueduta, extempore, without warning or meditation, suddenly. Sprouiero, a
sparue of a chamber or bed. Sprouista, as Sproueduta. Sprouisto, as Sproueduto.
Spruzzare, to sprinkle, to spout, to spirt, to asperge or bedew with drops, to
dash. Spruzzo, a sprinkling, a spirting, a bedashing with drops, a squirting or
dashing. Spruzzolo, a sprinkling brush as they cast holy water with.
Spruzzamento, as Spruzzo. Spuazzo, as Sputaccio. Spudare, as Sputare. Spudasto,
a lover and favorer of all unnatural and filthy, etc. Spudo, as Sputo.
Spugna, as Sponga. Spugnare, as Spongare, as Espugnare. Spugnoso, as Spongoso.
Spulezzare, to mince it, to pule it, to pick flease. Spulso, expelled, thrown
out, cast out. Spuma, foame, froth or skum. Spumare, to foame, to froth, to
skum, to gather into foame, froth or skum. Spumante, foaming, full of froth,
foame or skum, foamie, being in a foame, frothie. Spumeo, foamie, frothie,
casting foame, that has the color of foame or resembles skum. Spumoso, as
Spumante. Spuntale, a sting, a prick, a ^^dkin. Spuntare, as Spontare.
Spuntellare, the contrary of Puntellate. Spuntonare, as Spontonare.
Spuntonata, as Spontonata. Spuntone, as Spontone. Spuola, as Spola. Spuoladora,
as Spoladora. Spuolare, as Spolare. Spupillare, to grow out of nounage, to
(...) out of a pupils state. Spurare, to purify, to cleanse, to purge, to make
clean or neat. Spurchia, a disease in a horse proceeding of corrupt blood.
Also corrupt or goare blood. Spurgare, to strain or force to spit, to hem or
cl^ere the voice, to purge, to clarify. Spurghi, fleagme or spittings that is
fetch up straining, dots of fleagme. Spuriare, to adulterate, to sophisticate,
to counterfeit. Spurio, a whores son whose father is not know, a bastard, one
base borne. used also for a counterfeit. Sputacciare, to bespit or bespawe, to
beray with spittle. Sputaccio, Sputacchio, a man's spittle or slauering at the
mouth. Sputare, to spit or void fleagme at the mouth. Sputa sentenze, a nice,
coye, scrupulous, selfconceited wise man, that speaks and spits nothing but
sentences, an affected man in his speech. Sputatondo, a nice, coy, find-fault
fellow that will mark whether men spit in order or no. Sputatore, a spitting,
a spauling, snottie fellow. Sputazzo, as Sputaccio. Sputo, the spittle coming
from a man's mouth. Spuzza, Spuzzo, any kind of filthy sent, savor or stink.
Spuzzare, to stink or yield an ill savor. Spuzzetta, a coye, nice, fine,
dainty, puling dame. Spuzzolente, stinking, having an ill savor. Spuzzore, as
Spuzza. Squaccarare, to squatter, to squirt or lash it out behind after a
purgation. Also to scatter. Squacchera, a squattring soft turd. Squacciare, to
ruin, to spoil, to hauock, to disorder. Squaccio, ruin, spoil, hauock,
confusion, disorder. Squaccheracqua, a squattring soft turd as soft and thin
as water. Squacquarare, as Squaccarare. Squacquarata, a foolish chat, prattling,
or prating, a flimflam tale. Also a dashing or blurring, a squattring, a
squirting. Squaccherare, as Squaccarare. Squadernare, to open, to unfold, to
reveal, to disclose, to utter, to set, or lay open, to display. Also to toss,
to tumble, or ouerturne books or quires of paper. Squadra, a squadron, a
troop, or band of men. Also a square, a squire, or a carpenters ruler. Also a
certain part of a company of soldiers of 20. or 25. whose chief is a
Corporal. Squadrante, a quadrant. Squadrare, to square, to rule, to squire, or
cut or hew out. also to fadge, to become, to square, to fit, or beseem or
agree or suit well together. Also to mark, to heed, to note, to watch. Also
to make four square. Squadriglia, a route, a troop, a crew, or band of men.
Squadro, a square, a squire, or a ruler. Squadro di mare, a sea fish with a
rough skin called a skate. Squadronare, to marshall or set men in troops or
squadrons, to squadrone. Spuadrone, a squadrone, a troop or band of men, a
great number of soldiers reduced in array and framed in order to stand, to
march, to charge, or fight. Squaglia, a skale of any fish or serpent, a plate
of brass or other metal. Squagliare, to skale fishes or serpents. Also to
power or shed forth. also to melt, cast or found mettale. Also to soften or
vncrud milk. Squagliatura, a melting, founding, or casting of metals, an
vncrudding. Squaglio, Squaia, Squadra, as Squaina. Squaglioso, skalie, full of
hard skales as serpents be. Squaina, a skate or solefish, with a rough skin.
Squaiuola, a fish called a gudgeon. Squala, a kind of bird. Also a kind of
hazell nut. Squalidezza, grizlines, vglines, gastlines, filthiness, sluttishnes,
uncleanness, deformity of any thing for lack of trimming. Also the sorrowful
and ruthful estate of those that be arraigned or condemned, or otherwise in
great heaviness, who show to all men an heavy countenance. Squalidire, disco,
dito, to become, make or look grizlie, gastlie, ugly, foul, filthy,
sluttish, loathsome, or illfauoured, or grim. Squalido, gastlie, grim, grizlie,
ugly, foul, loathsome, filthy, sluttish, or slovenly, illfauored, causing
one to abhor the sight of it. Squalo, a fish called a pollard, or a chieuen.
Some take it for the skate or ray fish. Squalore, as Squalidezza. Squama, the
skales of fish or serpent or any other beast both of sea and land. Also the
little pieces of plate or nails in any piece of armor or harness. Also the
skumme, offall, or dross of lead or other metal when it is melted. Squammee,
the seames or joining together of the skull which lie about the ears on both
sides like scales. Squamoso, full of scales, dross, skumme, or bagage, rough
and sharp as a thing full of scales. Squarcella, an egge-pie, a flaune, a
doucet or custard. Squarciabocca, a kind of bit for a young coult.
Squarciamenti, rags, totters, tearings, cuts, iags, rentings. Squarciapino, a
kind of flyebote, pinnace, barge or whirrie. Squarciare, to rend, to tear, to
totter, to break into rags. Squarciatore, a kind of rending arrow or shot.
Also murthring shot. Squarciatura, a rend, a tearing, a tottring into rags or
pieces. Squarciauolpe, a kind of darting or shooting, or tearing shot.
Squarcina, a short sword, or courtelax, a dagger or a poynade. Also a privy,
close, short pocket dag or pistole. Also bar, cross, tearing, broken, or
haileshot. Squarcio, rend, torn, ragd or tottred. Also a day book, a
memorial or book of slate stones. Squarina, a sole fish with a rough skin, a
skate. Squaroso, rough, foul and sharp like a thing that is skalie, or having
some filthiness upon it. Squarra, as Squadra. Squarro, as Squaina. Squartare, to
quarter or cut in quarters. Squarscina, as Squarcina. Squarzina, as Squarcina.
Squarzo. Look Asquarzo. Squasimodo, in a manner, almost, as it were, as a man
would say, a what you call him? Also a simple gull, a foolish meacocke, an
ignorant noddie. one that is almost a man. Squassalare, as Squassare.
Squassare, to shake, to toss, to tumble, to totter, to wag. Squassa coda, a
bird called a waggetaile. Squassa pennacchio, a wag-feather, a ruffianly swash
buckler, a tisti-tostie-fellow, a swaggrer. Squassata, a shaking, a tossing, a
tumbling, a wagging. Squassatura, as Squassata. Squassolata, as Squassata.
Squatina, a kind of fish. Squatrare, as Squadrare. Squatro, as Squadro.
Squerro, a docke to build a ship in. Squietare, to disquiet, to trouble, to
molest, to disturb. Squietudine, unquietness, trouble, molestation, unrest.
Squilitico aceto, a kind of vinegar made of Squilla. Squilla, a little shrill
bell, a sance bell, any shrill thing, a sacring bell. a kind of sea Onion.
Also a kind of shell fish called a shrimp or a praune. Squillante, shrill,
resounding, ringing. Squillantia, a diasease in the throat called a squince or
squinancie. Squillare, to ring or iangle bells, to sound or speak shrill.
Squilletto, a spigot for wine. Squinante, squinanth, cammels meat, or sweet
rush which is very medicinable. Squinantia, as Squillantia. Squinternare, to
unfold, turn or toss over books, leaves, records or writings. also to blazon,
to displaie, to tell a glorious tale. Squiozzola, as Spoletta. Squisitezza,
exquisitenes, exactnes. Squisito, exquisite, exact. Squitato, idle, lazy,
drouzie, sluggish, slow, unquiet, dull minded. Squitinare, as Scrutinare.
Squitino, a joining or coupling together. Also as Scrutinio. Squittire, tisco,
tito, to squeake or cry as a parret. Squiuezza, as Schifezza. Squiuo, as
Schifo or Schiuo. Squizzare, as Schizzare, as Sguizzare. Squizzaruolo, as
Schizzaruolo. Squizzaro, a Swizzer or Heluetian. Squizzarello, a conduit pipe.
Squizzo, as Schizzo. Sradicare, to pull up by the roots, to root out, to grub
out. Sramponato, a kind of flat or smooth horse shoe. Sregolare, to bring out
of order and rule. Sregolato, unruled, out of rule and ordered, disordered.
Srenato, weak in the reins or hurt in the reins. St, a word commanding
silence, whosht or such like. St^, he stands, he dwells, he lies, he abides,
he remains. it sta^ds, remains, it consists, etc. Also used for questa,
this, namely before notte, sera, and mane. Stabbiare, to pollish, to varnish,
to steeke or make bright. Stabbio, an oxe-stall, a manger, a rack, a stable or
a hai-loft. Stabene, it is well, it is good, it is fit, it is seemly, it
fi^^eth, it becomes. Stabile, stable, firm, fast, constant, steadfast,
immoouable, sure, fixed, durable, fully determined. Stabili, firm, immoouable
goods. Stabilita, stedfastnes, constancy, firmenes. Stabilire, lisco, lito, to
establish, to confirm, to settle, to fix, to make steadfast, stable, firm or
sure, to settle and stay him self. Also to repair and make strong. Staboli,
certain bones in the hinder part of ones legs. Stabulario, an inholder, a
host, an hostler, a stable-keeper. Staccare, to pluck away, to disioyne, to
sever, to sunder, to vnfasten or pluck away from. Stacchi, a kind of herb
somewhat like to Horehound, but having a longer leaf, called wild sage or
field sage. Stacchiotto, close, whosht, squat, sneaking, lurking, prying
secretly. Statccia, a cake, a tarte. Also any flat thing or pie plate.
Stacciare, to sist or searse or bolt meal. Stacciata, a cake or tarte of
sifted meal. Stacciatura, any manner of sifting. Staccio, a sift, a sieue or
searse. Staccionata, an ouerridden, foiled whore, jade or spent horse.
Stacciqueto, a box, a clap, a tip, a whirret or blow given upon the ear or
cheeks. Stadeo, the name of some part of a cart. Stadera, a pair of great
skales or balances to weigh with. Stadiale, a measure of ground consisting of
125. paces, which is 625. feet. Stadiera, as Stadera. Stadio, a place where
running is excercised, as well of men as of horses, a race. Also a measure of
ground whereof be three sorts: one of Italy containing 125. paces, eight of
which make an English mile: the second Olimpicum, which is 120. paces: the
third Pirrhicum, which is 200. paces, we may call it a furlong. Staffa, a
stirop of a saddle. Also the boots of a coche. Staffeggiare, to be always
riding post. Also to loose the stirop in riding. Staffetta, a running post or
currier. A staffetta in post haste, posting, always riding. Some have used
Staffetta for the instrument called Crotalo. Look Crotalo. Staffetteggiere, as
Staffeggiare. Staffiere, a lackey, a footman, a horseboy running along the
stirop. Staffilare, to whip, to scourge, to ierke with a leather strap.
Staffilate, blows, stripes, ierks with a whip leather, lashes, slashes.
Staffile, a whip, a scourge, a strap or whip leather. Also as Staphile.
Staffita, as Staffile. Staffiro, the name of an herb. Stafisagria, the weed
stanes-akre. Stafoide, as Staphoide. Stagge, a kind of fowling ginne, haie, net
or spring. Staggio, as Statico. Staggire, gisco, gito, to heap up in cocks,
and then spread again as they do hay or corn. Also to sesse or rate one at
any payment. Stagione, a season or time of the year, tide. Stagionare, to
season or dress meats. Stagioncella, a small season, a little while.
Stagliare, to cut in pieces, to iagge, pinke or curas garments be. Stagnare, to
stay, to stop, to stanch running of blood. Also to steel, to glass or
tin any vessel. Also to stand still as a poole does, or grow to be a
standing poole. Stagnaria, a stannerie. Also the trade of pewterers.
Stagnarino, as Stagnaro. Stagnaro, a peawterer or seller of tin. Also a
tinkar. Stagnata, any vessel or pot trimmed within with tin or glass.
Stagno, the metal we call tin or pewter. Also a poole, a ponde, or standing
water, a mere, a stagne, or a fishpoole. Stagnuolo, a kind of clay that
founders use to stop and make their mouldes with. also a kind of foil of
tin that they put over iron plates. Stain pace, farewell, abide in peace.
Staio, Staro, a measure like an english bushel. Stalla, a stable, a stal, or
quierie for horses. Also a residence, dwelling or abode. the general name of a
place where cattle abide, an oxestall, a stable, a den, a sheep house, pen or
foulde. Also an ostellerie, a place for fodder. Stallagio, stabling, stalling,
or housing for cattle. Also the rent paid for a stable. Stallare, to stale, or
piss as a horse. Also to stable or stall cattll, to dwell, to empound cattle.
Stallaro, a stable or stall keeper. Stallero, Stalliero, as Stallaro. Stallire,
to hale or towe a ship. Stallo, a lodging, a chamber, a stable, a stall, a
mansion, a shelter or shrouding. Stallone, a stallion or horse to cover mares
Stalloneggio, the hire given for covering of mares. Stamaiuolo, a draper, a
dresser, or maker of stamels, a dresser of wool. Stamane, this present
morning. Stamatina, this present morning. Stambecchi, a beast called a chamoy.
some take it for a roe bucke. Stambucchi, as Stambecchi. Stame, thread, yarne,
stamine, whofe, stamell, or a web. Also a thread or spinning. Also a kind of
cloth as our pennie-stone or stammell is. Also flax, hemp, or wool, or any
other spinning stuff, or that is in the loome to be wouen. Stamegna, a sieue,
a searse, or a colander, or a strainer. Stamegnare, to sift, to searse, to
strain through a colander. Stametto, a kind of woollen stuff called say,
sarge, or such stanell stuff. Staminara. Stamine, the upright ribs or pieces
of timber of the inside of a ship, of some called footestocks, or footesteecks.
Stampa, a form, a moulde, a press, a stamp, a print or printing, an
impression, a mark, a shape, a figure, a station. Stampare, to print, to
press, to stamp, to form, to figure. Stamparia, a print or printing house.
Stampatore, a stamper, a printer, a stacioner. Stampella, a kind of religious
garment. Stamperia, as Stamparia. Stampinata. Stampita, a kind of country
dance, a fit of mirth or fidling. Also wearines. Stanca mano, the left hand.
Stanca cauallo, the herb Gratia Dei, or hedge-hysope, which when horses have
eaten, they wax lean and languish upon it. Stancare, to weary, to tire or
faint. Stancheggiare, as Stancare. Also to set the dice upon one, to tyrannize
over one. Stanchetta, as Stanghetta. Stanchezza, wearines, tyring, faintnes.
Stanco, weary, tired, faint, ouerlaboured, stanke. Stando, standing,
considering. Stanella, a poor shepherds garment or frocke. Stanfella, a colt
or fillie of an ass and a horse. Stanga, a bar, a bolt, a stange, a sprang,
a perch to bar a door with, a cool staff. Also a hawks perch. Stangare, to
bar, to sprang, to stang a door. Also to perch. Stangheggiare, as Stangare,
as Stancheggiare. Stanghetta, a little bar, bolt, stang, or staff. Also the
eye of the branch upward from the place of the water chain. Stangone, a great
bar, sprang, stang, or staff, or perch. Stanotte, this present night.
Stante, standing or being. Pocostante, a little while after. Acqua stante, a
standing water. Stante che, since that, whilst that. Stantia, a lodging, a
chamber, a dwelling, a residence, an abiding place, an abode. Also as Instantia
or Stanza. Stantiare, to lodge, to dwell, to abide, to woone, to remain, to
chamber. Stantietta, a little lodging, dwelling, or chamber. Stantio, Stantiuo,
stale, tainted, unsweet, mortifide, flie-bitten meat. Stanze, as Stantia. also
a stance or staff of verses or songs. Stanzare, as Stantiare. Staphile, the
vuula when it waxes black and blue like a grape at the utmost end. Staphoide,
the third bone of the foot called of Osso nauiforme, which is put next to the
ankle in the inside of the foot, called in English the ship-like, or bote-like
bone. Stare, sto, stei, or stetti, stato, to stand, to stay, to be, to do, to
lie, to dwell, to remain, to subsist, to rely, to continue, to live, to
endure or abide. Also to consist, to be fit, convenient or seemly, to become.
Look Fare stare. Stare al'erta, to lie in wait, to be wary, heedy, vigilant,
or circumspect, to be ready for all advantages, to look well about, to have a
quick eye. Stare a disagio, to stand or lie vneasilie. Stare a fare, to do,
or stand to do. Star' a giacere, to lie along. Stare all post, to stand or
wait in some set place or stacion. Stare alla guardia, to watch, to stand and
watch to keep sentinels. Stare a panciolle, as Scorpare. Stare appoggiato, to
lean, or stand leaning. Stare appresso, to stand or dwell near or by. Stare
allegro, to live and be merry. Stare a sedere, to sit, or be sitting. Stare a
vedere, to stand and see, to mark. Stare a crepacuore, to live at hearts ease,
to wallow at pleasure. Stare a pollo pesto, to be at the point of death, last
gasp or very sick. Stare a oglio santo, to be ready to give up the ghost.
Stare attorno, to stand, dwell, or be about. Stare a schimbecchi, to live and
be in baudie houses. Stare been, to stand well, to be well, to farewell, to
lie well. Also to become, to be fit, convenient, or seemly. Stare in letto, to
lie in bed. Stare in pace, to live or remain in peace. Stare lontano, to
stand or dwell far off. Stare di buona voglia, to stand or be merry. Stare
di buon' animo, to be merry, to have a good heart, to be nothing dismaide.
Stare di mala voglia, to stand or be sad and pensive. Stare buona pezza, to
stay or tarry a good while. Stare fresco, to be in an ill or bad taking.
Stare caldo, to lie, stand or be warm. Stare con altri, to dwell or stand
with others. Stare fermo, to stand fast, firm, or still. Stare cheto, to be
or stand quiet, still, or whosht. Stare in dozzena, to common, to boorde, to
eat and drink with others. Stare in casa, to be, to keep or dwell at home.
Stare in zurlo, to stand roundly together, to stand stark still till ones
teeth run a water. Stare il fatto, to matter, to consist. Stare inanzi, to
stand before or foreward. Stare inamorato, to be, or live in love. Stare in
arm, to be or stand in arms. Stare in mezzo, to be or stand between, or in
the midst. Stare in ceruello, to keep ones wits, to look warily about. Stare
in pendente, to stand in doubt. Stare in pensiero, to muse, think, or consider
well. Stare in sul puntiglio, to stand upon nice points of honor. Stare
insieme, to stand, be, or dwell together. Stare in sospetto, to live or be in
doubt. Stare in villa, to be or live in the country. Stare in speranza, to
live and be in hope. Stare in piedi, to stand up, or on foot. Stare male, to
be, live, or stand ill, to be sick or ill at ease. Also to become ill, to be
unfit or unseemly. Stare per, to be about or ready to do any thing. Stare per
morire, to be about or ready to die. Stare saldo, to stand or be fast and
firm, to be resolute. Stare sano, to be or live in good health. Stare sopra,
to be, stand, or dwell over or upon, to muse, consider, or suspende. Stare
sotto, to stand, dwell, or be under, to be in danger. Stare vicino, to be,
stand, or dwell near. Stare vigilante, to be wary, watchful, or circumspect.
Starna, a partridge. Starnoni, as Perniconi. Starnotto, as Pernicone.
Starnutare, to sneese. Starnutire, tisco, tito, to sneese. Starnuto, a sneese,
or sneesing. Staro, as Staio. Stasera, this night, or evening. Statarecci,
things that only come in summer, sommerly. Statarie, summer, or cold shadie
places. State, the summer season. Statera, as Stadera. Also a kind of coin in
Greece. Statiera, as Stadera. Statico, an hostage, a pledge, a pawn, a
surety, a deputy, a substitute for another. Stathmo, a kind of measure used
of yore in Greece. Stationario, a man that has his appointed station, standing
place or ward. Statione, a station or standing place, a road, a baie or
station for ships, a place of resort where matters are decided. Stato, stood,
been, dwelt, lien, subsisted, relide, consisted. Also been fit, convenient,
or seemly. Look the verb Essere, and stare, for it is the participle of
both. Also the form, state, fashion, or gesture of the body. Also the
condition or state of things, a quiet state of mind or life, an accustomed
trade or being. Also an estate, a dominion, or signorie of any body, a man's
whole wealth or stock. Also the state, being, or quality of any thing.
Statoua, Statoa, as Statua. Statua, a statue, an image or similitude, or
representation of metal, iuorie, or stone. Statuaria, the craft or art or
place of making or grauing or ietting of carved images or statues. Statuario, a
maker or caruer of images or statues. also of or belonging to images. Statuaro,
as Statuario. Statuire, isco, ito, to decree, to institute, to ordain, to
determine, to purpose, to appoint, to assign or to judge. Statuito, decreed,
instituted, determined, ordained, appointed, purposed, assigned, judged.
Statumina, a forke, a stake, a prop, a stay, or pole to underprop any thing.
Also mortar composed of lime and rubbish together. Statuminare, to underprop,
or underset a vine or tree with sorkes or stakes. Also to mingle and temper
rubbish and lime together. Statuto, a statute, a law, a decree, a
determination, a thing certainly determined and appointed, an ordinance.
Statura, stature, height, greatness, proportion, or bigness. Stazzo, a station, a
stand or standing place. Stazzonare, to stacion, to stand, to solicit, to
manage, to move, to be circumspect. Stazzone, a station, a stand, or standing
place. Also a porter. Ste, used for queste, the plural of Sta. Stea, used by
Dante for stia, let him stand. Stearite, a kind of precious stone like to
tallow. Steatoma, a kind of impostume wherein matter like fat or tallow is
contained. Stebe, a kind of herb, having stalk and leaves prickled, growing
in fennie grounds. Stecade, a kind of herb or flower called cotton-weede, or
sticados. Stecca, as Stecco, a riding rod or wand. Also the locket of a dagger,
a tool that shoemakers use or piece of wood. Steccadenti, a tooth-pick.
Steccato, the listes or place to combat in, or other place railed in with
stake, railes, or poles. Also a combat. Stecchette, little thin lathes,
shindles or boordes laid about broken legs or arms. Stecco, a stick, a stalk,
a chip, a wand, a bat, a cudgel, or riding rod, a butchers prick. Stefano,
has bin used in jest for a man's belly, panch, crauer, mawe, or gut. Also a
garland, a coronet, or chaplet. Stegge, bushes, briars, brambles, brakes,
thorns, etc. Stei, flocks of course silk. Also of the verb stare, I stood.
Stela, a cross or other like monument set up by the high way. Also a little
pillar which was wont to be raised up on end upon a sepulcre or grave. Stella,
a star, any of the celestial bodies that give light unto the world, used
also for a destiny, a fate, an after, a planet. Also a chip or spelt such as
carpenters make in hewing of timber. Also a starre-fish, or fiue-foote. Stella
fissa, a fixed vnmouing star. Stella herba, an herb called crowfoote
plantaine, buckhorne, or herb Iuie. Some take it to be sharewort, sterwort,
or codwort. Also some for swine-cresses. I find it also for woodroofe, or
woodrowe, or woodrowell. Stellamarina, a starre-fish, or fiue-foote. Stellante,
shining or twinkling, glistring or blazing like a star. Stellare, to shine,
to glister, to blaze or twinkle as a star. Also to reduce to chips, to chip.
Also the herb woodrowe, or woodrowell. Stellaria, as Stella herba. Also a
medicinable earth found in Samos, marked like a star. Stellatione, a
blasting. Stellato, starrie, full of stars, replenished or garnished with
stars. Also full of eyes like stars, marked with or having diverse speckles
or spots like stars. Also clipped, or reduced, or cut into chips. Stelletta,
the rowell of a spur. Also a tool that printers use. a little star.
Stelleo, full of stars, starrie. Stellifero, bearing stars, starrie,
twinkling. Stellino, a kind of bird. Stellionato, a deceit in dessembling a
thing to take profit by another unjustly, a counterfaiting of merchandise, a
cosening or cheating, or conycatching of any body. Stellione, a kind of fish.
Also a kind of beast like a Lizard, with spots in his neck like stars. Also
an upright pillar, as Stela. Stelo, a stalk or stem of any thing that
grows. Stemma, a garland of flowers. Also degrees of kindred, or the stock,
race, and blood of a gentle house. Stempanini, those that cut out money in
plates before they be coined. Stempella, as Tempella. Stempellare, to twangle
or play foolishlie upon any instrument, to fumble upon a Lute. Stemperamento,
as Stemperanza. Stemperanza, distemperance, disorder. Stemperare, to distemper,
to disorder. Stemperato, distempred, immoderate. Stendali, as Stentali.
Stendardo, a standard, a streamer, a banner, an ensign. Stendere, stedo,
stesi, stenduto, or steso, to extend, to reach, to spread, to display, to
stretch, as Tendere. Stenduto, steso, extended, reached, spread, displaied,
unfolded, stretched out. Stenebrare, to wax clear, or clear up, to vndarken.
Stentali, the seluedge or lists of cloth. Stentare, to suffer, to pyne, to
tire, to linger, to languish, to carke and care, to toil and moyle both with
body and mind. Stentatamente, painefullie, pininglie, carkinglie, with much
ado. Stentatissimo, most painful. Stentini, the smallest guts in any body.
Stentita, tainted, stale, flye-bitten meat. Stento, suffrance, carke, care,
toil, pining grief, passion or pain of body and mind. Stentore, a
suffering, carking man. Stentoso, full of carke, toil, care, grief, passion,
and suffrance. Stenuare, to extenuate, make lean, and slender, to minish and
make little, to appaire. Stenuatione, extenuation, slendernes, emptines,
leanenes, an appairing, a diminishing, a making less, an impairing. Sterco,
any kind of dung, mucke, compass, ordure or dirt. Also a turd. Stercorare, to
dung, to mucke, to compass, to beray with dung. Stercorario, of or belonging
to dirt, muck or turds. Stercorato, dunged, mucked, compassed. Stercoreo, of
dung or mucke, stinking like dung, dirt, dunghill, growing in dung or muck.
Stercoroso, as Stercoso. Stercoso, muckie, dungie, durtie, full of dung or
mucke, well dunged, growing in dunghils. Sterculino, a muck-hill or a dunghill.
Steresi, privation. Steria, an order, an appointment. Also a chance. Sterile,
sterill, barren, dry, fruitless, that cannot engender, without generation,
yielding or bringing nothing. Sterilite, lisco, lito, to be or wax barren or
unfruitful. Sterilita, sterilitie, barrennes, unfruitfulness. Sterlucco, a
fool, a ninnie, a gull, a sot. Sterminato, boundles, extreme, big, huge,
vaste, infinite, without limits. Sterminatamente, extremely, hugely,
infinitely, vastly, boundlesly. Sterminio, as Storminio. Sternace, that
plungeth or casts. Sternere, sterno, sternei, sternuto, to open, to spread,
to manifest. Also to lay along the ground, to throw or strike down, to lay
flat along, to lay and make ready, to make plain or smooth. Also to lie
down, to rest, to abate or make calm. Sternuto, opened, manifested, laid
along the ground. Look Sternere. Also sneesed or a sneesing. Sternire, nisco,
nito, to sneese. Also to cull or pick out. Sternone, that part of the breast
where the ribs meet and join together. Sternutare, to sneese. Sternutire,
tisco, tito, to sneese often. Sterometria, a measuring of length, breadth, and
depth. Sterpere, sterpo, sterpei, sterputo, to extirpe or pull up by the
roots, to root out. Sterputo, extirped or pulled up by the roots, rooted out.
Sterpo, a root, a stump or snag of a tree. Sterpone, a great root, stump or
snag of a tree. Sterpsicerote, a kind of wild beast. Sterquilinio, a muck-hill
or a dunghill, a mixen. Also a stinking knave, a basebrat. Sterrogonia, a kind
of frankincense called also Olibano. Steso, as Stenduto. Stessamente, as
Medesimamente. Stesso, as Medesimo. Stetho, Steto, the Anatomists call it the
region of the breast. Stia, let him stand. Also a cage, a pen, a frank or coope
for poultrie. as Stipa. Stiaccia, as Stiacciata. Stiacciare, to make, bruise,
crush or beat as flat as a cake. Stiacciata, a cake, a tarte or any flat
thing, a beating, a brusing. Stiacciatine, little, thin cakes, cheesecakes or
pancakes. Stiamazzo, as Schiamazzo. Stiancio, old, stale, tainted or unsweet
meat. Also sidelin or sloping or glancing, as Dare di stiancio, to strike or
hit sidelin or aslope. Stianciare, to bend, stoop or hit or go sidelin or
bending. Stiantare, to cleave, rap, rent, riue, burst, splint or shiuer in
sunder. Stiantatiuo, that may be burst, riuen or cleft asunder. Stiantatura, a
riuing, a cleft, a shiue of wood, a bursting, a cracking. Stiantio, as
Stiancio. Stianze, kibes or chi^blaines. Stiatatiuo, tough, hard, firm, fast.
Stiatta, as Schiatta. Stiauo, used for Schiauo. Stibio, a paracelsian drug
called antimonium or stibium. It is a white stone found in silver mines good
for the eyes. It is also taken for a kind of stuff that women use to make
their brows black and smooth with. Sticado, Lauander gentle or Cassidonie.
Sticciato, flat, bruised, crushed. Sticchinicchio, an idle, lazy, lubberly
Lourdant. Stidionare, to spit or broach a piece of meat. Stidionata, as
Spedonata. Stidione, as Spedo. Stiena, as Schiena. Stienuto, as Schienuto.
Stietto, as Schietto. Stiettezza, as Schiettezza. Stifello, a kind of pipe,
recorder, flute, or hornepipe. Stigi, used for hell, stix. Stigio, stigian,
hellish, infernal, devilish, belonging to hell. Stigma, Stigmatico, as Stimma.
Stisti, stigian, hellish, or hell it self. Style, a style, a phrase, a manner
or form in speaking or writing, an elegant form of speaking or writing, the
fashion or manner of ones penning. Also use, form, fashion, manner, wont,
guise, order, form, or rule. Also a marking-stone, or a pensill, a surgeons
probe or searching needle. Also a gnowman of a dyall. Also an instrument to
write in tables. Also any thing made sharp toward the top like a pillar.
Stilettare, to kill or stab with a poynard or little sharp dagger. Stiletto, a
little poyniard, dagger, poynado, bodkin, needle, or pin, or stabber. Stilla,
a drop, a still or trill of any thing. Stillamenti, distillations, droppings,
trillings. Stillare, to distill, to drop, to trill. Stillatione, a
distillation, a dropping. Stillato, distilled or dropped. Also a distillation
or dropping. Stillatoio, a still, a limbecke. Also a distilling house.
Stillatore, a distiller of waters, a dropper. Stillecchio, an yse-sickle or
flake of yse. Stillettare, as Stilettare. Stilletto, as Stiletto. Stillicidio,
the dropping of the ewes of the house, a little sink or gutter. Stillicidio
del' orina, the strangurie. Stillo, as Stiletto. Stiloidi, certain small
processes in bones like the fashion of a small bodkin. Stima, esteem,
estimation, account, valuation or reputation, or regard. Stimare, to esteem,
to judge, to suppose, to repute, to value, to regard, to deem, to respect.
Stimatione, as Stima. Stimatiuo, able to judge, value, or esteem Also
judgment or estimation. Stimma, the gross or thick matter of any ointment,
the gross thick substance or dregs remaining after squeasing or steaming.
Stimmate, used for the five wounds or mark^^ four savior. It is properly the
marks or printes of hot irons, such as th^eues have being burned in the hand,
or boared in the ear. Also used for infamy, d^tection, or reproach.
Stimmatico, Stimmoso, that is marked with a hot iron, that bears a mark of
shame. Also a rogue, a vagabond, an infamous detected fellow. Stimolare, to
prick, to provoke, to instigate, to eg^on, to urge, to incite, to spur, to
move, to incense, to stir forward, to enrage. Stimolatione, as Stimolo.
Stimolatore, a pricker or stirrer foreward. Stimolo, a prick, a pricking, a
stinging, a provocation, an instigation, an enticement, a goade, an urging, a
spur, a setting on, an encitement, a fervent moving, any thing that stirs,
incenseth, moves or pricketh forward. Also a rage or fury, a sorrow or
grief. Stimoloso, provoking, urging, pricking enciting. Stimulare, as
Stimolare. Stimulatione, as Stimolatione. Stimulatore, as Stimolatore. Stimulo,
as Stimolo. Stimuloso, as Stimoloso. Stincata, a rap or blow over the shinnes
or legs. Stinche, brushes made of brier. Also the name of a prison in Florence.
Stinchi, the shinnes or small of ones legs. Also a kind of fish. Stinchido,
shrunken or withered lims. Stinchieri, greaues, armor for the legs, or
shinnes. Stinco, a fish that is like a crocodile. Stinieri, as Stinchieri.
Stinguere, as Estinguere. Stinto, as Estinto, as Instinto. Stipa, a hedge, a
fence, a mound, a pile of wood. Also a cub, a pen or coupe to keep poultrie
in, any kind of dry fuel to make a sudden fire with. Also the plough
handle. Also stowage in a ship. Also swill, draugh, or dish-wash given to swyne
and hogs. Also a kind of low tree, broom, or shrub. Stipa di legne, a pile
or heap of wood. Stipare, to hedge, to fence, to fill up, to enuiron with a
guard, to mound, or compass, or rail, or empaile in, to coope in. Also to pile
or heap up wood. Also to press down hard, to stowe as merchandise is in a
ship. Also to stop chinks or clefts. Stipatione, a bolstring or holding upon
every side, a garding about or enuironing. Also a stopping. Stipato, environed
with men to be defended, as princes are with a guard. Also filled, replenished,
thick, garnished, furnished, stowed, fraighted. Also stopped, or pertaining to
stoppings. Stipatore, one that stops chinks. Also a kings guard that is
always about him. Also they that lay in, and pack up, or stowe merchandise or
packs in a ship. Stipendiale, of or belonging to wages. Stipendiare, to hyre,
to wage, to stipend, to give wages or pay unto, to pension. Stipendiario, a
hireling, one that takes wages. Also he that paieth tribute. Stipendio, a
stipend, a pension, a hire, a salarie, a pay, a tribute or toll, a payment.
Stipendioso, that has often received wages, or one full of wages. Stipia,
chafe, straw, litter, stubble, haume, or thatch. Stipite, a log, a stump, a
snag, or stock of a tree. Also a club, a bat, or cudgel. Stipiti, certain
wooden shoes to slide upon the ise withal. Also logs or stakes set fast in
the ground. Stipo, an armorie, or an ambrie. Stipola, holme, straw to thatch,
the husk that closes in the straw, stubble left in the field after it is
reaped. Stipolare, to promise effectually, to confirm a bargain, to require
by course and order of law, to require and demand a thing to be given him or
done for him with ordinary words of the law, to require before by covenant, to
make a covenant. Stipolatione, a confirmation of covenants by order and course
of law, a solemn covenant made with words ordinary in the law, wherein he
that is demanded of an oath answers that he will do or give a thing required,
a stipulation, a bargain, a promise, a covenant, or obligation to pay money,
or perform a thing that is required. Stipolatore, he that binds another by
requiring, and asking, he of whom a thing is required. Stippola, a kind of
windy or spungie substance or puff or fyste like a mushrom. Stipula, as
Stipola. Stipulare, as Stipolare. Stipulatione, as Stipolatione.
Stiracchiamenti, pullings, halings, wrestings, wyre-drawings, or stretchings.
Stiracchiare, to pull, to hale, to pluck, to wrest, to stretch or set on tenter
hooks, to wyre-draw a matter, to shrug, to shrink in or up. Stirace, as
Storace. Stirare, as Stiracchiare. Stirillo, the beard of a goat. Stirlico,
Antimonium or Stibium. Stirpare, to extirp or pull up by the roots, to grub
up, to root out. Stirpe, a progeny, a generation, a stock or kindred, a race,
issue, or noblenes of birth, an offspring, a house, a blood, a kind, a
pedigree. Also the root, stem, or stalk of a tree, plant or herb, a young
branch or set. Stirpeuole, that may be pulled up by the roots, or rooted out.
Stiticamente, nicelie, scrupulouslie, with affectation, restrictiuely,
stiptikly, costiuely, stoppinglie. Stitichezza, stricktnes, nicenes or foolish
affectation, too much precisenes, costiuenes, restriction, stiptickenes.
Stitico, stiptike, restrictiue, costiue, hard-bound, that stops or binds.
Also nice, fond, or scrupulous. Stiticozzi, swearing or swaggring muffs or
dutchmen. Stiua, as Stipa. Also the plough-taile or handle. Stiualaio, a
boote-maker. Stiualare, to boot, or put on boots. Stiuali, boots to ride
with, Look onger i stiuali. Stiualetti, thin boots or buskins. Stiuare, as
Stipare. Stiuieri, short buskins as old pictures are painted with. Stizza,
sudden rage, wrath, anger, vexation, choler, fury, fretting, impacience.
Stizzare, to stir up or provoke. Stizzarsi, to be angry, raging, or furious,
to rage or fret. Stizzato, angry, vexed, fretted, enraged. Stizzatamente,
angerlie, ragingly, frettingly, waywardly, foolishly, passionately. Stizzo, a
fyre-brand. Stizzolare, to stir up the fire or fyrebrands, to make it burn
clearer. Stizzolo, a fyre-brand. Stizzone, a fyre-brand. Stizzonare, as
Stizzolare. Stizzoso, subject to rage, wrath, fury, fretting, fury or choler,
toyish, foolish, waiward, testie, vexfull, soon vexed and peevish.
Stizzosamente, as Stizzatamente. Sto, used sometimes for questo, this, or this
same. Also I stand, dwell, or am, Look Stare. Stoccata, a foyne, a thrust, a
stoccado given in fence. Stoccheggiare, to strike with a short sword, a tuck or
a truncheon, to foyne or thrust at, to give a stoccado. also to play the ill
unthrifty man taking up commodities, to rob Peter and pay Paul, to live by
the loss, to spend the maine stock. Stocchi, Farestocchi, to make a new stock,
to run in debt, to take up commodities. Stocco, a truncheon, a tuck, a short
sword, an arming sword. Stocrofisso, used in mockery for stockfish. Stoffo, a
foundation, a ground, a stock, a subject, or stuff to work upon. Stogliere,
as Distorre, as Storre. Stoia, a mat or a hassock of straw, of bents or rushes,
any thing spread on the ground. Stoiare, to mat or furnish with mats, to spread
on the ground. Stoiaro, a matter or mat-maker. Stoicamente, severely, like unto
stoickes. Stoico, a stoicke, a severe kind of Philosopher. Stola, a stole, a
roabe, garment or religious habit, a tippet, such as religious men and doctors
wear, or such a hood as the freemen of London wear upon their shoulders, a
roabe of honor and dignity, a long vestment. Stolare, to adorn or attire with
a stoie or roabe, or tippet, or hood. Stolga, Stolca, Stolza, a wild hen, or
feasant. Stolidita, Stolidezza, foolishnes, fondnes, dullnes, unadvisedness,
doltishnes. Stolido, foolish, fond, dull, unadvised, doltish. Stolteggiare, to
play the fool, Look Stolto. Stoltezza, foolishnes or folly, as Stoltitia.
Stoltiloquentia, foolish speech, talk or babbling. Stoltiloquio, as
Stoltiloquentia. Stoltitia, foolishnes, folly, fondnes, doltishnes, idiotisme,
doting, a dulnes of the mind, sottishnes. Stolto. Look Stogliere or Storre,
taken, removed or retaken, or diuerted. Stolto, a fool, an idiot, a
simpleman, a fond, unadvised or unwise man. Also foolish, unwise, doltish,
sottish, without discretion. Stomacace, a sorenes of the mouth, a ranknes of
the gums so that the teeth fall out. Stomacaggine, lothsomnes, hatefulnes. Also
stomaking, anger or fretting. Stomacare, to hate, to loathe, or go against a
man's stomach, to stomach, to glut or cloy ones stomach, to have indignation,
to be angry or displeased. Stomacheuole, loathsome, odious, disdaynous, against
a man's stomach. Also that is sick in the stomach, that cannot keep the meat
that it has taken. Also full of stomach or indignation. It may also be taken
for that which is good for the stomach. Stomacino, a stomacher for the
stomach, a bib such as children use. Stomaco, the pipe whereby the meat goes
down into the ventricle, beginning at the root of the tongue in the lower
parts of the jaws behind Larince, to which is knit the meat pipe. It is
sometimes used (but improperly) for Ventricolo, and is called the stomach.
Also used for appetite or desire of a thing. Also digestion. Also indignation,
anger or wrath, abhorring of anything that likes not. Stomacoso, as
Stomacheuole. Stomacuzzo, a queasie, a squeamish, puling, dainty stomach.
Stomana, as Settimana. Stomatico, that has or is subject to have a sore or
swelling in the mouth. Also that has the nature and strength to open. Stoppa,
hirdes or towe or course hemp or okum. Stoppare, to stop with a stopple.
Stoppacci, hirdes of okum or tow, or any thing to make stopples with. Stoppata,
a stopping, a stopple, a bung. Stoppia, stubble, chafe, straw, litter, haume
or thatch, as Stipola. Stoppinato, at an end, near done, almost finished or
come to the snuff, burning in the socket. Also stust, filde, stopped or hard
bound. Stoppino, the week or cotton or snuff of a candle, the socket of a
candle stick. a stopple, a spigot. Also as Lucignolo. Stoppio, as Stoppia.
Stoppole, stubble of corn, as Stoppia. Stoppone, Stoppolo, a stopple or a
bung. Stora, as Stoia. Storare, as Stoiare. Storace, a drug, a gum, sweet
incence or perfume called Storax, whereof be two kinds: the one called Storace
calamita. because it was wont to be brought out of Syria in reeds, and that is
the right Storax, because it is mixed with Rosin and oil. Storacini, little
perfumes to burn made of Storax. Storcere, storco, storcei, storciuto, or
storto, to wrest, to writhe, to bend or make crooked. Also to wrench, to
extort. Look Torcere. Storciuto, Storto, wrested, writhed, bent or made
crooked, wrenched, extorted. Look Torto. Storcolare, to press, to crush, to
squease, or wring as they do grapes to make wine. Storcolo, a press to press
grapes or crabs in. Stordigione, as Stordimento. Stordimento, a giddines, a
dizzines, a dulnes, a stonishment, a staggering, a rauing in the head.
Stordire, disco, dito, to astonish, to become or make giddie, dull or dizie in
the head. Stordito, astonished, dull, giddie, dizie, mad, foolish, frantike,
rauing in the head. Storia, a history, a discourse, a tale, a story, a
narration. Also a kind of musical instrument. Storico, a historian, a writer
of histories or stories. Storione, the fish called sturgion. Stormare, to make
a noise, a rumor, a hurlie-burlie, or uproar, to storm. Stormento, any kind of
musical instrument, any kind of mechanical tool. Also a writing, a bond or
indenture. Storminio, confusion, ruin, hauoke or utter destruction. Stormire,
misco, mito, as Stormare. Stormo, a shoale, a flight, a drove, a rout, a
troop, a flock, a heard, a company, a crew. Also a noise, a storm, an
uproar, a hurly-burly, a braule, a quoile. Stornare, to turn back, to remove
or divert from ones purpose. Stornazzo, a menow fish. Stornello, a bird called
a stare or a starlin. Also a horse of that color. Storniamento, as
Stordimento. Storno, a bird called a stare or a starlin. Also a giddines,
dizzines or reeling in the head. Also giddie headed or foolish. Also as
Stornio. Storo, as Storno. Storpiare, to lame, to maime or make cripple.
Storpiato, lamed, maimed, lame, bruised or made cripple. Storpiatura, a maime, a
lamenes, a halting. Storpio, a breaking, a cracking or wresting and wrenching
of any thing. Also a let, a maime, a hindrance. Also a cripple or lame man.
Storre, stolgo, stolsi, stolto, to take, to remove or retake away from, to
divert from any attempt or opinion. Storsione, extortion or wrong. Stortare.
Look Storcere. Storta, a with or a wreath, a tool to pull out teeth with. a
wrench or wrest that ioyners use. Also a wrench or cricke in man or horse. Also
a winding still or serpe^tine, called a double SS. a sprain or strain in a
horse. also a sack-but or such other crooked instrument of music. Storti, a
kind of biscuit or spice-bread like symnels or cracknels. Storto, as Storciuto.
Stortocollo, as Collo torto. Stortola, as Storta. Stortura, a wrench or
vnioynting in a horse. Storzare, as Strozzare. Stouiglie, all manner of kitchen
things, trash, rags, vessels or kitchen stuff. Stozzo, the name of a
goldsmithes tool. Stra, used for Strada. Also much used in composition with
other words for Extra or Oltra. Strabalzare, to bound, or rebound, to hop or
skip as a ball does. Strabalzo, a bound, a skip or skipping of a ball, hopping
or skipping tricks. Strabigliare, to wonder, gaze or gape at with wonderment.
Strabiliare, as Strabigliare. Strabilio, amazement, or wonderment. Strabismo,
the squintnes in the eyes. Strabo, he that looks a squint or is goggle-eide.
Straboccante^, rash, furious, headlong, inconsiderate, ready to fall,
fond-hardie. Straboccare, to stumble, to trip, to fall headlong, to power out
of the mouth. Straboccheuole, as Straboccante. Straboccamento, as Strabocco.
Strabocco, rashness, fury, unadvisedness, a headlong fall, a stumbling.
Strabuzzare gli occhi, to stare or glote with ones eyes. Also to dazzle ones
eyes. Stracacciato, a kind of leap or iumpe used in Italy. Straccale, a
staff like a muskets-rest that porters use to rest their burdens upon when
they are weary. also a roll of linen that some old women use to wear about
their neck. Stracaro, more then dear, most dear. Stracantare, to sing and
over sing again. Straccare, to faint, to weary, to tire. Straccaspiedi, a
glutton, a gourmand, an Epicure, a lick-spit. Stracchezza, wearines, faintnes,
tyring. Straccij, rags, clouts, totters, torn or rent rags. Stracciable, that
may be rent or torn. Staccia brache, a prickled shrub called butchers broom,
kneeholme, or petigree. Straccia foglia, a waste paper. Stracciare, to rende,
to tear, to tottre, to break, to ragge or whinder in pieces. Stracciaria,
such a place as long lane is in London where old rags and clothes are to be
sold. Stracciaruola, a woman that rakes in the kennels for rags to make paper
with. Stracciaruolo, a botcher, a patcher or mender of old clothes. Also a
fripper or broker that sells old clothes. Straccioso, torn, tottred, ragged,
bare, beggarly, full of clouts or rags. Stracco, weary, faint, tired, stanke.
Straciare, as Stratiare. Stracio, as Stratio. Stracolli, hopping, leaping,
skipping, or knauish tricks. Stracorrere, corro, corsi, corso, to ouer-run, to
ouer-view, to run over and over, to course over. Stracorsa, a running or a
questing here and there. Stracorso, ouerrunne, coursed over, ouer-viewed, run
over and over. Stracorritore, an ouer-runner, an ouer-seer. Stracredere, credo,
credei, creduto, to believe, and rebeleeue again. Stracuraggine, as
Trascuraggine. Stracurare, to neglect, or set at naught. Stracutaggine, as
Trascuraggine. Stracurato, neglected or set at naught, careless, negligent,
fond, heedles, rechles. Stracuratamente, carelessly, negligentlie, heedeleslie.
Stracuratezza, Stracuraggine, carelesnes, heedelesnes, negligence. Strada, a
street or way, a high way. Stradamaestra, a high way, or chief street.
Stradaruolo, as Stradiotto. Stradebita hora, an unlawful or unseasonable
hour. Stradella, Stradetta, a little street, lane, or way, or path.
Stradesiderare, to desire beyond measure. Stradico, a kind of officer,
magistrate, judge, or provost marshall. Stradiotto, a kind of soldiers that the
Venecians use, a boote-haler, a freebooter, a carbine. Also a wandrer, a
gadder, a traveler, an earth-planet, a highwaie keeper, one of saint Nicholas
his clarks. Strafalciare, as Sbalestare. Strafalcione, as Farfallone, as
Sciarpellone. Strafare, to ouerdo, to misdo. Straforato, a disease in a horse.
also bored or pierced through. Straforo, any kind of hollow work.
Strafusaria, the weed called staves akre. Strage, slaughter, murder, havoc,
mortality, or fall of people, a discomfiture, a multitude of men slain. Also
a felling or cutting down to the ground. Stragiare, to slaughter, kill, or
murder. Straginare, to kneade or work paste, do, lome, mortar, or any
plaster rouling it up and down. Stragiudiciale, besides or without law or
judgment. Strahora, out of season, due time, or unseasonable hours.
Straintendere, tendo, tesi, teso, to understand thoroughly. also to
misundersta^d. Strainteso, understood thoroughly, or amiss. Stralciamenti,
vntanglings, vnbindings, vntyings. Stralciare, to disintangle, to unbind, to
rid, to free, to untie. Strale, an arrow, a shaft, a boult, a dart, a quarrie.
Straloccare, to gape or loyter about idly. Stralocco, an idle loytring gaping
fellow. Stralunare, to stare, to glote or look grim, to lowre, to lou^, to
pout, to look squinteied, to turn up the white of the eyes. Stralunamento d'
occhij, a staring, a gloting, a louring, a pouting, a louting. Stramacchiare,
as Stramazzare. Stramacchio, as Stramazzo. Stramacciare, as Stramazzare.
Stramaccio, as Stramazzo. Stramate, to litter or fodder cattle. Stramatto,
more then foolish or mad. Stramazzare, to kill, to slaughter, to murder, to
hauock, to tug, to beat, to bang. Also to fall or stumble. Stramazzo, hauock,
slaughter, murder. Also a matterasse, a couch, a pallet, a strawbed. Also a
hound or dog-fish. Stramazzone, a blow, a clap, a bang, a rap, a cuffe, a box
or whirret on the cheek, a down right blow. Strambasciato, tired, weary,
sweltring with wearines and sweat, out of breath. emb^st as a dear. Strambe, a
kind of rushes or bents. Also withes made of rushes or bents, we call them
frailes such as they bring figs or resins in. Strambellata, an unhandsome,
desheueled ill dressed woman. Strambelli, as Stramotti. Strambo, squint, bleered
or goggle-eide. Also perverse, foolish, peevish, and fond. Strambottare, to
sing rounds, gigs, catches or freemens songs. Strambotti, country gigs,
rounds, catches or songs, virelaies. Strambottiere, a maker or singer of gigs,
songs, catches or rounds. Strambottino, a short fine gig, round or catch.
Strame, litter, stubble, chafe, straw, haume or fodder for cattle.
Strameggiare, to litter or fodder cattle. Stramonia, a kind of thistle or
teazell called a thorn apple. Stramortire, tisco, tito, to swoune or fall in a
swoune, to faint. Stramortimento, a fainting or a swoune. Stramotti, as
Strambotti. Strampolare, to go or stalk on stilts, crouchets or scatches.
Strampoli, stilts, stalkings, crouchets or scatches. Stranamente, strangely,
frowardly, peeuishly, surly, churlishly. Stranezza, strangenes, surlines,
frowardnes, peeuishnes, churlishnes. Straneggiare, to be or play the strange,
foond, peevish or churlish companion. also to use a man strangely or
churlishly, to estrange. Strangoglioni, the strangullion, strangurie or choking
in the throat. Also choking or strangling morsels. Stragolamento, a strangling,
a stifling, a choking or smoothering. Strangolatione, idem. Strangolagione di
matrice, as Prefocatione. Strangolare, to strangle, to choke, to stifle, to
smoother, to throttle in the throat. Strangogiare, to swallow or glut down.
Also to throttle in the throat. Strangoiare, as Strangogiare, and
Strangosciare. Strangosciare, as Strangolare. Also to fall in a swoune or dead
trance. Stranguliare, as Strangullare. Strangullare, to power or cast out
largely, to spend riotously or lauishly. Strangullioni, as Strangoglioni.
Stranguria, as Strangoglioni. Also the strangurie when one makes water hardly,
painefully, and by drop-meale. Strangusciare, as Strangolare. Straniare, to
estrange, to allienate, to make strange. Straniero, a stranger, a foreiner, an
allien. Straniezza, as Stranezza. Stranio, strange, peevish, froward, fond,
fantastical, churlish, coye, nice, squeamish. Also an alien, a foreign, a
stranger. Straniolo, a strange, selfe-conceited, humorous, addle-headed fellow.
Strano, as Stranio. Stranutare, to sneese. Stranuto, a sneesing. Straordinario,
extraordinary, not common. Strapagare, to pay double or more then it is
worth, to ouerpay. Straparlare, to curse, to banne, to rail, to mispeake of
others. Straparlatore, a railer, a curser, a banner, a detractor, a mispeaker.
Strapie. Look A strapie. Strapiouere, to rain or shower beyond measure.
Strapocino, a kind of little bird. Strappare, to snatch or pull away by force.
Strappazzare, to oppress, to misuse, to put to all drudgerie, to hurrie, to
contemn. Strappazzo, abuse, drudgerie, ill using, hurring or oppression,
contempt. Stratipare, as Precipitare. Straripeuole, as Precipitoso. Strarupare,
as Precipitare. Strasauio, more then wise, very wise. Strascinare, to drag, to
pull, to hale, to tug, to draw, to traile along the ground. Strascinatore, a
dragger, a puller, a haler, a tugger, a drawer, a trailer. Strascino,
Strassico, a Princes or any woman's traile or train of her garment.
Strasognare, to rave or dream. Strasordinario, extraordinary, strange.
Strassicare, as Strascinare. Strassinare, as Strascinare. Strata, as Strada.
Also plain, flat, or spreading on the ground. Stratagema, a stratagem, a
policy, a wile or witty shift in war. Stratagliare, to tag, snip, or cut
through. Stratiare, to torture, to rack, to torment, to hurt, to vex, to
tear, to rend, to handle roughly. Stratiotico, warre-like, or pertaining to
war. Stratiote, water-millfoile which lives without a root, and swimmeth
only above the water, it is like Semperuiuum. Stratio, torture, racking,
torment, hurt, vexation, tearing, rending, rough handling. Stratto, extracted
or drawn out. Strauaccare, to play the beast, to yield or commit or wallow in
beastly leacherie as a cow. Strauagante, extrauagant, fantastical, foolish,
peevish, strange, newfangled. Strauaganza, extrauagancie, fantasticalnes,
strangenes, madness, peeuishnes, newfanglenes. Strauagare, to wander, to range,
to roame or gad, or stray out of the way. Strauaghezza, as Strauaganza.
Strauagliare, to free or deliver from trouble, care, or travel. Strauedere,
veggo, viddi, veduto, or visto, to see and ouersee again, to see through.
Straueduto, seen, and ouerseene again, seen through. Strauestire, vesto,
vestito, to disguise or shift in apparel, to mask, to counterfaite.
Strauestito, disguised or shifted in clothes, masked, counterfaite.
Strauizzeria, Strauizzi, bellie-cheere, gluttony, as Gozzouiglia. Strauolare,
to fly, to houer, or flutter up and down, to fly over or beyond.
Strauolgere, volgo, volsi, volto, as Strauoltare. Strauoltare, to turn, to
toss or tumble over and over, to ouerturne. Strauolto, turned, tossed, or
tumbled over and over, ouerturned. Strazzare, as Stracciare. Strazzariglia, as
Spinaruolo. Strazzi, as Straccij. Strazzoso, as Straccioso. Strebiare, to rub
up and down, to fumble, to rumble, to tickle, to clawe. Strecole, blows,
claps, raps, strokes, buffets, boxes, or whirrets on the cheek. Strega, a
witch, a sorceresse, a charmer, a hag or fairie such as our elders thought to
change the savor of children. Stregare, to bewitch, to charm, to forspeake.
Stregamento, a witching, a witchcraft, a charm. Stregaria, Stregheria, as
Stregamento. Stregghia, a horse-combe, a currie-combe. Stregghiare, to currie,
dress, rub, or comb a horse. Streggia, as Stregghia. Streggiare, as
Stregghiare. Streglia, as Stregghia. Stregliare, as Stregghiare. Stregnere, as
Stringere. Stregolare, to stroke or smooth with ones hand. Stregozzo, Andare in
stregozzo, to go a witching. Stregonare, as Stregare. Stregone, an old filthy
witch, hag, or sorcerer. Stremare, to force, to constrain, or bring to
extremity, to be, or make outrageous. Stremamente, extremely, exceedingly.
Stremire, misco, mito, to affright, or be affrighted through wonderment, to
wonder. Stremita, extremity, the utmost point, top, bound, or end of any
thing. Stremo, extreme, utmost, lag, last, furthermost. Also as Stremita.
Strempellare, as Stempellare. Strena, a new-yeares gift, or any present or
gift given to an advocate. Strenga, a point to trusse hosen with. Strengaio, a
point maker. Strengata, a blow, a yarke, or stripe. Strengere, as Stringere.
Strengiturina, an easy pinch, guird, wrench, griping, embracing or twinging.
Strenna, a new-yeares gift. Strenuamente, valiantly, stoutly, manfully,
boldly, vndantedly, courageously. Strenuita, valiancie, stoutnes, manlines,
boldness, courage, vndantednes, actiuitie, valiantnes, nimblenes, manhood,
stoutnes. Strenuo, valiant, stout, courageous, bold, hardy, manly, undaunted,
strong, doutie, active. Strepitare, to crack, to creake, to rustle, to rumble,
or make a great noise. Strepito, a noise, a rumor, a rumbling, a rustling, a
creaking, a cracking, a shufflling, a trampling, a noise made properly with
hitting things one against another. Strepitoso, rustling, rumbling, full of
noise, rumorous, harsh in sounding. Streppare, as Strappare. Stretta, a guird,
a pinch, a nip, a griping, a ierke, a wrench, a twinge. Also a narrow lane, or
allie. Also a dace, or as some think a mullet fish. Strettamente, straightly,
narowly, nearly, strictly, pinchingly. Strettezza, streightnes, narownes,
strictnes. Strettine, easy thrusts, pinches, guirds, gripes, twinges, or
claspings. Strettiuo, restrictiue, hard-binding. Stretto, straight, narow,
strickt, close. also straightned, made narow, shronke up, pinched, griped, tide
up, guirded. Also constrained, forced, bound fast, urged, enticed, clasped.
Also a close, sparing, niggardlie, pinching, narow-handed man. Also a straight,
or close passage, or a gulf, as Stretto di Magelano. Strettoia, a press to
press napkins, cheese, letters, or caps. Also a wrest, a pincer to wring any
thing with. Strettotio, a healing, closing, or restringent plaster. Also a
little wrest, or a pincer. Strettura, a pinching or a wringing. Also as
Strettezza. Stria, Strione, Striozza, a witch, an enchantres. Also a screech
owl or such unlucky bird, as Strie. Striaccio, a gadding, a roaming or
wandering about. Striare, to bewitch, to charm, to scritch as an owl. Also to
make rabbats, channels, furrows or chamfres in timber or stone. Striato,
chamfered, chaneled, or wrought inward with a winding. Striatura, a chamfuring,
a chaneling, a small furrow made or wrought in stone or timber. Striazzo, Look
Andar in Striazzo. Stribligine, a fault in speaking or writing called
solaecisme or incongruitie. Stricare, to draw, pull, or pluck out, to vntangle
or rid away, to put to flight, to grub or root out. Also to stroke, to sleeke,
or smooth up. Stribuire, isco, ito. Stributione, as Distributione. Stricatoio,
a sleeke-stone. Also a currie-combe. Stricca, Striccietta, a thin, long streeke
or line. Also a thin fine plate of any metal. Strichna, an herb which makes
them mad that eat of it. Strida, skreekes or pitiful cries. Stridare, to cry,
to proclaim. Stridere, strido, stridei, striduto, to skreek or cry out
pitifully, to gnash the teeth, to creake, to crash, to cry as a nightbird, to
make a whistling noise, to cry as a rail does. Striduto, skreeked or cride
out pitifully, gnasht the teeth, screekt, crasht, made a creaking noise.
Strido, a skreeke, a creaking, a clamor or pitiful crying out. Stridore, a
skreeking, a wailing or gnashing of the teeth, a creaking of a door turning
upon the hinges. Also whistling noise, as of wind, a rustling, a clamor, a
crashing, the crying of railes. Stridula, a skreeking, railing or creeking
thing. Stridulare, as Stridere. Stridulo, that makes a creaking, or crashing
or noise. Strie, as Stria. Also those parts in furrowed pillars which stand out
and swell as it were being higher then the furrows or gutters, called the
ridges. Some take them for carved furrows, rabbats or champhres in carved
work. Striga, as Strega. Strigare, to disintangle, to rid. Strigarie, as
Stregamento. Strigio, Stria, a fish like a dace. Striglia, as Streggia. Strige,
a skreech owl, an unlucky kind of bird, which (as they of old time say)
sucked out the blood of infants lying in their cradles. Also as Strega. Also as
Strie, or Stria. Also a kind of fish. Strigliare, as Stregghiare. Strigolare,
as Stregghiare. Strigone, as Stregone. Strigoso, lean, gant, meagre, dry,
spiny, withered. Also a starueling, a lean scrag, one that is nothing but skin
and bone. Strillare, to wail or lament, as Stridere, to yell or cry out
aloude. Strillato, a fish like a dace. Strillo, as Strido, a yelling or loud
skreeking. Strignere, as Stringere. Strinco, Strinzo, a kind of Lamprey or
eelepout. Stringiture, as Strengiturine. Stringa, a point with a tag.
Stringaio, a point maker. Stringare, to point, to trusse with points. Also to
wyre-draw a thing. Also to beat, to bang or ribbaste one. Stringato, pointed
or trust with points. Also handsome, neat, f^nicall, spruse, smug or fine.
Also wire drawn. Stringata as Strengata. Stringatuzzo, a fine, neat, spruse,
smug, handsome, niece, selfe-conceited fellow. Stringere, stringo, strinsi,
stretto, to bind, to claspe, to gripe, to clinche, to pinche, to guird. Also
to strain, to wring, to bind or trusse. Also to urge, to force, to constrain,
to provoke or entice. Stringersi nelle spalle, to shrug or shrink in ones
shoulders. Stringhette, little, small points, laces, ribands, strings or such
bindings. Stringolare, to point, to lace, or to string. Strinno, the herb
Nightshade or Petimorrell. Strione, Striozzo, a witch. Also a player of
comedies. Striscia, a list or seluage of any cloth or other thing. Also a
streake or line drawn out in length. Also a bedroule. Striscia di parole, a
rabble or huddle of words, a bed roll of words. Strisciare, to make a
trampling noise with ones feet, to slide or glide upon ise, to currie, rub or
dress a horse, to sleeke or make smooth, to drag or traile or creep along the
ground. Also to lay a counterfeit color upon any thing or to paint as women do
their faces. Strisciatura, a trampling noise, a sliding, a curring, a sleeking
or smoothing, a trailing, a dragging or creeping, a painting of a woman's face.
Striscio, a kind of painting that women use for their faces. a smugging or
smoothing. Strisciolare, as Strisciare. Stritolare, to crumble, to mince small
or to moulder. Also to digest meat. Also to skreeke or squeake, as the wheel
of a carte does if it be not greased. Strituro, the filme, rind or bark of a
tree or a shell. Striuiere, a blood-hound, a lime-hound, a setting dog. Strofa,
a wily deceit or subtilitie in arguing. Also a sudden turning or whirling.
Stroffione, as Strofinaccio. Strofinaccio, a dish-clout, a rag or a wisp to
wipe and scour dishes with. Also a mauking to cleanse an oven with. a scouring
slicke for a piece of ordinance. Strofinacciolo, as Strofinaccio. Strofinare,
to rub, to wipe, to scour, to struggle, to claw up and down, to gall or fret
away. Strofio, a kind of garland of flowers that priests were wont to wear.
Strofo, a fretting or gnawing in the bowels. Strologare, to profess
Astrology, to play the Astrologer. Strologia, the science called Astrology.
Strologo, an astrologer. Strombite, a stone in shape like unto a strombo.
Strombo, a kind of shell fish of the sea that has a leader whom the whole
shole does follow as their king. Stromentale, isntrumental, that serves as an
instrument or mean. Stromento, any kind of tool or instrument, an instrument
of music. Also an indenture, a bond, a record or writing. Also a mean or
instrument. Stroncare, to cut off, to curtall, to abridge. Stroncio, a turde.
Stronomia, the science of Astronomy. Stronomo, an Astronomer. Stronzo, a
turde. Stronzolo, a little turd. Stroppa, a twigge, a with, or osier to bind
vines, or hops with. Also the binding whereby a sword or buckler hangs.
Stroppaglio, a stopple of any thing, namely of a cannon. Stroppare, to bind
with twigs or osiers. Also to stop. Stroppata, a blow with a with. Also a
with full. Stroppelli, stopples of bottles, or bungs for barels. Stroppiare,
as Storpiare. Stroppiato, as Storpiato. Stroppicciare, to rub, to claw, or
trample up and down. Also to use frication. Stroppiccio, a rubbing, a clawing,
a trampling noise, a frication. Stroppicciola, a rubber, a wispe, or any thing
to rub withal. Stroppio, as Storpio. Strosciare, as Strozzare* to fall
furiously and clatter with falling as hail and rain does upon tiles.
Stroscio, a kenell for dogs, a stie for swine, a trampling noise. Also ruin,
spoil, or destruction. Also a violent clattring or crushing. Strozza, the
wind pipe or gullet, or vzell pipe or throat of any creature. Strozzare, to
wring a sunder, to pull, to tugge or pluck in pieces, to kill or crush to
death, to strangle or wring off ones neck. Strozzamento, a strangling or
wringing off of ones neck. Strozziere, a murderer, a puller or wringer off of
necks. Struccare, to squease, to crush, to press, to wrench, to wring clothes,
to stringe silk. Struccata, the grapes out of which all the juice is pressed,
and then given to hogs. Struccatoio, any thing to squease, crush, press,
wrench, or wring clothes with. Strucciare, as Struccare. Struccio, the bird
called an Estridge. Strucciola, as Sdrusciola. Strue, a pile of wood, a
woodstack, a heap of many things together. Struffare, to commit all manner of
riotousnes, wantonness, or lewdnes. Struffione, a shooe-clout, a dish-clout, a
wispe or ragge, or maulkin to wipe an oven with. Struffo, one given over to all
wantonness, riote and lewdnes. Also a stopple or a wispe or dish-clout, or a
maul^^n. Struffoli, a kind of ta^te or such other paste meat. Struggere,
struggo, strussi, strutto, to thawe, to melt, to consume, to destroy. Also to
build, to compact, to frame or set in order, to arraie. Also as Struire.
Struggimento, a thawing or melting. also a building or framing. Struire, isco,
ito, to set in order, fashion or arraie, to build, to make a frame, to work,
to compact, to lay or make, to prepare. Also to heap up. Also to contriue.
Also as Struggere. Also as Instruire. Struma, a wenne, or a swelling in the
neck or arme-holes, wherein be as it were hard kernels closed in the skin.
Some have taken it to be the kings evil. Also a bunch in the back. Strumatico,
that has the impostume struma in the throat, or the kings evil. Strumea. Some
take it for the herb crowfoote, and other some for a kind of herb that
beggars use to make their flesh raw. Strumentale, as Stromentale. Strumento,
as Stromento. Strumo, an herb or plaster that cures the kings evil. Also an
herb that cures that disease. Strumoso, as Strumatico, used also for one that
has a great throat. Strupo, as Stup^o. Strusciare, as Strutiare. Struscio, a
tugging, a moiling, a toiling, a vexing. Strutiare, to tug, to toil, to moyle,
to vex, to excruciate. Strutio, the bird called an eastrige or ostrich. Also a
toyling, a tugging, a vexing, an excruciating. Also the fullers herb wherewith
wool is commonly washed. Struttibile, made of many pieces, or of diverse
things. Also that may be melted or thawed. Strutto, melted, thawed, or
consumed, moulten, founded. Also built, compact, set in order or array, or
framed. Also butter or sewet. Also construction. Also as Instrutto. Struttore,
a builder, a framer, a compacter, a melter, a mason, a carpenter. Struttura, a
construction, a building, a framing, a compacting together, a frame, a setting
of things in good order, composition. Struzza, a kind of hunting with hounds
so called in Italy. Struzzicare, as Stuzzicare. Struzzo, an eastridge.
Struzzolo, a young eastridge. Stu, used for Se tu, if thou. Stua, as Stufa.
Stuare, as Stufare. Stuccare, to glut, to gorge, to cloy, to weary. Also to
dry, to stiffen, or to harden. Also to build with stucco. Stucce, a kind of
file that goldsmiths use. Stuccheuole, tedious, cloying, wearisome,
importunate. Also wallowish, or waterish in taste. Stuccio, Stuccietto, a
little pocket case with cisors, penkniues, and such trifles in them. Stucchio,
any fine little case, namely a combe-cace. Stucco, glutted, gorged, cloyde,
weary, full, satisfide, dride, stiff, or hardened. Also a kind of stuff or
matter to build statue or image work with used much in Italy, made of paper,
sand and lyme, with other mixtures, the imagerie work at Nonesuch in England in
the inner court is built of such. Studiante, a student, a scholar, a
solliciter. Studiare, to study, to muse, to endeavor, to apply the mind, to
care for a thing, to give his mind or affections to, to labor, to affect, or
covet to get, to have a desire or mind to a thing, to fancy. Studente, as
Studiante. Studietto, a little study, cabinet, or closet. Studio, a study or
place to study in, a cabinet, a closet, a university, a college. Also a
deske, a standing deske in a school for great books to stand upon, but
properly an earnest bending of the mind to a thing, great affection that one
has to do good or evil, study, exercise, feate, trade, endeavor, will, care,
carke, diligence, industry, appetite, fancy, desire, labor, affection,
delight, pleasure, opinion to a thing. Studiolo, as Studietto. Studiosamente,
studiously, carefully, desirouslie, earnestly, diligently, with diligence
and affection, for the nonce, expressly or of purpose, advisedly. Studioso,
studious, musing, careful, diligent, earnest, painful, constant, adict,
firmly disposed, desirous of learning, one that gives his mind to a thing.
Stufa, a stufe, a bath, a whot house. Stufaiuolo, a bathe or stufe-keeper.
Stufare, to sieve meat, to stufe, or bathe in a whot house. Stufaruolo, as
Stufaiuolo. Stufetta, a little stufe, sieve, bathe, or whot house. Stuffare, as
Stuccare, to slew meat. Stuffata, a pot of stued meat. Stuffeuole, as
Stuccheuole. Stuffo, as Stucco. Stuiello, as Stoppino. Also a tent to tent a
sore with. Stuoia, as Stoia. Stuoiare, as Stoiare. Stuoiaro, as Stoiaro.
Stuola, as Stola. Stuolare, as Stolare. Stuolo, an army, a troop, a band, a
squadron, a rout or company of men, a shoale of fish, a flight of birds, a
swarm of bees, a crew of good fellows. Stuora, as Stoia. Stuorare, as
Stoiare. Stuoraro, as Stoiaro. Stupefare, faccio, feci, fatto, to wonder, or
gaze at with admiration, to astonish or dismay. Also to be amazed, to be
astonished, or dismaide, to become abashed, to be driven into a dump, to stand
still immovable, to be past all sense, to marvel or wonder at, to be or have
one in great admiration. Stupetatto, wondered or gazed at with wonderment,
astonished, dismaide, amazed, abashed, that has lost his strength. Look
Stupefare. Stupefattione, astonishment, amazement, or wonderment. Stupendo,
wondrous, admirable, marvelous, working admiration. Stupidire, disco, dito, as
Stupefare. Stupidita, stupiditie, astonishment, amazement, dullnes, or
privation of the senses, sudden privation or lack of sense or feeling,
benumming, astoniednes, dulnes or a trouble of the mind upon a sudden fear,
not perceiving what is done, vnsensiblenes. Stupido, foolish, senseless,
fearful, amazed, astonished, dull or benumbed in fences, dismaide, abashed,
that fooleth nothing, that lacks his senses. Strupiare, Strupio. Look
Stuprare. Stupire, as Stupefare. Stupito, as Stupefatto. Stuporatione, as
Stupidita. Stupore, as Stupidita. Stuprare, to rape, to deflowre or ravish a
virgin. Also to commit adultrie or rape. Stupratore, an adulterer, a rauisher
of women, a deflowrer. Stupro, rape, rauishment, adultrie, shame, reproach,
whoredom, deflowring a virgin. Stuproso, corrupt, naught, whorish, adulterous,
given to aduoutrie or whooring. Sturare, to open, to vent, or unstop. Sturbare,
to trouble, to vex, to molest, to disturb. Sturbo, Sturbamento, a trouble, a
vexation, a disturbance. Sturione, the fish called Sturgeon. Sturno, as Storno.
Sturzo, an estridge bird. Stutare, to do out or extinguish. Stuua, as Stufa.
Stuuare, as Stufare. Stuuaiuolo, as Stufaiuolo. Stuzzicamenti, prouocations,
ticklings. Stuzzicare, to play, fumble, grope, touch, or dalli^ withal
wantonlie, to tickle, to provoke, to entice, to allure, or egg on.
Stuzzicatore, a fumbler, a groper, a dallier, a tickler, a prouoker, etc.
Stuzzico, a fumbling, a groping, a wanton dalliance, a tickling, a provoking,
an enticement, a setting on. Su, up, upward, over, upon. Also an aduerb of
encouragement, on, up, away, go to, to it. Su via, away, on, go to, forward, up
and away, an aduerb of encouragement. Sua, hirs, her own, his, his own.
Suada, the gods of eloquence or delectable speech. Suadela, persuasion, fair
speech. Suadere, suado, suasi, suaso, to counsel, to persuade, to entreat
with fair words, to endeavor with reason, to induce o^e to our opinion, to
exhort, to move. Sualiata, gallant, fair, decked, trim, garish. Sualigiare, to
rob, to rifle, to strip, to frip, or vncace by the high way. Sualisciare, as
Sualigiare. Suampare, as Vampare. Suangelizzare, as Euangelizzare. Suanimento,
a vanishing out of sight. Suanire, nisco, nito, to vanish out of sight to fade
away, to droope or faint. Suanito, vanished away, faded away. Also wine that
has lost his strength, drink that is flat or dead drooped or fainted.
Suantaggio, disadvantage, ods. Suaporare, as Euaporare. Suariare, as Zauariare.
Suarione, as Zauarione. Suaro, a kind of sea fish called in Latin Lacertus.
Suasibile, perswadable, that may be persuaded. Suasione, exhortation, motion,
persuasion, counselling. Suaso, counseled, persuaded, entreated with fair
words, induced to our opinion, moved, exhorted. Also a kind of whitish, pale
color that painters use. Some take it for a kind of sad graie. Suasore, an
exhorter, a perswader, an inducer, a counselor. Suasotio, of or belonging to
exhorting, persuading or counselling. Suasorio, disswasiue, perswasiue, moving
alluring. Suaue, as Soaue. Suauita, as Soauita. Suazzo, a fish called a Terbut.
Subalternare, to succeed in order or by turn. Subalterno, succeeding in due
order and by turn. Subato, Subatione, the appetite or stirring to generation
in swine, the grunting of the sow for the bore. Subatrice, a woman given to
leacherie or longing for it. Subbentrare, to enter under. Subbia, a shoomakers
awle. Subbiare, to whistle. also to prick with an awle. Subbio, a whistle.
also the roll whereon the weauer rouleth up his web or work, called a
yarne-beame. Subbiolare, to roll upon a role as a weauer does his work.
Subbiolo, a little whistle. a little weauers roll. Subbisso, a bottomless pit
or gulf, as it were Sotto abisso. Subbolire, as Sobbolire. Subdiuidere, vido,
visi, viso, to subdeuide. Subdiuisione, a subdiuision. Sube, a kind of bird
which is said to break the eagles eggs if he can possible come to them. Subero,
the light wood called cork. Subet, the name of a disease in a horse. Subia, as
Subbia. Subiare, as Subbiare. Subio, as Subbio. Subietto, as Suggetto, or
Soggetto. Subillare, by mere importunity and earnestnes to entreat and obtain
a suite of any man, as it were against his will. Subire, bisco, bito, to grunt
as the sow does longing for the bore to do his kind, to long or lust beastly.
Subissare, as Precipitare. Subitamente, suddenly, on a sudden, quickly,
hastily, unlooked for. Subitana, sudden. Morte subitana, sudden death.
Subitezza, sodainenes, speed, hastines. Subito, sudden, quick, nimble,
hastily, suddenly, unlooked for. Subitoche, so soon as, presently upon.
Sublimare, to raise, to set on high, to advance, to extol, to prefer, to
celebrate. Also as chimikes say to sublimate. Sublimato, high, raised,
advanced, preferred, extolled, that is above us, lofty, haughty, celebrated,
as Solimato, sublimated. Sublimatione, a sublimation, a subliming. Sublime, as
Sublimato, high, that is above us, aloft, lofty, haughty. Sublimita, height,
advancement, preferment, the top or tipe of any thing, highness. Subluogare, to
place, to lay, to settle, or dispose underhand, or underneath. Subluuie, filth
or ordure. Also a disease in cattle between the claws of the feet.
Subornare, to suborne, to entice, to allure or misleade to evil or to bear
false witness, to send one privily and instruct him to do or say a thing to the
end to deceive. Subornatione, a subornation or misleading. Subornatore, a
suborner, a misleader, an enticer, a seducer to some evil. Subsistentia, the
subsistence or bottom. Also an appointment. Subsistere, sisto, stei, sturo, to
subsist, to abide, to remain, to stand still, not to give place or recoyle, to
resist, to withstand. Also to substitute or appoint in the room of another.
Subsistuto, subsisted. Also a substitute. Also substituted or appointed for
another. Subsolano, the easterlie wind, an East wind. Subueare, to lurk or
sneake in some hole. Succedaneo, that succeeds or comes in place of
another. Succedere, cedo, cessi, cesso, or ceduto, to succeed, to follow, to
inherit, to come to pass, to ensue, to come in the place of another, to go
well forward, to have good success, to prosper and come to pass and effect.
Succeduto, Successo, succeeded, followed, inherited, come to pass, Look
Succedere. Successione, a succeeding, a succession, an inheritance, or coming
in place of another. Successiuo, successiue, orderly, succeeding. Successo,
succeeded, followed, inherited, come to pass, Look Succedere. Also a success
or succession, an event, or issue, a coming to pass, increase of fruit,
fullnes, prosperity, good luck. Successore, a successor, a follower, an
inheritor, he that follows or comes after, or in the place of another.
Succhia capra, a kind of bird which is said to suck a goats vdder. Some have
taken it for the winde-fucker. Succhiare, to suck. Also to smack. Succhiatore,
a sucker, a suckling. Succhiellare, to boar or pierce through. Succhiello, an
augre, a percer, a wimblet, a gimblet, a boarer, a forcet. Also a kind of
little pipe or flute. Also a bird called a winde-fucker. Succhio, the juice of
any thing. Also a smacking or a sucking till a print remain. Also the sap or
moistnes of trees. Also watrishnes, or moistnes, venire in succhio, to have
ones teeth run a water, longing for any thing. Also as Succhiello. Succiare,
to suck or smack. Succida, new-shorne wool, unwashed, greasy. Succido,
sluttish, filthy, foul, sweatie, sullied, stinking, unwashed, greasy as
wool as when it is new shorn. Also moist or full of juice. Succidezza, as
Succidume. Succidire, disco, dito, to foul, to filth, to defile, to sullie
with sweat or grease. Succidume, all manner of filth, sullines, sluttishnes,
filthy sweat or grease. Succinare, to make a soft noise, to sing a base or
tenor. Succinco, of or belonging to amber. Succingere, to vnderguirt, to
compass, to enuiron, to fence about. Succino, rozen or the gum of sweet
trees, specially of the Pine tree: in old time it was called glass, by reason
of the cleanenes thereof. The first and best kind of Succino is Amber, which is
yellow and bright through, and whereof they make beads: the other kind is
white and duskish and called bastard amber. Also as Lincurio. Also a kind of
plumme or damzen tree. Also of or belonging to amber. Succinto, succint, short,
compendious, brief, material, pithie. Also vnderguirt, or trust up, guirt,
trussed about, environed, that wears or has by his side. Succio, a sucking
or a smacking. Succiola, a sucking or a smacking, a sucking babie. Succiolare,
to suck, or to smack. Succire, cisco, cito, to suck, or to smack. Succiso, cut,
slasht, gasht, hewed or mangled under. Succo, the juice or moistnes of any
thing, used also for vigor or strength. Succoso, moist, or full of juice or
moisture. Succumbij, a certain kind of spirits which will take the shapes of
women upon them, and so have the company of men. Succussario, Succussoni,
slow, dull, heavy going iades. Sucino, Sucina, a kind of plum, or damzen.
Also a plum tree. Suco, as Succo. Sucoso, as Succoso. Sucubij, as Succumbij.
Sucule, a number of stars called the seven stars, which appear the 12.
kalends of June, and are called Hiades. Sud, among mariners is used for South.
Sudaccio, filthy, stinking sweat. Sudare, to sweat, to drop with, to labor
sore, to take much pains. Sudarcato, a sickness called the iandise. Sudario, a
towell, a napkin, a wiper, a rubber, a handkercher. Sudatorio, a sweating
place, a stew or hot house. Sudest, the Southeast wind. Sudetto, aboue-spoken,
aboue-said, forenamed. Suddiacono, a subdeane of a Church. Suddito, a subject,
a vassal. Sudi, a kind of great fish, and of a pleasant taste. Sudice,
filthy, sluttish, as Succido. Sudiciume, as Succidume. Sudiciotta, a filthy,
sluttish slut. Sudo, the clear firmament without clouds, fair and dry
weather after wet and rain. Sudore, sweat. Also labor, pain, or travel.
Sue, hirs, his, theirs, Dante has used it for Su. Suefare, Suefatto, as
Asuefare, to bring in use or custom. Sueggiare, as Suegliare. Suegghiare, as
Suegliare. Suegghiaruolo, as Suegliaruolo. Suegghiato, as Suegliato.
Suegghiatoio, as Suegliaruolo. Suegliare, to wake, to awaken, to watch, to
rouse up. Suegliato, awakened, watched, awake. Also vigilant, rouzed, wary,
quick, careful, heedie. Suegliaruolo, a larum in a clock to wake a man with
striking. Suegliatoio, as Suegliaruolo. Sueglione, a loud instrument called a
hautboy. Suelare, to vnuaile, to uncover, to manifest, to disclose. Suelenire,
nisco, nito, to vnpoison, to vnrankle, to vnfester. Suellere, suelgo, suelsi,
suelto, to extirp or pull up by the roots, to grub up, to root out. Suelto,
extirped or pulled up the roots, grubled up, rooted out. Suenare, to cut the
veins or throat, to kill, to murder, to stab. Suenatabriglia, a bit with an
open mouth as ports or vpsets. Suenatore, a murderer, a stabber, a butcher, a
killer. Suenatura, riders call it open mouths, whether it be a cats foot or
any other vpset or port. Sueneuole, inconvenient, ill-favored, unseemly.
Suenire, vengo, venni, venuto, to fainte or fall in a swoune. Suenimento, a
fainting or a swouning. Suenuto, fainted or fallen in a swoune. Suentare, to
euaporate, to blow or vent out, to air, to wind, to shake in the wind. Also
to let the wind, breath, spirit, force or wit of any thing or man fly out.
Suentato, euaporated, blown, breathed or vented, aired, winded. Also a
foolish, light headed, fond minded man. Suentolare, to wave in the air or
wind, to vent or vapor. Suentolo, a fan or van of feathers to make wind with.
Suentraglia, the guts, garbish, o ffale, panch or entrails of any creature.
Suentrare, to vnpanch, to panch, to vnbowell, to pull out the guts, offale or
garbish of any creature. Suentura, a mishap, an ill luck, a misfortune or
mischance. Suenturato, unhappy, unfortunate, unlucky, dismal. Suenturoso, as
Suenturato. Suerginare, to ravish or deflower a maiden. Suerginata, a ravished
or deflowred woman. Suerginamento, a rape or a rauishment. Suergogna, shame,
reproach, impudency. Suergognare, to shame, to reproach, to wrong. Suergognato,
shamed, reproched, wronged shameless, impudent. Suernare, to wax summer. Also
to winter or to pass the winter. Suertare, to tell or utter whatsoever one
knows, to be tom-tell-troth. Suestire, suesto, suestito, to disaray, to
unclothe, to strip, to pull off ones clothes, to uncase, to disrobe, to
disattire, to strip naked. Suestito, disaraide, unclothed, stripped, pulled off
ones clothes, vnclad, bare, naked. Sueta, a fish called in latin Nasus.
Suetino, a kind of yellow precious stone. Sueto, accustomed, wont.
Suffarcinare, to lade, to lead, to burden, to stuff up, to trusse up.
Sufficient, sufficient, able, enough. Sufficienza, sufficiency, ability.
Suffilo, a kind of disease in the ears. Suffimento, as Suffumicatione.
Suffilare, to whistle. Suffocare, as Soffocare. Suffocatione, as Soffocatione.
Suffolare, to whistle. Suffolcere, as Soffolcire. Suffolto, as Soffolciuto.
Suffolo, a whistle. Suffolino, Suffoletto, a little whistle. Suffragano, as
Soffragano. Suffragare, as Soffragare. Suffragatione, as Soffragatione.
Suffragatore, as Soffragatore. Suffragatorio, as Soffragatorio. Suffraginoso,
any beast or horse that is diseased in the boughs or pasterus, that has the
scratches or spauen. Suffragio, as Soffragio. Suffrago, as Soffrago.
Suffrenatione, as Soffrenatione. Suffriggere, as Soffriggere. Suffritto, as
Soffritto. Suffrenare, to check a horse or give him a correction with the bit,
or with one rain of the bit. Suffrenata, a check or job or twitch with the
bit given to a horse. Suffulcere, Suffolcere. Suffuleno, a bull-finch.
Suffumicare, to smoke or hang up in the smoke, to burn sacrifice, to use
suffumications, to fume or perfume underneath. Suffumigij, as Suffumicatione.
Suffumicatione, suffumication, smoking or burning sacrifices, a fuming, a
perfuming. Suffusione, a disease in the eyes called a pin and a web. Also a
spreading abroad or spreading upon. Sugamano, as Sciugamano. Sugare, as
Sciugare, as Succhiare. Sugaro, the wood or tree called cork. Sugatoio, as
Sciugatoio. Sugherello, an elder pipe. Suggellare, to seal, to sign or stamp.
Suggello, ^ale, a signet, a stamp, a mark. Suggere, suggo, sugge^, suggiuto, or
sutto, to sack or draw dry. Sugge^e, risco, rito, to minister, find, allow
or give one, to yield or send forth things whereof are plenty. Also to
suggest or put in mind, to prompt, to show, to tell. Also to choose in ones
place. Suggiuto or Sutto, sucked or drawn dry. Suggestare, as Suggerire.
Suggestione, a suggestion or putting in mind. Suggesto, suggested or put in
mind. Also a high bush or round tuft of hair, which ancient matrones were
wont to roll somewhat high upon their heads. Used also for a high chair,
pulpet or seat, whereout orations and sermons are made. Suggettare, to
subject, to yoke, to bring in subjection or thraldom, to submit^, to bring
under. Suggetire, tisco, tito, as Suggettare. Suggettito, subjected, brought
under subjection. Suggettione, subjection, thraldom, bondage, servitude, as
Soggettione. Suggetto, a subject, a vassal, a thrall. also subjected or
inthralled. Also a subject, a cause, a ground or theme, to write or speak of,
as Soggetto. Sughero, the light wood called cork. Also a devise made of
bladders or cork to fasten to ones shoulders to learn to swim with, that
children use in Italy. Sugna, as Songia. Sugo, any juice or moisture. Sugoso,
moist, full of juice or moisture. Sugumera. Suiamento, an inticement, an
allurement, a misleading, a straying out of the way. Suiare, to entice, to
allure, to mislead, to draw or straie out of the right way, to debauch. Suiato,
enticed, allured, suborned, mislead, drawn or straide out of the right way.
Also an unthrifty, careless, debaucht or mislead man, debauched.
Suillaneggiare, to chide, to braule, to skould, to offer one villainy or wrong.
Sul, upon, over, over the, upon the, in the nicke, in and upon, at the
instance. Sulfar del di, upon or by break or peep of day. Suilluppare, to
unwrap, to unfold, to vntangle, to rid free. Suilluppo, an vnwrapping, an
unfolding, a riddance, an vntangling. Suinchiare, to whiske with a rod or
riding wand. Suisare, to deface, to gash, to slash or cut a man's face. Also to
neglect, and not consider upon. Suiscerare, as Suentrare. Suiscerato,
vnbowelled, vnpanched. Suiscerato seruitore, an hearty, loving, affected
servant. Suisceratamente, heartily, withal a man's heart and bowelles. Sulimato,
Mercury or sublimat that chimiks do use. Sultanino, a kind of Turkish coin.
Sumacchio, a drug to die black with called Sumacke. Summa, as Somma. Summare,
as Sommare. Summario, as Sommario. Summettere, as Sommettere. Summesso, as
Sommesso. Summessione, as Sommessione. Summissiuo, as Sommessiuo.
Sumministrare, to minister, to supply, to give, to find or deliver what is
asked for. Also to do service unto one. Sumministratione, a subministration, a
supply, an aid or help at a pinch, an vnderseruice. Sumministratore, an
vnderseruant or such a one as supplieth and ministers what is wanting. Sun,
used by Dante for Su. Sunto, a sum or total reckoning. Suntuosamente,
sumptuously, gloriously, stately, profusely. Suntuosita, as Sontuosita.
Suntuoso, as Sontuoso. Suo, his, his own, hirs, her own. Used of Dante for
Su. Suocera, a wives or husbands mother. Suocero, a wifes or husbands father.
Suogliare, to bring out of taste, to make unwilling, to have ones lust or
longing. Suogliato, tastelesse, unwilling, sad, pensive, unlusty, crazed, had
ones will. Suogliatamente, unwillingly, sadly, vnlustily, without taste. Suoi,
his, hirs, his own, her own. Suola, a sole of a shoe or such. Suolaio, as
Solaio, as Solaro. Suolare, to sole a pair of shoes, to seele, to floor or
plank any room. Suolazzamento, as Suolazzo. Suolazzare, to beat, to slap, to
houer or flutter with ones wings* to pur as a partridge. Suolazzo, a fluttring,
a flapping, a houering or beating with ones wings, a purring. Suolgarizzare, to
publish, to explain, to translate. Suolgere, volgo, volsi, volto, to turn or
wind away from, to d^^ert from. Suolere, voglo, volsi, voluto, to nill, to be
unwilling. Suole, he is wont, he is accustomed. Suoluto, nilled, or bin
unwilling. Suolo, a thing that bears any thing on it, the earth, ground
floor, soil, land, bottom, groundwork or foundation, or superficies of
any thing, a roof or seeling of a room, a sole of a shoe. Su^lo a suolo,
piled in order or ranks one upon another, as herrings be in a barrel. Suolsi,
it is wont, the manner or fashion is. Suolto, turned or wound away from, as
Suilluppo. Suonanza, as Sonanza. Suonare, as Sonare. Suonatore, as Sonatore.
Suono, what noise or sound soever the ear of man can comprehend. Suono di
palm, the noise of clapping of hands. Suono a morto, a knell or tolling for
the dead. Suora, a sister, a title given to nuns, or religious women, a nun.
Suoresca, sister-like, nunlike, sisterlie. Supeditaneo, as Suppeditaneo.
Supeditare, as Suppeditare. Supeditatione, as Suppeditatione. Supelleticario,
as Suppelleticario. Supelletile, as Suppelletile. Superabile, that may be
passed or overcome. Superante, exceeding, surmounting, passing, ouercomming.
Superare, to overcome, to vanquish, to conquer, to surmount, to excel, to
ouermatch, to perform, to go over, to exceed, to be greater, to pass, to
ouerreach or ouerpasse, to ouerliue. Superarogare, to superarogate, to give
moreover. Superarogatione, superarogation, a giving more then is required.
Superatione, an ouercomming, a conquering, a surmounting. Superbia, pride,
disdain, haughtines, statelines* surquedrie, loftiness of mind, arrogancy.
Superbiloquente, one that speaks proudly. Superbiloquentia, proud, or
arrogant speech, haughty words. Superbire, bisco, bito, to grow proud,
haughty, disdainful, or arrogant, to be proud, high minded, or have a lofty
stomach. Superbito, Look Superbire. Superbo, proud, haughty, stately,
disdainful, surly, high minded, arrogant, beasting, wicked. Also magnificent,
noble, high, sumptuous, or with a majesty. Superceleste, more then heavenly.
Superchiare, as Soperchiare. Superchiaria, as Soperchiaria. Superchiamente, as
Soperchiamente. Superchiatore, as Soperchiatore. Superchiatura, as
Soperchiatura. Superchio, as Soperchio. Superciglio, the upper eie-lid of a
man's eye, the eye brows, or ridge of hairs above the eye eyelids. Also the
countenance, severity, gravity, pride, stately look or countenance of a man.
Also the hanse of a door, or mantle of a chimnie. Also the top or height, or
highest part, the browe or ridge of a hill. Superciglioso, very squeamishly, or
haughtily. Also sour or grimme in countenance. Supereminentia, a prerogative,
or excellency above others. Superficiale, superficial, that is not very
deep. Superficiare, to peruse over superficially. Superficiaro, a superficial
man* that has but mean skill. Also belonging to the outside of a thing. Also
he that builds a house on another man's ground, and therefore pays
quitrent. Superficie, the superficies or outside of any thing. Superfluare, to
ouerflowe, to be superfluous, to exceed, to run over, to abound. Superfluita,
superfluity, ouer-plus, profasenes, more then needs. Superfluo, superfluous,
overplus, overmuch, profuse, that runs over. Superfluire, isco, ito, as
Superfluare. Superfugio, a flying away. Superi, as Superiori. Superfuso, powered
upon, ouerflowing, spread abroad. Superiore, superior, elder, senior, above,
better, higher, chiefer, former, upper, uppermost. Superiori, ancestors,
predecessors, elders, seniors, betters, superiors, they that excel or pass
us. Also used for the gods above, or they that are in heaven, gods, saints,
angels, etc. Superiorita, superiority, senioritie, or eldership, pre-eminence.
Superlatione, the figure hyperbole, or excessive amplifying. Also a name given
to one by excellency. Superlatiuo, the superlatiue or chief degree.
Superlato, borne upon or over, excessiuely amplifide, preferred. Supernale,
supernall, high, above, chief. Supernato, borne or grown over and beside
other. Superno, as Supernale. Supersata, a kind of haggas, farcing, or
pudding. Superste, as Superstito. Superstito, a suruiuour, or ouerliuer, he
that ouerliueth or remains alive after other be dead, or that tarrieth after
other be gone, escaped and safe from death. Superstitione, superstition,
curiosity, scruple, or error in matters of religion, a vain religion or
devotion, an honoring of that should not be honored, a vain reverence or
fear toward the thing wherein is no efficacy or force but only by
illusion, it may be called a spiced conscience in vain things. Superstitioso,
superstitious, scrupulous, curious, vain or timorous in conscience, one that
makes scrupulositie in conscience to do a thing vainly, timorous in religion
without cause. Superuacuo, too much, superfluous, overmuch, vain, not
necessary, unprofitable, to no use. Supinare, to lay upright, or the belly
upward. also to go stately holding the nose up into the wind. Also to make
proud and stately. Supinato, laid upright, turned up, holden up in the air.
Also vnbended and somewhat bowing backward. Supino, upright, looking up, with
the face upward, the belly upward. Also used for idle, lither, negligent,
retchlesse. Supositorio, Suppositorio, a suppositorie. Suppa, as Soppa.
Suppare, as Soppare. Suppedaneo, a footestoole, any thing that is set under the
foot. Also any thing that images stand upon. Suppeditare, to be enough, to
have sufficient, to be able to give or furnish to others, to subdue and
vanquish, to endure and abide, to give or minister sufficiently, to have
wherewith to bear and find ones charges. Suppeditatione, a finding, a giving,
or ministering of things that one lacks. Suppeleticario, a bondma^ or slave
which is accounted for chattle. Also a servant having a charge of household
stuff. Suppeletile, any kind of implements or householde stuff, all things
mooueable in the house, all manner of goods or chattle. Suppilare, to steal or
pilfer vnderhande, or craftily to rob, or pill. Supplica, a supplication, an
entreatie, a suit, a request, a prayer. Also a general procession or
sacrifice. Supplicante, a suter, a suppliant, an humble entreater. Also humbly
entreating. Supplicare, to beseech, to entreat, to request, to pray, to sue
for, humbly to entreat, to make humble request. Supplicatione, as Supplica.
Supplice, mild, lowly, suing, entreating, suppliant, humbly entreating, that
desires any thing kneeling or prostrate. Supplicemente, mildly, in humble
suing manner, humbly, lowly, humbly kneeling in manner of supplication.
Supplicheuole, as Supplice. Supplicheuolmente, as Suppliceme^te. Supplicio,
punishment, correction, torture, torment, or pain. Also supplication, or
humble prayer. Supplicioso, full of punishment, torture or correction.
Supplimento, a supply or furnishing of any want, that supplieth or makes up
that lacks in number or quantity, a filling up the number and places.
Supplire, plisco, plito, to supply or furnish any want, to make up that which
lacks, to make even and perfect, to fill the places of him that lacks.
Supplita, as Supplimento. Supponere, as Sottoponere. also to suppose or
surmise. Suppositione, a putting of a thing under another, a supposition.
Supposito, a suppose, a thing supposed. Also vnder-set, or put under, put in
the place of another. Suppositiuo, that may be supposed or cou^terfeite,
suppositiue. Also put under. Supposto, as Supposito. Also supposed, deemed,
weened. Suppurare, to matter as a sore does, or grow to an impostume.
Suppuratione, a mattring of a sore, a gathering to matter, an impostume.
Suppuratiuo, a sore that mattreth, a salve to rotte or make an impostume run
matter. Supputare, to count, to reckon, or cast. Also to suppose, deem, or
surmise. Also to prune or cut trees slightly. Supputatione, a counting, a
computation, a reckoning. Also a supposing, a surmise. Also a pruning of trees.
Supremita, supremitie, supremacy, superiority, soueraintie above all,
chiefedome. Supremo, supreme, chief, higest, sovereign, principal, highest
of all, greatest of all other, extreme, the last, the uttermost. Used also for
funeral obsequies, death, or latter days. Also a last, will and testament.
Sura, the calfe of the leg. Also the whole shanke or leg from the knee to
the ankle. Surculo, a young set or slip, a young graffe a sciene, a shoot, a
young twigge or branch. Suretti, slippers, chopinos, or pantofles with high
cork soles. Surettione, as Resurettione. Suretto, a kind of dainty
compounded drink which they use in Turkey in steed of wine. Surgere, surgo,
sursi, surto, to rise, to arise, to grow, or spring up. Look Sorgere.
Surgente, arising, rising, growing, springing up. Surgitore, or Sorgitore, a
rode for ships to ride at. Surnag, a kind of medicinable root. Suro, Surella,
a fish called in latin Lacertus. Surprendere, prendo, presi, preso, to
surprise, or take on a sudden. Surpresa, a surprise, or taking on a sudden.
Surrogatione, a substitution, an appointing in ones room, a subrogation.
Surrogare, to put in place of another, to make a deputy, to substitute, to put
or appoint in another room, to subrogate. Surse, used by Dante for Suso. Also
he did arise, or rise up. Surso, as Sorso. Also up, or upward. Surto, risen,
arisen, grown or sprung up. Look Sorgere. Suscettione, an enterprise, a
taking of a thing in hand, an undertaking. Suscetto, received, enterprised,
undertaken, begotten. Also a thing undertaken or enterprised. Suscino, as
Susino. Suscipere, to undertake, to take on, to usurp, to receive, to
enterprise, to adventure, to beget, to conceive. Suscitabolo, a provocation or
stirring. Suscitamento, as Suscitatione. Suscitare, to take one out of his
sleep, to raise or rouse up, to call to his work, to stir or provoke, to
kindle or quicken, to exhort, to move, to move an uproar or stir up some
insurrection. Suscitatione, a raising, a tumult, an uproar, a sedition, an
often stirring up, an insurrection. Suscitatore, a rayser, a seditious man, a
stirrer of some uproar. Susimani, a kind of dainty plum in India. Susina, a
kind of plumme or damzen. Susino, a plum or damzen tree. Suso, upon, over,
above, up, on, away, foreward, go to. Suspendere, as Sospendere. Suspensione,
as Sospensione. Suspeso, as Sospeso. Suspettare, as Sospettare. Suspetto, as
Sospetto. Suspettoso, as Sospettoso. Suspicare, as Sospettare. Suspicoso, as
Sospettoso. Suspittione, as Sospetto. Susseguente, consequent, succeding.
Susseguenza, a consequence, a subsequence. Sussequente, as Susseguente.
Sussidiali, as Sussidiarij. Sussidiare, to help, to relieve, to comfort, to
stand by ready to aid and succor if need be, to supply, to store, to aid,
to defend, to subsidy, or task with subsidies. Sussidiarij soldati,
helpefull soldiers, such as serve for a defense or supply, or that are sent
and given to the aid of other, or coming to aid others. Also of or
pertaining to subsidies, helps, or assistance, or taxes. Sussidio, subsidy,
help, relief, comfort, aid, succor, supply, assistance, a garrison, an aid
in an extreme point or pinch, a refuge, a rescue. Sussiego, as Sossiego.
Sussurare, to whisper, to mutter, to buzze, or humme as bees. Also to murmur,
to charm, or forspeake with whispring words. Also to make a low, gentle,
still noise as a gentle wind does among trees, or as a river when it runs
and glideth with a gentle stream amongst the pible stones, or as birds when
they chirpe and chatter amid the woods. Sussuratione, a whispering, a muttring,
as Sussurro. Sussuratore, as Sussurone. Sussurro, a privy whispring, a soft
muttring, a buzzing, a murmuring, a charming, a humming, a soft, gentle, still
noise as of running water falling with a gentle stream, or trees make with
wind, or birds when they chatter. Sussurrone, a murmurer, a mutterer, a
whisperer, a buzzer, a hummer, a charmer, a secret carie-tale that slandereth
and backbiteth one, he that privily with carrying of tales and false reports
makes dissension. Sustante, vpstanding, standing upright. Sustantia, as
Sostantia. Sustantiale, as Sostantiale. Sustantiuo, as Sostantiuo. Sustentare,
as Sostenere. Sustituire, as Sostituire. Sustituito, as Sostituito. Sustituto,
as Sostituito. Sustitutione, as Sostitutione. Sustitiuo, that may be
substituted or deputed. Sutela, crafty working, subtlety, a crafty deceit, a
cauillation invented to break a covenant. Suteloso, he that is a wrangler, a
cauiller, one full of cauillations. Suto, used for Stato, the participle of
Essere, binne. Also fastened together, sowed, seamed. Sutore, a shooemaker, a
souter. Sutorio, belonging to a shooemaker. Sutterfugio, as Sotterfugio.
Sutterfuggire, as Sotterfuggire. Suttilita, as Sottilita. Suttilizzare, as
Sottigliare. Sutto, Look Sciutto, dry, or dride. Also used for sucked or
drawn dry. Sutura, a seame, a fastening or joining together. Also the line
under the yard of a man. Also joining together of bones in the head, much like
to a thing drawn together with long stitches, or that manner of composition
seen in the head, wherein the bones being indented one within another, are
like the teeth of a saw, a suture. Sutura retta, Look Sagittale. Suuero, the
wood called cork. Suui, thereupon, upon it.
T
TA, for Tali, such, such like, used also for Tua, thine, thine own.
Tabacchinare, to play the baude or pander secretly. Tabacchino, a secret baude
or pander, namely for boys. Tobacco, the precious herb Tobacco. Also as
Tabacchino. Also a bunch or bump of flesh growing between the flesh and the
skin. Taballi, drums, drumslades, timbrels, or (...). Tabano, as Taffano.
Tabaro, as Tabarro. Tabarrare, to cover, to array, to cloak or enmantle with a
riding cloak. Tabarrino, a slender, little riding cloak, or shepherds frock.
Tabarro, any kind of riding or shepherds cloak, robe or mantle. Tabe, a
consuming and wasting of the body by long sickness and want of nourishing. Also
an impostume or rottennes of the lungs consuming the whole body, the tissike,
a consumption and putrefying of the lights, most commonly following a sharp
distillation from the head, a pining and drying, a withering or wasting away
for lack of natural moisture. Also infection, poison, rotting, putrefaction,
matter, and corrupt blood coming out of a wound: used sometimes for strength
to putrify and consume. Tabella, a table to write in. Tabellione, used for a
scriuener or a letter. Tabento, a kind of spongious stone. Tabernacolo, a
tabernacle, a skreene, a cupbord, a chariot or box to carry or keep images
in, a shed, a shelter, a shop made of boords, a tent, a pauillion. Tabernarie,
comedies playde by common base people, pertaining to tauernes. Tabescere, to
consume and pine away, to corrupt and languish, to wear and waste away.
Tabesciuto, Tabito, corrupted, consumed, wasted or pined away. Tabi, a kind of
thin silk stuff called tabis, tissue, or bisse, or tabin. Tabifico, that
brings into consumption, pining and wasting away. Tabitudine, as Tabe. Tabo,
corrupt, filthy, goare rotten blood. Taca, the name of a wheel in a clock.
Tacca, a spot, a dash, a blurre, a blemmish, a fault, a blame, a drop, a bruze,
a dent, a flaw, a cut, a gash, or a skarre. Also a smack, a taint, or relish.
also any trash, matter, or stuff. Also a sise, a bigness, or fashion.
Taccagnare, to dodge, to wrangle, to cogge, to foist, to jest, to frump, to
cavil, to conycatch, to miche, to flinch, to palter. Taccagnarie, dodgings,
wranglings, coggings, cauillations, foystings, ill conditions, blemishes,
michings, flinchings, paltries. Taccagnatore, a dodger, a wrangler, a cogger, a
cauiller, a foister, a conycatcher, a micher, a flincher, a paltrer, a wretch,
a niggard, a chuffe. Taccagno, as Taccagnatore. Taccagnone, as Taccagnatore.
Taccare, to spot, to dash, to blemish, to tax, or blame. Taccarelle, ill
conditions, blemishes, faults, spots, dashings, dents, gashes, slashes.
Taccheggiare, to seek to hurt, to provoke, to egg on with pricking. Also to
blame or tax one of some fault. Taccherelle, as Taccarelle. Taccia, as Tacca.
Also let him hold his peace, of Tacere. Tacciare, as Taccare. Also to tax or
blame. Taccola, a chough, a rooke, a dawe. Also a skould, a pratler, a railer.
Also a babbling, a railing, or a skoulding, a flim flam tale. Also a spot, a
blurre, a blemish, a dash, or a drop. Also a pretty jest, or biting quip. Also
a patching, or botching piece of work, a bungling. Taccolare, to chat, to
prattle, to skould, to rail, as Taccare. Taccolata, as Fagiolata. Taccoloso,
freckled, speckled, spotted. Tacconare, to cobble, to botch, to clout, to tack,
to soute, to piece. Tacconatore, a cobbler, a souter, a botcher, a tinker.
Tacconcini, little tacks, patches, or pieces. Tacconi, cobling, patching, or
botching pieces or patches. Taccuire, to attempt or dodge about a matter.
Tacendo, not to be spoken, keeping silence, speaking nothing. Tacere, taccio,
tacqui, taciuto, to be silent, to hold ones peace, to conceal, to be quiet, or
whosht, not to speak a word of, to be quiet or in rest, to make no noise, to
keep secret. Tacente, speaking nothing, still, quiet, making no noise, mum.
Taciuto, bin silent, held ones peace, concealed, bin quiet or hoosht, Look
Tacere. Tacitamente, without speaking any word, covertly, secretly, without
noise, inwardly in the heart. Tacito, silent, quiet, hoosht, secret, that
holds his peace and is still, saying nothing, without noise. Also passiuelie
that is not spoken of, kept secret, that is, let pass without any mention, not
uttered in words, dumb, speechles, luna tacita, the new moon or the
conjunction of the moon and the sun, she being not seen. Taciturnita,
silence, secrecy, mum, secretnes of tongue, keeping of counsel. Taciturno, as
Tacito, but properly that naturally keeps counsel, that makes no noise,
that is no babbler of things told, speaking never a word. Tacola, as Taccola.
Tacolare, as Taccolare. Tacuino, a foolish astronomer that foretells only by
tokens and imagination. Also a prognostication or an almanake. Taffano, Tafano,
a hornet, or an oxe-flye. Also a kind of horse-flye which is said to have
four wings in Italy, which do sting their horses and leave a mark of their
biting behind, which horses so bitten are called Attafanati, or Attauanati.
Taffanello, Tafanello, a young little horse-flye or hornet. Taffeta, Taffetado,
all manner of taffeta. Tafferia, a kind of tool that goldsmiths use.
Tafferugli, as Strauizzi. Taga, Tagha, a kind of beam, rafter, or quarter.
Tagace, a fellon on a man's finger. Tagemie, a kind of fish. Taglia, a tallie,
a tale, a skore. a stature, height, proportion, or pitch of a man. also a
ransom, a hyre, a tribute, a fine, a taxation or imposition of any payment.
Also a task, a size, or a fee. Tagliare, to cut, to slice, to hew, to mince,
to shread, to slash, to gash, to skore, to iag, to tallie, to hack, to reap or
mow corn or grass, to carue, or to make incision, to pare or clip round.
Tagliamento, a cutting, a slicing, a mincing, a shreading, a reaping, a mowing.
an incision, a gash, a slash, a collop, a shiue, etc. Also a slaughter.
Tagliante, as Taglia cantoni. Tagliarelli, little shreads or cutting pieces.
Also a kind of paste meat used in Italy cut small and dride, and so sodden
in pottage. Tagliarini, as Tagliarelli. Tagliatura, as Tagliamento. Taglia
borse, a cutpurse, a rogue. Taglia cantoni, a cutter, a hackster, a
swash-buckler, a hacker, a swaggrer. Taglia pietra, a stone-cutter, a hewer of
stones. Taglia legne, a wood-cleauer, a wood-feller. Tagliar a pezzi, to cut,
to slash or hack in pieces. Tagliar le carte, to cut or heave the cards.
Tagliar il fieno, to mow, to reap, or cut down hay. Tagliar minuto, to cut,
mince or slice small. Tagliata, a cutting, a gashing, a slashing, a cut or a
gash. Tagliatelli, as Tagliarelli. Taglieggiare, to sease, to syse, to sesse,
to tax, to fine, to set a ransom upon one. Tagliente, sharp, cutting,
slicing, keen. Tagliere, a trencher, a plate, a trencher-plate. Taglietti,
cuttings, shreads, iags or little cuts. Taglij, cuts, slashes, gashes, pinkes,
iags, cuttings, incisions, shreads, slicings, collops or skars of hurts.
Taglio, a cut, a slash, a gash, a pinke, a iag, a cutting, and incision, a
shread, a slice, a collop, a skar. Also the edge or sharpnes or keen-nes of any
tool or weapon. Also a fitting, an agreeing or squaring with ones quality or
humor. Look Intaglio. Also as Taglione. Tagliolo, a little cut, a slice, a
shiue, a collop of any thing. Taglion^, a fine, a fee, a tribute, a taxation, a
ransom, a subsidy or imposition of any payment, an equal or like pain in
recompense of a hurt. Tagliuola, a mouse-trap, a trap for any thing. Tagliuole,
tallies or skores as brewers use. Tagliuolo, a graffe, a set, a branch, sprig,
syen or slip, of a vine or other tree to set or graft or plant without a root,
an imp, a bud, a stalk, a stem. Also the name of a carpenters tool.
Tagliuzzare, to slice, to cut, to iag, to pinke any thing small, namely
garments. Tagliuzzatore, a slicer, a cutter, a pinker or iagger. Tagliuzzi,
small pinks, cuts or iagges in clothes. Tago, a greek word used in Xenophon
for a leader, a chieftaine or captain. Tai, the plural of Tale, such. Tal,
such, or so, or resembling. Tala, a dye to play with. Also the shread of a
vine. Talacimani, sentinels, watches, guards. Taladro, an instrument, heauer,
or engine to mount any piece of ordinance up into the carriage. Talamo, a
bedchamber, or handsome lodging. Talare, a long garment down to the ankle.
Also shoes with wings as Mercury is fained to wear. Also the joint of the
foot. Talari, goutie sw^llings in the ankles, as Talare. Talario, of or
belonging to huckle bones, or dyce. Talasione, Talassione, a song contained in
certain verses used to be sung at marriages, an exclamation or cry used at
marriages having the beginning when Romulus and the Romans ravished the maidens
of the Sabines. Talche, so that, so then, why then. Talcimani, as Talacimani.
Talco, a drug so called, that chimicks use. Also a pargetting or plaistring.
Tale, such, so, or resembling, syke. Taleni, sobs, blubbrings, groans, sighs.
Talentare, to will, to grant, to afford, to please, or consent unto others
inclinations. Talento, an earnest desire, an appetite, a will, properly an
inclination to the mind of others. Also a value of money among the greeks,
whereof were two sorts, as Talento attico maggiore, which was worth 133. pound
and od money sterlin, and Talento Attico minore, which was worth about 99.
pound sterling, then was there Talento Hebraico maggiore worth 400. pound
sterling, and Talento Hebraico minore worth half so much. Talfiata, sometimes,
at times. Talhora, sometimes, at times. Talhotta, sometimes, at times. Talia, a
swelling of the gout about the ankle. Tali, a kind of game or play so called.
Talietro, the herb fluxwort, or laskewort. Tallione, as Taglione. Talla, as
Tallo. Tallo, as Tagliuolo. Tallone, as Talone. Talmente, in such manner, such,
so. Talmenteche, so that, so as, in such manner that. Talmuda, Talmudista, Look
Thalmuda. Talodino, a kind of tawnie color. Talone, a heel of a man's foot,
an ankle, a huckle bone, the pasterne of a ^orse, the ankle bone of the foot,
the pasterne bone of a beast. Talpa, a mole or want that casts the earth, a
moodie-wart. Tal sia di voi, choose you, do as you will, as you bake so brew.
Taluolta, sometimes, at times, now and then. Tama, when with much travel or
going, the blood comes down to the leg, and causes it to swell. Tamaceto,
the herb Tansie. Tamaccto acquatico, Sneesing wort. Tamagnino, a little fellow
that is elder then he seems for. Also a turde or a shitten fellow. Tamarigio,
as Tamarisco. Tamarindi, a fruit in India, the tree whereof is like a Date
tree, the fruit like Damascens, very medicinable against the heat of choler,
whereof the Indians make a kind of dainty wine. Tamarisco, the shrub called
Tamariske, of which be two kinds: the greater which bears fruit like the
lesser oak apples or galls; the lesser bearing grayish leaves without fruit.
Some have abusiuely taken it for the Ewe tree. Tamarisso, as Tamarisco.
Tamarro, black Briony. Tambascia, as Gozzouiglie. Tambasciare, as
Gozzouigliare. Tambureggiare, to drum, to tabour. Tamburagione, a drumming, a
sounding of a drum. Tamburrino, a little drum, a tabour, a timbrell, a
drum-slade. Also a dru^mer. Also a little trunk. Also a tabour and pipe.
Tamburiere, a drummer. Tamburro, a drum, a timbrell, a tabour, a drumslade.
Also a drummer. Also a trunk or a chest. Tambussare, to knock, to thump, to
bounze, to dub a dub, to drum. to bang, to beat, to swaddle, to rattle, to
ribbast. Tamen, yet, notwithstanding, for all that, howbeit, so that or
provided. Tamendoa, a kind of beast in India feeding on pisse-mires, which it
takes by lilling out his tongue so long till it be full of them, and has so
long and so bushie a tail, that he will hide all his body under it.
Tamerigia, a kind of cruise pot to drink in. Tamigiare, to sieue or searse, to
strain, to sift or boult meal. Tamigio, a sieue, a searse, a strainer.
Tamisare, as Tamigiare. Tamiscio, as Tamigio. Tamiso, as Tamigio. Tammurello.
Look Crotalo. Tamo, a worm breeding in tallow. the gentle or magot. Tampano,
a kind of musical instrument without strings. Also a tool that stone cutters
use. Tampoco, as Tanpoco. Tamussare, as Tambussare. Tana, a den, a cave, a
grot, a cauerne, a lurking hole. Tanaceto, the herb Tansie, whereof be two
kinds. Tanado, a fish of a tawnie color having an unsavory smell. Tanagliare,
to torture, to pinch, to tanakle with toongs, pincers or tanakles. Tanaglie,
toongs, pincers, tanakles, mullets. Tanagliette, little toongs, mullets,
pincers or tanakles. Tancia, a kind of damask work upon daggers and knives.
Tanco, a kind of beastly unnatural lust or occupying. Taken, Taneto, tawnie
color. Tanfo, a damp or loathsome smell. Tangari, poor, bare, base, idle,
loitring, begging or roguing fellows. Tangere, tango, tangei, tangiuto, to
touch, to feel, to join near to, to rub, to move, to hit, to move or
grieve. Tangibile, that may be touched. Tansa, a blame, an imputation, a
chiding. Also a taxing, a sessing or fining for any payment. Tansare, to chide,
to skould, to brawle, to rail, to tant, to nip, to shent. also to tax, to
sesse to rate or fine any man to any payment or subsidy. Tantaferata, as
Fagiolata. Tantarare, to swing in a halter. Tantaro, a swinging in a halter.
Tanti, so many, as many. Tantillo, as Tantino. Tantino, a very little, never
so little, a little little quantity. Tanto, so much, as much, as well, as, so
much, of so great value, price or importance, so dear or so much to be
esteemed, so great, so many, so worthy, so noble, etc. Tanto che, so that,
then, in so much as. Tantolino, as Tantino. Tanto maggiormente, so much the
more. Tanto manco, so much less, so much the less. Tanto meno, as Tanto
manco. Tanto meglio, so much the better. Tanto o quanto, but a little, never so
little. Tanto peggio, so much the worse. Tanto piu, so much the more. Tanto
quanto, as much as, even as much. Tanpoco, much less, as little, neither, nor
so. Tanto tempo, so long, as long, so long time. Tanto lontano, so far, as far.
Tanto apresso, so near, as near. Tantosto, soon, anon, by and by, presently.
Tanza, a kind of iron work. Tao, a stone like a peacocke. Tapelone, as
Vranoscopo. Tapeto, a carpet for a board. Tapezzare, to hang or cover or dight
with tapestrie. Tapezzarie, all manner of hangings or tapestrie work.
Tapezziero, a weauer or worker of tapestrie works. Also an vpholster.
Tapinare, to wander, to roame, to roue, to gad or go up and down, loytring,
beggingly or wretchedly, to pine, to linger, to languish, to draw to an end.
Tapinelli, poor, silly, wandering or roaming beggars. Tapino, a poor wretched
wandrer that goes up and down begging. Tappe. Look Piriolo. Tapsia, an herb
yellow like gold to dye withal. Tapula, a law made for feasts. Tara, the tare,
waste or garbish of any merchandise or ware. Tarabara, higledi-pigledie,
helter-skelter, cricket a wicket. Tarabusi, a kind of bird. Some take it for
the wood-pecker. Tarabasso, a foul called a bittour. Taraca, a buckler, a
target, a shield or a palueis. Taracone, as Taraca. Also the herb Taragon or
gardine Dragon. Tarando, a beast like a buffe, with head and horns like a
stag, of a red color, but will change himself into the color of the thing
that he touches or leans unto. Tarangola, a bird in latin Phoeopus.
Tarantello, the uttermost part of the belly which covers all the entrails.
Also a little eft or euet. Taranto, a greene-finch. Tarantola, a serpent called
an eft or an euet. some take it to be a fly whose sting is perilous and
deadly, and nothing but diverse sounds of music can cure the patient. Also a
fish so called. Tarantato, one that is bitten with Tarantole. Tarantolato, as
Tarantato. Tarare, to abate the allowance which commonly is allowde upon
merchandise and ware between merchant and cheapman. to tare. Taragnuole, a
kind of ravenous bird. Tara tantara, the clang or sound of a trumpet.
Tarassacone, the herb sowthistle. Tarantello, a kind of salt fish. Tarazzuoli,
a kind of ducke or mallard. Tarchiare, to compass, to enclose, to compact or
trusse up together. Tarchiato, well and strongly limd, compact and well trussed
up together. Tarda, a bustard. Tardamento, a delay, a slowing, a stay, a demur,
a deferring, a prolonging, a taring, a lingering. Tardanza, as Tardamento.
Tardare, to delay, to defer, to slow, to put off, to demur, to linger, to
tarry, to abide, to let, to stop, to hinder or stay, to make long a coming,
to keep back and withhold, to be slow. Tardetto, somewhat slow, late, long,
idle, lazy or tedious. Tardi, late, very late, or slowly. Tardigrado, that
goes slow or that has a slow pace. Tardi-loquio, that draws his speech in
length. Tardi pede, that goes slowly, that halteth. Tardita, slownes, latenes,
delay, demur, tediousnes, slacknes, hindering or delaying. Tardo, late, slow,
tedious, lazy, idle, dull, lither, slack, long in coming, lingering. hard
witted, thick, gross. Tarello, a kind of cheese or sweet cake. Targa, a
target, a shield, a buckler, a palueis. Targare, to arm or cover with a
target, a buckler or shield, to shield. Targhetta, a little buckler, target or
shield. Targhettiere, a targettier, one that fights with target or buckler.
Targone, a great shield, target or buckler. Tariffa, arithmetike or casting of
accounts. Tarlare, to eat or gnaw as worms do old rotten wood, to mothe-eate.
Tarlatura, dust of old rotten wood, good to skin young flesh about children.
Tarlino, a bird called a kurlue. Tarlo, a worm that breeds in old timber.
Also a mothe. Tarloso, full of worms or worm eaten. Tarma, a mothe breeding
in woollen cloths or worm breeding in timber, a worm that eats flesh, a
maggot. Tarmare, to mothe-eate or worm eat. Tarmoso, mothie, full of mothes
or worms. Taroccare, to play at Tarocchi. Also to play the froward gull or
peevish ninnie. Tarocchi, a kind of playing cards used in Italy, called
terrestrial triumphs. Tarocco. Look Da tarocco. Tarolare, as Tarlare.
Tarolo, as Tarlo. Also a cunt-botch or winchester goose. Tarpare, to clip the
wings of a bird that he may not fly, to snatch, to catch. Tarsia, a kind of
painting, in laying or setting in of small pieces of wood, Iuorie, horn or
bone, with pretty works and diverse colors, as in tables, chesseboordes and
such. Tarsiamento, as Tarsia. Tarsiare, to work or lay in with pretty joining
works, as chesseboords and tables are. Tarso, the first part of the foot,
which immediately succeeding the leg is answerable to the wrist of the hand.
Tartagio, a stutter, a stammerer, a lisper, a clipper of his language, a
masfler. Tartagliare, to stammer, to stut, to falter, to lisp, or clip ones
speech, to maffle. Tartaglione, a stutting, stammering, or lisping fellow, a
maffler. Tartara, a tarte, a custard, or a florentine. Tartaree port, the
gates of hell. Tartareo, of hell, hellish, terrible, strong. Tartareschi, a
kind of antike, fretted, or carved ioyners work. Tartarino, fearful,
terrible. Tartaro, the lees or dregs of wine. Also a kind of grauellie stone
growing fast to the inside of a vessel where wine is kept good for many
purposes, and used of dyers, and in physic, called argall or argoll. Some late
writers take Tartaro to be the stone or gravel which is engendered in the
reins of a man's body, as also the gravel engendered in the joints whereof the
gout is caused. Also a wood-pecker. Also a deep place in hell. Tartassare, to
rib-baste, to bang, to beat, to swaddle, to cudgel, to smite, to tugge, to
hale, to vex, to molest, to hurrie. Tartaruga, as Tarterucca. Tartera,
Tarterella, any kind of tarte. Tarterucca, Tarteruga, a tortoyse, or
shell-crab. Tartuga, as Tarterucca. Tartocca, Tartugella, as Tarterucca.
Tartoffola, the swelling, mark, or black and blue of a blow or hurt. Also a
blow given with ones knuckles upon ones head. Also a kirimiriebuff. Tartoffalo,
as Tartuffo. Tartuffo, a kind of meat, fruit or root of the nature of
potatoes called traffles. Also a kind of artichock. Tartuffola, as Tartuffo.
Taruca, a kind of kingly ornament. Taruolare, as Tarlare. Taruolo, as Tarlo,
or Tarolo. Tasca, a pouch, a pocket, a bag, a budget, a purse, a satchell, a
hauking bag, a poake, a scrip. Tascaccia, a filthy, foul, greasy pouch, bag,
or pocket. Tascare, to put up into a bag, pouch, or pocket. Tascoccio, as
Tascaccia. Tascone, as Tascaccia. Tasconio, a kind of white clay or marble,
whereof goldsmiths pots wherein they melt their metals were made. Tascotato,
as Trascurato. Tasentare, to whosht, to still, to put to silence, to hold ones
peace. Taso, as Tartaro. Tassa, a tax, a taxation, a taxing, a fine, a rate, a
sise, a sessing, a prizing. Also a blemish. Also a pile or stack of wood.
Tassare, to tax, to sise, to fine, to rate, to sesse at a certain value. Also
to blame, to touch in credit, to slander, to disparage, or disable ones
credit and reputation. Tassatione, as Tassa. Tassatore, a taxer, a rater, a
finer, a siser, a slandrer, a rebuker, he that rebukes or taxes another.
Tassello, the under roof of a house before it be tyled or covered. Also a
little anuile. Tassico, the tree Tasso. Tasso, a gray, a brock, a badger, which
is said to sleep six months in the year. Also an ewe or yew tree, or
another tree that bears a berrie that is poison and venomous, and against man's
nature. Also a kind of anuile that goldsmiths use. Tasso barbasso, as
Verbesco. Tasta, a tent that is put into a sore or a wound. also a taste, a
proof, a trial, an assaie, a feeling, a touch. Also as Tasca. Tastare, to
taste, to assaie, to feel, to grope, to sound, to try, to proof, to touch.
Also to tent a sore or a wound. Also to fret an instrument of music.
Tastatore, a taster, a feeler, a groper, a sounder, etc. Tasti, the frets or
keys of any musical instrument. Tasto, a taste, a feeling, a touch, a proof,
a groping, a trial. Tastone, groping, feeling or sumbling in the dark. Tata,
a darling, a dilling, a pug, a pigsneye, a pillicock, a sweet heart, a minion.
Also a wanton word in singing, wherewith one answers another. Also the voice
or speech of young infants to their fathers, daddie, dad, or bab. Tattamellare,
to prattle, to tattle, to play the coye, nice, or wanton fool. Tattamelle, a
kind of sweet fruit. Also a noddiepoope, a gull, or a sot, a blab, a
pratler. Also a kind of instrument of music. Tattamellino, a nice, coye,
dainty, wanton, cockred, squeamish fellow, one that is better fed then taught.
Tatteo, a kind of salt very good for the eyes. Tattere, tatters, rags, iags,
clouts, trash, shreds, pillage, luggage. Tattici, they whose office it is to
set an army in array. Tatto, the sense of feeling or touching. Also felt or
touched. Also a kind of great toade. Tatula, a chough with red feet. Tatusia,
a beast in India of the bigness of a hog, with a scaly hard shell into which it
draws his head like unto a tortoise. Tauanello, as Tafanello. Tauani, as
Taffani. Tauella, the husks, cods, or shales of silkewormes, or of any pulse,
as of peason and beans. Tauerna, a tavern, a tippling or victualing house, an
alehouse. Also an inn. Tauernaro, a keeper of a tavern, or tippling house, a
vintner. Tauerneggiare, to frequent and haunt tauernes, or tippling houses.
Tauernesca, common, fithie, tauernelike. Tauerniere, as Tauernaro. Tauernine,
wanton, foolish, pendents for ears, only fit for base people. also poor
tippling houses or tauernes. Taugargante, a kind of herb or root. Tauola, a
table, a planke, a board. Also a picture. Also a banquet, a feast, or a
feeding. Also a stale at chesse when one has nothing to play. Also a book or
register for memory of things, a paper iornall, a writing table. Tauolare, to
table or board at meat. Also to rail or paile in with boordes, to planke, to
boorde, to floor, to seele or fence in with boords, or plankes. Also to set
prick-song. Also whereof tables, boardes, and planks may be made. Tauolato,
tabled or borded at meat, feasted or banquetted, railed, boorded, fenced,
planked, floored, or seeled with boordes, railed, or pailed in. set in
prick-song. Also a paile, a rail, a floor, a partition, a pent-house, a
planking or sceling of plankes or boordes. also a kind of measure. Tauolata, a
table full, or a company of fellow borders at one table, a tabling.
Tauolaccio, a kind of great target or palueis. Also a great planke, a butte or
mark of boords to shoot at. Tauolaccino, a base groom, hind, swain or
servant. Tauolatura, a prick-song, a song set in prick-song. Tauole, all manner
of boordes, plankes, or tables, Also tables to play with, or writing tables.
Tauoletta, a little table, board, or planke. Also any picture upon a board.
Also a childs horn-booke. Tauolette, writing tables, little boordes, tables or
plankes. Tauoliere, a pair of tables to play with, a man that plays at
tables. Tauolino, a little pretty table, board, or shelfe of boordes. Taura,
has bin used for a cow. Taurea, a scourge or whip made of neates leather, or
of a bulls pizle. Also a buckler or target made of a bulls hide. Taurello, a
young bull, a runt, or steer. Taureo, of, or belonging to a bull. Tauriforme,
like a bull, in fashion of abul. Taurina, goats rue, or Italian fitch. Taurino,
of, or belonging to a bull. Tauro, a bull. Also one of the twelve signs in
heaven called Taurus. Also a little bird being a kind of finch, having a voice
somewhat like a bull. Some call it a Bittour. Tausia. Tautologia, a repeating
of one and the selfsame thing in other words. Tazza, a goblet, a boule, a
mazor or drinking cup, a godard. Tazzetta, a little goblet, boule, mazor, or
cup. Tazziere, a cup bearer to a prince. Te, hold, catch, keep, or take to
thee. Te, thee, thee-selfe, to thee, to thee self. Also from thee. Teatro, a
theater, Look Theatro. Teca, as Tauella. Tecca, as Boccata. Teco, with thee,
with thee self, in thy company. Tecolito, a stone like unto the stone of an
olive, called the stone of India, and is good against the colike and the stone.
Teco medesino, with thee self, in thy own company. Teda, a tree so called.
Also a logge, a block or a stumpe of wood: but properly the middle or the heart
of the pine tree when it is grown to be so fat and full of liquor, that being
kindled it burns like a torch. Also a wedding. Also a song at a wedding.
Tede, torches, lights, tapers, or firebrands used at weddings. Tediare, to
molest, to trouble, to importune, to weary. Tedio, tediousnes, trouble,
molestation, yrkesomnes, importunity, wearines, heaviness of mind. Tedioso,
tedious, long, troublesome, importunate, yrkesome, wearisome, loathsome. Tedulo,
an importunate pratler that all men shun and be weary of. Tefrite, a stone
having the figure of a new moon in it, of a black or ash color. Tega, as
Tauella. Tegame, as Tegghia. Tegametto, as Tegghiame. Tegghia, a dripping pan,
a frying pan, a tar^e pan, any kind of pot or pan. Tegghiame, all manner of
pots or pans. Tegghiola, Tegghiuzza, as Tegghia. Teggia, as Tegghia. Teggiola,
as Tegghia. Tegimento, a cover, a cottage. Tegiolare coltedio, to dally with,
to delay or play with, to put off wantonlie. Tegiuzza, a pan to burn coals in.
Teglia, a tree called linden or teyell tree, Look Tilio. Also a fish called a
Barble. Tegna, the scurfe or scald that comes to some men's heads. Tegnente,
holding. Also a tenant. Tegnere, as Tingere. Tegnoso, scaldie, or scurfie,
having a sore head. Tegola, a tyle, or slate to tyle a house with. Tegolare, to
tyle, to slate, or cover a house with tyles. Tegolaio, a tyler, a tyle-maker.
Tela, any kind of web or wonen cloth so it be not of wool. Also a work or
business. Tela d' argento, cloth of tissue or silver. Tela di lino, any kind
of linen cloth. Tela di sangallo, the stuff we call buckrum Also calico. Tela
d'oro, cloth of tissue or gold. Tela di ragno, a spiders web, a cobwebbe.
Telami, toils such as they hunt with, all manner of linen cloth. Telamoni,
images bearing up pillars, posts or supporters in building. Telarino, a little
loome for a weauer. Telaro, a loome to weaue withal. Also a printers frame for
his letters. Also any frame else as for a picture or a looking glass, or a
map. Telaruolo, a linen draper. Also a little loome. Also a weauer of any
thing. Telefio, wall-pepper, or stone-woort. Telenone, as Telone. Telerie, all
manner of linen clothes or weauings. Teletta, as Membrana. Also fine tinsell,
tissue, or linen cloth. Teletta d'oro, tinsell or tissue of gold. Telicardio,
a precious stone of the color of the heart. Teliccina, a little thin skin or
caul over any thing. Telifero, which bears arrows or darts. Telino, a kind
of precious sweet oyntement. Tellicina, as Teliccina. Tellina, a snaile, a
cockle, a muscle, a perawinkle or such shell fish. Also a fish called a
lamprey. Tello, the earth or ground, our common mother earth. Telo, a darte, a
flight, an arrow, a bolt, a quarrey, a little spear or any weapon that may be
cast or thrown with hands, be it stone, wood or iron, and by a metaphor it is
taken for all manner of helps and defense. Also the sun beams shaking. Also a
cruel pain in the side with sudden grief, as if ones body were thrust
through with a sword. Some call it the stitch. Telo trisulco, lightning.
Telone, an instrument of war like that which brewers use with a cross beam
to draw water, it is called a sweep. Telossa, the herb centorie. Tema,
fear, doubt, suspect, dread, timorousnes. Also a theme or an argument, as
Thema. Temalo, a kind of very dainty fish called in latin Thymalus. Temaro,
a fish called a grailing or omber. Temente, fearing, dreading, suspecting,
timorous. Temenza, as Tema. Temerare, to violate, to defile, to distain, to
pollute, to corrupt, to vnhallowe, to ravish, to commit adultery. Temerando,
to be violated or broken, etc. Temerariamente, rashly, foolishly, unadvisedly,
lightly, without consideration, regard, or ground, at rouers, at all
adventures, ha^ or nab, indiscreetely. Temerario, rash, headlong, unadvised,
foole-hardie, hare-braind, more hardy then needs, and wisdom requires,
indiscreet, without judgment. Temerato, broken, violated, etc. Temerita,
rashness, unadvisedness, foole-hardines, fondnes, hastines, indiscreetnes Temere,
temo, temei, temuto, to fear, to dread, to doubt, to suspect. Temuto, feared,
dreaded, doubted. Temero, Temelo, Temolo, as Temaro. Temeto, a kind of strong
wine which intoxicateth the brain. Temmirio, a necessary sign or mark, a
sea mark. Temo, the stern, helm, or rudder of a ship. Also a beam of a wane
or wagon, a draught tree of a yoke, an axell-tree. Also a stake, a beam, a
rafter, or pole laid overthwart. Temone, as Temo, Temoniere, the steares man
of a ship. Temore, fear, dread, or doubt. Temeroso, timorous, fearful.
Tempella, a fiddle, a crowd, or kit. Also a great swaggring twanger, a horse
tool, a great dildo, or good prick. Tempellare, as Stempellare. Tempera, a
temper or temperature of any thing, as Temperamento. Temperante, moderate,
temperate, sober, forbearing, sparing. Also tempring, mingling. Temperanza,
temperance, moderation, or sobriety, refraining of sensuality and unruly
affections. Temperare, to moderate, to temper, to mix, to mingle, or moderate
in order and measure, to rule, to govern, to order, to forbear, to spare, to
abstain, to refrain, to mittigate, to allaie, to assuage. Also to supple and
make soft. Temperare vna penna, to cut or make a pen that it may write.
Temperarino, a penknife, a little sharp knife. Temperamento, a moderation, a
temperance, a mean, a measure, a refraining a proportion of the four chief
qualities of the body. Temperatione, a moderation, a governing, a temperature,
a tempering, a mixing, an ordring and framing. Temperato, tempred, moderated,
forborne. Also temperate without excess, keeping a mean, modest, sober,
mild, discreet, as Temperante. Temperatoio, as Temperarino. Temperatura, a
tempring, a temperature, a moderation in mingling and mixing of things
together, a temper, temperatenes or good disposition. Temperie, a good
moderation or temperatenes in cold and heat. Tempesta, a storm, a tempest, a
boistrous weather, a bluster, be it wind, rain or hail. It is commonly taken
for a tempest or storm of rain and hail together. Also great trouble,
ruffling or business in a commonwealth, a storm or trouble of adversity,
danger or peril, a commotion. Tempestare, to storm or to tempest, to fall as
thick as hail, to bluster. Also to engraile, to beset or empaile with
precious stones. Also as Subillare. Tempestiuo, seasonable, timely, ripe for,
done in due time and season. Tempestiuamente, seasonably, conveniently, in due
time and season, in season, in due and convenient time, timely. Tempestiuita,
seasonablenes, opportunity, due time or convenient season, fitnes of time.
Tempestoso, tempestuous, stormy, blustering, turbulent, rough, unquiet,
boystrous. Tempiale, the name of a weauers tool. Also the flaps or labels that
hang down by the ears of a night cap, or bishops mitre. Tempie, the temples or
sides of a man's head, between the eye and the ears. Tempio, a temple, a
church or a chapel, a place consecrated to divine service. Tempione, a blow
or clap given upon the temples or ears of a man. Also an idle loytrer, a gull,
a noddie, a lazy companion. Also one that has high temples a ioulthead.
Tempissimo, very early or timely. Tempo, time, season, leisure, opportunity
or occasion, the state of time, commodity or necessity of the time present.
Also weather foul or fair. Bello tempo, fair weather. Cattiuo tempo, foul
weather. Tempo fu, a while ago, the time was, of ^ore, in elder time. Tempone,
a knot, a crew or meeting of good fellows to make good cheer. Look Far
tempone. Temporale, temporal, that which dureth or is made for a certain
time, of or pertaining to time. Also a sudden storm or tempest by sea, a
berrie, a gust, a gale or flaw of wind which dureth but a while. Also a
temporal man, a lay man. Also temporalitie. Temporalita, temporalitie.
Temporaneo, a temporizer, a worldling, one that obeieth times. Also momentarie.
Aso done suddenly, at a certain time, pertaining to time. Temporeggiare, to
temporize or obey and follow times. Temporeggiatore, as Temporaneo.
Temporiccio, early ripe, timely, any thing that is ripe betimes. Temporiuo, as
Temporiccio. Temposereno, clear, fair weather. Tempra, as Tempera. Temprare,
as Temperare. Tempre, tempers, moderations, rimes, concordances, the feet or
measure of verses. Also manners or fashions. Temulente, drunken, tipsie,
sottish, cupshotten. Temulentia, drunkenness. Temuto, feared, dredded, doubted,
suspected. Ten, used for Tene, to thee or thee thereof or of it. Tenace, that
holds fast, good and sure, steadfast. Also gluish or clammie. Also constant,
wilful, headstrong, stifnecked, hard to be moved, too much constant,
persisting and stiff in his purpose. Also covetous, hold fast, miserable or
pinching, niggish sparing, hard, a pinch-pennie, one that keeps surely.
Tenacita, niggardnes, stedfastnes, wilfulnes, constancy, hardness in sparing of
expenses, retaining, keeping. Tenacule, as Tanaglie. Tenagliare, as Tanagliare.
Tenaglie, as Tanaglie. Tenagliette, as Tanagliette. Tenasmone, a great desire
to go often to the stool, and yet can do nothing. Tenazza, a little hold or
keep made of one bulwark or curtine. Tenca, a fish called a Tench. Tencone,
as Panocchia, or Taruolo. Tenda, a tent, a pauillion, a curtin, a trauesse.
Tendare, to pitch, raise, or set up tents or pauillions, to intent.
Tendecchiare, as Tendare, as Tendere. Tendente, stretching out. Also tending or
extending. Tendere, tendo, tesi, tenduto, or teso, to spread, to extend, to
display, to tend, to stretch, to pitch, to bend, to lay a snare, to go, to go
forward, strait on, or about, to make toward, to direct, to endeavor, to
proffer, to reach, to prepare, to pretend, to purpose, to assaie. Also to pitch
tents or pauilions. Tenduto, teso, spread, extended, displaid, tended, stretched
out, pitched, bent, Look Tendere. Tendini, as Tendoni. Tendoni, the tennous, or
instruments moving in the top of the muscles made of sinews and ligatures,
and knitting them to the bones, and are harder then sinews, and not so hard as
ligatures. Tenebrare, to darken, to dim, to obscure, to ouercloud, Look
Tenebre. Tenebre, darkness, obscurity, dimnes, pitchines, the lack of light,
night. Also great confusion or disorder, obscuring, disgracing, contempt. Also
want of renown, fame or estimation. Tenebroso, darkesome, obscure, dim,
pitchie. Tenebrosita, darkness, obscurity, pitchinesse. Tenente, holding, a
tenant or a holder. Tenenza, tenencie, a holding, a keeping, a dwelling.
Tenere, tengo, tenni, tenuto, to hold, to keep, to detain, to take, to
apprehend, to hold or keep in, to restrain, to refrain or bridle. Also to
repute, to abide, to dwell, to hinder, to withhold, to have, to possess, to
esteem, to reserve, to govern, to rule, to choose, to deem, to judge, to
repress, to shun, to avoid. Also to understand, to know, to perceive, to
keep back, to hinder, let, or make to tarry, to let or hinder to do. Also to
keep in remembrance, to remember. Tenuto, held, kept, detained, reputed, let,
taken, abided, dwelt, hindered, withheld, pussessed, esteemed, reserved, ruled,
deemed, judged, refrained, shunned, etc. Look Tenere. Tener' il sacco, to
hold the bag, id est, to yield or consent, to take part, to keep ones
secrets, to be accessarie with another. Tener' a mente, to remember, to keep
in mind. Tener mano, as Tener' il sacco. Tener dozzena, to board or common
scholars at meat and drink, to keep an ordinary. Tener l'inuito, to accept
of ones courtesy being enuited to do any thing, to take ones offer, to see a
vye at any game, namely at primero. Tener l'auanzo, to see ones vye or rest at
primero. Tener memoria, to keep or hold in mind, to remember well. Tener
ragione, to keep a court of law, justice, right, sessions or sises.
Tenerello, somewhat tender or soft, Look Tenero. Tenerire, risco, rito, to
soften, to mollify or make tender, to become tender and soft, to wax
merciful and gentle. Tenerito, softened, mollifide, or made tender. Tenericcio,
somewhat soft, mellow or tender. Tenerezza, tenderness or softnes, affection in
love. Tenerino, somewhat soft or tender. Tenero, soft or tender, young, gentle,
merciful, pliant, easily induced to any thing. Also nice, delicate,
effeminate. Tenerone lungone, a tender, young, lusty, tall striplin, or lad.
Tenerume, the soft, braune pithines or fleshines of any thing namely of meat.
Tengere, as Tingere. Tenia, a woman's head-band, fillet or lace to tie up her
hair, the knot or fastening of a fillet. Also a roll that women were wont to
wear on their heads. Also a woollen ornament like a turbant that men were wont
to wear on their heads. Also a kind of seafish long and narrow. Also a kind
of brow or iutting over in pillars. used also for a long row of rocks or
cliffes along the seashore, or a vein of white stones which to them that be a
far off upon the water appears long like unto a kerchefe. Also a kind of
worms that be long, broad, and slender, of some called grave worms, as
ingendring of the rotten flesh of buried bodies. Teniere, a place to hold fast
by, a hold-fast. Tenimento, a hold, a houlding, a tenement. Tenitore, a
hou^der, a keeper. Tenore, a tenor or degree in music, a form, a tenor, a
tenure or content of any matter, a continual order, form, fashion, trade,
state or race, continuance of a thing without staying or interruption, never
changing the manner of. Tentare, to tempt, to attempt, to assay, to try, to
sound, to go about a matter, to offer or profer to do any thing, to prove, to
handle or feel often, to tempt one to do evil. Tentamento, a tempting, an
attempting, an assay, a sounding, a proof, a trial. Tentatamente, feelingly,
by trial, attemptingly, by assay. Tentatione, a temptation, a tempting. Also a
proof or assaying. Tentatore, a tempter, an attempter, an assayer, a proouer.
Tentenna pennacchio, a wag feather, one that has more baire then wit, a
tisti-tostie. Tentennare, as Nicchiare. Tentennate, blow, stripes, bangs,
whirrets. Also a yarke, the sound of a stroke with a whip. Tentenino, a
tempter, a tempting, enticing or alluring man, woman or spirit. Tentennone, a
doult, a gul, a patch, a fopper, a fool. Tentigine, the standing of a man's
yard, called lust-pride or prick-prid, as Satiriasi. Tentionare, as Tenzonare.
Tentione, as Tenzone. Tentipellione, Tentipelone, a medicine or instrument to
make the skin plain and without wrinkles. Tento, dyed or colored of any
color. Also a taint in a horse. Tentonare, to fumble, to grope, to grouell, or
go fumbling in the dark. Tentone, gropingly, fumbingly, groueling in the
dark. Tenton tentone, as Tentone. Tentore, a dyer of colors. Tentoria, a
diers house. Also the art of dying. Tentura, a dye, a dying, or coloring, a
hew. Tenturare, to die or to color. Tenuare, to make small, lean, gante,
thin, little or slender, to diminish or grow less, to pine, to make feeble.
Tenuatione, a making thin or slender. Tenuita, slendernes, gantnes, thinnes,
leannes, smalnes. Tenuo, lean, meagre, gant, thin, small, slender, sparing,
spinie, little. Tenuta, a holding, a tenure, a possessing, an inioying. Tenuto.
Look Tenere. Tenzonare, to strive, to quarrel, to contend, to brawle.
Tenzone, a fraie, a quarrel, a brawle, a contention, a strife. Teofania, vel
Theofania. Teogonia, as Theogonia. Teologia, Teologo, as Theologia, as
Theologo. Teologizzare, as Theologizzare. Teorica, as Theorica. Teorico, as
Theorico. Tepefare, as Tepidire. Also to heat or warm. Tepidamente, meanly
warm, between hot and cold, coldly, faintly, nothing earnestly. Tepidario,
the entry into the stew and first chamber or baine, where they were wont to
wash themselves in warm water. Also the baine, stew or hot house it self.
Tepidezza, luke warmth, faintnes, slownes, meannes, between hot and cold.
Tepidire, disco, dito, to become hot, to make lukewarm. Also to cool, to
allay, to assuage, to mittigate, to appease. Also to faint or grow slow.
Tepidita, as Tepidezza. Tepido, lukewarm, neither hot nor cold, mean
between cold and hot. Also faint, slow, or cold and no thing earnest in a
matter. Tepore, warmth, warmnes, or heat. Terapestica, remediale medicina.
Terazza, as Terraccia. Terdecimo, the thirteenth in number. Terdura, a kind of
poor men's meat like a hasty pudding. Terebinto, the tree that yields the
gum called turpentine which is fair, clear, and thicker then the liquid rozen
gathered from the bark of the fur tree, which now is commonly used for
turpentine. Teredine, a little worm that eats wood. Also a moth that eats
clothes. Also a handworme. Teretro, a kind of instrument wherewith a thing is
made round. Terfez, a kind of root or herb. Tergemino, threefolde, triple,
one of, or the three borne at one time. Tergere, tergo, tergei, tergiuto, to
burnish, to polish, to smooth, make clean or scour. Also to retire or draw
back. Also to cover, to shroude, to shelter, to back. Also to dry. Tergiuto,
burnished, polished, smoothed, retired, or drawn back, covered, shrouded,
backed, dride. Tergiduttore, a sergeant or captain of a band, that commonly
follows his troops. Tergirino, a thin wall or partition of bushes, rods,
reed^, railes or pailes. Tergiuersare, to turn back, or ones tail unto, to
shrink from, to avoid from, to deny, to overthwart, to wrangle, to run away
and fight still. Also to hafte and by no means to come to any reasonable
point. Tergiuersatione, hafting, ouerthwarting, a none-sute in the law when
the plaintiff lets his matter fall. Tergiuersatore, he that withdraws and
shrinketh back and will not hold to a point, a hafter, a wrangler, a dodger,
one that runs back and yet will not give over. Tergo, the back of a man,
behind. Also a man's shoulders. Also any hinder part. Also a hide or a skin.
Teriaca, treakle against poison. Terigio, as Pterigio. Terigode, as Pterigode.
Terigoide, as Pterigoide. Terligia, Terlisa, a kind of sackcloth worn in
doublets and hosen in Italy. Terlino, a bird called a Kurlue. Term, Look
Therme. Also a little worm that eats flesh or wood, a maggot, a gentle.
Termentina, a kind of gum called turpentine. Terminalie, feasts instituted to
the honor of the god Terminus, and kept in February at the eight cale^ds of
March, because that between Terminalie and Regifugio the odd days of the
year were put in. Terminale, of, or belonging or serving to bounds and limits.
Used also for a mearstone, a land mark, a stone set up to show the limits of
fields and lands. Terminare, to decide, to end, to limite, to bound, to finish,
to determine, to define, to appoint or assign bounds or marches.
Terminatamente, determinately, conclusiuely. Terminatione, a bounding, a
limiting, a termination, a limitation, a defining, a deciding. Termine, a
term, a bound, a limite, an end, an aim, a gole, a definition, a mearestone,
a precinct, a sign declaring one man's land from another, the end or compass
of a thing. Termine di febbre, a fit of an ague. Terminto, an herb so called.
Also a hard and red swelling rising in the crown of the head, in the privy
parts, or arm pits, our chirurgions call it a little loaf, or manchet.
Ternale, as Ternario. Ternaria, the name of a magistrate in Venice who has
charge of the custom of oils. Ternario, of three, consisting of the number of
three. Terni, the cast of two treas upon the dice, consisting of three.
Ternire, to tarnish, to darken any glass with breathing upon it. Ternita, a
trinity, a number of three. Terpentina, as Termentina. Terra, the element
called earth, any ground, earth, country, province, region, land, soil,
town, city, borough, hamlet, or village. Also a freeholde, a copie-holde, a
farm, a manor. Also of the verb Tenere, he shall hold. Used also for the
whole world. Terrabasa, a foul called a Bittore. Terra ferma, the firm or
maine land. Terra di San Paolo, as Terra Samia. Terra lenia, as Terra
sigillata. Terra Samia, a kind of earth against poison, that mountibankes use
in Italy. Terra sigillata, a kind of earth against poison. Terra franca, a
free town, a commonwealth. Also a freehold. Terra neola, a bird called a
bunting. Terraccia, a terrace, a leads, an open walk, a gallorie, a flat
roof, or seeling, or floor. Also as Rauellino. Also a little hold or keep
where a sentinel does sit to watch. Terrracciano, a towns man, a towns
dweller. Terraglio, as Terrapieno. Terragna, a mud-wall, or any thing made of
mud, earth, or such like things. Terragnolo, heavy going, dull, drooping,
drowsy, without metal, as some heavy going horses are. Terrandola, a bird
called a bunting. Terrantola, a salamander. Also a bunting. Also as Tarantola.
Terrapieno, a skonce, a blocke-house, a dyke, a bull-warke, or other fence and
fortification walled or filled with earth. Also the earth that is rampired and
filled up unto the inside of any wall, bulwark, or rampire. Terrapianato, made
even and level to the ground, razed. Also ensconced, or filled up with earth
or mudde. Also entrenched or enflanked with earth or barikados. Terrazza, as
Terracia. Terrazzano, as Terracciano. Terrazzare la terra, to grub, to break
or harrow land. Terrefare, to terrify, to put in fear, to fraie, to affright.
Terremoto, an earthquake, or shaking of the earth. Terrena camera, a low
ground chamber. Also earthly. Terreno, earthly, made of earth, terrestrial,
worldly, low to the ground, that lives or keeps on land. Also ground, land,
soil, earth, or mound. also a field or a land. Terreo, as Terrestre.
Terrestre, of, or belonging to the earth, or land, that lives on the earth,
terrestrial, earthly. Terrestreita, earthlines, the nature or quality of the
earth. Terribile, terrible, dreadful, horrible, ghastly, cruel, fell, to be
feared. Terribilita, terriblenes, horror, gastlines, cruelty. Terricciuola, a
little town, village, city, borough, or hamlet. Terrigeneo, borne, begotten,
or bred, or engendered of earth. Terrieri, townes-men, towne-dwellers.
Territorio, a territory, a circuit, a precinct, a dominion, or compass of
land, lying within the bounds of a city. Terrore, terror, dread, horror,
fright, or gast^ines, fear. Terroso, full of earth, sand or gravel, earthie,
grettie, durtie. Tersita, neatenes, cleanlines, smoothnes, polishednes. Terso,
neat, pure, clean, unspotted, smooth, polished. Tertenere, tengo, tenui,
tenuto, to entertain. Tetrenuto, entertained. Tertenimento, entertainment.
Tertiana, a tertian ague, as Terzana. Tertiare, to third the pike either to
bear the same upon his shoulders, or to charge the same ouer-hande. Also to
third out. Tertio, the third. Also a little regiment of soldiers. Tertufalo,
a puff or todestoole full of wind. Also a swelling, a blister, a bunch or
knob of flesh. Tertufo, as Tertufalo. Terza, the hour that priests call prime.
Also the third in number. Terzana, the mizen sail of a ship. Some call it the
poope sail. Also a tertian ague, or any thing that comes by thirds.
Terzanello, a kind of slight silken stuff made of feret or filosella silk.
Terzare, as Interzare, as Tertiare. Terzaria, a payment or taxing of the third
part of any thing. Terzaruolo, a mizen or poope sail. Also a little firkin, a
rundlet, a tierce, a thirden-deale. Terzeruolo, a mizen or poope sail.
Terzetto, a terset of rymes, rymes that ryme three and three. Terzino, as
Terzetto. Terzo, the third in number, as Tertio. Terzolo, a tassell gentle of a
hawk. Terzoletto, a mizen or poope sail. Also the foreman or jack of a cast
of merlins. Terzulo, as Terzolo. Terzuoletto, as Terzoletto. Tesca. Also
Tesqua, rough places that lie untilled and vnoccupide, places hard to come up
to, where the Augures practiced their divination by flying of birds. Teschio,
the head or skull of any dead creature. Tese, a general or indefinite question
or argument. Teso, spread, extended, displaide, tended, outstretched, pitched,
bent, stiff-standing, Look Tendere. Tesoreggiare, Tesoro, Look Thesoreggiare.
Tessandro, any kind of web, or weauing. Tessarella, as Tessitrice. Tessaretta,
as Tessitrice. Tessaro, Tessaruolo, a weauer, Look Tessere. Tessella, a small
piece that men make checker work with in tables or boords. Tessellare, to make
or work checker-worke, or inlaid work. Tessera, a thing in every part square
as a dye, a dye to play with. Also a watchword, a privy sign or token
whereby spies and enemies are discerned from companions and fellows in arms,
and it was either a dumb sign or uttered with the voice: among our sentinels
it is called the word, or watchword. Also a token of lead, leather, or other
thing which was wont to be given to the people as a dole. Also a tale, tallie
or skore whereon the number of things delivered are marked, such as our bruers
and bakers and checker-men use to skore upon. Also a geometrical figure
fouresquare. Also the name of a tool that farriers use. Also some part about a
yoke. Also a sign, a note, a mark, or token: Also a kind of device of iron
called tarriers to play and pass away the time withal. Also some part of a
weauers loome. Tesseracosto, the time of forty days before and after a man's
birth, wherein the mother might not be partaker of the holy ceremonies, which
time being expired they celebrated a feast called Tesseracosto. Tesserario, a
serieant or watch-maister, or he that gives or brings the watchword among
soldiers. Tessere, tesso, tessei, tessuto, to weaue, to work, to complot, to
contriue, to devise, to compact, to make, to build, to write, to compose, to
gather, to frame together. Tesserino, a weauer. Also a kind of fine stuff
like silk mockado, or calimanco. Tessuto, wouen, wrought, completted,
contrived, devised, compacted, Look Tessere. Tessimento, a weauing, a web, a
complot, a devise, a compact, a working together, Look Tessere. Tessitore, a
weauer, a contriuer, a complotter. Also a kind of monstrous fish, Look
Tessere. Tessitrice, a woman weauer, used also for a spinner. Tessitura, as
Tessimento. Tesso, has bin used for Testo. Testa, a head, a pate, a skonce, a
nole, a test, a testerne, a chief, a beginning, a spring. Also wouen, wrought,
or compact together. Also anciently used for a shell. Also an earthen pot or
gallie cup. Also burnt tile or brick. Also a piece of broken bone, a sharde of
a pot or tile. Testabile, that by the law may bear witness. Testaccia, a
ioulthead, a shallow skonce, a great nole. Testacei animali, all manner of hard
shell fishes as oysters and scallops. Testaceo, made of tyle, brick, or earth
baked. Testa di cane, the herb called dogshead. Testagrossa, a kind of bird.
Also a ioulthead, a loggarhead, a gross pate. Testamento, a testament, or last
will. Testamentario, of or belonging to a last will and testament. Also a
forger and falfifyer of dead men's wills and testaments. Also a scriuener or
writer of men's last wills and testaments. Testardia, headines, wilfulnes,
stiffneckednes, self-conceit, or opinion, testines. Testardo, headie, wilful,
stifnecked, testie, one that has a head, a testerne of a bed, a self-conceited
fellow. Testare, to bear witness, to testify, to attest, to make ones will or
testament, to call to witness, to show and declare manifestly, to tell openly,
to bear record. Testato, borne witness, testified, attested, made ones will and
testament, as Testardo. Also openly proved and known of all men. certain,
sure, and as it were tried by witness, approved, allowed, confirmed, witnessed.
Testareccio, as Testardo. Testariccio, as Testardo. Testatione, an attestation
or bearing witness. Testatore, a witness, an attestator, a testifier, he that
makes a testament. Testatrice, a woman-witnes, or attester. Test, now, even
now, at this instant, or a little past. Also a witness, a testis, a giver of
evidence, one that is privy to a thing. Test, certain eminent parts behind
Saloide in the extreme part of the brain, which the Anatomists so called,
because they are like the stones of a man. Test, Test, even very now, but a
very little since. Testericcio, testie, fond, humorous, opinatiue, stifnecked.
Testeso, used of Dante for Test. Testesso, thee self, thou thy self.
Testicciuolo, a little pretty head, pate, skonce or nole. Testicola di cane,
the herb rag-woort or gander-goose. Testicolato, that has stones or cods.
Testicoli, the cods or stones of any living creature. Testiculi, as Testicoli.
Testiera, a testern or head of any thing as of a bed, a headpiece or helmet or
caske. Also an obstinate, selfe-conceited, testie or wilful woman. Also the
headstall of a bridle, a headstraine. Testiere, as Testardo. Testificare, to
testify, to bear witness, to confirm, to bear record. Testificatione, a
testification or witness, a witness bearing, a proouing by witness, a testimony,
a declaration. Testificatore, a testifier or witness, he that bears witness.
Testimonianza, a testimony or witness, an evidence or a deposition.
Testimoniare, to testify, to witness. Testimonio, a testimony or a witness, an
evidence or deposition. Testina, a little subtle head. Testio, as Teschio.
Testione, a ioult-head, a logger-head, a grosse-pate, a dull-skonce. Testo, a
text, an argument, a theme or ground of any subject. Also the test of silver
or gold. Also any kind of pot-lid. Also a kind of melting pot that goldsmiths
use. Also any thing that is wouen or wrought cunningly. Also a style or the
manner of ones words and speaking. Testone, a coin so called in France, worth
eighteen pence sterling. Also as Testaccia. Testore, as Tessitore. Testoso,
headie, wilful, testie, headstrong, humorous, opinatiue, self-conceited.
Testrice, as Tessitrice. Testudine, a tortoise, a shell-crab, a lobster, a
crab-fish, a shell-toade or any great snaile of land or sea. also the roof or
vault of a house which consists of two arches, the one going crosse-wise over
the other. Also the belly of a lute, or a lute because it resembles a tortoise
shel. Also a warlike engine or fence made of boordes covered over with raw
hides, which served against fire and stones flung against soldiers; under the
which they might safely assault the walls. Also a target fence which was a
close-holding and ioining together of targets over head like a roof, wherewith
the footmen being defended, did bear off the thick shot of arrows or flinging
of stones. Also a great shield, target or paluoise. Testugine, as Testudine.
Testuma, as Testudine. Testura, as Tessimento. Tetanico, that has the cricke
in the neck or a kind of cramp which holds the neck so stiff that it
cannot bow. Tetano, a kind of cramp happening to the body in such sort that it
can neither bow, bend nor stir no way. Tetanotro, a medicine used to take away
wrimples from the skin and to make it smooth. Tetra, the number of sower in
greek, but used in composition of many words. Tetracordo, an instrument of
four strings. Tetradoro, four handfuls broad every way. Tetradramma, a coin
of greece of four dragmes. Tetragano, any thing four square, a quadrangle.
Tetragone, as Tetragano. Tetragramato, of four letters. Also the great name of
God or Jehovah. Tetramelo, a meeter of four feet. Tetramente, hidiously,
ghastly, stinkingly, darkely, horribly, grisly. Tetrastico, a sentence of four
verses. Tetrasilabo, of four syllables. Tetrametro, a meeter of four feet.
Tetraptoti, declined in four cases. Tetrarca, a government of a fourth part.
Tetricita, sowernes or sadness of countenance. Tetrico, lowtish, crabbed, sour
or sad to look. Tetrinare, to cry as a duck does. Tetrigometra, the mother or
matrice of grasshoppers. Tetrigonia, a kind of small crickets or the
grasshoppers. Tetro, hideous, dark, pitchie, foul, ghastly, lowering, louting,
duskie, black, horrible, abominable, naught, mischievous, stinking. Tetrobolo,
a coin in greece of four oboles. Tetta, a pap, a teat, a dug. Tettare, to
suck or draw a dug. Te^tina, a little dug, pap or teat. Tetto, the roof, ridge
or cover of a house, be it of slate, lead, tile or board. Also taken for a
house or roof. Also for a deck of a ship. Tettonare, to roof or cover a
house. Tettonato, (...) or covered a house, a roof, a cover, or a pent-house.
Teucrio, an herb like Germander, great or wild Germander. Teuerio, a kind of
venomous herb. Teuertino, as Tiuertino. Teurgia, Sort di cabala. Teurgo,
Sort di cabalista. Tezzadaaia, a house or little shelter to put corn in in
time of rain. Thalasio, a sea-water-greene color. Thalasseglie, as Potamanti.
Thalassino, as Thalasio. Thalmudista, a professor of the chaldeans or Egyptians
old laws. Thalofori, bringers of branches or boughs. Thapsia, an herb like
Dill, which being cut yields a juice as white as milk. Thargelie feste,
feasts and games in honor of Apollo. Theamede, a stone which contrary to the
adamant, puts away iron from it. Theangelide, a kind of herb. Theatinerie,
hypocritical friars tricks. Theatini, a kind of order of friars, dissembling
purity. Theatro, a theater which was a place made half round where people
assembled to behold players, a stage or scaffold, a spectacle or common play,
an open place where all men do see and behold, or wherein one shows and
declares. Theletteri, she-ferne, or female fern. Thelico, a stone like unto
an olive stone, which drunk breaks the stone in the kidney. Theligonio, an
herb having berries like an olive, called the grace of God. Thelifono, an
herb, the root whereof does kill scorpions. Thema, a theme, an argument, a
matter supposed to be written or spoken of, a subject or ground to speak or
write of. Also a figure set by astronomers, containing the state of heaven and
the planets at any certain time, an horoscope, the consideration of the time
of ones nativity or birth under this or that planet. Themologia, Look
Ethimologia. Thenare, the fleshie part of the hand, between the thumb and the
middle finger. Theogonia, the beginning of the gods, their generation and
beginning, or original. Theologare, to preach divinity, or holy things, or
reason of divinity. Theologia, divinity, a profession of holy things, reason
and science of holy things. Theologico, pertaining to divinity, theological.
Theologizzare, as Theologare. Theologo, a divine, or preacher of divinity, a
professor of divinity or holy things. Theomantia, a kind of divination.
Theophilo, loving God. Theorema, a theorem, a speculation, any axiom or
undoubted truth of an art, but particularly that which respects speculation
more then practice. Theoretico, belonging to contemplation. Theoria,
contemplation, deep study, a sight or beholding. Theorica, as Theoria,
Theorica Astronomia, that part of Astronomy that gives the view of the
motions of the planets by their orbs. Theorico, belonging to contemplation or
view. Also theoricall rather then practike. Also a speculator or contemplative
man. Thereo, the bird called a robin red-brest. Theriaca, treacle, a remedy
against poison. Also of a viper or other cruel beast. Theriomata, an
vlceration or sore about the privy members, whereby all the parts about them
are corrupted. Therionarca, an herb that if wild beasts do but tread on they
become senceles and drowsy, it has a flower like a rose. Therme, waters
naturally warm, hot bathes. Thero, the name of a dog, as one would say
kill-bucke, or fierce look. Thesaurizzare, as Thesoreggiare. These, a general
or indefinite question, or argument. Thesoriere, a treasurer. Thesoreggare, to
lay up treasure, to hoord up riches. Thesoreria, a treasury or place where
treasure is kept, a storehouse, an inward or secret place. Thesoro, treasure,
riches, wealth, abundance. Thessalico, a kind of purple color. Theta, the
name of a greek letter. Also a mark of condemnation to death. Thimba, as
Thimbra. Thimbra, the herb winter sauorie. Thimi, a kind of warts growing
about one, that have a small root, and are somewhat long and big. Thimo, the
herb Time. Also a kernel under the canell bone, which in men is slender, and
in beasts thick. Thifone, a violent whirle-winde. Thirsite, a stone like unto
coral, which used in drink procures sleep. Thiriatino, a kind of bluish
color that painters use. Thirso, the stalk, stock, or stem of any herb.
Also a iauelin wrapped about with iuie, borne of harlots in Bachus his feasts
and sacrifices. Thoro, a bull, as Tauro. Thorace, as Torace. Thracia, a
flintstone, or a kind of black Agath, of a wonderful nature, for being
steeped in water it burns, and sprinkled with oil it quenches. Thridacea,
the female mandragora. Thridace, sper-hauk herb, or hauk-weed. Thrissa, a kind
of fish. Throno, a throne, or seat of majesty, a seat of a king or emperor.
Also a kingdom. Thu, incense, or frankincense. also ground pine, or field
cipres. Ti, thee, to thee, from thee. Also tho^. Tiade, as Ptiade. Tiame, an
oven or a furnace. Tiano, an oven or a furnace. Tiara, a turbant, or round
wreath of linen for the head such as the Turks use to wear. Tibia, a flute, a
recorder, a pipe. Also the shanke or shinne-bone of a leg which comprehends
all that space between the knee and the foot and contains two bones, of
which the greater has the name of Tibia. used also for a thrashing of corn.
Tibiale, a leg harness or greaue. Tibiare, to sound upon a flute, a pipe, or a
recorder. Also to thrash corn, or winnow it. Tibiatore, a piper upon flutes,
recorders or pipes, a thrasher. Tiburino, a monstrous seafish that has two
ranks of sharp teeth. Tibidrago, a kind of strong spanish Sack so called, we
call it Rubiedauie. Tibilustri, days in which men went with trumpets as it
were in procession about their lands. Tibribastio, gibbrish, pedlers french, or
rogues language. Tichirnabo, a great titimouse or ox-eie. Tiella, Tiello, hold
it, take it. Also a tarte pan, a pan to bake a tarte in. Tiemo. Tiepidezza,
as Tepidezza. Tiepidire, as Tepidire, Tiepido, as Tepido. Tiermite, a kind of
wild olive. Tifa, an herb growing by the water. Tifolare, as Strillare.
Tifole, as Strillo. Tiglia, as Teglia, as Tilio. Tigna, as Tegna, as Tarma.
Tignoso, as Tegnoso. Tigname, the lote tree. Tignato, moth or woorme-eaten.
Tigno, a meale-worme. Tignola, as Tignuola. Tignosuzzo, as Foramello. Tignuola,
a moth that breeds in woollen clothes. Also a little worm that breeds in
corn. Tigrame, a kind of sweet gum or perfume. Tigre, a tigre, a wild
beast of a wonderful swiftnes. Tilia, Tilio, Teglia, Tiglia, a tree which
bears a round fruit as big as a bean, in which are seeds like to annis
seeds. Some call it the linden, or teile tree. Timallo, Timalo, a fish called a
flower, goodly to look upon, and sweet in taste and smell. Ti^ariotti, such
men as live upon timarros, as hold land in knight service under the great
Turk. Timarro, lands, livings, farms or states of new conquered lands
distributed and holden in knights service under the great Turk, by well
deserving soldiers and captains. Timbade, witches and sorceresses which keep
about tombs and graves, and cut off some member from dead bodies which they
abuse to their sorceries. Timbo, a tomb, a grave or monument. Timelea, a shrub
bearing a kind of pepper. Timidezza, as Timidita. Timidire, disco, dito, to
be, to make, or become timorous, fearful or faint, to quail. Timidita,
timiditie, fear, dread, awe, fearefulnes, bashfulnes, timorousnes. Timido,
timorous, fearful, awefull, faint, bashful, falseharted. Timiopoli,
ingrossers or regraters of markets, which make victual dear and scarce.
Timmote, with limbs shrunken up. Timo, the herb time. Also a kind of fish.
Also a kernel under the canell bone both in men and beasts. Timolo, a kind of
water-snake having six teeth, which swimmeth on her back. Timonare, to steare
or guide a ship. also to waggle the tail as some birds do. Timone, the stern,
helm, or rudder of a ship, the beam of a wagon or waine, the draught tree
whereon the yoke hangs. also a yoke, an axeltree, a stake or a pole, a rafter
laid overthwart. and among riders Timone is used for the riders hand that
holds the bridle, for that with it he gouernes the horse. Timoniere, the
steares-man of a ship. Timore, fear, dread, awe, fearefulnes, scare or doubt
of some evil motion. Timoroso, fearful, timorous, dreadful, awefull.
Timpanista, a drummer, a tabourer, a drum-player or drumster. Timpanite, a
timpanie or dry dropsy, a dry timpanie or dropsy rising of much windines
gathered together between the skin Peritoneo and the bowels, which if it be
smitten upon with the palm of the hand makes a noise like a drum. Timpano,
a timbrell, a tabour, a drum, a drumslade, the name of a printers tool called
a timpine. also a bell-pearle fashioned like a bell. Also the watermill wheel
that takes and delivers water in turning. Timpano a volta, Look Campanello.
Timpana piano, Look Campanello. Tina, a tun, a bruers, a vintners, or dyers
fat, or vat. Tinaccio, as Mastello, as Tina. Tinacciuolo, as Mastello. Tinazzo,
as Mastello. Tinca, a fish called a tench. Also a milkesop, or fresh water
soldier, such as thirty must go to dig up a turnep. Tincone, as Tencone.
Also a tool belonging to a chimnie-sweeper. Also a man's privy member.
Tindaridi, used for the twins Castor and Pollux. Tinella, a tray, a milke-pan,
a washing-bowle, a little tub. Tinellanti, ordinary serving men that never go
farther then the hall or buttrie. Tinello, a tub, a fat, a hutch, a bing, a
bruing fat or vessel, a bathing tub. Also a common dyning hall where servants
use to dyne in a gentleman's house. Tinge, as Ptinge. Also he dies or
colors. Tingere, tingo, tinsi, tinto, to dye into any hue or color, to dip
in color. Tinger chi falla, a kind of Christmas game in Italy. Tinnito, as
Tintino. Tino, as Tina. Tinoccio, Tinozzo, a great wooden tun, or vat.
Tinosa, as Tinella. Tinnunculo, a kind of bird. Tinore, as Tenore. Tinta, a
dye, a hue, a dying, a color, or coloring. Also the water of a precious
stone. Tintalhora, a wanton, wily, tempting wench. Tintene, a kind of
musical instrument without strings. Also a little shrill sounding bell.
Tintinante, ringing, iangling, sounding, clattring, tinkling, that ringeth and
makes a sound, sharp in sound, shrill ringing, tingling. Tintinabulo, as
Tintene. Tintinare, to ring, to iangle, to sound shrill, to tinkle or tingle,
to gingle as metals or bells. Tintinamento, as Tintino. Tintinire, nisco, nito,
as Tintinare. Tintino, a shrill, sounding, or iangling of a basin or bells, the
tinkling that tinkers use, the clattring of armor, a glowing or sound in the
ears. Tinto, dyed or colored, dipped or washed in any color. Tintore, a dyer
of colors. Tintoria, a dyers worke-house, the trade of dying. Tintura, a dying
or coloring. Tiorba, a kind of musical instrument used among country
people. Tipha, a kind of corn like rye called typh wheat, or wheat of Rome.
Tipha acquatica, a flower that flies away like the down of a thistle, called
water-torch, cats-taile, red mace, douch down, marsh beetle, or marsh pestle.
Tiphone, a great violent whirlewinde. Tipho, arrogancy, or haughtines of
mind. Tipico, mystical, as it were shadowed. Tipo, a tipe, a figure, an
example, a form, a draught, a likeness, a shadow of a thing, a pattern, mould
or sample whereby the image-maker or mason notes his stone, or melts his
brass. Tipocosmia, a type or figure of the whole world. Tipografia, the art
of printieg of books. Tipografo, a printer of books. Tipulla, a kind of
water-spider with six feet, which runs on the water without sinking. Tira
longa, a kind of boys play used in Italy. Tirannia, tyranny, cruelty, as
Tirannide. Tirannicida, a murderer or killer of a tyrant. Tirannicidio, the
murdering or killing of a tyrant. Tirannico, tyrannical, tyrannous, cruel.
Tirannide, tyranny, cruelty, a cruel or violent rule or government for
private commodity, and not the public weal. Tirannizzare, to tyrannize or
play the tyrant. Tiranno, a tyrant, a murderer, a cruel ruler or Lord. In old
time it was taken in good part for a King. It has also been used for a kind of
faulkon or eagle called a nine murderer. Tirannoso, as Tirannico. Tirante,
breeches or hosen in pedlers French or rogues language. Tirare, to draw, to
pull, to hale, to pluck, to attract, to tugge, to shrink, to bring or lead
toward one, to withdraw or retire. Also to throw, to cast, to fling, to
hurl, to darte, to shoot, to stretch, to sling, or pitch from one. Also to
defer, to dilate, to protract, to prolong, to wyerdrawe, to drive off, to
extend. Also to entice, to persuade or allure. Also to wrest and draw to
himself. Also a draught or drawing. Also to kick or winze as a horse. Tirato,
drawn, pulled, haled, plucked, retired, thrown, cast, flung, hurled, stretched,
shot, shrunk, tugd, pitched. Also a nice, coye, scrupulous, pure, precise,
wyerdrawing, selfe-conceited fellow, attracted. Look Tirare. Tirata, a
draught, a pull, a pluck, a throw, a cast, a fling, a hurl, a shot. a
shrinking, a stretching, a haling, a retyring, an attracting, a dash. Look
Tirare. Tiratiuo, drawing, attractiue, haling Look Tirare. Tiratore, a drawer,
a puller, a haler, a plucker, a thrower, a caster, a flinger, a hurler, a
shooter, a stretcher, a shrinker. Look Tirare. Tirar' inanzi, to draw forward.
Tirarcostiero, to shoot sidelin or wide. Tirar' indietro, to draw or shrink
back. Tirar' acqua, to draw water. Tirar le calcie, to pull off ones hosen, id
est, to die, to yield up the ghost. Tirar' un petto, to let a fart. Tirar
sotto, to draw, pull, or hale under. Tirar un sasso, to hurl, to fling, to
cast or throw a stone. Tirar di bocca, to bear too hard upon the hit as some
headstrong horses do. Tirar dritto, to shoot right, to draw straight. Tirar
da canto, to draw aside. Tirar la barca, to hale or towe a boat. Tirar la
barra, to throw or pitch the bar. Tirar l'anciana, to tug, to hale, to draw
or tow a barge with cords against the stream. Tirar d'arme, to play at sense.
Tirar di costiero, to shoot wide. Tirar per i crini, to draw, to tug or pull
by the hairs. Tirar d'arco, to shoot in a bow. Tirar' vna coreggia, to let a
guirding fart. Tirar d'arteglieria, to shoot off great ordinance. Tirar la
paga, to receive or draw a pay. Tiraro, as Carruccio. Tira oro, a gold drawer,
that draws gold wire. Tirelirare, to sing or chirp as a lark. Tireo, a stone
of the nature of the stone Scirio. Tiremo. Tirimattare, a kind of play at
tables like unto tick-tacke. Tiro, a shoot, a cast, a throw, a flinging, a
hurling, a darting, a hurl, a fling, a shot, a tire, a reach, a distance, a
stretching from one. Also a drawing, a pulling, a pull, a haling, a tugging, a
pluck, a plucking, a shrinking, a twitch, a twinging, a twang, a draught to or
toward one. also a prank, a feate, a part, a trick, a knack, a devise, a
slight, a conceit, a drift or aim at a thing. Also a stroke, a blow, a bang, a
nip. Also a quip, a scoff, a tant. Also a shoot out of a bow or of a caliuer,
a stones cast, a cast at dice, attire of ordinance. a draught at chesse, a
trick at cards, a trick of youth, a pranke of knauerie, a merry pranke, a
cunning feat, an odd part, a draught or line in painting or drawing. a nip on
the head. a venie at fence, a hit or hitting to the quick. a yarke or yerke
with a whip. a kick or winzing of a horses heels. a slash over the face. a
draught, suppe or whiffe of drink or Tobacco. a dash given suddenly. Also a
shrinking of sinews called of cunning ferriers Tiro di nerui. Also a kind of
serpent. Look Tirare. Also a fresh water soldier he that first enters into
experience or practice of any feate, art or science, a young beginner or
nouice. Tirocinio, the first exercise in any thing, an apprentiship, a first
beginning. Also unskillfulness, simplicity, lack of experience and wisdom.
Tiro di nerui, a shrinking of sinews. Italian riders say it is a disease in a
horse which comes of great cold and heat; whereby the great sinew in the
neck is so restrained as the horse cannot open his mouth: there is no English
name for it. Tiromantia, a divination by cheese. Tirone, a young fresh water
soldier, a milke-sop, a faint hearted wretch. Tirreno, a stone which being
whole swimmeth, but being broken every part thereof sinketh. Tirsi, as Thirso.
Also the circle without the wall of a town, wherein men may walk for their
solace. Tisana, Tysan or barley water given to the sick. Also Ptisana. Tisbina,
a kind of child's play in Italy. Tisichezza, pursines or shortness of breath a
cough of the lungs. Tisichire, chisco, chito, to grow short winded, to become
pursie. Tisico, pursie, short or broken winded, having the ptisicke. Tisicuzzo,
somewhat pursie or short winded. Tisigo, as Tisico. Tistera, the cape of any
garment, a hood of a cloak. Tita, as Tetta, a tittle in writing, a whit, a jot.
Titalora, a gull, a fool, a ninnie, a doult. Titillare, to tickle, to prouok
or move pleasantly. Titillatione, a tickling, a stirring or a pleasant moving.
Titillico, a tickling. Also ticklish. Titilloso, ticklish. Titimaglio, as
Titimalo. Titimalo, spurge herb. Also the herb sea-lettuce, woolfes milk or
milke-thistle. Titispissa, a bird called a wagtaile. Titolare, to entitle, to
title, to surname, to nickname. Also titulare, consisting of titles. Titolato,
entitled, titled, surnamed, nicknamed, a man having titles or dignities.
Titolatione, an entitling, a titulation, a surnaming. Titolo, a title or
inscription of a work or act, a surname, a name of dignity, a title, prick
or point used in writing. Titubante, stumbling, reeling, tripping, staggring,
stutting, stammering, quiuering, wavering. Titubare, to stumble, to reele, to
trip, to stagger in speaking or going, to slut, to stammer, to falter, to
quiver, to tremble, to waver, to miss, to err. Titubatione, a stumbling, a
reeling, a tripping, a staggring, a flutting, a stammering, a faltring, a
quiuering, a trembling, a wavering, etc. Titulare, as Titolare. Titulatione, as
Titolatione. Titulo, as Titolo. Tiuertino, a kind of stone to build withal.
Also a kind of marble. Tizzare, to stir up the fire, to eg on, to irritate, to
provoke. Tizzo, a firebrand. Tizzonare, as Tizzare. Tizzone, as Tizzo.
Tizzoniera, a fire fork to stir up the firebrands with. Tlaguace, a kind of
wild beast that carries her young ones in a pouch or bag under her belly.
Tlasi, a disease or brusing in a man's stones or cods. Tlaspi, the herb called
country mustard or raifort. To, take, hold, catch, take to thee. Also thine,
or thine own, as Tuo. Also he takes. Toca, a kind of bird in India of the
bigness of a rooke, with a white breast and his bill gilt. Tocca, a touch, or a
touching. Toccadiglio, a game at tables like ticktacke. Toccadoro, a kind of
tinsell of gold. Toccare, to touch, to feel. to appertain, to belong unto, to
join near to, to fall to ones lot. to strike, to smite, to hit, to move or
grieve, to rub. Also to quip, to taunt, to take up. Also to write, to speak or
mention a thing. Tocca auoi, it touches, it concerns, it belongs to you,
it falls to your lot. Toccare li tasti, to touch the keys or frets of any
instrument, to touch to the quick. Toccarla mano, to touch, to feel or take by
the hand, to shake hands. Toccar' ad altri, to belong, to appertain or fall to
others lot. Toccar' il polso, to feel or touch ones pulse. Toccare sul viuo,
to touch to the quick. Toccata, a touch, a touching. Toccato d' oro, as Tocca
d' oro. Tocchetti, a kind of minced meat, shread, sliced, or cut in collops
or steakes. Also a kind of weight in Italy. Tocco, a touch, a feeling. Also
touched, felt. Also stricken, smitten, blasted, inspired. Also a piece, a scrap,
a collop, a slice, or mammock, a cob. Also a venie at fence, a hit. Also a nod,
a beck, a sign, a glance. Also a touch stone. Also a child's play used in
Italy. Tocco di campana, a knock, a stroke, a knell, or peale, or toule upon
the bells. Toculare, to touch, to feel. Tofo, a kind of sandy, soft,
mouldring stone. Toga, a gown, a robe, or long garment, which garment the
Romans did always wear in peace. Togato, gowned, or having a gown on. Also
that wears a gown. Togliere, tolgo, tolsi, tolto, to take, to receive, to
accept. Also to take away. Togliere a fitto, to take to farm, to rent.
Togliere il vanto, to deprive another of glory. Also to take upon, to boast
of. Togliere in iscambio, to mistake one for another. Togliere, a nuolo, to
hyre or take to hyre a ship, or a horse. Togliere, Passunto, to take the charge
or burden upon himself. Togna, a fishing rod. Also a flurt, a slut, a
driggledraggle. Tola, a board, a planke, a table. Toleone, Tolleone, an engine
to draw up water, called a sweep. Tolerabile, tolerable, indifferent, that may
be endured or borne withal, that may be suffered, or abidden. Tolerabilita, a
tolerablenes. Toleranza, toleration, suffrance, permission, patience, enduring,
abiding. Tolerare, to suffer, to endure, to tolerate, to permit, to bear with,
to abide. Also to nourish, sustain, or maintain himself. Toleratione, as
Toleranza. Toll, Tole, a waxen kernel or swelling in the jaws. Tollenone, an
engine to draw up water that has a great weight at the end, as Toleone.
Tollere, as Togliere. Tolleta, theft, larcenie, pilfring, purloyning, robbing.
Tolleto, as Tolleta. Tolto, taken, received, accepted. Look Togliere.
Tomacella, a kind of meat made of the pluck, giblets, or purtenances or
tripes of beasts, but properly that meat which we call olives of veale. Also
a kind of hogs pudding. Tomano, a coin in Persia worth about twenty
crowns. Tomara, Tomaia, the rande of a shoe. Some have taken it for the upper
leather. Tomare, to tumble, to rumble, to roll or fall down. Tomasella, as
Tomacella. Tomba, a tomb, a grave, a sepulcre, or hollow dark place. Tombare,
to entombe, to bury, or lay in a grave. Tombolare, to tumble or fall down
groueling. Tombolo, a tumbling trick. also a measure of corn about a bushel.
Tomicidenti, the foreteeth. Tomo, a downfall, a rumbling, a tumbling, a
rouling or falling down. Also a tome or volumne of a book where diverse works
of one author be divided into sundry parts. Tomolare, as Tomare. Tomolo, as
Tomo. Also a kind of measure. Tonaca, a coat or a iacket, or a sleeueles
coat. Also a petticote, or kirtle. Also a cover like a pill, a rind or a
skin. Also a kind of gilli-flower. Also a coat that covers the eye, whereof
there be four sorts, the first Cornea, which is white and resembles horn:
the second Vuea, which is like a grape kernel: the third Vitrea, a which
resembles glass: the fourth Christallina, which resembles crystal in
cleerenes. Tonante, thundering, rumbling, roaring, rattling, sounding, loud,
resounding, shrill. Used also for God. Tonare, to thunder, to rattle, to
rumble, to crackle, to make a great sound, or terrible noise, to roar. Also to
tune an instrument or voice, to accent, to sound. Tonarione, a certain shalme
with a sweet sound. Tonda, round, or made round. Tondare, to round, to
circle, to compass, to make round. Also as Tondere. Tondeggiare, to round or
make round. Tondere, tondo, tondei, tonduto, or toso, to poule, to notte, to
sheare, to cut, to pare round, to clip, to shave, to lop, to top, to crop, to
brouze, to bite, to nibble, to reap, to mow. Tondere moneta, to clip money.
Tonduto, toso, pouled, notted, shaven, shorn, cut, pared, clipped, lopped,
topped, cropped, brouzed, bitten, nibled, reaped, mowed. Tonditore, a sheare^,
a notter, a pouler, a barber, a clipper, a shauer, he that clippeth or
sheareth. Tonditura, a pouling, a notting, a clipping, a shauing, a rounding, a
cropping, a lopping, a shredding. Tondino, as Fondello. Tondo, round, or mad
round. a round, a circle, a compass, or a trencher, a plate, a little dish. Also
ones bum or arse. also a gross pate, a shallow brain, a loggarhead. Also a
fish with white and purple spots on his belly. Some have taken it for a lump
fish. Tondo senza pelo, a hearles round, id est, a young bum. Tonega, as
Tonica. Toneggiante, thundering, sounding, rumbling. Toneggiare, to thunder, to
rumble, to rattle. Tonello, any kind of tun or barell. Also a kind of a fish.
Tonia, a kind of flat fish. Tonica, a religious long garment, a cassocke, a
frocke, a coat, or iacket, as Tonaca. Tonicare, to gown, to put on a
cassocke, frocke, or iacket. Tonicella, a body coat, a waste-coate, a
petiecoate, a little frocke or cassocke. Tonina, a kind of meat made of
tunnie fish. Tonitrabile, which may thunder or crackle. Tonitrale, wherein is
thunder or a crackling noise. Tonitro, a thunder or a crackling. Tonnellata, a
tun weight, or burden. Tonnera, the fishing for tunnie. Tonnina, as Tonno.
Tonno, a fish called tunnie, which looks like bacon or porke. Tono, a thunder,
a rumbling noise, a tune, a note, an accent. Also as Tonno. Tonsile, that may
be shorn, clipped, rounded, notted, lopped, shred, or cropped. Tonsilla, an
inflammation of fiery heat about the jaws, a hard swelling. Tonsore, as
Tonditore. Tonsura, as Tonditura. Topaio, a rat-catcher. also a mouse-trap
Toparca, as Satrapo. Toparchia, the rule of a country. Topatio, Topazo, a
precious stone called a topace, of the color of gold, and shining much in
thick darkness. Topiaria, the seat of making images, or arbours in trees or
herbs. Also the tame or garden Branke-vrsine. Topica, topikes, books that
speak and entreat of places of inue^tio^ in and touching logike. Also
invention or finding out of arguments, the art of invention, a part of logike
noting the places of invention. Also pertaining to the places of inuenting
arguments. Topicello, a little mouse or rat. Topinari, the scratches in horses
pasterns. Topinara, a mole hill. Also a mole that lives under ground. Also a
rats nest. Topo, a mouse, a rat. Also a kind of fish. Topo alato, a night bat,
a reare-mouse. Topographia, a description of places. Topografo, a describer of
places. Topolino, a little mouse or rat. Topomarino, a fish that is always a
guide unto the whale. Toporagno, a kind of rat or mouse. Toporello, a little
mouse or rat. Toppa, the spring or ward of a springlocke. Also a latch or
wooden lock of poor country houses. Also a dripping pan. Toppare, to find
or meet withal by chance, to snatch or take away. Tor, as Togliere. Torace,
the breast or bulk of a man. Also the middle space between the neck and the
thighs. also a placket or a stomacher a breast plate or corselet for the body.
Torbante, as Turbante. Torbidare, to trouble, to confound, to disturb, to
puddle, to stir or make water thick. Torbidezza, thicknes, confusion,
muddines, disturbance. Torbidire, disco, dito, as Torbidare. Torbido, troubled,
troublous, not clear, muddie, thick, stirring, pudlie. Also turbulent,
tempestuous, fierce, busy. Also foul, gloomie, duskie, dark, obscure.
Torbinale, fashioned, broad above and small beneath like a top or a gigge.
Torbinare, as Turbinare. Torbine, as Turbine. Torbineo, as Turbineo. Torbo,
troubled, thick, muddie. Also as Turbine. Torbolare, as Torbidare. Torbolente,
turbulent, stirring, unquiet, stormy blustering, contentious, busy, seditious,
troublous, angry, full of contention, confused. Torbolenza, turbulence,
disturbance, unquietness, bluster, contention, sedition, trouble. Torcaletto, a
turners tool that he turns and works with. Also a little turn. Torce, a
torche or a link, a taper. Torcello, a wreath, or wispe of any thing rouled up
round, that women use to set upon their heads to carry any burden the easier
and better. Torcere, torco, torcei, torciuto, or torto, to wrest, to wreath, to
bend, to bow, to turn round, to twist, to wrap, to wind in, or whirle
about. Also to crispe, to curle and frizle. Also to retorte, to make crooked.
Also to wringe or press, or squeese out. Also to torture, to torment, to vex
or grieve. Torchia, a kind of measure of liquide things. Also a torche or a
link. Torchiellare, to press, to turn, or wrest a press. Torchiello, a
press such as chandlers use to press crabs. Torchiero, a torch bearer, or
torch maker. Torchino, blue color. Torchietto, a little torch or link. Also a
little press. Also a little pile, a stake, a beam, or post. Torchio, a
torch, or a link. Also a press to press wine with, or a printers press.
Torcia, a torch or a link. Torciaro, a torch bearer, or torch maker.
Torcibile, that may be turned, bended, wrested, that is pliable. Torcietta, a
little torch or link. Torcifecciole, the last dregs or lees wroong out of
grapes. Torcimano, an interpreter, or troucheman, a spokesman. Also a good
fellow, a good ladde. Torcimanno, an interpreter, or trouchman, a spokes-man.
Torcimento, as Torcitura. Torcino, a little torch or link. Also a little
press to press letters or napkins. Torcitoio, the pin, pegge, wrest, bar,
handle, or winder to turn a press with. Also a press to wring out any thing
of. Torcitore, a retorter, a twister, a wrester, a bender. Torcitura, a
retorting, a wresting, a twisting, a bending. Torciuto, torto, retorted,
twisted, wrethed, bended, turned, bowed, wrested, made crooked, corbe, wrapped,
wound in, whirled about, crisped, or curled, Look Torcere. Torcolare, to
press wine, sider, or verdiuice. Torcolo, a wine press, a press for wine,
sider, or verdiuice. Also the brain tunnell. Torculare, as Torcere, as
Torcolare. Tordo, the bird called a thrush, a thrussell, a mauis, an owsel, or
a black-birde. Also a fish which some say lives among the rocks and stones,
being not a foot long, and has four finnes besides the hindermost finne, and
is in figure like a tench, in color russet, having on his belly spots of
purple and white. Torello, a young bull, a runt, a yearling, a steer. Also an
instrument that a horseleach does use to cleanse and feel horses sores.
Toribolo, a censor wherein frankincense is burned. Torlo, a twirle, a round
turning trick in dancing. Also a top or a gigge that children play with. Also
a round ring to put upon a spindle to make it go heavier when women spin. Also
the yolke of an egg. Torloru, a fool, a ninnie, a gidd^-headed guil. Torma, a
company, a crew, a route, a troop, a knot of good fellows, Look Turma.
Tormentare, to torment, to torture, to afflict, to rack. Tormentatore, a
tormentor, a torturer, a rack-master. Tormentilla, seauen-leaued-grasse, or
setfoyle, or tormentill. Tormento, torment, torture, affliction, a rack, an
engine to torment, a pain or grief. Also any ordinance pertaining to war,
to cast stones or quarrels, any kind of battring piece of ordinance or gunne.
Also the wringing or griping of the belly. Tormentoso, grievous, full of
torment. Tormina, fretting or wringing in the guts or belly. Torminoso, that
fretteth the guts, or that has torments and frettings in the guts. Tormora, as
Torma. Tornadura, a kind of measure in Italy. Tornaio, a kind of bird or
foul. Tornare, to turn, to return, to reuert, to come again. Tornato,
returned, turned, reuerted, come again. Torna sole, the turnesole flower so
called because it turns with the sun. Also changeable silk. Tornata, a
turn, a return, a reuerting or coming home again, a return of money.
Tornatile, that turns or may be turned. Also that is wrought or made with a
wheel or turn or that is turned. Torneamento, a torneament, a torney, a just,
a tilting. Torneare, to tilt, to torney, to just, to fight at barriers. Also to
compass or encircle about, as Torneggiare. Torneggiare, to turn or work by a
turners wheel, as turners do. Also to polish or make smooth. Torneo, as
Torneamento. Tornellare, as Torneggiare. Tornello, a turners wheel. Also a
spinning wheel. a turn or instrument that turners use to make things smooth,
polished and round. Tornese, a coin so called. Torniamento, as Torneamento.
Torniare, as Torneare or Tornellare. Torniaro, a turner. Torniatore, a turner.
Also a tilter or tornear. Tornidore, a turner. Tornio, as Torneo, as Tornello.
Torno, as Tornello, a turn, a twirle, a turners or spinners wheel. Also
about, touching, thereabout. Also a place where a horse is taught to turn.
Toro, as Tauro, a bull. Also a great ox. Toroni, a kind of comfets. Toroso,
mighty and strong in the brawns of the arms and legs, well flesht and
brawned, strongly made. Also that has many knots and swellings in the stalks
or stems, hard, tough, pithie. Torpedine, Torpedo, as Sgramfo, a cramp fish
that has the nature to make the hands of them that touch it to be astonished,
though they do it but with a long pole. Also as Torpore. Torpere, torpo,
torpei, torputo, to be or become dull, heavy, slow or sluggish, to make or
become senseless, drouzie, sleepie or nummie, as parts of the body are
sometimes, to be astonished. Also to loose the lively brightness and color. to
tarnish. Torpido, dull, drouzie, heavy, sleepie, number, astonished in mind.
Look Torpere. Torpitudine, as Torpore. Torpotare, to make senceles, drouzie,
number, sleepie or astonished. Torpore, a feeblenes, a debilitation, a dulnes, a
drouzines, a sluggishnes or numnes of the mind, of moving and feeling, a
sleeping of lims and members, a heavy unaptness to do any thing, a slothful
heaviness or dulnes as one were astonished. Torquato, a bird called a kurlue. Also
that wears a collar or chain about his neck. Torquella, a wry-neck or
hick-way. Torracci, old ruinous towers. Torre, as Togliere. Also a tower or
turret or any thing like it. Torreggiante, towering or soaring high.
Torreggiare, to tower or soar up high, to build towers. Torre la volta, to get
the start of one. Also to prevent one. Torrente, a torrent, a land flood, a
rain flood, a swifte running stream, vehement and forcible, flowing with a
great sweep, rough and boistrous like waters that fall down by mountains and
rocks, running swiftly. Torribolo, a censer. Torricella, a little tower or
turret. Torrido, dry, parched, burnt, scorched. Torrione, a great tower or
keep in the midst of a castle. Torroso, mighty, strong, sturdie,
well-limbd, strongly sinewed or brawned in arms or legs, as Toroso. Torsione,
a kind of fish sharp like a wedge. Also extorsion. Torso, a stem or stalk of
any herb. Torsone. I find it used for a hunting pole. Also the name of some
part of a horse. Torta, a tart, a cake, a custard, a white-pot, a pudding-pie,
a florentine. Tortano, a kind of white-pot, pudding-pie, or cheese-cake.
Tortaro, a tarte or pudding-pye-maker. Tortegli, Tortelli, little tarts, cakes,
pudding-pies or florentines. Tortezza, crookednes. Tortiera, a pan to bake a
tart or pudding pie in. Tortile, that is or may be bent, bowed, wrested,
crompled, rouled or crooked. Tortiloquio, crooked or winding talk. Tortiuo,
that is or may be wroong or squeesed or pressed out. Torto, a wrong, an
injury, a torte, a disgrace. Also as Torciuto. Look Torcere. Tortora, a
turtle-doue. Tortorato, doves, turtles or pigeons color. Tortore, a torturer,
a racker, a tormentor. Tortorella, a young turtle dove. Tortumaglio, an herb
growing by the water side. Tortuoso, crooked, winding, full of crinkles and
crankles, that windeth or turns many ways. Tortuosita, a crookednes, a
bending, a folding, a crinkling or crankling. Tortura, torture, torment,
vexation, racking or fretting of mind or body. Torturare, to torture or to
torment. Toruare, to lowre, to frown, to loute, to poute, to look crabbedly
or grimly. Toruita, sowrenes, lowering, frowning, louting, pouting,
grim-looking, rabbed-looking, sternnes, grimnes. Toruo, sour, frowning,
stern, crabbed, pouting, lowering, grim, cruel and spiteful in looks, fell,
rough, unpleasant, horrid to look upon. Also crooked. Torzo, the top or stalk
of a cabbedge or a colewort. Tosa, a young wench, a girl, a less, a maiden.
Tosare, as Tondere. Tosare monetta, to clip or pare money. Tosatore, as
Tonditore. Tosatura, as Tonditura. Toscare, as Tossicare. Tosco, as Tossico.
Also a tuskane. Toscoso, venenious, poisonous. Toso, a young boy, a lad or
striplin. Also as Tonduto. Tosone, a fleese of a sheep. Also a lad or boy,
whose hair is notted. Toss, the cough, a coughing. Tossere, tosso, tossei,
tossuto, to cough. Tossicamento, a poisoning. Tossicare, to enuenom or to
poison. Tossicatore, a poysoner, an enuenomer. Tossico, any kind of venim,
bayne or poison. Tossicoso, venomous, poisonous. Tossilagine, the herb
fole-foot or horse-foot. Look Tussilagine. Tossina, a little gentle cough.
Tossire, sisco, sito, to cough. Tossito, coughed. Tossoso, coughie, pursie,
full of the cough. Tostamente, quickly, out of hand. Tostano, a quick,
speedy, nimble fellow. Also timely or quickly. Also sudden, quick or speedy.
Tostare, to toste, to bloate, to parch with heat. Tostissimo, very quickly,
out of hand. Tosto, quickly, soon, at once, out of hand, by and by, speedily.
Tosto tosto, very quickly, very soon, by and by, out of hand. Totale,
totale, comprehending the whole sum. Totalita, a totalitie or whole sum.
Totano, a kind of moorhen. Totena, a cuttle fish or calamarie. Totone, a sea
swallow. Tottela, take it to thee. Touaglia, a table cloth, a board cloth.
Touaglietta, a little table cloth, a cupboord cloth, a napkin. Touaglini,
little drinking clothes or napkins. Touagliuolo, a towell, a napkin, a drinking
cloth. Tozzami, all manner of pieces, scraps, mammockes, cobs or lunches.
Tozzare, to break into scraps, mammocks or little pieces. Tozzi, as Tozzami.
Tozzolare, as Tozzare. Tozzoli, as Tozzami. Tozzoloni, as Tozzami. Tra,
between, with, amongst, what with. Used also in composition and before many
words for the latin Trans, over, from one place to another, beyond or on the
other side: and many times they add an S to it, and say Tras, and sometime ns,
as Trans, as Traportare, Trasportare, and Transportare, etc. It signifies also
through, as Trauedere, to see through, Translucido, through shining, etc.
Trache, what with, what between. Tralemani, in hand, between hands. Traquesto
mezzo, in the mean while. Tratanto, idem. Trabacche, pauillions, tents,
boothes, bowres, shelters, shrouds. also sparuises of beds, valances or
curtains for beds. Traballare, to stammer, to stut, to falter, to lispe, to
reele or stagger as a drunken man, to shake, to totter as a thing that is
loose. Trabalzare, to bound, hop or skippe as a ball. Trabalzo, a bound, a
skip, a hopping, a shift for any thing by hook or crook. Trabattere, batto,
battei, battuto, to beat, to bang, to touze, to strike, to smite. Trabea, a
roabe worn by Kings under their mantles of estate. a roabe that Augures were
wont to wear. Trabattuto, beaten, bangd, touzed, stricken, smitten.
Traboccamento, an ouerturning or falling down headlong. Traboccante, falling
or reeling on one side, or as we say down weight, ready to fall. Also a kind
of wine so called. Traboccare, to fall down groueling or headlong, to reele,
to stagger, to stumble. Trabocco, a trap, a snare, a ginne, a pitfall to catch
birds with, a fall, a stumbling, a reeling. Also an engine of war called a ram.
also the pin upon which the balance yield or go. Trabocco di fiele, a disease
called the yellow iaundise, or ouerflowing of the gall. Tra cane e lupo, about
twy-light, or cock-shoote, when a dog is not known from a wolf. Tracagante, a
kind of herb or shrub. Tracanardo, an ambling hackney or nag. Also an
hackney pace. Tracannare, to swill, to bouze, to tipple, to bib, to quaffe, to
drink freely, to swallow down. Tracassare, to hauock, to tug, to spoil, to
ruin, to destroy, to confound, to fumble, to misuse. Trachea, the pipe of the
lungs, the windepipe. Trachelo, the chine of man or beast from the head to the
hanche. Trachinia, a stone that is kindled with water and quenched with oil.
Trachilo, a bird called a Wren. Traccia, a trace, a tracing, a track, a
footing, a print, a mark, a footestep. Tracciare, to trace, to track, to
follow by the footing. Tracia, as Trachinia. Tracidolce, herb galingale.
Tracollare, to make the balance give a yerke on one side, to slip or fall
down. Tracollo, a yerke, a slip, a stumbling, a breake-neck-fall, a twinge.
Tracoma, a roughnes within the eyelids. Tracoraggine, as Trascuraggine.
Tracorare, as Trascurare. Also to pierce to the heart. Tracorrere, corro, corsi,
corso, to overrun, to out-runne. Also to ouer-view in haste. Tracorso,
overrun, out-runne, ouer-viewed in haste. Tracorsa, a suruaying in haste, an
ouer-looking, an ouer-running. Tracotanza, as Trascuraggine. Tracotato, as
Trascurato. Tracredere, credo, credei, creduto, to ouer-weene, to be
ouer-credulous, to ouer-beleeue. Tracreduto, ouer-weened, bin too credulous,
believed too much. Tracuranza, as Trascuraggine. Tracurare, as Trascurare.
Tracuraggine, as Trascuraggine. Tracutato, careless, without care or
consideration. Tra da, what between. Tradigione, a treason or treachery.
Tradimento, all manner of treason or treachery. Tradire, disco, dito, to
betray, or be a traitor. Tradito, betraide, or bin a traitor. Traditoraggine,
as Tradimento. Traditore, a traitor. Traditione, a tradition, a delivery, or
doctrine, or teaching left by word of man from age to age. Tradotto, Tradutto,
Look Tradurre. Traduce, a vine or branch brought along from tree to tree, or
upon the branches of many trees joined as a traile together. Traducere, as
Tradurre. Tradurre, duco, dussi, dutto, or dotto, to bring, to turn, to
convert, to convey from one place to another, to bring over. Also to translate
out of one tongue into another. Also to bring, convert or transport from one to
another, to lead over, to displace and remove from one place to another, to
transpose. Tradutto, translated, brought, conuaide, converted, or transported
one from another, Look Tradurre. Traduttione, a translation, a transporting.
Also a passing over. Traduttore, a translator, a transporter, he that brings
from one place to another. Traetta, a traile, a train, or border of a garment.
Trafolciona, a gadding, a stallion ramp, riggish, gixie wench or where.
Trafellare, to tire, or p^^^ or throb through wearines, to be ^^host as a
dear, to be out of breath. Traferfero, a cruel fell rascal, as Tr^ffarello.
Traficante, a merchant, a trader, a chapman, one that does trafique. Traficare,
to trafique, to trade, or use merchandise. Traficheuole, full of trade or
trafique, traficable. Trafichino, a trader, a dealer, a bargainer, a broker, a
chapman. Trafico, trafique, trade, or merchandising. Traffiero, a kind of sharp
pricking needle. Also a surgions probe. Traffiggere, figgo, fissi, fisso,
fitto, to transfix, to pierce, to thrust or strike quite through, to prick or
sting. Trafila, a tool that wyerdrawers use with many holes in it to draw
wire through it. Trafisso, transfixed, pierced through, pricked or stung. Look
Traffiggere. Trafitta, a piercing, a transfixing. Trafitto, as Trafisso.
Trafisse, prickings, stingings, piercings, thrusts. Traforare, to bore or work
through. Traforato, borne or wrought through, a transparent, hollow or through
work. Traforellerie, as Truffarie. Traforello, as Truffarello. Traforeria, as
Baratteria. Trafugare, to steal, to filch, to pilfer, to purloine. Also to
run up and down like a runnegate or fugitive. Trafuggire, fuggo, fuggij,
fuggito, to fly from place to place, to flee from his own captain or from
his own people to the enemy. Trafugo, a runnegate, a fugitive, an outlawed, a
wandrer here and there by stealth, a traitor, one that flies from his own
part to the enemies. Trafugone, by stealth, in hugger mugger, stealinglie.
Trafugio, a running away, a yielding to the enemy. Tragacante, a tree which
yields a kind of gum called draganth, or dragagant. Tragedia, a tragedy or
moornefull play being a lofty kind of poetry, and representing personages of
great state and matter of much trouble, a great broile or stir: it begins
prosperously and ends unfortunately or sometimes doubtfullie, and is
contrary to a comedy. Tragediante, a player of tragedies, a tragedian.
Tragedo, as Tragediante, a player in a tragedy. Tragelafo, a kind of wild
beast. Tragettare, as Traghettare. Also to cast or sting over. Tragettione, a
passing over, a conueying or carrying over, a casting or flinging over.
Tragetto, as Traghetto. Traggea, all manner of comfets. Tragga, let him draw,
pull, or hale, hurl, or cast. Tragenda, a tragedy. Traggere, traggo, trassi,
tratto, as Tirare, or Trarre. Traghettare, to ferrie, to conuaie, to lead, to
pass, to carry, to transport, to bring or sail from shore to shore, or over
any place or river. Traghettaro, a ferrie man. Traghettiere, a ferrie man.
Traghetto, a ferrie, a passage, a foarde, a gozell over, or from shore to
shore. Traghiettare, as Traghettare. Traghietto, as Traghetto. Tragico,
tragical, dismal, deadly, dolorous, cruel, outrageous, belonging to
tragedies. Also a maker or writer of tragedies. Tragicomedia, a tragicomedie,
beginning mournefully, and ending merrily, half a tragedy, and half a
comedy. Tragie, a kind of penets or cough comfets that Apothecaries use. Also
small comfets. Tragio, an herb growing only in Candie, having boughs, leaves,
and seeds like Juniper, but it sauoureth like the stinking of a goat, false
or bastard Dictam. Tragiungere, to join together, to entreioyne or join
between. Tragionto, entreioyned, joined together, or between. Traglia, the
throat, gullet or vzell pipe of any creature. Traglio, a stalk, a stem, a
graffe, a set, a sprig, a scien. Trago, a goat. Also an herb like Gionco
marino. Also a shell fish having an ill and stinking savor. Also a kind of
corn less nourishable then our common corn, and very hard of digestion. Also
a kind of hard, thick, and rough sponge. Also a net called a dragge. Also the
embossement, or bunching out of the ear. Tragone, the rerewarde of a battle,
or squadron. Tragonia, the herb Taragon. Tragoponade, a bird in Ethiopia
greater then an eagle, having horns like a goat. Tragopogo, an herb called
goates-beard, having leaves like to saffron, and a great knop or bud upon a
sharp stalk. Tragopiro, a kind of grain called buckwheate, or bolimong,
good to fatten cattle. Tragorigano, peni-royal growing wild. Traguggiare, as
Tranguggiare. Trahente, drawing, attracting, casting, hurling, Look Tirare.
Trahere, as Traggere, or Tirare. Traina, a train or training for a hawk, a
shuffling or racking pace of a nagge. Trainare, to train, to traile, to dragge
or draw along. also to go a shuffling or racking pace. Trainello, a stale or a
call for birds. Also a kind of long horse-fetters or pasterns. Also as Traino.
Traino, a train or company of followers, a trayle. Also a kind of barow or
tumbrell, or wheele-barow. Tral, as Tra il, between the. Tralacciare, to
enterlace, or tie together. Tralasciare, to omit, to neglect, to ouerslip.
Tralascio, negligence, carelesnes, ouerpassing. Tralcij, branches, boughs,
poles, props or forks to hold up vines or hops with. Also all manner of
entanglings. Also young buds or sprigs. Tralciamenti, as Tralcij. Tralciare, to
tie, to bind, to underlay or underprop vines or hops. Tralignare, to
degenerate, to digress, to grow from kind. Tralucere, luco, lucei, luciuto,
to shine through. Traluciuto, shined through. Trama, a web, a weauers woofe in
weauing. Also by a metaphor, adeuise, a complot, a plot, a deceitful trick in
imagination, a contriuing. Also the mossines of the out ward part of fruits.
Trama ci e, I smell a rat, some knauerie is in hand. Tramandare, to send and
send again. Tramare, to weaue, to warpe, to devise, to complot, to contriue,
to forecast. Tramatore, a weauer, a warper, a deviser, a contriuer, a
complotter. Tramazzare, to founder or to be apt to be foundred. Tramazzo, an
orderles confusion, a hurly-burly, a havoc, a spoil. Also the foundring of a
horse. Tramazzone, as Stramazzone. Trambo, between both, both together.
Trambusciare, as Trafellare. Tramenare, to shuffle, to handle, to wrigle, to
shake any thing together or to and fro. Tramentire, to lie out of measure, to
lie and lie again. Tramentito, lyde and lyde again, or out of measure.
Tramettere, metto, misi, messo, to intermit, to interpose, to put, set or lay
between or send between. Tramesso, intermitted, interposed, put between.
Tramettimento, an interposing, an intermission. Tramezzano, an interpositor,
one that puts himself between others. Tramezzamento, as Tramezzura.
Tramezzare, to part between, to work among, to intermeddle, to interweaue, to
interlace, to intermixe, to mediate, to interpose, to divide or part in halfes.
Tramezzino, as Tramezzano. Tramezzo, as Tramezzura. Tramezzura, an interlacing,
an interweauing, an intermixing, an interposisition, a partition, a division, a
hedge that deuideth land. Tramito, a distance, a space or interuall between
place and place or time and time. Tramoggia, a sluttish corner, a dust basket
or place where sweepings are cast. Also a mill-hatch or mill-bin, or
mill-chest. Tramonta, a cold northerly wind. Tramontana, the north, the
northern wind, the north star. the sun set. Tramontani, those folks that dwell
beyond the mountains. Tramontare, to pass over the hills, to set or go down
as the sun does. Tramortimento, a swouning, a falling into a swoune.
Tramortire, tisco, tito, to swoune, to faint, to fall into a swoune.
Tramortito, swouned, fainted, fallen in a swoune. Trampellare la vita, to rub
out, to hold out, to wear out ones life, to keep the wolf from the door.
Tramplare, as Trampolare. Trampli, as Trampoli. Trampolare, to stalk it, to go
on stilts or high startops. Trampoli, stilts, or high chopinos. Tramutare, to
alter, to shift, to change from place to place, to transmute. Tramutamento, as
Tramutatione. Tramutatione, a transmutation, an alteration, a change, a shift.
Trana, an interiection of mockery, as we say, nay, tush, fie, or I smell a
rat. Tranare, to pass, or swim over. Also as Trainare. Tranatare, to swim or
pass over. Tranellare, to entrap, to ensnare, to entramell, to lay a train
for. Tranelli, trains for a hawke. also cheating, crafty, conycatching or
cosening tricks. Also a trap or any kind of snare or tramels. Also as
Baratteria. Also as Trainello. Tranghiottire, tisco, tito, as Tranguggiare.
Tranghiottito, devoured, glutted, or swallowed down. Trangoiare, as
Tranguggiare. Tranguggiare, to devour, to glut, or swallow down.
Tranguggiatore, a deuourer, a glutter, a swallower. Tranguiare, as
Tranguggiare. Trannare, to translate, to transport, to transfer. Tranotare,
to swim or pass over. Tranottare, to pass over the night. Tranuotare, to swim
or pass over. Tranquillare, to appease, to calm, to quiet, to pacify, to
make quiet, still, and calm. Tranquillita, tranquillity, quiet, rest, peace,
calmenes, quietness, stillnes, a calm and quiet season. Tranquillo, quiet,
still, content, calm, peaceful, whosht, in rest, in peace, peaceable, fair,
untroubled, without surges. Also fair and calm weather. Transalpino, which is
over and beyond the alps, or on the further side. Transcendere, scendo, scesi,
sceso, to go or climb over, to exceed, to surmount, to go beyond.
Transcendente, transcendent, surmounting, or going beyond. Transegna, an upper
ensign, or mark. Transenna, the netting of a ship like a lettise serving for
defense. Transferire, risco, rito, to transfer, to transport or remove away,
to carry or bring from one place to another, to convey over, to translate from
one language to another, or from ones possession to another. Transferito,
transferred, transported, or removed away. Look Transferire. Transfigurare, as
Trasfigurare. Transfiguratione, as Trasfiguratione. Transfuggire, as
Trafuggire. Transfugio, as Trafugio. Transfugo, as Trafugo. Transfugone, as
Trafugone. Transfulgido, which shines through, through shining. Transile, that
grows, ouer-reacheth, or goes over another, that passes over. Transire,
sisco, sito, to go forth, to pass or go over, to run through, to slip
over, to leave untouched, to let pass and not speak of. Also to fall in a
swoune, to dye or gasp the last. Transito, past or gone over, yielded up the
ghost. Look Transire. Also that has bin past over. Transito, a passage or
going over, a passing or going from one place to another. Also a trance. Per
transito, cursoriewise, in haste, a snatch and away, a glance and go by,
without stop or stay. Transitorio, transitory, momentarie, frail, fading,
soon passing away. Translatare, as Traslatare. Also as Tradurre. Translatione,
as Traslatione. Also as Traduttione. Translucido, transparent, through shining.
Transmarino, that comes from or is of parts beyond the seas, as Trasmarino.
Transmeatione, a passing through. Transmettere, metto, misi, messo, to
transmit, to put, set or send from one place to another. Transmigrare, as
Trasmigrare. Transmigratione, as Trasmigratione. Transmontano, that dwells
beyond or is of beyond the mountains. Transmoto, removed from one place to
another. Transportare, as Trasportare. Transuersario, the shorter and
overthwart piece of a Jacobs staff. Transuersione, a turning away or cross.
Transuerso, overthwart, a cross, transuersed, out of order or ill placed.
Transricchire, to grow rich suddenly or beyond expectation. Transtri, cross or
overthwart, beams transtroms. Transunto, a transcript, a transumpt or
exempl^fication written out of records or copy of any writing. Trantrana, as
Trana. Trapanare, to pierce or pass through. Also to grope or fumble for. Also
to open ones skull with a trepan. Trapano, a surgeons tool to open a man's head
with, called a trepan. Trapassamento, a transgression, a trespassing, a
yielding up the ghost, a passing over. Trapassare, to pass through, away or
over, to decease, to die. to trespass, to transgress. also to go a racking or
shuffling pace. Trapassati, our deceased forefathers, the deceased and dead.
Trapasso, a shuffling or racking pace. Trapazarola, a duckling or dobchickin.
Trapelare, to wade or get through lightly, to drop, to trill through. Trapella,
a mouse trap. Trapellare, to entrap. Traper, what between. Trapere, has been
used for a dagger. Trapese, herb orach or golden flower. Trapiantare, to
remove, to plant or set in another place. Trapiouere, piouo, piouei, piouuto,
to rain between or through. Traponere, pongo, posi, posto, as Tramettere.
Traporre, as Traponere. Traposto, as Tramesso. Trappanare, to slide, to glide
or slip thorough and away. Also as Trapanare. Trappare, to catch, to snatch or
take by maine force. Trappola, any kind of trap, snare, pitfall or ginne. Also
a game at cards so called. Also a play that children use called trap.
Trappolare, to entrap, to ensnare or catch in some gin. Trappolatore, as
Barattiere. Trappoleria, as Baratteria. Traportare, to transport or carry over.
Trapungere, pungo, punsi, punto, to prick, to pierce or sting through. Also to
quilt, to stitch, to embroder, to counterpoint. Trapunto, pricked, stitcht,
pierced or stung through, quilted, embrodered or counterpointed. Also a quilt
or counterpoint. Also a kind of stitch, called hollow stitch. Trar, Look
Trarre. Trar per dado, to cast the dice for, to cast lots, to rifle, to begin
any thing. Trarre, traggo, trassi, tratto, as Tirare. Trarre la sort, to cast
lots, to draw cuts. Trarupi, amongst rocks or clifs. Trasandamento, a going
beyond or out of the way, a falling a sleep, a dying. Trasandare, to go
beyond or out of the way, to fall a sleep, to give up the ghost. to rave or
dote. Also to outgo. Trasapere, to ouerknow, to be ouerwise. Trascendere,
scendo, scesi, sceso, to transcend, to go beyond. Trascendente, transcending,
transcendent. Trasceso, transcended, gone beyond. Trascina, a sea fish so called
in Rome, like a thorne-backe or ray. Trascinare, as Strascinare. Trascolorare,
to discolor or change color. Trascorrere, corro, corsi, corso, to ouerrun,
to out run, to peruse over in haste. also to quest or hunt to and fro as a dog
does, to run over, to pass over quickly. also to pass with short mention,
and not to speak of. Trascorso, ouerrun, out run, perused over a book, etc.
Trascorsa, an outrunning, a perusing, an excursion, an outrode. Trascotanza, as
Trascuraggine. Trascotato, as Trascurato. Trascrittione, a transcription, a
writing, or copying out. Trascriuere, scriuo, scrissi, scritto, to write or
copy over. Also to transfer or give over his right to another. Trafcritto,
written or copied over. Also a manuscript, a copy, or a transcript.
Transcuraggine, carelesnes, negligence, retchlesnes, want of heed, oversight,
unadvisedness, ouerweening, presumption. Trascurare, to neglect, to set at
naught, to be heedles, or careless of. Trascurato, neglected, set at naught,
been careless. also heedles, negligent, retchles, unadvised, rash, ouerweening.
Trascuranza, as Trascuraggine. Trascuratezza, as Trascuraggine, Trascutanza, as
Trascuraggine. Trasecolare, to be astonished or dismayed, to be ravished with
some heavenly joy. Trasferire, as Transferire. Trasferito, as Transferito.
Trasficcare, to thrust or drive through. Trasfigurare, to transform or change
from one shape into another. Trasfiguratione, a transformation or
metamorphoses, a changing of shapes. Trasfondere, fondo, fondei, or fusi, fuso,
to power out of one vessel into another, to translate, to transpose, to
transfer. Trasformare, as Trasfigurare. Trasformatione, as Trasfiguratione.
Trasfuga, a subduing or putting to flight by some wyle. Also an ouerflight.
Trasfugare, as Trafugare, to put to flight by some craft. Trasfuggire, as
Trafuggire. Trasfugio, as Trafugio. Trasfugo, as Trafugo. Trasfugone, as
Trafugone. Trasfulgido, through shining. Trasfumare, to smoke through.
Trasgredire, disco, dito, to transgress, to digress, to swerve, to trespass,
to pass or go over and beyond, to surmou^t or exceed. Trasgredito,
transgressed, swarued, digressed, trespassed, etc. Trasgressione, a
transgression, a swaruing, an offense, a trespass, a passing or going over, a
digression from one purpose to another. Trasgressore, an offender, a
transgressor, a trespasser, a swaruer. Trasguardo, a sight hole through any
instrument. Trashumanare, of humane to become divine, to go beyond humanity.
Trasi, a kind of fruit so called. Traslatare, to translate, to reduce from one
place to another, as Tradurre. Traslatione, a translation, or transposition, a
transporting or carrying over, a transferring or remoouing from one to another.
Also the using of a word in signification, less proper to augment or make the
thing less. Traslatiuo, transferred, or transposed, taken from other, taken
out of others, of no great weight, nothing curious or excellent, ordinary, of
the common sort. Traslato, a metaphor. Also translated. Also as Traslatione.
Traslatore, a translator, or transporter, he that does transport, translate or
convey from one place to another. Traslattare, as Traslatare. Trasmarino, a
kind of precious blue color that painters use, as Transmarino. Trasmettere,
as Transmettere. Trasmigrare, to remove from one dwelling place to another, to
go and dwell farther off. Trasmigratione, a transmigration, a departing from
one dwelling to another. Trasmodare, to pass measure, to exceed mean.
Trasmudare, to transmute, to alter, to shift, to change from one place to
another. Trasmutare, as Trasmudare. Trasmutatione, a transmutation, a shifting,
a change, an alteration. Trasognare, to rave, to dream, to slumber, to pass
the time drouzily, to go out of his wits. Trasonare, to sound between. Also
to crake, to boast or vaunt, as a Thraso. Trasonarie, boasts, crakes, foolish
ostentations. Trasone, a thraso, a bragger, a boaster, a craker, a vaunter.
Trasparente, transparent or through shining. Trasparenza, a transparence or
through-light. Trasparere, paio, parsi, parso, or paruto to be transparent, to
shine through. Trasparso, been transparent, or shined through. Trasparuto, as
Trasparso. Traspiantare, as Trapiantare. Traspietare, as Trapiantare.
Traspontino, a style, a gappe or yate over a hedge, a little bridge over a
ditch. Trasponere, as Trasporre. Trasporre, pongo, posi, posto, to transpose,
or remove from one place to another. Trasportamento, a transporting.
Trasportare, to transport, or carry over, or remove from one place to
another. Trasportatione, a transportation. Traspositione, a transposition or
remoouing. Trasposto, transposed or removed. Trasricchire, to become very rich
suddenly. Trassinare, as Strascinare. Trassostantiale, transubstantiall.
Trassostantione, transubstantiation. Trassostantiare, to transmute substance.
Trasti della barca, the forms or benches or seats of a gallie, whereon the
mariners use to sit when they row. Also a transome or beam going cross a
house. Used also in Venice for the highest or chief place in a gondola, as we
say the cushions in a pair of oars. Trasto, as Trasti. Trastornare, to turn
or return back. Trastrauato, a horse that has a forefoot and a hinder foot
crossewise white. Trastullare, to solace, to sport, to dandle, to dally with,
to still, to quiet. Trastullo, sport, pastime, sollace, delight, daliance,
quietness. Trasuedere, vedo, viddi, visto, or veduto, to ouersee, or see
through. Trasueduto, ouerseene, or seen through. Trasuerso, as Trauerso.
Trasuolare, to fly over, or over fly. Tratanto, in the mean while.
Tratenimento, entertainment. Tratenere, tengo, tenni, tenuto, to entertain.
Tratenuto, entertained. Trateneuole, full of entertainment. Tratta, leave, or
privilege to transport merchandise. Also a trade or trading. Also a space or a
distance. Also a company, a troop, a rout, or a crew. Also as Tirata.
Trattabile, tractable, tractible, that may easily be entreated, handled, or
ordered, gentle, quiet, pliant. Trattamento, an entertainment, a treaty, a
treatise, a usage, a parlie, a dealing, a handling, a carriage, a behavior.
Trattamessa, the pricking of a nail, or retreat in a horse. Trattare, to
treat, to entreat, to reckon up, to exercise or to use, to behave, to deal,
to negotiate, to order and govern, to see to, to do, to emploie, to handle, to
practice, to contriue, to complot, to parley, to describe, to write, or
discourse of or upon, to manage, to meddle with. Trattato, treated, entreated,
used, dealt, negotiated, done, handled, practiced, complotted, contrived,
reasoned, written, or discoursed upon. Also a treaty, a tract, an entreaty, a
treatise, a practice, a complot, a poem, a discourse, a handling, a
describing, a part of a book wherein any thing is handled, Look Trattare.
Tratteggiare, to shadow in painting. Tratteggio, a line or shadowing in
painting. Trattenimento, entertainment. Trattenitore, an entertainer.
Tratteuole, tractable, that may be handled, managed, treated, or discoursed
upon. Tratti di corda, strappadoes given with a cord. Tratto, as Tiro. Also as
Fiata, or volta, un Tratto, one time or once. Also a space or a distance, as un
gran Tratto, a great distance. Also a draught of drink, a whiffe, Look Inanzi
tratto. Also a drawing in length, a space. a country, a coaste, a region, a
trace, or reach, a course, a deriuing. Tratto di vino, a draught of wine.
Trattolino, id est a little tratto. Trattorio, a winde-lace, to draw up
heavy things. Trattoso, quick in answers, full of quips and witty jests.
Tratto, tratto, now and then, every foot, very often. Trauagliare, to travel,
to trouble, to molest, to labor, to toil, to wander, to busy, to moyle,
whether it be in body or mind. Trauaglio, travel, care, trouble, labor,
molestation, business, toyling, moyling, swinke, teene. Also the name of a
farriers tool. Trauaglino, a factour, a pickthanke, a promoter, a dealer, a
negotiator. Trauaglie, used by Dante as Trauaglio. Trauaglio da buoi, an
oxe-stall, or rack for oxen to feed in. Trauaglione, a painful, laboursome,
toyling fellow, a drudge. Trauaglioso, laboursome, careful, troublesome,
busy, tedious, toylesome. Traualcare, as Traualicare. Traualicare, to swerve,
to trespass, to transgress, to offend. Also to pass or go down a river
according to the tide or stream of it, to flote down the stream, to go a
drift. Traualicatore, an offender, a trespasser, a transgressour. also a floter
or passer of a river. Trauasare, to put, remove, or change from one vessel to
another. Trauasatore, such as our wine porters be, that remove wine from place
to place. Trauato, a horse that has two white feet of any one side.
Trauariare, to rave, to trifle. Also to go out of the right way. Trauata, any
compact made of beams or timber, a houell of timber. Trauatura, a frame or
joining together of beams of timber. Traue, any kind of beam, transome,
rafter, quarter, or great piece of timber. Look Dare la traue. Traueggole,
mistaking, or seeing amiss. Trauersa, a trauers, a cortine* a crosse-fortune, a
mishap. Also a woman's sauegarde or kirtle. Also a traversing or thwarting
ground. Also a cross current of waters. Also a flanker of a wall. Also a
thwart or crosse-fortune. Trauersare, to cross, to thwart, to trauers.
Trauerse, or Trauersi, a kind of scurffe in a horse. Also the trauesses of a
horse. Trauerso, a cross, a thwart, crosly, thwartly. Trauescio, a kind of
faulcon so called. Also a kind of small household wine. Trauersone, a thwart,
overthwart. Also a crossebowe. Trauestire, as Strauestire. Trauestito, as
Strauestito. Trauetto, a little beam, transome, rafter, quarter, or such piece
of timber. Tra via, between, or cross the way. Trauiare, to digress, to
strait, or go out of the right way. Also to pass or go through. Trauicello,
as Trauetto. Trauio, a missing or straying out of the way. Trauisare, to advise
very well* Also to ouersee amiss, to see one thing for another. Traulo, a
stutterer, a stammerer, a maffler, one that can scarcely utter his words.
Trauo, as Traue. Trauolare, to ouerflie, to fly beyond. Trauolgere, volgo,
volsi, volto, to toss to turn, or tumble over. Trouolto, ouer-turned, tossed,
or tumbled over. Also lame. Trazza, as Traccia. Trazzare, as Tracciare.
Trazzeina, a fish called a viuer. Tree, the number of three. Treaggio, a kind
of course home spunne cloth, that shepherds use to wear. Tree fia tree, three
times three. Tree volte, thrice, three times. Tree volte tanto, three times as
much. Tree cento, three hundredth. Trebbiano, a kind of precious wine in Italy.
Trebbiare, to mow, to reap, to thresh, or to winnow corn. Trebbio, as
Trebbiano. Also a knot, a crew, or route of good fellows. Trebellico vino, as
Trebbiano. Tree caponi, a kind of boys play in Italy. Trecca, a woman frutrer,
costermunger, or seller of fruits. Trecciare, to plate, to tie, to tramell, or
role up in tresses as women do their hairs. Treccie, plaites, tresses,
tramels, or roules of women's hairs. Trecciuoli, tramels, tressels, tapes,
filets, laces, or ribands to tie women's hairs. Trecena, a kind of shellfish.
Treccola, a squeamish, nice, coy, prating, skoulding woman, a skould, a rig, a
flurt, a gixie. Treccolare, to prate, to prattle, to chat, to skould, to rig up
and down as a gixie wench. Treccone, a fruitrer, or costermunger. Also a sad
sullen person that never laugheth. a busy, prying, lurking pickthanke
companion, one always full of suits and business. Trecotanti, thrice as many.
Tredeci, the number of thirteen. Tredecimo, the thirteenth in number.
Trefoglio, as Trifoglio. Trega, as Tregua. Tregare, as Treguare. Tregenda, as
Versiera. Treggea, all manner of small comfets as biskets and carowaies. Also
such little sticks or strawes as birds build their nests with. Treggia, a
sledge or cart without wheels. Treggieia, a remedy against poison called
treacle. Treglia, a fish called a Barble. Some take it to be the Mullet.
Tregliuzza, a little Barble or a Mullet fish. Tregua, a truce, a league, an
atonement, a peace, rest, repose, or quiet. Treguare, to make a truce, a
league, a peace, an agreement, or atonement. Tremaccio, as Tremaruola.
Tremante, trembling, shaking, shiuering, chilling, quiuering, quauering,
chattring or quaking. Also wavering or warbling. Tremare, to tremble, to shake,
to quiver, to shiuer, to be chill, to quauer, to chatter for cold, to quake, to
waver, to warble. Tremarina, as Tremaruola. Tremaruola, a shiuering, a
trembling, a quaking, a chilnes, a shaking or quiuering for cold, a quauering,
a chattring. Also great fear. Also an earthquake. Tremazzo, as Tremaruola.
Tremebondo, as Tremendo. Tremendo, dreadful, redoubted, fearful, that
troubles much. Tremiscere, misco, miscei, muto, as Tremare, but properly to
tremble or quake for fear, to shake and be sore afraid. Tremuto, shaken,
trembled, quiuered, quauered for, or through fear. Tremito, as Tremaruola.
Tremo, as Tremaruola. Tremola, a kind of thin plate like gold that vintners
use to adorn their bushes with. Tremolante, as Tremante. Also a stop in
music called the quauering, wavering or warbling stop. Also goldfoyle, thin
leaves of gold, of silver, or other metals. Also aglets or spangles.
Tremolare, as Tremare, but properly to quauer, to waver, or warble. Tremolo, as
Tremante. Also as Sgramfo. Tremoloso, as Tremolante. Tremore, as Trema^uola.
Tremoto, an earthquake. Trempella, as Stempella. Tempellare, as Stempellare.
Trempellino, a tressle of a table. Tremulo, as Tremante. Trenta, the number of
thirty. Trenta paia, il trenta paia, a curse they use in Italy, as if one
should say all the devils in hell take thee. Trentauecchia, as Trentina.
Trentena, the number of thirty, one and thirty. Trentina vecchia, an old
trot, an old beldam. Also a number of thirty. Trentuniera, a woman that has
bin occupide by 31. men. Trentuniere, one of the one and thirty that has
occupide a woman. Trentuno, one and thirty. Also a game at cards called one
and thirty, or else the game on the head. Also a punishment inflicted by
ruffianly f^llowes upon raskalie whores in Italy, who (as we pump them in
England) so they cause them to be occupide one and thirty times by one and
thirty several base raskalie companions. Also an occupying of one and thirty
times to such a colmon hedge whore or ouer-ridden jade, as we say in England a
pumping of a common whore. Trepese, a kind of herb called orage, or orache.
Trepidare, to fear, to dread, to be fearful, or quake for fear, to be or
make astonished or amazed. Trepidatione, fear, dread, fearefulnes, or trembling
for fear. Trepido, timorous, fearful, faint-harted, trembling for fear,
astonished or amazed for fear. Trepiedi, or Trepie, a trivet of iron as they use
in kitchens. Also a threefooted stool or pot, any thing that has three feet,
as a tressle. Treppare, to tickle, to wantonize, to dally, to dandle, or jest
with. Treppese, an herb called orache or orage. Treppo, a tickling, a
dalliance, a wantonizing, a jest. Trepudio, as Tripudio. Tresca, a kind of
antike, or morice dance, a jest, a daliance. Trescare, to jest, to dally, to
dandle, to dance, to hop, to skip. Trescata, as Fagiolata. Trescatore, a
iester, a dallier, a dandler, a morice dancer. Trespido, a tressell, or a
three-footed stool. Trespito, as Trespido. Trespodo, as Trespido. Trespolo, as
Trespido. Trespeggio, a rumbling, crackling, or rattling noise. Also a route, or
crew of good fellows. Tretanto, three times as much. Treuella, as Triuella.
Treuellare, as Triuellare. Treuellino, as Triuellino. Treuisco, a kind of shrub
whereon Coculus India grows. Tree volte piu, three times as much, or more.
Trezzare, as Trecciare. Trezze, as Treccie. Triaca, a remedy against poison,
called treacle. Triade del cielo. Triafarmaco, a kind of plaster used among
horse leaches. Triangolare, three angular* having three corners, three
cornered. Triangolo, a triangle, a figure that has three corners. Triarij,
soldiers among the Romans that always fought in the rereward, and were the
strongest men: they fought ever standing and bowing somewhat their knees, as if
they would rather die then remove their places. Tribali, a kind of weapon or
engine of war. Tribbiano, as Trebbiano. Tribbiare, as Trebbiare. Also to
shake for fear. Tribilio, a kind of measure used in Greece. Tribo, as Tribu.
Tribolare, to loyter or go gazing idly up and down. Also to teaze clothes.
Also to trouble, to molest, to afflict, to vex, to oppress. Also to stir
together. Also to break, to thresh or to bruise with a flaile. Tribolatione,
tribulation or trouble of mind, anguish, grief or pain. Tribolo, a kind of
thistles, bur or teaz^ls to teaze or scrape clothes with, called land
calthrops. Also caltrops used in war to prick horses feet. Look Tribulo.
Tribracho, a foot in verse of three short syllables. Tribu or Tribo, the 35.
part of the people of Rome, because the whole number of citizens was divided in
35. tribes, we may call them tribes, bands, wards or hundreds. It seems that
in old time the same people were divided into three parts only, and that this
name Tribu did first rise thereof. Tribuire, buisco, buito, to give, to favor,
to attribute, to ascribe unto, to set much by, to esteem or account, to impute
unto, to grant, to bestow, to apply or yield unto. Tribula, as Tribolo.
Tribulare, as Tribolare. Tribulatione, as Tribolatione. Tribule, one of the
same band or ward, and as some think one of the same stock, tribe or kindred.
Tribulo, a kind of weapon like a flaile. Also caltrops used in war to prick
horses feet; they are so made with four pricks of iron that which way soever
they be cast one prick stands up. Also as Tribolo. Tribuna, a tribunal or
royal court, a guild hall, a court or seat of justice or judgment. Tribunale,
a judgment or tribunal seat, a judgment seat. Tribunato, the office or
dignity of a tribune, the protectorship of the commons. Tribunitio, of or
belonging to the tribune. Also he that has been tribune. Tribuno, an officer
among the Romans having chief jurisdiction among the commons, a protector of
the commons, which office was appointed to maintain the liberties and benefits
of the commons against the power of the nobles, and for that cause had the
gates of their houses always standing open both night and day, a tribune.
Tributare, to bring to subjection, to subject, to make or cause to pay tribute
unto. Also to pay tribute to one. Tributario, tributarie, that pays tribute.
Tributione, a giving, a dealing, a distribution. Tributo, a tribute or money
raised upon the goods of subjects according to their ability. Triccare, to
shuffle, to iumble, to trip, to stumble, to stagger. Also to go a shuffling or
racking pace. Also to trifle, to jest or loytringly spend the time, to toye
with trifling words. Triccatina, a kind of tripping dance used in Italy. Also a
nimble dancing wench, a trifling, jesting wench. Tricche tacche, a kind of game
at tables called tick-tacke. Triccolare, to feed hungerly, to make good
cheer, to fare well, to tipple, to quaffe. Triccolo, a fruterer, a
costermunger, a huckster. Triccone, as Treccone. Trichiasi, a disease in women's
paps that give suck, which comes by drinking down of some hair. Also a
cleft about the back bone running out in length, but so small that it cannot
be seen, and oftentimes it causes death. Trico, a kind of stone that has 3.
diverse colors in it, at the root it is black, in the middle sanguine, and at
the top white. Tricomene, the herb maiden-haire or goldi-locks. Tridente, a
three forked mace, any weapon or tool having three teeth, any tool or
instrument that has three teeth. Tridramma, a coin of three drag^es in
Greece. Triduano, of three days continuance. Triegua, as Tregua. Trieguare, as
Treguare. Triemare, as Tremare. Triemito, as Tremito. Trienne, that has three
years. Also a small coin about the value of a farthing. Trienza, a
pitch-forke, a dung-forke. Trienzetta, a little pitch-forke or dung-forke.
Trifat^dico, that is a great prophet. Triface, a darte or quarrel three cubits
long shot out of a Catapulta. Trifauce, having three throtes or mouths, as
Cerberus had. Trifoglio, three-leafed-grasse. Some call it trefoyle or suckles.
Triforme, that has three forms or three shapes. Trigamo, he that has had
three wives. Trigemino, three children at a birth, or one of those children.
Also three fold. Trigesimo, the thirtieth in number. Triggea, as Treggea.
Triglia, as Treglia. Triglite, a fish called a mullet. Also a stone of the
color of a mullet. Triglifo, graven hollow like three gutters or furrows, as
we see in wainscot works. Trigonale, three cornered or that has three
corners. Trigonia, the third age. Trigono, a triangle, three cornered, having
three corners. Also a fish called a thorne-backe. Trigoli, a kind of fruit in
Italy. Some take it for a kind of thistles. Trilingue, one that speaks three
languages. Also three forked. Also one that has three toongs. Trilustre,
containing three lustres, that is fifteenth years. Trimacro, a foot in meeter
of three long syllables. Trimetri, a verse of three measures, which are six
feet, as Iambikes. Trinare, to chirp as a swallow. Trinario, consisting of the
number of three. Trinca, a game at cards called swig or new cut. Trincare, as
Tracannare. Also to trim or smug up. Nuoua di trinca, as we use to say spike
and span new. Trincato, fine, neat, smug, feat, trickesie, trim, crafty,
wily, sly, subtle, spruse. Trincea, a trench, a dike, or askonce about a camp
or fort. Trinceare, to entrench, to inskonce, to fortify with trenches.
Trinch^tto, a small sail in a ship called a trinket. Trinci, gardings,
fringings, lacings, iaggings, hemmings, weltings or other ornaments of
garments. Also cuts, iags, or snips in garments. Trinciante, a caruer at a
noble man's board. Also keen, or sharp. Also a caruing knife. Trinciare, to
cut, to carue, to slice, to break up or shread any meat, to mince. Trine,
cuts, iags, snips, or such cutting or pinching, pinckt work in garments. Trine
velutate, a kind of silken stuff so called. Trinepote, he that is three
lineall descents from my child's child. Trinezza, she that is three lineall
descents from my child's child. Trinfare, to chirp as a swallow. Trini, three
together. Also two treis upon the dice cast at once. Trinita, the holy
Trinity, the number of three. Also a kind of herb called Hepatica. Look
Hepatica. Trino, trine, consisting of three, threefolde. Trinomio, of three
names. Trinsare, to chirp as a swallow. Trinzante, as Trinciante. Triobolo, a
coin in greece of three oboles worth about two pence sterlin, a dandiprat.
Trione, seven stars being in the north, called Charles waine. Triomfale,
triumphant, vide Corona, of or belonging to triumph. Trionfante, triumphant,
rejoicing. Trionfare, to triumph, to rejoice, to get the conquest. Also to
rejoice greatly. Also to trump at cards. Trionfatore, a triumpher, a reioycer.
Trionfetti, a game at cards as our trump. Trionfo, triumph, joy, gladness,
which is a solemn pomp or show at the return of a captain for some victory
gotten. Also a trump at cards, or the play called trump or ruff. Triorca, a
kind of the herb centorie. Triorco, a kind of hawke, named so because it
feeds upon Triorca, which is said to have three stones. Triotalmo, a stone
having the figure of three eyes in it. Tripe, as Trippe. Tripara, as Trippara.
Triparco, very sparing, niggish. Tripartire, to divide in three parts.
Tripartito, tripartite, divided in three parts. Tripedale, that has three
feet, or is three foot long. Tripettore, thrice breasted, or that has three
breasts. Triplicare, to treble, to triple, to put three together, to fold a
thing three times. Triplicatione, a tripling, or folding, or doing thrice.
Triplice, triple, treble, three-fould, or three together. Triplo, triple,
three-fould. Tripode, a kind of musical instrument. Also a three-foo^ed
stool, a treuet, a tressle. Tripolio, the herb Serapions turbith, the root
whereof is thought to be Turbith, used to purge fleagme. Some call it blue
camomill or blue dasies. Tripolo, a tool that stone-cutters use. Tripone, as
Trippone. Trippaccie, filthy foul tripes. Trippa, a kind of tripe velvet
that they make wome^s saddles with called fustian of Naples. Trippara, a
tripe-woman. Trippe, all manner of tripes or souse. Trippone, a filthy, foul,
fat, greasy, gorbellied man. Triptoti, nounes having but three cases.
Tripudiare, to dance, to trip on the toes. Tripudij, dancing of birds or
trippings, trippings on the toes. Tripudio, a kind of foolish country dance or
tripping on the toe. Trireme, a gallie of three oars on a bank or side.
Trisagio. Trisciato, smooth, vp-straight, smug, smirke, handsomely dressed up.
Trisilabo, of three sillables. Trissa, a kind of grate of timber which some
ships have for an upper deck. Trissagine, the herb Germander, after some the
upright Verueine, or as some call it Chamaepitus. Tristacciuolo, as
Tristanzuolo. Tristamente, sadly, pensiuely. Also badlie, naughtilie, or
craftily. Tristanzuolo, a wearish, crazed, sickly man. Also a crafty, slye,
knauish wag. Tristarello, somewhat knauish, wily, or crafty. Also sad,
discontent, heavy, or pensive. Also a kestrell. Look Tristo. Tristezza,
knauishnes, craftines, subtilnes. Also sadness, heaviness, pensiuenes,
sorowfulnes. Tristinculo, a kestrell. Tristitia, as Tristezza. Tristitiuole,
little knaueries or trumperies. Tristo, sad, discontent, grieved, melancholy,
pensive, heavy, full of discomfiture, sorrowful, woeful, of much gravity,
unpleasant. Also knauish, wily, crafty, subtle, malicious, deceitful, slye.
Trisulca, having three edges, or three-forked, an arrow-headed tongue. Trita,
tender, or mortified. Also small, minced, or common, worn and beaten small.
Tritale, an herb which thrice a year has flowers. Tritamente, by piecemeale,
mincinglie, smallie, commonly used. Tritamento, a mincing, a wearing, or
cutting small. Tritare, to bruze, to wear, to champ, to stamp, to cut, to
crumble, to slice, to shread, or mince as small as may be. Also to grind or
thresh corn, to wear to nothing. Tritaua, Tritauola, a great grandmothers
mother. Tritauo, Tritauolo, a great grandfathers father. Tritello, a kind of
ranged bread. Triteo, a kind of measure. Tritera, as Fagiolata. Tritico, all
manner of corn that may be ground, we call it in english greest, but it is
properly red wheat. Tritinare, to cry or hiss as a goose or a duck. Trito,
small, minced, worn, made in dust, common, usual, homely, overcome, old,
threadbare, broken, wasted, much used. Also the act of breaking, brusing,
threshing or grinding. Tritolare, as Tritare. Tritolo, as Trito. Also as
Boccata. Tritono, consisting of three tuns. Tritoni, a kind of serpents,
tritons. Triturare, as Tritare. Trituratura, any kind of grinding small. Look
Trito. Triuella, a wimble, an agree or a boarer. Triuellure, to boar through
with an agree. Triuellino, a little wimble or agree. Triuello, a wimble, an agree
or a boarer. the boar of a cannon. Triuellone, a boaring iron to boar a
canon. Triuiale, common, used, homely, triuiall, used or taught in high ways,
of small estimation. Triuialita, homelines, triuiality. Triuio, a place that
looks three ways, or where three sundry ways do meet, a way that passes
outright, and parts on the left and on the right side. Also a market place
where common people do meet, and where common resort is. Also a cottage or
poor country house. Triumuirale, of or belonging unto the office of
Triumuiro. Triumuirato, the office of three in like authority. Triumuiro, one
of the three officers that are in equal and like authority. Triuolo, a kind
of burre, bramble, or thistle. Some have taken it for mournful. Triuoloso,
full of thistles, brambles, or burres. Also mournful. Trocheo, a foot in a
verse consisting of two feet, the first a long syllable and the last a short,
so called of swiftnes in running, and because it was fit for dancing. Trochilo,
a wren. It is also another kind of water-fowle friend to the Crocodile, some
take it for a wagtaile, because it does continually wag the tail, othersome
for a sea-wood-cock because it has a long bill. Trochisci, any kind of
medicine made round like a loase, the Apothecaries call them Trochiske.
Trocciola, a pullie of a well or a ship. Also any kind of little wooden
wheel. Trocleo, a pullie wherein cords do run, a windelace. Trofeo, as
Tropheo. Trogliare, as Balbezzare. Troglio, a stutting, stammering, lisping
fellow. Troia, a farrowing sow. Also a common filthy whore. Troiare, to
farrow, or pig as a sow does. Troiata, a farrowing sow, a hog-stye. Also a
sowes pigging, a farrowing. Tromba, a trump, or a trumpet. Also a sackbut.
Tromba d'amore, as Coppa di Gioue. Tromba di fuoco, a kind of casting
wilde-fier used in wars and fights. Trombare, to sound a trumpet, to busse,
to make a rumbling noise. Trombattore, a trumpeter. Trombeggiare, to sound a
trumpet, or to play upon a sackbut. Also to proclaim. Also to snort, to trump
or bray as an ass. Trombeggiata, any march or point of war sounded upon a
trumpet. Trombeggiatore, a trumpeter. Trombetta, a trumpet, a trump. Also a
trumpeter. Trombettare, as Trombeggiare. Trombettaro, a trumpeter. Trombettero,
a trumpeter. Trombettiero, a trumpeter. Tromboncino, a treble or mean sackbut.
Trombone, a bace or great sackbut, a great trump. Also a foul called a Bittor.
Troncare, to cut off, to clip, to pare, to curtall, to cut short, to abridge,
to mayme. Troncato, cut off, clipped, pared, curtalled, cut short, abridged,
maimed, mangled, imperfect. Tronco, as Troncato, a trunk, a stock, a log, a
block, a stump, a stem without boughs. Also a body without a head. Also a
troncheon or a bat. Also a loggerheaded fellow, a block-headed dunce, a
heauie-nole. Troncone, a great Tronco. Troncoli, the vailes of a cook, the
giblets or shreds of meat or foul. Tronfare, to puff, to swell, to blow up.
Also to trumpe at cards. Tronfiare, as Tronfare. Tronfiezza, a puffing
swelling, or huffing. Tronfio, puffed, swollen, full, blown up Also a trumpe at
cards, a game at cards called trumpe. Tronfo, as Tronfio. Tronera, a loope
hole, a spike hole to shoot out at. Trono, a throne or seat of majesty.
Tronzoli, the dung or truttles of any cattle, as of sheep. Tropheo, a trophey,
a sign or token of victory, any spoils gotten from the enemy kept in sign
of victory, a mark or token set up where a victory was had, and where
enemies were vanquished, with their harne^s or other spoils hanged on it, a
brave, a victory for joy. Also used for a certain wind moving and stirring,
which comes from the sea to the land. Tropello, a troop, a route, a croude, a
crew, a band, or company of people. Tropiccare, to stumble, to trip, to fall,
or tumble down. Tropicciare, as Stropicciare. Tropici, two great circles in
heaven being of equal distance from the Equator, the one is called Tropico di
Capricorno, the other Tropico di Cancro, at the which the sun turns either
higher having been at the lowest, or lower having been at the highest,
whereof they have their names. Tropico, figurative. Tropo, a figure, a manner
or fashion of speaking. Tropologia, a figurative speech or speaking. Tropolio,
a kind of herb. Troppa, a troop, a squadron, or band of men. Troppi, too
many, ouer-manie. Troppo, too much, overmuch, superfluous. Troppo grande, too
great. Etroppo, it is too much. Troscia, a flow of water, a sink. Also a small
standing water. Also a violent shower of rain. Trosciare, to shower down
violently. Also to grow to a standing water. Trota, as Truta, or Trutta.
Trotta, as Truta, or Trutta. Trottante, trotting, a trotting horse. Also
drudging, a drudge. Trottare, to trot, to go a trotting pace, to trudge.
Trottatore, a trotter, a trotting horse, a trudger. Trottiera, a place where
horses learn to trot. Also a word much used in Venice about their magistrates.
Trottino, a trotting nag. Trotto, a trot, or trotting pace. Trottolare, to
turn round as a top or a gigge. Also to rack or go a shuffling pace, that is
neither an a^^ble nor a trot. Trottolo, a racking or shuffling pace, a top or a
gigge to play with. Also a kind of fish. Trottone, a trotter, a trotting horse.
Trouadelli, findlings, children found, findings. Trouare, to find, to devise,
to invent, to imagine, to get, to obtain, to procure, to seek out. Trouato,
found, devised, invented, imagined, gotten, obtained, procured, sought out.
Also a device, an invention, a conceit, an imagination, an excuse. Trouatore, a
finder, an inuentor, a deviser. Also used for a poet or a^ctor. Trozzare, as
Strozzare. Also to tread a path. Trozzetto, a little path or narrow way.
Trozzo, a path or common high trodden way. Trucca, a fustian or rogish word for
a trull, a whore, or a wench. Trucca bocca. Trucca coltelli. Truccare, to
truck, to barter, to change ware for ware, to swab. Also to trudge, to skud, or
pack away, to chop and change. Also to play at billiards. Trucco, a kind of
play with balls upon a table called billiards, but properly a kind of game
used in England with casting little bowls at a board with thirteen holes in
it. Truculento, cruel, fell, grim, gastlie, grisly, horrid in looks, rough,
terrible. Truculentia, cruelty. Truce, Trucido, cruel, fierce, terrible,
dreadful or rough. Trucidare, to kill, to murder, to slay in most cruel and
bloody manner. Trucidatione, a killing or murdering in most cruel manner.
Trucitare, the voice of the mauis or thrush Truffa, a cosening, cheating,
conicatching, pilfring, crosbiting or purloying trick. Truffare, to cosen, to
cheat, to con^catch, to crosbite, to pilfer or purloyne. Truffaria, as Truffa.
Truffaruola, a cosening, cheating or conicatching wench. Truffarello, a
crafty, cosening, cheating, conicatching, filching knave. Truffatore, a
cosener, a cheater, a crosbiter, a conicatcher, a pilfrer, a filcher. Truffoli,
a kind of paste-meate used in Italy. Truggiolare, to tug, to touze, to hale.
Truogo, Truogola, a trough to feed swine in. Trulla, a close stool* used also
for a traie of wood or bread washing bowl, or a wooden broad cup or mazor to
drink in. Trullare, to go to a close stool, to cacke, to fart, to break wind
behind. Trullo, a roch-fish. Truouare, as Trouare. Truouato, as Trouato.
Trusciare, to blurt with ones lips or tongue to encourage a horse in managing
him. Also to pop. Truscio di labbra, a blurting with ones tongue or lip to
encourage a horse, a popping with ones lips. Truta, Trutta, a fish called a
trout, a Salmon trout or a Salmon peale. Trutilare, as Trutillare. Trutillare,
to sing as a thrush or a black bird. Trutina, a diligent examination or
considering, a good advise or judgment. Trutinare, to weigh or examine, to
consider well and thoroughly. Tu, thou, thy self. Tua, thine, thine own.
Tuare, to thou a man, to make thine. Tuba, a trump or a trumpet. Tubercoli, a
little swelling or push, a pimple or wheale. Tubero, a puff growing on the
ground like a mushrome or toade stool. Also a swelling in a man's body, a
bunch, a knob, a round rising commonly with a fall. also a knot in a tree.
Tubertana, in French Granate. Tubo, a pipe wherein water is conveyed to a
conduit. Also the pipe wherethrough the marrow of the back bone runs.
Tucia, as Tutia. Tudice, a printers ink bals, called pumping bals, wherewith
they beat the letters in the form lying upon the press. Also a printing iron.
Tudone, a foul called a bittor. Tuello, part of a horses foot. Tuffare, to
diue, to ducke or plunge under water, to dampe, to smoother, to stifle.
Tuffata, a diuing, a ducking or plunging under water. Tuffo, as Tuffata. Also a
damp or loathsome smell coming out of some dungeon. Also a turfe, a clod or
lump of earth to burn* also a kind of black stone that is very soft and
mouldring. Tuffolare, as Tuffare. Also to feed, to cram or pamper or make fat.
Tuffolotta guancia, a plum, round, apple check. fat or pampred. Tufo, a kind
of soft crumbling or moldring quarrie stone to build with. Tugurio, a
sherpherds cottage, bully or shead, a house in the country. Tugurietto, a
little homely shepherds cottage. Tul, for Tuil, as Tulfaceti, thou did it,
thout it. Tulipa, an herb called little Narcissus. Tumere, to swell, to rise,
to puff up, to increase or burst out. Also to wax proud, stately and
disdainful. Tumidamente, swellingly, puffingly, proudly, haughtily,
disdainfully. Tumidezza, as Tumore. Also surquedrie. Tumidire, disco, dito, to
swell, to fester, to rankles to puff up. Also to become proud and disdainful.
Tumido, swollen, risen, festred or puffed up. Also proud, disdainful or
haughtie-minded, lofty. Tumolo, a tomb, a grave or a sepulcher, a hearse.
Also a little hill, hillock or barrow, a heap of any thing. Tumore, a
swelling, a rising, a puffing up, a festring. Also loftines, pride, disdain or
haughtines. Also an inflammation, a rising of flesh by some malicious matter or
ill humor. Tumorosita, as Tumore. Tumoroso, full of swelling, festring or
inflammation. Tumulo, as Tumolo. Tumulto, a tumult, a sedition, a hurly-burly,
a ruffling, a business, stir, trouble or broile, that rises of a great fear,
sedition, insurrection, commotion of people, great noise and broile, uproar or
mutiny. Tumultuante, as Tumultuoso. Tumultuare, to raise a tumult, an uproar,
a sedition or a hurly-burly, to ruffle, to make a tumult, ruffling, stir or
business, to storm, to trouble, to be in an uproar. Tumultuario, that is done
in haste without aduisement, that is done suddenly and without fear, hasty,
unorderly, suddenly, rashly, made or hudled up in haste, tumultuous, ruffling.
Tumultuatione, a tumult, a trouble or business, a ruffling or stirring in a
sudden fear. Tumultuoso, tumultuous, seditious, turbulent, ruffling, full of
business, trouble, and ruffling, troublous, that stirs to sedition, busy,
full of that which causes hurly-burly, broile and stir, rough and tempestuous.
Tunara, fishing for tunnies. Tunica, as Tonaca, or Tonica. Tune, a ginnie-hen.
Tuo, thine, thine own. Tuo, take, hold, catch, have to thee. Tuoi, thine,
thine own. Tuonare, to thunder to rumble, to tune, to sound or give a true
accent. Tuonante, thundering, rumbling, tuning, sounding, accenting.
Tuoneggiare, as Tuonare. Tuono, a thunder, a rumbling, a tune, a note, a sound,
an accent. Tuor, Tuorre, as Toglicre, or Torre. Tuordo, Tuordello, as Tordo.
Tuorlo, as Torlo. Tuosa, a purse of money in rogues language or pedlers french.
Tuppo, the docke or the rump of a horses tail. Turaccio, a stopple, a bung, a
muffler. Also a skouring stick for a piece of ordinance. Turacciolo, as
Turaccio. Turaglio, as Turaccio. Turare, to stop, to muffle, to dam up. Turba,
the common people, a multitude, a rout, a crew or crowd of people, an assembly
of people, a throng, a swarm, a rabble or rout, the many-headed-monster
multitude. Also trouble, debate, stur or ruffling. Turbamento, a perturbation,
trouble or molestation of the mind. Turbante, a turba^t, that is a round
wreathed round attire of white linen, as all the Turks wear on their head.
It is just like a top or gig that children play withal turned vpside down.
Turbare, to trouble, to molest, to disturb or move, to anger, to stir, to
ruffle, to disorder, to confound and make unquiet. Turbato, troubled, molested,
disturbed, vexed, angry, stirred, moved, ruffled, disordred, confounded, and
made unquiet. Turbe, troubled, fatal, duskie, gloomie, dark. Also turfes or
turues of earth to burn. Turbidare, as Torbidare. Turbido, as Torbido.
Turbinare, to make round and sharp like a top. Turbinatione, the fashion of a
thing broad above and small beneath, like a top. Turbinato, round, or sharp
like a top, broad above and small beneath, contrary to a turbant. Turbine, a
whirle wind, a gust, a berrie, or flawe, or sudden blast of wind, a
boystrous storm or tempest, or wind beating down trees and houses. Also a
breaker and disturber. also a tempest and danger. Also fury and sudden rage.
also a whirle-poole, a violent and great ruinous stream. Also a top, gigge
or nun that children play with, a whirlegigge. Also a bird called a
wrie-neck. Also a woodpecker, or specht. Also a shellfish called a welke or
wrinkle. Also a still or stillatorie, a limbecke. Tu^bineo, of, or belonging to
a storm and blustering wind, or whirling round. Turbistro, a thing mixed with
liquor wherewith wool is died, which makes the die sink into the wool.
Turbith, a root used in physic to purge fleame. Turbo, as Turbine. Also as
Trottola. Turbolente, as Torbolente. Turbolenza, as Torbolenza. Turbone, a
ruffler, a swaggrer, a swash-buckler, a tistitostie, a ruffian. Turbulente, as
Torbulente. Turcasso, a quiver to put in arrows. Also a goldsmiths case or
box for his pounces. Turchesa, a blue precious stone called a Turkoise.
Turchesca, as Turchesa. Also turkish. Turchimano, as Torcimano. Turchina, as
Turchesa. also blue, azure, or sky color. Turchino, blue, azure, watchet, or
bisse color. Turcimano, as Torcimanno. Turdella, as Tordo. Turdo, as Tordo.
Turco, a Turk, a turkey horse. Turesia, as Turchesa. Turgere, turgo, turgei,
turgiuto, to swel, to puff, to fester, to blow up, to rankle, to burgen and
grow, and wax big, and swell for anger. Turgiuto, swollen, puffed, festred,
blown up. Look Turgere. Turgido, swollen, puffed up, risen, inflate, big,
strouting out. Turibolo, as Toribolo. Turini, a kind of mushrums, or toades
stools. Turma, a troop, a crew, or company of men, as Turba* but properly, a
company or troop of soldiers containing 32 horsemen. Turluru, a fool, a
gull, a ninnie, a patch. Turpe, filthy, dishonest, shameful, foul,
unlawful, reproachful, vnhonorable. Turpidire, disco, dito, to beraie, to
defile, to pollute, to dishonest, to deface, to bring out of good fashion, to
disfigure. Turpilla, as Sgramfo. Turpitudine, filthiness, dishonestie, shame,
reproach, villainy, deformity, rebuke, ill-fauourednes. Turpore, as Torpore.
Tuso, bruised, beaten, or stamped. Tussilagine, an herb good for the cough
called folefoote, or coltesfoote, horsefoot, or bull-foote. Called also of the
apothecaries Vnghia cauallina, or Vnghia di cauallo, it has leaves like Iuie,
but bigger, with many corners, the upper part green, the nether whitish, and
lies flat on the ground. Tussire, Tussito, as Tossire. Tutela, a wardship, a
gardianship, or custody of a child in his noneage. Also tuition,
safe-keeping, protection, defending. Tutelare, to guard, to keep, or protect a
child. Also of or belonging to protection, to a guardian, or to the custody of
a ward, or to defense. Tutelina, the goddess having the tuition of corn.
Tutthora, at all hours or times. Tutia, a kind of medicinable stone or dust
good for bruses, called Tutie, which is the heavier foil of brass that
cleaves and sticks to the higher places of fornaces or melting houses.
Tutilare, to sing as a black-birde or a thrush. Tuto, sure, safe, secure, out
of danger, defended from peril. Tutore, a tutor, a guardian, a protector, a
defender, he that has the tuition of a ward. Tutoria, a tutorship, a
protection. Tutta fiata, still, always, continually, evermore. Also
nevertheless, or yet. Tutta via, as Tutta fiata. Tutta via che,
notwithstanding that, whenever that. Tutta volta, as Tutta fiata. Tutto, all,
altogether, the whole, every whit or jot. Tutto che, all that, whatsoever
that. Tuttocio, all that, whatsoever that. Tutto a vntratto, all at once, all
at a cast. Tutto per tutto, as Tututto. Tutto quanto, as Tututto. Tutto in
sapore, loving earnestly, even till ones teeth run a water. Tutto di, all day
long. Tutto sella, the full time of a man's or horses perfection in ryding. Look
Huomo and Cauallo. Tutto solo, all alone. Tuttuno, all one, all alike. Tutulo,
the top of the hair wounden with a purple lace, or the crown of a matrons
head, proper to the high priests wife to discern her from other women.
Tututto, altogether, every whit and deal.
V
V, Where? whether? there, thither. Also you. Va, go, go thou. Also he goes.
Vacalsuth, a tree in America that bears a fruit, in form like a man's heart
and smells most sweet. Vacant, vacant, void of, being without. Also that
is at leisure, at good leisure, as though he had nothing to do. Vacanza,
vacation, vacancie, leisure, ceasing from labor or common business. vacation of
time, ceasing, exemption, immunitie, dispensation. Vacare, to cease or give
over labor, to have or be at leisure. Also to endeavor or apply the time,
and study to any thing, to attend and give his mind and diligence to a thing.
Also to be empty, void, clear or without. Vacatione, as Vacanza. Vacca, a
cow. Also a kind of fish. Vaccamente, like a cow, whorishlie, beastly.
Vaccareccia, cowish, beastly, filthy, or cowe-beefe. Vaccarella, as Vacchetta.
Vaccaro, a coweheard, a neate-heard. Vaccheggiare, to play the cow, the beast
or filthy whore. Vacchetta, a little heifer, or young cow. Also neates
leather. Vacciare, to speed, to hasten, to rid, to dispatch. Vaccina, as
Vacchetta. Vaccina, of a cow or neates leather. Also cowes flesh, or beef.
also of or belonging to a cow. Vaccinio, as Vacinio. Also cowes cheese.
Vaccio, speedily, quickly, hastily, out of hand. Vaccinari, the fruits of
brambles. blackberries. Vacconaccia, a filthy great cow, a common strumpet, a
filthy whore. Vacerra, a rail or perclose made of timber, wherein something
is closed. Also a stake or post whereunto horses be tide in stables. Vacile, a
basen to wash hands in, a lauer. Vacillare, to waver, to be fickle, to stagger,
to totte, to move inconstantly, not to stand sure, to reele or stagger, to
shake, to wagge, or waver, to be loose and unconstant. Vacillamento,
inconstancy, wavering, ficklenes, mutabilitie, a totting, a wagging.
Vacillante, unconstant, imperfect, fickle, staggring, wavering, tottring,
reeling, mutable. Vaccillatione, as Vacillamento. Vacinio, the fruit of the
great bramble, a black-berrie, a whort, or whortle berrie. Some take it for the
sweet violet, garden violet, or marsh violet. Othersome for the flower of the
herb Hiacinthus or crowe-toes, Vacinio palustre, a fen-berrie, or marsh whort.
Vacuare, to empty, or void, to make hollow. Vacu^ta, vacuitie, emptines,
voidenes, hollownes, cleerenes, or freedom from. Vacuo, void, empty, idle
and vain, waste, hollow, open and wide, careless, free, deuoide, that
brings no profit, quiet and free, not let or troubled with any occupation
or business, at laisure, having nothing to do, void of care, delivered, free or
exempt from. Vada, let him go, let it go, a word at primero, as we say pass,
let it go, or play. Vadare, to wade, to foarde or pass over a water. Also to
go or run as a river does. Vadetti, narrow wading places or foards. It is
also taken for button holes. Vadia, some kind of mournful habit that the
widows in Venice wear. Vadimonio, a promise or bond of appeerance before a
judge at a day appointed, a day of appearance. Vado, any foard, f^rrie,
passage, or wading place, a shallowe place, where men and beasts may go over a
foot or wade through without danger. Also taken for the sea. Also the first
person singular of the present tence of the Indicative mood of the verb
Andare, I go, Look Andare. Vadoso, a water that may be waded over by man or
beast without danger. full of foardes or shallow places. Also fennie, watrish,
deep, moorish, plashie, or boggie. Vadrito, a bird that seems to chirpe
Vadrito. Vaframento, a craft, a guile, a wile. Vafro, crafty, wily,
guilefull. Vagabondo, a vagabond, wandering, gadding, ranging, rouing or roguing
idly about or up and down. Also a rogue or earth planet, or a faitour. Vagame,
as Vagabondo. Vagante, as Vagabondo, wandering from place to place, now in one
part, now in another. Vagare, to wander, to roame, to gadde, to iet, or loytre
idly up and down, to vagarie, or range, to straie abroad, to go from coast
to coast. Vagatione, a vagarie, a gadding, or roaming of the mind, a wandering
or straiing about. Vagellamenti d'occhi, dimnes, mistines, or darkness, or
rolling of the eyes. Vagellare, to dim, to darken, to ouercaste or turn up
ones eyes. Vagheggiare, to behold or view amorouslie, to court or make love
unto with looks, to desire, to admire, to consider or gaze upon with delight.
Vagheggiatore, an amorous beholder, or lover, a gazer, an admirer or viewer
with delight. Vaghezza, beauty, handsomnes, favor, delight, grace, propernes,
love, delightful admiration, amorous desire or lust. Also hope. Vaghire,
ghisco, ghito, as Inuaghire. Vagghire, ghisco, ghito, to cry as a hare does.
Also to houle as a woolfe. Vagghito, cride as a hare, howled as a woolfe.
Vaggimento, a whining or crying of a child. Vaggire, as Vagghire. Also to cry
or whine as a child or little infant. Vaggito, cride, or whined as a child.
the crying or whyning of infants or young children. Also as Vagghito.
Vagillare, as Vacillare. Vagina, a sheath for a knife, a scabberde for a
rapier, a case of leather. Vagimento, a whining, a crying, a walling, a
howling. Vaginare, to sheath or put into a scabbard. Vagire, as Vaggire.
Vagito, as Vaggito. Vagitamento, as Vagimento. Vagitare, to cry or wh^ne as a
little infant. Vagli, sieues, fans, boulters, scarces, or winnowes to winnow
corn with. Vaglia, worth or value. Vagliare, to sist, to purge, to winnow, to
searce. Vaglio, a sieue, a winnow, a searce, a van. Also I am worth. Also a
valuation or esteem. Vagnele, as Guagnele. Vago, beautiful, saire, trim,
glad, handsome, graceful, proper, pretty, lovely, gracious, loving, gentle,
comely, blithe, bonnie unto the ere. Also buckesome, full of glee, desirous,
glad, amorous, longing, delightful, sheene, enamoured, lusty, lustful,
thirsty, covetous. Also gadding or wandering up and down, and abiding in no
place, uncertain, roauing, unconstant, flickering, moving and restles,
running at random, flittering. Also ones favorite, minion, lover, servant,
pigs-ney, wanton, darling, paramour or hearts delight. Vaiaro, a surrier or a
skinner. Vaio, Vai, a kind of rich furre called gray miniuer. Vaiolo, Vaiuolo,
a pocke, a blane, a plague, a sore, a carbuncle, a botch, a winchester goose.
Also a fish called a bace. Vairone, a fish called a cob, a quob or gudgeon.
Valanghino, the name of a smiths tool. Val caua, used by Bocace for a woman's
privy parts, a hollow cave or vallie. Valcare, as Valicare, as Gualcare.
Valchera, as Gualca. Valco, as Vado, or Varco. Valcostura, the seame-vallie,
used for the priuities of a woman. Valdrappa, a foot clothe to ride withal.
Vale, used to bid one farewell. Also it is worth. Also as much to say. Valente,
valiant, worthy, valorous, puissant, mighty, strong, in good health, that can
do much, of great force, like to prevail. Also value or worth. Valentia, as
Valentigia. Valentigia, value, valor, worth, valiancie, worthiness, puissance,
might, power, strength. Valentre, as Valente. Valenterie, valiant, worthy or
valorous exploits. Valenza, as Valentigia, as Valor. Valenzana, a kind of
say, serge or stuff to make curteins for beds with. Valenzana del letto, the
valances of a bed. Valere, vaglio, valsi, valuto, to be worth, to prevail, to
be of value, to be able, of authority, of force and power, to may or can, to do
much, to profit, to serve or be good for, to be strong or puissant, to be
whole, to be in health, to have the force of, to be much or greatly esteemed.
Valuto, been worth, prevailed, been of value. Look Valere. Valeriana, the
herb Valerian, caponstaile or setwall. Valetudinario, subject to sickness,
sickly, often sick, queasie. Also an hospital for sick folks. Valetudine,
as Valitudine. Valeuole, worth, valuable, able, mighty, vaileable, of worth.
Valgio, an instrument to make floores smooth. Valgo, a man that has his legs
bowed outward, narrow between the knees and the feet inward, that goes like
a creuisse, crooked or wry in going. Valicare, to foard, to wade or ferrie
over, to flote or go down a river according to the stream and tide of it, to
go a drist. Valido, strong, valiant, mighty, puissant, sturdie, able, valide,
of force, in good health, that can do much, forcible. Valigia, a male, a
cloke-bag, a budget, a portmanteaw. Valigiare, to put up in a male or
cloke-bag. Valigiaro, a maker of males, a budget maker, a cloke-bag maker. Also
a drummer. Valigietta, a little male, budget or cloke-bag. Valimento, value,
worth. Valitudine, health or welfare. Also sickness or crasednes, crasines or
weakness. Vallare, to enclose, to entrench, to fortify, or fence or hem in
about. Also to descend into a vallie*. vide Corona. Also of or pertaining to a
trenche or bullwarke. Vallata, a vallie, a dale, a vale. Valle, a vale, a
vallie or a dale. Vallea, as Valle. Valle di Acheronte, a woman's privy parts
or gheare. Also hell Valletta, a little dale or vallie. Valletto, a varlet, a
lackey, a groom, a page, a serving boy, a squire. Vallo, a rampire, a skonce,
or bulwark made of wood, a hold or a fort, a trench made to defend an army.
Also a pole or long sparre of timber, a stake or pile or post sharp at one end
to be driven into the ground. Vallone, a great vallie or dale. Also a strong
high rampire, forte or bulwark of wood. Look Vallo. Valloncello, as Valletta.
Vallonia, a kind of bark of a tree that tanners use to tan leathers. Valloso,
full of dales and valleies, and low bottoms. Vallura, a vallie or a dale.
Valoppa, a kind of monstrous shell fish somewhat like a bear. Valorare, as
Aualorare. Valor, worth, value, valor, worthiness, esteem. Valorosita, as
Valor. Valoroso, valorous, worthy, valiant, noble, hardy. Valsente, worth or
value or valuation. Valuare, to value, to prise, to esteem. Valuasore, a
principal officer having some dignity of honor about a Prince, a Lord or
commander in his own precinct, a vauoser: but sometimes now a days taken in
mockery, as we say a iollie fellow, a great man. Valuolo, the shale, busk or
peele of a bean. Also a pease shale or cod. Valuta, worth, value, or valuation.
Vampa, a sudden flame, flash or blaze of fire. Vampare, to flame, to blaze, to
flash, to burn bright or suddenly. Vanagloria, vainglory or ostentation.
Vanagloriare, to brag vaine-gloriouslie. Vanaglorioso, vainglorious,
bragging. Vanare, as Vaneggiare. Vanazzi, buzzards wings, goose wings.
Vaneggia, vanity, folly, lightness, fondnes, doting in words or deeds. as
Vanita. Also a void place or grass plot in a garden. Vaneggiare, to trifle,
to rave, to play any manner of vanity*. to doat. Vaneggiatore, a trifler, a
rauer, a fool, a fondman, a doater. Vanello, a bird called a lapwing. Vanezza,
as Vaneggia. Vanga, a goade. Also a spade, or a mattock. Also a fish called
Pesce vanga. Vangaiuola, a fishing net. Also a little goade, spade, or mattock.
Vangare, to delue or dig the ground. Also to prick with a goade.
Vangaruola, as Vangaiuola. Vangaticcio, delued, or dug ground. Vangelio,
the gospel, or gladsome tidings. Vangelista, an evangelist, a gospeller, a
bringer of good tidings. Vangelizzare, to preach the gospel, to bring glad
tidings. Vangelo, as Vangelio. Vanghetto, as Marra. Vania, misery,
wretchedness, ruth, or sillines, vanity. Also a wrong, an injury. Vanidico, a
liar, a teller or vain speaker of foolish and vain tales. Vaniloquentia,
vain talk, vain babbling. Vanire, nisco, nito, to vanish out of sight. Also
to wrong, to injury. Also to come to misery. Vanita, vanity, trifling,
fondnes, lightness, leasing, lying, folly, inconstancy. Vannare, to winnow or
vanne corn. Also to flutter with wings, or to fan with feathers. Vanni, used
for the whole wings of any bird. Also the principal forefeathers, or sarcels
of any birds wing. Vanno, a fan, or vanne to winnowe corn with, and to
cleanse it from chafe and dross against the wind. Also they go, being the
third person plural of the presentence of the Indicative mood of the verb
Andare. Vano, vain, void, hollow, or empty. Also foolish, vain, forcelesse,
frustrate, that misseth. idle, fond, or frivolous. Also false, lying,
delighting in lying and tryfles. Also light of credit or belief. Also a
hollow or void place. Vantaggiare, to advantage, to give odds, to save, to
spare, to hoord up. Vantaggiati, such soldiers as have more pay or privilege
then others. Vantaggio, advantage or ods. Vantaggioso, aduantagious, having ods
or advantage. Vantamento, as Vanto. Vantarsi, to boast, to brag, to glory,
to vante, to crake. Vantatore, a boaster, a bragger, a vanter, a craker. Vanto,
a vante, a boaste, a glory, a brag, a crake, an ostentation. Vapiccare, to
catch, to take hold of, to fasten unto, to seize on. Vapido, that gives an ill
smacke, that casts a vapor of an ill savor, stinking. Vaporare, to exhale,
to fume, to smoke, to vent, to euaporate, to steams, to reeke, to send out
vapors, to breath. Vaporatione, a casting of vapors or hot breath, a sweating
or a reaking of hot breath. Vapore, a vapor, a smoke, a fume, an exhalation, a
steaming, a reaking, a hot breath. Vaporoso, full of vapors, or exhalations.
Vappa, wine that has lost his force and strength, used also for a man in whom
is no wit or reason. Vara, a kind of grapes. Look Vua vara. Also a post set
upright with a forke in the upper end to bear up another post ouerlaid.
Varare, to lanch a ship from out the dock into the water. Varcare, to wade,
pass, foard, or ferrie over any water, as Vadare. Varco, a foard, a ferrie, a
passage, or wading place of any river, as Vado, Look Vado. Also a kind of
measure in Italy. Vardare, as Guardare. Vare, net shoares, little forkes
wherewith nets are set and borne up for wild beasts. Also as Varole, or
Varuole. Vari, a kind of furre called gray miniuer. Variabile, variable,
changeable, mutable, diverse, fickle, unconstant, subject to change. Variamente,
changeablie, vnconstantlie, diversely, variablie. Variante, diverse, of diverse
colors and fashions, varying, changing, changeable, mutable, inconstant. Also
verrie or varrie in armorie. Variantia, as Varieta. Variare, to vary, to
change, to differ, to alter, to make diverse or of sundry fashions, to
interlace, to work with diverse colors, to deck, trim, or mingle diversely,
to vary, to differ, to disagree or square in opinion, to write diversely. also
to change, to alter, or be mutable. Variatione, a variation, a change or
alteration, a changing, a being or making diverse. Variato, varied, verrie or
varry in arms, changed, wrought with diverse colors, made diverse. Varice, a
crooked vain swelling with corrupt and melancholy blood namely in the legs,
temples, or belly. Varicare, to go wide with the knees or legs, or to go
stradling. Also to transgress or pass over negligentlie. Varico, that has
the veins of his legs puffed, swollen, and full of blood. Also that goes wide
or stradling. Varicola, as Varice. Varicoso, that has the veins swollen and
puffed up more then ordinary with ill and gross melancholy blood. Varieta,
variety, difference, change, ficklenes, or inconstancy, diversity,
mutabilitie, choice. Varile, any kind of barell or firkin. Vario, diverse,
sundry, unlike, variable, unconstant, flickering, doubtful, changeable,
mutable, of diverse colors or fashions. Also that has spots in the face, or is
speckled and freckled. Also one well seen in diverse and sundry matters, full
of variety, that changes color, used also for a trout or burnetrout, used
also for Vaio. Varlotto, a rundlet, a little barell, or firkin. Varo, crooked,
winding, bending, awrye. Also that has crooked legs bending inward. Also open
to gripe and embrace. Also a dock wherein ships be built. Also diverse and
repugnant. Also a spot, a speck, a fleck, or freckle in ones face. Varola, a
kind of fish called a Base. Varolare, to infect, or be infected with the pox.
Varole Vare, or Varuole picciole, the small pox, which be little white risings
but red round about. Also little red pimples or specks on the face being hard
and round, such as we see commonly in drunkards faces. Varole, gross, the
great or french pox. Varolo, as Vaiuolo, a fish called a Base. Varoloso,
pockie, full of the pox, botches, or blanes. Varone, as Vairone. Varotaio, a
skinner or a furrier. Varra, any kind of bar, as Barra. Varrella, a little
bar. Varrile, as Varile, or Barile. Varrilotto, as Varlotto. Varro, a kind
of long measure so called in Italy. Also a kind of cormorant. Varuasore, as
Valuasore. Varuola, as Varola. Varuolare, as Varolare. Varuole, gross. Look
Varole. Varuole picciole. Look Varole. Varuolo, as Vaiuolo. Vasa, all manner
or any kind of vessels. Vasaio, a vessel maker, a potter. Vasca, Look Tina.
Vascapo, a kind of Munks habit. Vascolo, any kind of little vessel.
Vascellanie, all kind of vessels. Vascellamento, all manner of vessels.
Vascellaro, a potter, or vessel maker. Vascello, any kind of vessel. Vase,
any kind of vessel. Vasella, as Vascella. Vasellamento, as Vascellamento.
Vasellaro, as Vascellaro. Vasello, as Vascello. Vasetto, any kind of little
vessel. Vaso, any kind of vessel. Vaso di zibetto, a siuet box. Vasone, a
great vessel. Vassallo, a vassal, a subject, a slave, a bondsman.
Vassallaggio, vassallage, subjection, bondage. Vastare, to waste and destroy,
to make waste of, to bring to desolation and vastnes. Vastezza, as Vastita.
Vastita, vastnes, desertnes, hugenes, excessive greatness, destruction,
desolation. Vasto, vaste, huge, great, wild, desert, great beyond measure,
bourlie, wide, broad and large, misshapen, ill favored, desolate, not
inhabited. Also insatiable, outragiouslie covetous. Vate, a prophet, or
soothsayer. Also a poet. Vaticinare, to divine, to foretell, to soothsay, to
prophecy, to coniect. Vaticinatione, prophesying, soothsaying, foretelling.
Also an oracle or prophecy. Vaticinatore, a prophet, a soothsayer, a
foreteller, a teller of things to come. Vaticinio, a soothsaying, a prophecy,
a foretelling, a divination, an oracle. Vaticino, of or belonging to
prophesying or deuining, or to them that practice it, prophetical. Vatigaro, a
harrier, a drouer, a driuer of cattle. Vatio, he that has legs bowed inwards,
wide between the knees, and the feet outward. Vatrace, one that has ill legs
from the knees downward. Vattene, go, or get thee hence, away from hence, get
thee gone. Vattina, a kind of great pot or cesterne to keep water in. Also a
pond of water. Vattino, the name of an implement that Apothecaries use. Vbbia,
a foolish, false, lying tale, or lying for the whetstone. Vberare, to make
plentious and fruitful, to fatten, to feed as it were with paps or dugs.
Also to be fruitful and plentious, to be in good plight and liking, to be
abundant. Vberi, breasts, paps, vdders, dugs, teats. Vberifero, plentiful,
abundant, plentious, fertile, fruitful, copious, ample, rich, store-full,
fat. Vbero, as Vberifero. Also as Vberi. Also a bosom. used also for the cock
or spout of a conduit. Vberoso, fertile, plentious, plentiful, battle. Vberta,
plenty, store, abundance, fertility, fruitefulnes, battlenes, copy of,
cheapenes. Vbertiera, as Vbertifero. Vbertoso, as Vbertifero. Vbidiente,
obedient. Vbidienza, obedience, obeisance. Vbidire, disco, dito, to obey.
Vbiero, as Vbino. Also the name of the color of a horse. Vbinetto, a little
young hobbie-horse. Vbino, a hobbie horse, such as Ireland breeds.
Vbiquinario, such a one as professes vbiquitie, as some of the sacramentaries
of Germany do. Vbiquita, an vbiquitie, in what place or thing soever. Vbliare,
as Obliare. Vbligare, as Obligare. Vbligatione, as Obligatione. Vblio, as
Oblio. Vblioso, as Oblioso. Vbriacarsi, as Imbriacarsi. Vbriachezza, as
Imbriachezza. Vbriaco, as Ebrio, or Imbriaco, cup-shotten. Vbrigare, as
Obligare. Vccellabile, that may be caught as a bird, or cozened, or
ouer-reached, or conie-catcht. Vccellaccio, a filthy ravenous bird often taken
for the cuckoo. Also used for a simple gull that will soon be caught and
cosened. Vccellaia, any place where birding or fowling is, or a place where
foul is kept in mue. Vccellaio, a birder, a fowler, a faulkner. Vccellamento,
as Vccellaggine. Vccellami, as Vccellaggine. Vccellaggine, all manner of foul,
fowling, birding, or hawking, all manner of cozening or conycatching tricks.
Vccellaggione, as Vccellaggine. Vccellare, to catch birds, to foul, to hawke.
Also to cosen, to cheat, to conycatch, to deceive, to crossebite. Vccellatoio,
a fowling, a birding, or hawking place. Vccellatore, a birder, a fowler, a
faulkner. Also a cosener, a cheater, a conycatcher, a cross-byter. Also a
keeper of foul or poultrer. Vccellessa, a crafty, subtle, conycatching
woman, a hen-bird. Vccelliere, as Vccellatore. Vccelliera, a great bird-cage.
Also a fowling place. Vccelletto, any kind of little or small bird. Vccellino,
a little bird. Vccello, any kind of bird or foul. Vccello del paradiso, a
kings fisher. Vccello del Duca, as Grotto molinaro. Vccello di Santa maria, a
kings fisher. Vccellone, any great bird or foul. Also a gull, a fool, or a
ninnie, as Vccellaccio. Vccello d'oro, a wittwall. Vccello di neue, a wagtaile.
Vcchiello, an oylet hole, a button hole. Vccidere, cido, cisi, ciso, to kill,
to slay, to murder, to quell. Vcciso, killed, slain, murdered, quelled.
Vccidimento, a slaughter, a killing, a murder. Vcciditore, a killer, a slayer,
a murderer. Vccisione, as Vccidimento. Vccisore, as Vcciditore. Vdente, as
Vdiente. Vdiente, hearing, listening, harkening. Vdientia, audience, hearing,
listening. Also an auditorie, or an audience. Vdienza, as Vdientia. Vdire, odo,
vdij, vdito, to hear, to listen, to harken. Vdito, heard, listened, harkned, as
Vdita. Vdita, the sense of hearing. Also an audite. Vditore, a hearer, a
harkner, a listner. Vditorio, an auditorie, a place of hearing. Vdo, wet,
moist, flashie, flabbie, used also for cupshotten or drunken. Vdriare, to lure
a hawke, to bring to the lure, used also to entice, or allure. Vdrio, a hawks
lure, to lure a hawke with. Also an enticement or allurement. Ve, see, behold,
look, note, take heed. Also where? or whether? Also there, or in that place.
Also there is. Also you, or your selves. also to you, to your selves, or your
self. Vecchia, old, or aged. Also an old woman. Vecchiaccio, a filthy old
man. Vecchiaia, age, eld, eldernes. Vecchia trentina, an old hagge that would
feign be young again, one that is very very old, and would be taken but for
thirty, an old beldame. Vecchiardo, as Vegliardo. Vecchiare, to grow old,
to become aged. Vecchiarella, a little, silly, poor old woman, somewhat
old, elderlie. Vecchiarello, a little, silly, poor old man, or somewhat
old or elderlie. Vecchietta, as Vecchiarella. Vecchietto, as Vecchiarello.
Vecchiezza, age, elde, eldership. Also quicksilver, according to Alchimists
phrase. Vecchio, aged, old. Also an old aged man. Vecchionaccio, as
Vecchione. Vecchio marino, a kind of sea monster or fish. Vecchione, a goodly
aged old man, a grave old man. Veccia, the pulse called vetch or tare. Vece,
stead, place, liew, vice, standing for another. Vecordia, madness, or trouble of
mind, lack of good sense or reason, doting and folly. Vecorde, mad, troubled
in mind, out of his wits, doting, without sense or reason. Vedello, a calfe, a
young neat, or steare, or runt. Vedere, vedo, or veggo, or veggio, vidi, or
viddi, veduto, or visto, to see, to look, to behold, to view, to suruay, to
prye, to mark, to note, to foresee, to perceive, to understand, to advise, to
consider, to take heed, to regard, to see to, to pass, to care or provide
for. Also to devise or find some means. Veduto, seen, looked, viewed, beheld,
surueied, pried, marked, noted, foreseen, perceived, understood, advised,
considered, taken heed, regarded, seen unto, cared or provided for. Veder
l'mimico, a kind of march sounded in time of war upon the trumpet and drum.
Vedetta, a watch tower, a loouer or lantern on the top of a house, a beacon, a
prying or peeping hole. Veder l'muito, to see the vie at play, to see the rest
at Primero. Veditore, a seer, a viewer, a looker, a beholder, a surueier, etc.
Vedoua, a widow. Also alone, destitute or without. Vedouanza, widow-hood. Also
lack of things. Vedouare, to widow, to bereave, to divide, to leave alone, to
make widow, to deprive, to leave desolate, to destitute, to make comfortless,
to divorce or take ones dear thing from, to divide or take a way, to separate,
to leave alone. Vedouatico, as Vedouanza. Also what belongs to a widow.
Vedouetta, a silly poor little widow. Vedouile, viduall, widow-like. Vedouo,
a widower, bereft, deprived, alone, void, destitute, without. Veduta, seen,
viewed. Also the sight of man. Also a high prospect. Also experience,
knowledge. Look Vedere. Vegentana, a kind of precious stone found in Italy, of
a black color, mingled with white spots. Vegetabile, vegetable, all manner of
vegetables, as herbs, plants, and trees. Vegetatione, a making strong, lively
and quick, a refreshing or comforting. Vegetatiuo, vegetative, that is fresh,
quick, sound, lively or growing. Vegetare, to refresh, to quicken, to recreat,
to make lively or strong. Veggente, viewing, seeing, looking, beholding.
Vegghia, a watch, a watching, a wake, a waking, a sentinel, a reuelling a
nights. Vegghiare, to watch, to spy, to wake, to revel a nights. Vegghie,
watches, sentinels, wakes, revels a nights. Vegga, let him see, that he or I
may see. Veggia, a pipe, a but, a tun, a hogshead, a barrel. Also a wake, a
watching, a reuelling, a meeting of good company by night. Veggiare, as
Vegghiare. Veggilante, as Vigilante. Veggilanza, as Vigilanza. Veggio, Veggo,
Vedo, I see, I look, I view, I behold. Look Vedere. Vegli, see them, view
them, behold them. Also aged or old men. Veglia, as Vecchia, as Vegghia.
Vegliaia, as Vecchiaia. Vegliacco, as Vigliacco. Vegliardo, an aged elderly
man. Also a foolish old doting fellow, a dotrell, a dotard. Vegliare, as
Vegghiare, as Inuechiare. Vegliezza, as Vecchiezza. Veglio, as Vecchio. Veggo,
as Veggio. Look Vedere. Vehementare, to urge, to force, to constrain, to
violent, to make vehement, to use vehemency. Vehemente, vehement, fierce,
rash, earnest, violent, great, urgent, sharp, forcible, very strong,
sturring, unruly, of great force. Vehemenza, vehemency, fiercenes, rashness,
violence, earnestnes, strongnes or ranknes. Vehicolo, a kind of cart,
tumbrell, or wheel-barrow. Ve^entana, a kind of blackish stone. Look
Vegentana. Vel, to you it, it to you. Io vel diedi, I gave it you. Vela, any
kind of sail for a ship. Also a veil or shadowing, a covering, a curteine.
Velame, all kind of sails, vailes, lawnes, shadows or couerings or curteins.
Velare, to sail by sea, to hoyse up sail and sail forth, to pass by water.
Also to veil, to cover, to hide, to shadow, to curtein, to heal, to apparel.
Velaregli, bone-graces, shadows, vailes or lawnes that women use to wear on
their foreheads for the sun. Veleggiare, to sail by sea, to wave as a sail
does, to hoyse up sail and sail forth. Velenare, to poison, to enuenom, to
infect. Velenatione, a poisoning, an infection, a venoming. Velenato, poisoned,
venomed, infected with poison. Velenifero, venomous, bringing poison. Also as
Venefico. Veleno, poison, venim, infection, baine, any thing that does alter
the nature or color that it is mixed with. Also used for witchcraft or
sorcerie by drinks. Velenoso, infectious, bainfull, venomous, poisonous, full
of poison. Veletta, as Vedetta. Also a little sail. Also a kind of fine lawne
or cipresse. Velettaro, a veil or cipresse maker. Also a spy or eaues
dropper. Velette. Look Caualli delle vellette. Also a kind of soldiers
garment or horse man's cote. Veletto, a little veil, lawne, cipresse, shadow or
bone-grace as women wear on their heads. Veliuolante, running, and as it were
flying with full sail. Velli, has been used for the hairs. Also fleeces.
Vellificare, to bring forth fleeces, to fleece. Vello, a fleese of wool, a
fell or skin that has wool on. Vello d'oro, the golden fleese. Velloso,
hairie, woolly, soft, thrummie, fleesie, full of fleeses or wool. Velo, a
veil, a cipresse or lawne as women wear in Italy. Also the roof of a house
or church. Also a sail. Also the mortal veil, man's carkas or body. Veloce,
swift, speedy, nimble, fleet, quick, light, subtle, lightly and quickly
passing away. Velocita, swiftnes, speed, f^^^tnes, quicknes, nimblenes. Velte,
a kind of hurdle. Veltra, a gray-hound-bitch. Veltro, a gray-hound-dog.
Velucchio, as Vilucchio. Velutare, to make soft or woolly, to work velvet
wise. Velutaro, a weauer or maker of veluets. Velutato, made soft or woolly, or
wrought as velvet is. Velutino, fine, slender, course, refusado velvet. Veluto,
a stuff of silk called velvet. Veluto figurato, figured velvet, or wrought
velvet. Veluto riccio, unshorn velvet. Velutoso, soft, woolly, thrummie, full
of silk or velvet. Vellutare, as Velutare. Velluttino, as Velutino. Velluto,
as Veluto. Vellutaro, as Velutaro. Ven. Look Vene. Vena, any kind of vein.
the natural disposition, instinct or vein of a man. a pulse or an artery.
Also a vein of the earth. Also a vein or style of writing or speaking. Vena
porta, a vein which having diverse roots in the hollow parts of the liver,
does at length join together into one trunk or stock, and so passes forth
between the two eminences or rising parts of the liver into the bladder of
choler, into the ventricle, into the spleen, into Mesenterio, into Omento, and
other parts of the body. Vena di fontana, the vein of a fountain, the belling
or rising up of water out of a spring. Vena di mettallo, a vein of the earth
yielding metal. Venaccione, a great vein. Venale, venale, mercenarie, that
may be bought, that is set to sale, that does and speaks what one will for
money, that will be bribed, and sell his troth and faith for money. Venalitio,
a place where servants and slaves are sold, the market where any thing is
sold. Also the selling it self or the thing that is bought and sold or to be
bought and sold. Vena lustrante, gold, according to the Alchimists phrase. Vena
magna. Look Chili. Vena porta. Look Vena. Venardi, the day called fridaie.
Venasone, as Venatione. Venatione, venizon or hunting game, a hunting or
chasing. Venatore, a hunter, a chaser, a hunts-man. Vencastro, as Vincastro.
Vencere, as Vincere. Venchi, as Vinchi. Vencibile, as Vincibile. Vencido,
tractable, yielding, soft, flexible, gentle, pliable, withie. Vencidire, as
Rauencidire. Vencita, as Vincita. Vencitore, as Vincitore. Vendemmia, vintage,
harvest or making of wine, the gathering of grapes to make wine, grape
gathering or grape harvest or wine harvest. Vendemmiale, of or belonging to
gathering of grapes or ripe fruits in harvest, namely about wines or making of
wines. Vendemmiare, to vintage, to gather grapes, to make wine, to gather in
wine harvest. Vendemmiatore, a vintager, a vineroll, a vintner, a maker of
wines or a grape gatherer, he that in harvest gathers grapes to make wines.
Also the name of a star which appears the third Nones of March. Vendere,
vendo, vendei, venduto, to sell, to set to sale. Venduto, sold, or set to sale.
Vendere all' incanto, to sell at who gives most, or by a common crier. Vendere
buona derrata, to sell good cheap. Vender buon mercato, idem. Vender caro, to
sell dear or at a high rate. Vendereccio, that is to be sold, vendible,
saleable, venale, mercenarie. Look Venale. Vender finocchio, to sell fenell,
id est, to cog, to foist, to blandish or to flatter withal. Vendetta, revenge,
vengeance, punishment, reuengement, a taking of punishment. also according to
old histories a rod which was laid upon the head of a servant when he was made
free, or a rod that the Lord delivered to his bondmen when he set them at
liberty. Vendibile, Vendereccio, vendible, saleable, easy and ready to be
sold. Also vulgar and of the common sort. Vendicare, to revenge, to avenge, to
punish, to wreake. Also to vendicate, to claim or challenge to himself. Also
to defend, deliver or save from danger or wrong, to restore or set at liberty.
Vendicatiuo, reuengefull, cruel, inexorable, wreakefull, full of revenge.
Vendicatore, a revenger or punisher of wrongs, as Vindice. Vendice, as Vindice.
Vendicheuole, as Vendicatiuo. Vendi legne, a wood-munger, a seller of wood.
Vendi oglio, one that sels oil. Vendita, the sale or selling of any thing, a
vendition. Vendi tela, a linen draper or a seamester. Venditione, as Vendita.
Venditore, a seller, one that sells. Vene, to you of it, to you thereof, you
of it. as Io vene parlai, I spoke to you of it. Also you hence or away or you
thence or away. as Voi ve ne andaste male sodisfatto, you went away or thence,
or hence not pleased. Veneficare, to bewitch, to inchant, to forespeake, to
charm. Also to venom, to poison or infect with poison. Veneficatore, a witch,
a sorcerer, an inchanter, a charmer, a magitian, a necromancer. Also he that
poisoneth. Veneficio, the art or craft of poisoning. Also of sorcerie,
witchcraft, charming or forespeaking. Venefico, as Veneficatore. Also venomous,
that poysoneth, poysonfull. Venenare, as Velenare. Venenario, a poysoner, one
that makes or provides poisons. Venenaro, as Venenario. Veneno, as Veleno.
Venenoso, as Velenoso. Venerabile, venerable, worshipful, reverend or
honorable, worthy to be honored. Venerabilita, as Veneranza. Venerando, as
Venerabile. Veneranza, worship, honor, reverence, awe. Venerare, to reverence,
to honor, to worship. Veneratione, as Veneranza. Venerdi, the day called
friday. Venerdi santo, good friday. Venere, the day called friday. Also the
goddess of love, wantonness, lust, or leacherie. Also beauty. Also the day or
morning star, lucifer or venus. Also twilight or cock-shoote. Venereo,
venerian, wanton, luxurious, fleshly, lusty, disposed to leacherie,
leacherous, veneriall. Also fair and lovely. Veneria, fearne. Veneto, a light
or Venice blew, a Turkey color. Vengiare, as Vendicare. Venia, leave, license,
permission, pardon, toleration, mercy, forgiunes, favoring. Veniale, venial,
pardonable, remissible, tolerable, worthy pardon or forgiveness. Venire,
vengo, venni, venuto, to come, to become, to ariue, to chance, to happen, to
come to pass, to spring, to grow, to prove, to be brought or conveyed to a
place, to enter into. Venuto, come, become, arrived, chanced, come to pass,
sprung, grown, proved. Look Venire. Venire adosso, to fall or come upon one,
to happen to one. Venir a casa, to come home, to come to the matter or purpose.
Venir a galla, to flote up and down the water. Venire al fatto, to come to the
matter or to the purpose. Venire all mani, to come to handieblowes, to grapple
together. Venire al quia, to conclude, to come to a conclusion or to the reason
of the matter. Venire a manco, to come to less. Also to swoune, to fall in a
swoune. Venire a sesto, to come to some good order, form, or condition, or
according to compass and rule. Venire a volo, to come flying, or in
postehaste. Venire in succhio, to long for a thing, to have ones teeth run a
water. Venire detto, to be said, told or reported. Venir fatto, to be done, to
succeed, to happen, to come to pass. Venire meno, to swoune, to fall in a
swoune. Venoso, full of veins or arteries. Ventaglia, as Ventaglio.
Ventagliare, to fan or van or make wind. Also to winnow. Ventaglio, Ventaio, a
fan or van of feathers. Also a flip flap or any thing to make wind with.
Ventare, as Ventagliare. Also to blow a wind. Ventarello, as Ventaglio. Also a
pleasant or small gale of wind. Also a piece of a card or paper cut like a
cross, and with a pin put in at the end of a stick, which running against the
wind does twirle about*. our English children call it a windmill. Ventaruolo,
the name of a wheel in a clock. Ventena, a score or twenty in number.
Ventesimo, the twentieh in number. Venti, the number of twenty. Also winds.
Venticello, a little pleasant gale of wind. Ventiera, used for a window, or a
casement of a window. Ventilare, to wave, to waver, to houer or air in the
wind, to breath, to blow as the wind does, to van or winnow corn. Also to
ca^^ase a matter to and fro, to turn out of one hand into another.
Ventilatione, a wauing, a hou^^ing, a panting, a breathing, a vanning or
winnowing, a stirring or wauing to and fro. Vento, a wind, a puff, a gal^, a
guste, a blaste, a blowing, a berrie or flaw of winds. Also used for favor or
reputation. Also a storm or tempest. Also vanity or trifle. Vento-contrario,
a contrary wind*. look Vento in faccia. Vento in faccia, the wind in the
face, to have no good success in any attempt. Vento in popps, the wind in the
po^pe. all things favorable as one would have them, in all prosperity. Vento
prospero, a prosperous or good wind. Also good success. Vento secondo, good
success or a prosperous wind. Ventola, a fan or winnow to winnow corn with.
Ventolare, as Ventilare. Ventolino, as Ventarello. Ventolo, as Ventarello.
Ventosare, to let blood with cupping glasses, to cup with cupping glasses.
Ventose, boxing or cupping glasses, to let men blood withal. Ventosita,
windines. Ventoso, windy, full of wind, light, swift, unconstant, bragging,
vanting. Ventraglia, as Ventraia. Ventraia, a panche or great belly. Also as
Ventresca, a gorbelly or great guts, a gulche. Ventraiuola, as Ventresca. Also
a child that through ill diet has his belly big and swollen or hard. Ventrale,
a stomacher, an apron or other garment that covers the belly. Ventre, a belly
or panch of any creature. Also a woman's womb or child she goes with. Also
belly-cheere. used also for Ventricolo. Ventreggiare, to follow all lust and
sensuality, to wallow in sin. Ventrepieno, has been used for a turd.
Ventresca, an oxe-midrif, a calves pluck, a sheep gather, a hogs hastler, the
ombels of a dear, the offal, panch^ or guts or intrailes of any body, be it
man or beast. Ventricchia, as Ventresca. Also meat made of tripes, liver,
guts, lungs, heart and such intrailes. Ventricchio, the gargill or throat hole,
the craw, the maw, the crop or gorge or panell of a hawk. Also as Ventresca.
Ventricello, a little belly, panch or womb. Ventricolo, the ventricle whereby
the meat which we eat, being thither conveyed by the stomach is first
digested. Some use it for Epigastrio, many call it the stomach. Also a little
belly. Ventricoli del cuore, two not^ble and large cauities sited after the
sides of the heart; one on the right side, the other on the left, the sleeke or
hollow parts of the heart. Ventriglio, as Ventricello. Ventrino, as
Ventricello. Also the calfe of a man's leg. Ventroso, panchie, that has a great
belly, bellied, a gor-belly, a grand-gut, is gulche. Ventruto, as Ventroso.
Ventura, fortune, hap, luck, chance, adventure, hab or nub. Venturuto, happy,
fortunate, luckie. Venturo, coming, to come. Venturoso, as Venturato. Venusta,
bea^tie, fairenes, grace, comelynes, f^^mlines, favor, (...), a grace or
pleasantnes in speaking, a delectable utterance. Venusto, beautiful, fair,
graceful, comely, seemly, welfauoured, proper, delectable, pleasant to the
eye, sightly, having a good grace. Venuta, a coming, an arrival. Venuzza, a
little vein in any body. Vepre, thorns, brambles, shrubs, briars, brakes,
bushes. Vepretto, a thornie, bushie, shrubbie or brierish place, a bryer bush.
Vepricoso, full of briars, brambles or bushes. Ver, toward, toward. Also true
or the truth, as Verso, as Vero. Verace, true, tru-saying, that says true,
very, sooth. Veracita, truth, verity, sooth, saying of the truth. Veramente,
Veracemente, truly, verily, soothly, according to verity and truth, indeed,
rightly, as truth is. Veratro, the herb neesing woort or bears-foote, or
ling-woort. Verbale, verbale, acording to the word, consisting of words, that
is of a word, or that descends of a word. Verbasco, as Verbesco. Verbascolo,
the pettie-mulleyn, of which be diverse kinds, as Verbascolo odorato, the
cow-slip. Verbascolo albo, the oxe-lip, Verbascolo minore, the primerose.
Verbena, the herb Veruein, whereof be two kinds; one called Verbena retta, or
Verbena colombina, upright or straight Veruein; the other Verbena supina, base
or flat Veruein. It is also used for all kind of herbs and boughs pertaining
to purging or making holy, which were occupied in or about any religious
ceremonies, or were hanged about the altars to garnish them, as the Myrtle, the
Olive, and the Laurel. Verbenario, a herald or ambassador which did bear on
his head a garland of Veruein when he was sent to the enemies. Verberabile,
that may be or is worthy to be beaten. Verberare, to beat, to punish, to
strike, to batter, to bit against (...) the s^nne does. Verberatione, a
beating, a das^^ng, or battering. Verbereo, worthy of beating, that deserves
to be swinged or (...). Verbero, a beating, a stroke or a l^sh, also a heat or
striking of the sun beams against something. Verbesco, wooll-blade, touch
herb, ^^ngwoort, bares-beard, french (...) or wooddi-mullein. Verbi gratia, as
for example, as a man would say. Verbo, a word, a term, a quip, a proverb.
Also a verb one of the eight parts of speech. Also a whole sentence or saying.
Also a litterall sense. Verbosita, much talking or speaking. Verboso, wordie,
full of words, prouerbial, a wrangler, a iangler, a pratler, one that uses
many words. Verbum caro, the holy writ or gospel. also taken for Christ or
Messiah. Verdacchij, certain kinds of green plums so called in English.
Verdadero, as Veritiero. Verde, green, new, young, fresh, lusty, in prime,
lively, youthful, strong. Also the greengrasse. It has also bin used of
Petrarke for the final end, when he says, Guinto al verde, alluding to a
candle which they were wont to paint green at the big end, as we should say in
English, burning in the socket, almost consumed, drawing to an end, beginning
to to faint, decaying. Verdeazzurro, a kind of color that painters use.
Verdeggiante, flourishing, lusty, youthful, green, verdent. Verdecchio, as
Verdiccio. Verdegiallo, a yealowish green. Verdeggiare, to flourish, to be
green, lusty or young. Verdemontano, a green finche. Verderame, verdi-greese
or green coperasse. Verdero, a green finch. Verdiccio, greenish or drawing to
green. Verdiero, a green finch. Verdone, a kind of dark french green. Also
a bird called a green finch. Verdugo, a rapier, a tucke or little sword.
Verdura, greennes, all manner of green, as grass, boughs, or leaves. Also
youth or lustines. Verecondia, bashfulnes, modesty, shamefulnes, demurenes.
Verecondo, shameful, bashful, demure, modest. Verende, the privy parts of
man or woman. Verettone, as Vereto. Vereto, a kind of boult, shaft or arrow.
Also a turning vice or skrue. Verga, a r^d, a verge, a kind of measure like a
yard, a man's yard or privy member. Also a gimmall ring of gold or a plain hoop
ring. also a wa^d, a little stick, a magistrates staff, a sergeants mace, a
royal scepter, an officers verge. a twig, a sprig, a bra^ch, a scourge, a
whipping rod, a carpenters ruler or squire. Also the gnow-man or needle or
index of a dyall. a painters pensell, a scriueners ruler. Also a ledge, a sow,
an ingot, a plate, a wedge or gad of any metal. Verga di pastore, fullers
thistle or teazell. Verga aurea, the herb called golden rod. Vergare, to
rule, to wright, to fold, to plaite, to ingraue, to draw, to limne, to paint,
to stripe, to draw lines. Also to whip, to scourge with a rod. also to work
any wouen stuff with striped work as canuasse is. Vergate, stripes or lashes
given with a rod. Vergato, Look Vergare. Also that has rod, or long and
slender rays or strikes in it like rods. Also made of twigs. Also laced or
laid over as a garment with stripes or rays of gold or any thing else.
Vergellato, hogs grease clarified or purified. Also a kind of fish. Vergelle,
little rods, branches or under wood. Verghe, the plural of Verga. Also as
Vergate. Vergheggiare, as Vergare. Verghetta, a small or little Verga, a plate,
ledge or ingot of metal. Verghezzino, a wooll-winder, or dresser of wool.
Vergie. Look Verze. Vergieto, an orcharde full of trees and fruit. Verginale,
maiden-like, virgin-like, pertaining to a virgin or maiden. Vergine, a virgin,
a maid, an undefiled damzell. Also a kind of tormenting iron to torture men
with. Also one of the twelve signs in heaven. Verginella, a young pretty
virgin or maiden. Vergineo, as Verginale. Verginita, virginity, purity or
maidenhead, chastity, pussilage. Vergiotti, as Verzotti. Vergogna, shame,
reproach, infamy, dishonor, disparagement. Also bashfulnes, modesty, blushing,
shamefastnes, or demurenes. Vergolato, wrought or women with stripes, as
striped canuasse is. Vergole, the stripes that are women in any canuasse. Also
a kind of little bote used heretofore in Venice. Vergognare, to shame or be
ashamed. Vergognarsi, to be ashamed or bashful. Vergogne, the privy parts of
man or woman. Vergognose, Parti vergognose, the priuities of any creature.
Vergognoso, shameful, shamefast, bashful, modest, demure. Vergotta, nothing,
any thing. Veridico, a true sayer, a truth teller, a soothsaier, that says or
tells truth. Verificare, to verify, to a^er, to approve, to prove any
thing true. Verificatione, a verifying, an approouing, an auerring, a proouing
of a thing true. Veriloquio, the true exposition of a word, an ethimologie or
right meaning of a word, a true tale, speech or report. Verisimile, likely,
like the truth, possible, credible, like or likely to be true. Verisimilmente,
likely, possibly, according to truth. Verisimilitudine, likelihood,
possibility, a semblance of truth. Verita, truth, verity, sooth, very deed,
simple sooth. Veritiero, a truth teller, a soothsayer. Verme, Vermo, any kind
of worm. Also a disease in a horse called the bots. Vermena, a rod, a sprig, a
twig, a wand, a branch, a graffe, a set, a plant, an impe, a syen. Also the
herb called veruein. look Verbena. Vermicata, a ring worm or tetter.
Vermicelli, all manner of little worms or vermin. Also a kind of small cut
paste meat they use in Italy to make pottage with, and th^^ put grated chief
in them. as Tagliarini. Vermiculare, to be full of ver^i^e or worms. Also as
Vermigliare. Also to make checker work or other like, with small pieces
colored as in tables, boards or pauements. Vermiculatione, worm eating or
breeding of worms in fruit or trees. Vermiculato, wrought with checker work
or with small pieces of diverse colors representing sundry pictures, as we see
in tables or counters. in-laid work. Vermigliare, to creep and crawle as all
sorts of worms do. to run thick and threefold as c^^^ets do. Vermiglio, red
or vermillion color. Also a kind of silk worm. Vermina, as Vermena.
Verminacola, holy-herbe, pigeons grass or Iunoes tears. Verminare, to have a
wringing in the belly. to have, bread or void worms. Verminatione, a desease
with worms properly in cattle. Also a vehement ache or wringing of the guts,
as if they were gnawne with worms. Vermini, any kind of little worms or
vermin. Verminoso, full of worms, worm eaten, troubled or pained with worms,
or that wherein worms are. Verminucci, as Vermicelli. Vermocane, a kind of
sickness which some take to be the french pox. Vermoso, as Verminoso. Vermo
volatico, a cankrous ulcer in the nose of a horse. Vernaccia, a kind of strong
wine like malmesie or muskadine, or bastard wine. Vernacciuola, as Vernaccia.
Vernale, of or pertaining to winter. Vernare, to winter, to become winter or
cold weather. Vernareccie, a kind of winter pear in Italy. Vernata, a winter
or a wintring. Vernatione, the old skin of a snake or adder that he casts off
in the spring time. Also used for the spring time of the year. Vernecare, as
Vernicare. Vernicare, to varnish with a kind of color. Vernice, varnish. Also
a kind of binding silken lace or riband. Also a kind of white stone. Vernile,
servile, sausie, malapert. Vernilita, flattring, servile or slavish behavior.
Verno, a winter, the winter season. Vernocchio, the swelling of a blow or
stripe. Vero, true, very true, sooth. Also truth, sooth or verity, a true
tale, a true matter. Also uncorrupted, very, just, substantial, unfeigned, of
it self, right, good, natural, unmingled. Verola, the small or the french
pox. Look Varola. Verola grossa, the great or french pox. Look Varola.
Verola picciola, the small pox. Look Varola. Verolato, pockie or full of the
pox. Veroloso, as Verolato. Verone, a building of pleasure ietting or butting
out in prospects or galleries, a ietting out of houses, a bay-window, a round
out window. Veronica, the herb Betonie. Verpa, a man's yard. Verpo, he that
has the foreskin of his yard cut off, and is circumcised. Verra, he shall
come. Verretone, as Vereto, or Veretone. Verrino, of or belonging to a boar.
Verro, a boar hog, an vngelded hog. Verro, I will or shall come. Verrone, as
Verone. Also a great barrow hog or boar. Verruca. Look Verruche. Verrucaria,
the herb wartwort or turnesole. Verruche, holes in steeples or old buildings
for birds to breed in. Also a hillocke or knap of a hill. Also wartes or knaps
of flesh rising in the body. Verruca pensile, a long and hanging wart with a
great head and slender at the foot. Verruca sessile, or else Formicante, a wart
black like an ant, an ant-wart, which being deep rooted, broad below, and
little above, does make one feel as it were the stinging of ants when the same
is pulled at. Verrucoso, full of wartes, hillockes or knaps. Versabile, that
may be turned or winded. Also that may be powered out. Versaglio, as Be^saglio,
a mark to shoot at. Versante, turning, moving. Also pouring forth. Also
conuersing or frequenting. Versare, to shead, to power or skinke forth as they
do wine from one pot to another, to reuerse or ouerturne. Also to leake as a
ship does. A so to conuers with, to hant or frequent or come often to a place.
Also to turn often, to wind. Versato, conversant, expert, frequented, that is
often in place, occupied or busy. Also turned or whirled about. Versatore, a
skinker of wine, a sheader, a reuerser, a fill cup. Versatile, that turns or
may be turned, that is turned or wounden one about another. Versatione, a
sheading, a skinking, a turning, a reuersing. Also a conuersing, frequenting or
coming often to a place. Versatura, a leake in a ship, as Versatione.
Verseggiare, as Versificare. Versicare, as Versificare. Versiera, an old hag,
beldam, wizard or witch-walking by night. Versificare, to versifie, to make
verses. Versificatore, a versifier, a rimer, a poet, a maker of verses.
Versificatura, a versifying or riming, a making of verses. Versifico, that
makes verses, that versifieth. Versione, a turning, a translating. Verso,
toward, toward, against. Also a verse or a rhyme. Also a line of any writing.
Also order, course, method, byasse, proportion, according to the hair or wool
or true byasse. Also turned or changed. Also an order or a row. Also a turning
or twirling round. Verso dentro, toward the inside, inward. Verso dove?
toward what place? which way? Verso casa, home-warde, toward home. Verso man
destra, toward the righthand. Verso qui, this way, toward this way.
Versolino, a little verse or line. Versoria, the needle of a compass used in a
ship to know the coasts. Versorio, that turns it self, that runs back.
Versura, as Verdura. Versucia, wilines, craft, cunning slights. Versuto, wily,
crafty, mutable, changing, variable, often changing or turning, shifting,
quick witted. Vertago, a hound that will hunt by himself and bring home his
game. Vertebre, a joint in the body where the bones so meet that they may turn
as in the knuckle bone. Look Verticale. Vertente, as Verticale. Verticale,
that whirleth, turns or twirleth round, vertical. Vertice, the top, the tip,
the crown or height of any thing as of a hill, or a man's head. Also a whirle
poole, the ^dd^e or turning round of the water or a whirle wind. Used also for
the hooks that a door hangs on by. Also the crown of the head. Also the
seame in the head that runs from the middle of the forehead directly over
the crown to the neck, and deuideth the head and hair into two parts, as it is
easily to be seen in a woman's head, when the hair falls half to the right
side of the head, and half on the left side. Vertici del mondo, the north and
south poles. Used also for the elect people of God that go to heaven.
Verticello, a wherue or wherle, or whirle of lead or stone that spinners use to
put upon their spindles. Verticillato, knit together as a joint, apt to turn
as a wherue. Verticordio, that turns the heart and changes the mind.
Verticoso, as Verticale. Vertigine, a whirling or turning round, the eddie of a
water, a giddines, a dizzines, or a swimming in the head, with a mistines, a
dimnes, sparkling or glimmering of the eyes, a rolling, a change, a turning
about, a sickness by the means of windines which does so trouble one, that all
things seem to turn round. Verticoli, or Verticuli, the knuckles or turning
ioints of the back bone or chine. Vertiginoso, giddie, dizzie, dim, mistie or
glimmering in the head or eyes, giddiebrained or that has the disease
Vertigine. Virtue, virtue, honesty, strength, grace, puissance, power,
perfection or authority, valiantnes, manlines, manhood, prowes, help, merit or
desert. Also a property. Vertuoso, virtuous, honest, full of virtue. Veruice,
used for a weather or a sheep. Veruilagine, the black Chamaeleon thistle.
Veruina, a kind of long dart or iauelin. Verule, a kind of cherrie so called
in Italy. Verunamente, by no means, in no sort, at no hand. Veruno, any one,
not one, no body, no one, not any body. Veruto, a short and narrow weapon or
dart headded with iron, called a casting dart with a slinge. Verzaino, as
Verzerotto. Verze, cole-worts. Verzellata carne, a kind of dressing of meat
in Italy. Verzerotto, a bird called a yellow hammer or gold hammer. Verzette,
young cole-worts. Verziere, an orchard. also a plot of ground where cole-worts
grow. Verzinare, to color red with brazell. Verzino, brazell wood or
fernanbucke to dye red withal. Verzolino, as Verzerotto. Verzotti, young
cole-worts that are between a cabbage and a cole-wort. Verzura, as Verdura.
Veschiare, as Vischiare. Veschio, as Vischio. Veschioso, as Vischioso. Vescia,
a fizzle, a fiste, a close fart. Also a puff, a push or a toads-stoole, a
blister, a bladder. Vesciare, to fizzle, to fiste, to blister, to bladder.
Vescica, as Vessica. Vescicare, as Vessicare. Vescie di lupo, puffe-fistes or
fusse-balles. Vescouado, a Bishopric. Vescouato, idem. Vescouo, a Bishop.
Vesina, as Stambecco. Vespa, a waspe or a hornet. Vespaio, a waspes or hornets
nest. Also a kind of goldsmiths work in chains so called. Vespare, to sting
with a waspe. Vespe, a waspe. Vespertillo, a night-bat, or reremouse.
Vespertillone, as Vespertillo. Vespilone, a digger of graves or pits, but
properly he that carries forth dead bodies in the night times to be buried as
they use in times of great sickness or plague. Vespra, the hour when they ring
in to evening prayer. Vesprale, pertaining to evening, or evening prayer, or
belonging to the west parts. Vesprata, an afternoon, even, or evening. Vespro,
the evening, even, evening tide, afternoon, or evening. Also euensong or
evening prayer. Also the evening star Lucifer or Venus. Vessa, as Vescia.
Vessare, to vex, to trouble, to molest, to disquiet, to grieve, to cumber, to
disturb. also to toss or tormoyle too and fro or hither and thither, to
afflict, to do all mischief that can be, to torment grievously. Also as
Vesciare. Vessatione, vexation, trouble, molestation, grief, torment. Vessica,
any kind of bladder or blister. Vessicare, to blister, to bladder, to grow to
a bladder or blister, to gall. Vessicaria, the herb bladderwoort, or
nightshade, winter cherries, bladdernut, or Alkakengie. Vessichetta, a little
bladder or blister. Vessiconi, great blisters or bladders, or windgals in a
horse. Also puffs or pushes, or dry toadestooles that be full of dust,
fusse-bals. Vessiga, a blister, or a blader. Vessigoni, as Vessiconi.
Vessilaro, a standarde or enseigne bearer. Vessillo, a standard, a banner, a
flagge, a streamer, an enseigne. Vessiuillo, a kind of sparrow, some think it
to be a thrush. Vesta, vest, any kind of garment, robe, mantle, attire,
clothing, suit, vesture, a weed, vestment, or habit. Also the goddess of
chastity. Vestale, vestall, of, or pertaining to the goddess of chastity.
Vergini vestali, the vestall virgins, whose charge it was to preserve and keep
fire in a certain temple in Rome from going out or being quenched. Vest, as
Vesta. Vestiaria, a vestrie, a place where garments are sold, or wardrope
where apparel is kept and laid up. Vestiario, one that sels clothes ready made
Also a wardrobe keeper, or a yeoman of a wardrobe. Vestibolo, a porch, an
entry, or void place before a door, a lobbie. Vesticciuole, pillowbeares, or
tykes for beds, cases for anything. Also poor simple clothes. Vestigare, to
seek, but properly to seek by the print of the foot, to trace, to search
diligently, to hunt after and seek out. Vestigatore, a hunter, he that seeks
and traceth out as hunters do. Vestigio, a step, a tracke, a footing, a
tracing, a mark, the print of a man's foot, a footestep, a trace, or tracke, a
token, sign, or mark of any thing, according to Anatomists the same that
Pedio. Vestimento, as Vesta. Vestire, vesto, vestij, vestito, to cloth, to
apparel, to attire, to cover, to array, to deck, to garnish, to enrobe, to
adorn, to inueste. Also any suit of apparel, vestment, or attire. Vestito,
clad, attyred, apparelled, enrobed, adorned, invested, covered, yclad, or
arraide, decked, garnished. Also any suit of apparel, raiment, ornament,
trimming, or apparelling. Vestiri, all manner of clothing, or suits of
apparel. Vestito alla francese, apparelled after the french fashion. Vestito
di corrotto, clad in mourning weeds. Vestito di duolo, clad in mourning
clothes. Vestito da furfante, apparelled as a rogue Vestoriano, a kind of
color that painters use. Vestura, any kind of vesture or garment. Vetera,
old, aged, ancient, eld. Veteranamente, agedly, anciently. Veterano, old, aged,
ancient, eld, one that has served long in a place or office. Also as Rediuio.
Veteraneo, after the old and ancient fashion. Veterare, to grow old or aged, to
make ancient. Veterinaria, the trade or art of making of glasses. Veterno, a
drowsy disease* engendered through idleness, a continual desire of sleeping.
Also slothfulness, sluggishnesse. Vetolaro, a tub, a fat, a cowle that they
carry grapes with to the press between two men. Vetonica, the herb called
Betonie. Vetralla. Vetraio, vetraro, a glasier. Also a glasse-maker. Vetrare,
to glase, or cover with glass. Vetraria, a furnace where glasses are made.
Also a shop where glasses are sold. Vetrici, as Vinechi, or Vimini. Vetrino,
of glass, glassie, made of glass. Vetriola, the herb called Basil. also
glassie, or made of glass. Vetriare, as Vetrare. Vetriolo, vitrioll, or
coperas. also a kind of herb. Vetriotto, a kind of transparent alablaster.
Vetro, any kind of glass. Vetta, as Vedetta. Also a top, a tipe, or height of
any thing. Also a with to bind withal. Also a block, a stumpe, a snag, or
logge of a tree, the bark of a tree, a truncheon. Also small, thin, narrow
plates of any metal. Also a kind of earthen pot. Also as Vitta. Vettina, a
kind of earthen pot with a narrow long neck for birds to breed in. also a
little Vetta. I find it also used for a chime of bells, or for a squirels maze,
going about in a cage with bells. Vettoria, as Vittoria. Vettorioso, as
Vittorioso. Vettouaglia, victuals, meat, food, or sustenance. Vettouagliare,
to victual, or furnish with food. Vettura, the hyring of a horse. Also the
hyre it self. Vetturale, as Vetturino. Vetturare, to let forth to hyre, to
hyre namely horses or mules of hackney men. Vetturino, a hackney man, that lets
forth horses or mules to hyre, a muletier. Vetusta, age, antiquity, eld,
ancientnes, oldnes, eldertime, long continuance. Vetustamente, agedly,
anciently, according to the old time, of a very long time. Vetusto, aged,
ancient, old, of long continuance. Vetustezza, as Vetusta. Vezza, the pulse
Veccie, or Vitches. Vezzeggiare, to wantonize, to dally, to dandle, to play
the wanton with, to play with, to pamper, to jest, to blythe, to flatter, to
quaint it, to mignardize it either in words or gestures. Vezzeggiamento, a
wantonizing, a dandling, a flattring, or mignardizing. Vezzeggiatore, a wanton,
a minion, a dandler, a mignard, a quaint fellow. Vezzi, wanton to yes,
wantonness, quaintnes, flattries, dandlings* as Vezzo. Vezina, a kind of fish
in Muscouie that has no bones at all in him, and is very good meat. Vezzo, a
wa^tonnes, a quaintnes, a squeamishnes, a dandling, a dalliance, a wantonizing,
a mignardizing, a pampring, a flattery, a toie, a jest, a blythnes. Also a
play. Also a fault or oversight, a vice, an error, a sin. Also a custom, a
wont, a fashion or habit in a man. also a chain or file of pearls, a
carkanet, a necklace, an ornament or collar worn about the neck for a grace.
Vezzosamente, wantonly, dandlinglie, quaintly, squeamishly, flattringlie.
Vezzoso, quaint, pleasant, blithe, bucksome, wanton, loving, flattring, bonnie,
nimble, peart, pretty, coie, squeamish, puling, nice, spruce. Vezzura, as
Verdura. Vfficiale, official, any kind of officer, of, or pertaining to
offices and duties. Vfficiamenti, all manner of offices together. Vfficiario,
an officer. Vfficio, an office, a duty, a point, a part, a trick, a good
turn, a service, a benefit, a pleasure. Also homage, honor. Also state,
degree, charge, or diligence, double diligence. Also the morning or evening
prayer, or service that is said in churches. Also a Primer book or Service
book, or Prayer book. Also a calling or function of a man. Vfficioso,
officious, dutiful, kind, diligent. Vfficiuolo, a Service book, a Primer, a
Prayer book. Vffo, vffoli, some part of a horse. Vggia, fear, fright, terror,
amazement, importunity, irkesomnes. Also darkness, or pitchines. Also
annoyance, hate, spite, blemish, obscurity, malice, dark. Vggiare, to darken,
to obscure, to malign, to hate, to blemish, to afright, to anoye. Vggio, as
Vggia. Vgnere, vngo, vnsi, unto, to anoint, to oynt, to grease. Unto, anointed,
ointed greased. Vgnea, a kind of fearne to burn to ashes whereof they make
glasses. Vgnianno, yearly, every year. Vgnolo, single, plain, slight,
vnlyned. Vgola, the vuula or falling of the palet of a man's mouth. look Vuola.
Vguaglianza, equality. Vguagliare, to equal, to match, to compare. Vgualare,
as Vguagliare. Vguale, equal, alike, match, even. Vgualita, equality.
Vgualmente, equally, alike. Vguanno, this year, this very year. Vi, to you,
to your self, you, your self. Also there, in that place, or thither. Via, an
aduerbe of encouraging, much used by riders to their horses, and by commanders,
go on, away, go to, on, forward, quickly. Also a way, a high way, a path, a
street, a causey. Also being joined with meno, manco, and piu, it stands for
much, or a great deal, as, via piu much more, via meno, much less, etc. Also
a manner, a mean, or a way, a custom, a trade, or fashion, a rule, method or
order. Viale, a path, or allie in fields or gardens, a walking place. Via meno,
via manco, much less, a great deal less. Via piu, much more, a great deal
more. Via croce, a cross high way. Via via, an aduerbe of encouraging, on,
away, go to, forward, go on, quickly. Viaggiare, as Viandare. Viaggio, a
voyage, a travel, a wayfaring, a way. Viandante, a wandrer, a traveler, a
wayfaring man. Also traveling, iourneying, wandering. Viandare, to travel, to
voyage, to journey, to wander, to wayfare. Viaticare, to provide necessaries,
or furnish with provision for a journey. Viatico, provision of whatsoever is
necessary for a journey, be it victuals, or any thing else, voyage provision, a
man's farewell given him at his setting forth to travel. Viatolo, a narrow
path, a little causey. Viatore, a traveler, a wayfaring man, a pursuiuant, a
beadle. Vibice, a mark or print of a stripe or blow remaining in the flesh
black and blue. Vibio, any creature that lives on water and land. Vibone, the
flowers of the herb Britannica, which being eaten before thunder, are thought
to keep men from fear of lightning. Vibrante, brandishing, trembling,
shaking. Also warbling, or quauering. Vibrare, to brandish, to shake, to
flourish, to wag, to toss, to quauer, to warble any kind of weapon in the
air, to quauer, or warble in music. Vibrire, ris^o, rito, to warble or quauer
in singing. Vibrisse, the hairs within the nostrils. Vibro, a bran^ishing, a
shaking, a flourishing, a wagging, a tossing any kind of weapon in the air.
Also a quauering, a warbling, or running in music. V^caria, a vicar-ship, a
deputation, or lieuetenant-ship. Vicariato, a vicarage, or a vicar-ship.
Vicario, a vicar, a deputy, an vnderseruant that does the office of another,
that is in stead or place of another, that supplieth another man's room, and
takes pains for him. Vice, stead, liew, place, room, course, time, turn,
behalf, change, or mutation. Also office or duty for another, and used much
in composition of other words. Vicecapo, a vicepresident, a lieutenant, a
deputy, a viceroy. Vicenda, Auicenda, by course, by turn, orderly,
successively, interchangeably, in the second place, in order, now one, and then
another. Also a man's share or part chosen by turns. Also the turn or course
in altering now one now another, an interchangeable course. Vicendeuole,
interchangeably, by turn, by course, in order one after another. Look
Vicenda. Vicendeuolmente, as Vicenda. Vicecameriere, a vice-chamberlaine.
Vicegerente, a vicegerent. Vicegouernatore, a vicegouernour, a
deputie-gouernour. Vicenome, a surname, a nickname. Also a pronoune. Vicere, a
viceroy, a deputy king. Vicereggente, a vicegerent, a deputiegouernour. Vici,
or Vicci, you there, there you. Vicina, a neighbor, she that dwells next us,
or not far from our house. Vicinanza, neighborhood, company of neighbors
dwelling together, as Vicinita. Also the joining of houses one to another,
nighnes. Vicinare, to approach or dwell near together. Vicinato, as Vicinanza.
Also approached, or dwelt near. Vicinita, neighborhood, proximity, neernes,
nighnes, likeness. Also the company of neighbors dwelling nigh one. Vicino,
near, nigh, next, by, not far off, next to, hard by, very like, almost. Also
a neighbor, one that dwells near ones house, or not far from him.
Vicissitudine, changing or succeeding by course, the turn or course in
altering now one now another, an interchangeable course. Vico, a street, a
suburb, a maine street, a village, a hamlet, a borough, but properly a row
of houses close one to another with a way between them. Vide, as Vite. Vidita.
Vie, much or a great deal, but it must be joined with piu, meno, or manco, as.
Vie meno, much less, a great deal less. Vie piu, much more, a great deal
more. Vietare, to forbid, to prohibit, to let, to hinder, to inhibite, to
interdict. Vietatore, a forbidder, a hindrer, a letter, a prohibiter. Vieto, a
forbidding, a prohibition, a let, a hindrance, an inhibition, an interdicting,
a stop, a let, an obstacle. it has been used for a man's privy parts. also
faint, lither, limber, weak, feeble, that has lost his natural strength.
Vietta, a little narrow lane, way, path, or allie or causey. Vie va. Look Per
un vie va. Vieuocato, forenamed, named, foresaid, inuoked. Vigentesimo, the
twentieth. Vigesimo, the twentieth in number. Vigilante, watchful, wakefull,
vigilant, quick-sighted, charie, that watches diligently, waking, diligent,
never sleeping, nimble, quick. Vigilanza, vigila^cie, wakefulnes, watchfulnes,
diligence. Vigilare, to watch, to wake, to be vigilant or very diligent, to
take pain. Also to fast, to keep the even of any holy day or solemn feast.
Vigile, as Vigilante. Vigilia, an even or vigile before any solemn feast or of
a holy day, an even, a wake, a vigile, a fasting day. Also a watch, a
watching, or abstaining from sleep, a watch by night, which was wont to be
used in old time, dividing the night into four parts, whereof comes the
first, second, third, and fourth watch. Also vigilancie and diligence.
Vigliaccarie, ra^kalitie, skuruines. vile, base, raskallie, skuruie tricks.
Vigliaccamente, raskallie, skuruilie, basely, roguishlie, villainouslie.
Vigliacco a raskal, a villain, a base, vile, abject, skuruie fellow, a
scoundrell. Vigliaccone, a filthy, base rascally, scoundring companion.
Vigliare, to bind or tie. Vigna, a vine, or a vineyard. Vignaio, a vinekeeper,
a vineroll, a viner, a vine-yard-keeper. also a prop to stay up a vine.
Vignaiuolo, as Vignaio. Vignale, a vineyard. also of or pertaining to a
vineyard. Vignale, whatsoever pertaines to a vineyard, or the rent thereof.
Also a vineyard. Vignetta, a little vine, or vineyard. Also a vine^, or such
border about any work, namely in printed books, or upon guilt books.
Vigorare, as Vigoreggiare. Vigore, force, vigor, strength, sturdines, lustines,
liuelines, courage. Vigoreggiare, to flourish, to thrive, to prosper, to battle
in strength and force, and vigor, to be or show himself lusty, strong and
vigorous. Vigorire, risco, rito, as Vigoreggiare. Vigorosita, as Vigore.
Vigoroso, vigorous, strong, lusty, sturdie, firm, tough, able, sorcible. Vil,
vile, vile, base, abject, skornefull, cowardly, crauen, faint hearted, base
minded, contemptible, of no worth, of no value or account, little worth or
set by, good cheap, of little price, dog cheap. Vilimento, vileness,
baseness, contempt, scorn, cowardice, Look Vile. Vilipendere, pendo, pesi,
peso, to despise, to contemn, to scorn, to vilify, to disable. Vilipensione,
contempt, scorn. Vilipeso, despised, contemned, scorned, vilified, disabled.
Vilire, lisco, lito, as Vilipendere. Also to be or become vile of small price,
value, or estimation. Vilito, as Vilipeso. Vilmente, vilely, basely, abiectly,
contemptiblie, cowardlike. Villa, a town, a village, a borough, a hamlet. Also
a country farm, manor, place, house or palace of pleasure out of a city
or town. Also the country (...) self. Villa rustica, that part of a cuntrie
house wherein the farmer dwells that keeps the house, with all manner of
things pertaining to husbandry or a farm^ to occupy husbandry in. Villa
Vrbana, that part of a manor where the lord himself does lie, as we call it
the place or chief house, manor, or hal. Villaccarie, as Vigliaccarie.
Villacco, as Vigliacco. Villaggio, a village, a borough, a hamlet, a country
town. Villana, a kind of haggard faulcon. Villanata, a kind of country song,
iigge, or dance. Also a kind of country meat for the poor. Villanamente,
villainously, clownishlie, carterly, basely, inciuilie. Villaneggiare, to
injury, to wrong, to abuse, to offer wrong in words or deeds. Also to play
the base companion, or country clown. Villanella, a pretty little country
wench less, or girl. Also a country dance, a iigge, a round, a song, a
horne-pipe, or a ballat, such as country milke-maids sing. also a milke-maide.
Villancione, a grout-headed, clownish, filthy, rusticall, lubbarly, inciuill,
carterly fellow. Villanetta, a little pretty country wench, girl, milke-maide,
or less. Villanetto, a little country man, ladde, clown, boore, or
ploughman. Villania, villainy, abuse, wrong, injury, baseness. a carterlie,
clownish or scuruie trick. Villanesco, as Villesco. Villano, a clown, a
villain, a countryman, a plough-man, a carterly fellow, or one that
dwells in the country, or in a farm, and is given to husbandry, a husband
man. Villeggiare, to dwell, go, abide, or frequent country towns, or the
country. Also to be occupied or busied about husbandry, or to have the rule
of husbandry in the country. Villesco, clownish, carterlike, rustically,
inciuilie, basely, countrey-like. Villetta, a little pretty town, hamlet,
village, farme-house, manor, or place in the country. Villicare, as
Villeggiare. Villicatione, the rule of husbandry under the owner or master of a
manor. Villico, a clown or servant holding in soccage. Also a baylife or
steward of husbandry, and the whole stock, and fruits thereof, or officer
that belongs to a country manor, to ouersee and order the husbandry, and
has authority to pay quick-rents issuing out of the manor, distraine or
empound beasts upon the ground, fell trees, repair houses, etc. Villoso,
full of towns, or villages. Also full of hairs, hairie, or having a high nap.
Vilpestrello, a night-bat, or a reremouse. Vilta, baseness, cowardice, vileness,
contempt, inciuilitie, faintnes of heart, dastardie. Also cheapenes. Vilucchio,
the herb withy-winde, or weede-binde, or hedge-bels, it is like Iuie.
Vilucchio maggiore, the greater withibinde. Viluppare, to enwrap, to bundle, to
fold, to fardle, to role up, to entangle, to trusse up, to heap up. Viluppo,
a huddle, a bundle, a fardell, a trusse, a role, a heap, a pack, an
enwrapping. Vime, as Vimini. Viminale, apt to wind and bind. of, or belonging
to osiers or twigs. Vimini, twigs, such as a cooper binds his hoopes with,
sprigs, withs, rods, wandes, osiers, or wicker. All manner of twigs that wind
and are pliant to make things of. Vimoli, as Vimini. Vinaccia, the kernels,
seed, or grain that are in grapes, or grape stones. Also the mother of wine.
Vinaccio, filthy, mustie, naughty, small wine, the tappings of wine. Also the
grapes that are stamped and given to hogs to eat. Vinaceo, of, or belonging to
kernels of grapes or to wine it self. Vinagro, sour wine, vinegar. Vinaiuolo,
a vintner, a tauerner, one that makes or sels wine, a vinerol. Vinalie, feasts
belonging to tastings of wine, an order kept among the painims, and yet
observed in some parts of Europe about Saint Martins day, and are called Saint
Martins feasts. Vinca, the herb Perwinkle. Vincastrare, to strike with a wande
or a with. Also to tie or bind, to wrappe, to guird or hoope with twigs or
osiers. Vincastrata, a blow or stripe with a wand or a with. Vincastro, as
Vimini. Also a sheepheards staff, wande, rod, hook or crook. Vincente,
vanquishing. Look Vincere. Vincere, vinco, vinsi, vinto, or vitto, to win,
to ouercom, to vanquish, to ouermaster, to get victory, to subdue or conquer.
Also to pass, to excel, to exceed. Also to prove, or convince with reason.
also to prevail or take place, to have the upper hand. also to gain, to get,
or win at any game or play. Vinchi, as Vincigli. Vinci, as Vincigli.
Vincibile, vincible, that may be vanquished, or overcome, easy to be
vanquished or overthrown, vanquishuble. Vincibosco, wood-binde, or
honie-suckle. Vincigli, the shreads, loppings or sprigs cut off from vines,
Look Cacauincigli. Vincire, as Vincere. Vincitore, a conqueror, a vanquisher,
an ouercommer, a victor, a winner, a gainer at games, a subduer. Look Vincere.
Vincita, a conquest, a victory, a subduing, an ouercomming, a winning at play.
also a good hand or maine at any game or play. Look Vincere. Vinco, a sprig,
a with, a rod, a reed, a sedg, a bull-rush, a bent, a wande, an osier. Vincolo,
a bond, or any thing that binds or tieth, or fastneth. also fetters,
shackles, manicles, fastnings, gives, cords, or imprisonment, as Vinco. Vin
cotto, a kind of sodden wine which we call cute, to put into otherwines, to
make them keep the longer. Vinculo, as Vincolo. Vindemmia, as Vendemmia.
Vindemmiare, as Vendemmiare. Vindicare, as Vendicare. Vindicatiuo, as
Vendicatiuo. Vindice, vendice, a revenger of wrongs. a redresser of things, and
abuses. a defender, one that restores and sets at liberty or out of
danger, a punisher of things done amiss. Vinea, a warlike engine made of
timber and hurdles, under which in assaults men marched safely to assaul^ or
scale any wall or town. Vineca, as Vinaccia. Vinessa, as Vinaccia. Vinetto,
small, mean, weak wine. Vino, any kind of wine. Used also for quassing or
drunkenness, the cause for the effect. Vino adaquatto, wine that is watered. Vino
del monte, the best kind of wine in Italy. Vino gagliardo, strong wine. Vino
garbo, sour wine. Vino grande, great, strong wine. Vino cerasuolo, a kind of
wine made of cherries. Vino leggiero, light, small, weak wine. Vino liatico, a
kind of wine in Italy. Vino muffato, mustie wine. Vino nuouo, new wine or
must. Vino picciolo, small weak wine. Vino potente, mighty, strong, full
wine. Vino suanito, wine whose strength is gone out, dead wine. Vino racente,
sour or sharp wine. Vino sobbollito, boiled or sodden wine, called cuite.
Vino tibidrago, a kind of strong wine or sack. Vino trebbiano, a kind of
muskadine wine. Vino chiarello, claret wine. Vino rosso, red wine or alligant.
Vino voltato, sour wine that has lost his strength, dead wine. Vino muffo,
mustie wine. Vinno, a bush or lock of hair gently or softly curled. Vinolo,
soft, gentle, warbling or wanton, as it were merry with drinking and wine
bibbing, tipsie, cup shotten. Vinolentia, drunkenness, overmuch drinking of
wine. Vinolento, a drunkard, one given to drink much wine. Vinoso, that is full
of wine, headie, strong or fuming. Also one that loves to drink, to tipple,
quaffe or taste wine. Also tasting or smacking of wine; having a smacke or
savor of wine. Vintena, a score, twenty in number. Vintesimo, the twentieth
in number. Vinti, twenty in number. Vinto, subdued, vanquished, conquered,
overcome, gained, won or gotten in gaming, accoyed. Look Vincere. Viola, a
flower called a Violet. Also an instrument called a Violl or a Violine. Also a
violl of glass. Also a violet color. Viola di gamba, a violl de gamba. Viola
bianca, the stocke-gilloflower. Viole acciocche, a kind of violets so called.
Viole mammole, idem. Violabile, violable, that may be violated, forced, broken,
abused, hurt, ravished, etc. Violaceo, a kind of purple or violet color. Also
like a violet. Violare, to force, to ravish, to pollute, to defile, to mar,
to spoil, to rape, to violate, to corrupt, to make foul, to deflowre, to
distaine, to hurt, to misuse, to wrong, to infringe, to do against, to
transgress, as a man does a law. Also to adorn with violets, to dye violet.
Violatione, a forcing, a deflowring, a rauishment, a polluting, a violating, an
abusing, etc. Violata, forced, ravished, polluted, raped, violated, wronged.
Violaro, a place or plat where violets grow. Violato, forced, ravished,
polluted, deflowred, defiled, mard, spoiled, violated. Look Violare. Also a
color called a violet color, a purple, a puke or a french russet. Also dressed
with violets. Violatore, a forcer, a rauisher, a deflowrer, a wronger, an
infringer, a transgressor. Violebbo, a iulep made of violets. Violentare, to
force, to urge, to constrain, to compel, to offer violence unto. Violente,
violent, forcible, cruel, rash, headlong, harebraind, constraining, fierce,
vehement, injurious, offering violence, one that is impatient. Violenza,
violence, force, compulsion, constraint, cruelty, rashness, fiercenes,
vehemency, a violent rage. Violetto, Violettino, a violet or purple color, or
a kind of french russet. Violina, a little violet flower. Violino, a little
violl of glass. Also an instrument of music called a violine. Violo, a kind
of white violet. Violone, a great violl, or Viole de gamba. Viotortolo, a kind
of drinking glass with a crooked winding neck, called a bubbling glass.
Viottello, as Viottolo. Viottolo, an allie, a way, a path, a walk or narrow
causey. Vipera, a venomous serpent, adder or snake called a viper. Viperale,
the herb Rue or herb of grace. Viperare, to enuenim, to enuiper, to become
serpent-like. Vipereo, viperous, serpentine, of the nature of a viper. Also of
or belonging to vipers or adders. Viperina, snakes-grasse, or vipers-grasse.
Viperino, as Vipereo. Vipistrello, a night-bat, or a reremouse. Virago, a woman
of stout and manly courage, a manly or mankind woman. Virente, green,
flourishing, budding, young, springing. Virga, as Verga. Virga aurea, an herb
called golden rod. Virgile, the seven stars about the bull. Virginale, as
Verginale. Virgin, as Vergine. Virginella, as Verginella. Virgineo, as
Vergineo. Virginita, as Verginita. Virgola, a little yard, or rod. Also a
little stroke, line, point, or gnowman. Virgulto, a shrub, a twig, a spring, a
sprout, a young branch, a sprig, a young shoot, but properly a company of young
shootes, or many young tender sprigs and sproutes growing together out of the
ground. Viridario, a garden, an orchard, or green plot, or pertaining to them,
a green place enclosed, wherein beasts and foul are kept, or place that is
always green. Viridiale, a bird called a Greene-finch, or Canarie bird.
Viriere, a glasier. Also a glasse-maker. Virile, manlike, valiant, stout, male,
grave, of mankind, pithie, substantial. Also of, belonging, or meet for a
man. Toga virile, a gown or garment which was taken and worn when pretesta
was left off, to wit, after the age of sixteen years was expired, it was
commonly worn of young beginners and new married persons, a wedding gown, a
gown without welt, guard, stitch, or lace. Virilire, lisco, lito, to grow a
man, to grow or make strong. Virilita, virilitie, manlines, manhood, courage,
valiancie. Also the privy parts of a man, man's genitors. Viriolo, vitriole, or
green coperas. Viripotente, ripe for marriage, able to live and lie with a man.
Viro, a man. Virolare, to scrue, or turn round with a scrue, or a vice.
Viroletto, a scrue, or vice to turn round. Viroso, desirous or lusting after
man, full of manly force, valiant as a man. Also of ill savor or taste, full
of poison or venomous. Virtilla, a w^yneck, or hickwaie. Virtu, as Virtue.
Virtudioso, as Vertuoso. Virtuoso, as Vertuoso. Virulento, full of poison,
venomous, sti^king, of an evil taste. Visaccio, a filthy, illfauored face.
Visaggio, the visage, face, or look of a man. Visare, to mark, to aim at, to
note, to consider. Visaruola, a visard, a mask. Also a prying hole, as
Visiera. Viscappa, a double, or a lyned cloak. Viscardo, a Thrush, a Ma^i^, or
Throssell. Viscarugine, the Chameleon which brings forth bird-ly^^.
Vischiare, to entangle, to enf^are, to make clammie, to cover, catch, or take
with bird-lyme. also to become or make slimie. Visceglio, a grove of young oaks.
Viscerare, to panche, or pull out the bowels. Visceratamente, hartelie, with
all ones heart and guts, but properly by the bowels or entrails, even to the
very inwards, piece by piece, or by part. Viscere, the entrails, bowels,
guts, panch, of any creature. Also the garbage that hunters give their dogs.
Vischio, bird-lyme, slyme, glue, gum, clammishnes Also the shrub miscelden, or
mistletoe. Also all the flesh that is between the skin and bone. Also the
chief entrails of man or beast, as the heart, spleen, liver, lungs, and the
bowels. Vischioso, slimie, clammie, gluish, gummie. Viscido, clammie, slimie,
fast as glue. Visciuolo, as Foroncolo. Visco, as Vischio. Visconte, a Vicount.
Also a Sheriff of a county. Viscoso, as Vischioso. Visenteria, in Spanish
Camaras. Visera, as Visiera. Visetto, a little pretty face. Visibile, visible,
apparent, that may be seen. Visiera, the sight of a helmet, or caske, or
stone-bow, or any other shooting piece. Also a man's look, aspect, or
countenance. Also a visard or a mask, a pair of spectacles. Visione, a
vision, a seeing, an apparition, a fantasy. Also the sight of the eye. Also a
thing that one has seen in his sleep, a sight, a vision, a dream, a
fantasy. Also any thing that is set before one to behold. Visir, a chief
counselor or statesman of the Turk. Visita, a visiting, or visitation, a
suruaie, a view. Visitare, to visit, to suruaie, to view, to come to see
often. Visitatione, as Visita. Visiua, as Visuale. Visiuamente, visibly,
apparently. Visiuo, visible, apparent, that may be seen. Visnepote, the sons
sons son. Viso, the face, visage, look, sight, or aspect of a man. also
the sense of sight. Dante said Fu viso a me, meaning me thought or it seemed
unto me. Viso arcigno, a grim, frowning look, or countenance. Visone, a great,
big, huge face, or look. Visorio neruo nel ceruello. Visso, lived, breathed,
bad life. Visse, he lived. Look Viuere. Vista, the sense of sight, seeing, or
looking of any creature, a look, a prospect, an aspect, a view, a show, a
grace, a presence or semblance, a sight, a spectacle of any thing. Also a
countenance of a man. Also seen, noted, viewed, or looked. Vistamente, as
Vistosamente. Also quickly, out of hand, taken from the French. Vistosetta,
somewhat comely or welfauored, or hamdsome to look upon. Visto, Look Vedere,
or Veduto. Vistosamente, comely, seemly, welfauoredly, sightly, in sight, in
open view. Vistoso, seemly, comely, welfauored, sightly, worth the seeing,
that makes a good show. Vistrici, as Vimini. Visuale, visuall, pertaining to
the sight. Visualmente, visuallie, apparantlie, visiblie. Vita, l^fe, form,
fashion, or manner of living, or any bodies manner of life* it is sometimes
taken for the stature or proportion of man or woman. Vitalba, wild vine or
tetterberrie growing in hedges with red berries and winding about sets; the
juice whereof will cause the skin to blister: some call it the Travelers joy:
some have taken it for the herb Sengreene or housleeke the greater; other some
for the herb Perwinkle. It is also a belt or guirdle of leather or cord that
friars or hermits use to wear about them. It is also taken for Brionie, wild
Nep or white wine. Vitali, le parti vitali, the vital or life parts, as the
brain, heart, liver, lungs, etc. Vitale, vital, lively, that may live or hope
for life. Also that whereby we live, and does either bring or preserve life,
any thing pertaining to the maintenance of life. Also the herb Sengreene or
housleeke the greater. Vitatino, a gull, a ninnie, a silly fellow. Vitalita,
life, liuelines, the spirit of life whereby we live. Vita militare, a military
life, or profession. Vite, an arbor of vines, the vine it self. Also a vice or
a serve. Viteale, the herb with-winde, or binde-weed. Vitella, a cow calfe or
young heifer, a veale. Vitellare, to rejoice in skipping and leaping like a
young heifer or cow. Vitellina, a young cow calfe or veale. Also calfes or
neats leather. Vitello, a bull calfe or veale. Also a kind of fish called a
Seal or a sea calfe. Also the yolke of an eg. Vitello marino, a fish called a
sea calfe or seal fish. Vitiare, to ravish, to corrupt, to deflowre, to
spoil, to vitiat, to seduce, to sin, to defile, to deforme, to mar, to
infect, to hurt. Vitiatore, a corrupter, a deflowrer, a rauisher of young
maids. Vitice, a kind of withie or willow, called in English parkeleaues,
chastetree, hemp tree or Abraham's balm. Viticella, a young springing vine, but
rather an herb which takes hold of any thing next unto it, as does the vine.
Also white brionie. Vitici della vite, the tendrels of a vine, the s^o^ts or
branches of a vine. Vitile, pliant, flexible, meet to bind with, that may be
wounden. Vitiligiuoso, full of the leprosy. Also full of the morphew.
Vitiligine, the morphew upon ones skin. Also the leprosy. Vitio, a fault, a
vice, an error, a sin, a defect, an impediment, naughtines, an imperfection,
or corruption, an incurable disease, a blemish, a blame, an offense, a
villainy, a default, the contrary to virtue. Also a disease or impediment in
all the body, or in any part. Vitiosita, vice, naughtines, lewdnes, the
contrary to virtue, corruption, an inconstant affection of mind in all manner
of behavior. Vitioso, vicious, faulty, naughty, imperfect, corrupted,
diseased, blemished, offensive, full of vices, wicked, ^ewd^, corrupt, full of
errors, false, sick^, shaken, rotten, not sound, worm-(...), perished.
Vitrea, Look Tonica. Vitrearia, a glass house, or trade of glasses. Vitreo,
of, or belonging to gl^ss^, gl^ssie, glassie green, clear like glass, or
resembling glass. Also bri^^^, so thin and fine that one may see through i^
as through a glass. Vitriolo, vitrioll or coperasse. also a kings fisher. Also
an herb growing on walls wherewith glass being scoured, it is made wonderful
clean and bright. Some take it for pellitorie of the wall. Vitta, a kind of
linen veil, coife, headband or hairelace, wherewith the priests wifes did tie
their hairs, a ribband, a garland or wreath for the head. Vittima, a
sacrifice, an oblation. Also the beast killed for sacrifice. Vittimari, one
that has charge of or kills the sacrifice. Vitto, vanquished, overcome,
convinced, subdued, conquered, cast or beaten or let of his purpose and
intent. Also sustenance, living, food or feeding, victuals, provision, and
things necessary to live by as meat and drink. Used in jest for a man's privy
member. Vittore, a vanquisher, a conqueror, a victor, a conuincer, he that
vanquisheth and overcomes, one that has his purpose and intent, one that
has gotten the goall. Vittoria, victory, conquest, the upper hand or
vanquishing. Vittoriale, of or belonging to victory. Vittoriola, toong-blade,
double-toong, horse-toong, toong-lawrell or laurel of Alexandria. Vittorioso,
victorious, triumphant, that has conquered and gotten victories. Vittouaglia,
as Vettouaglia. Vittouagliare, as Vettouagliare. Vittrice, she that vanquisheth
or overcomes, a woman victorious. Also triumphant, victorious, declaring
victory. one that has her purpose and intent. Vitullare, as Vitellare.
Vituperabile, as Vituperoso. Vituperare, to shame, to reprove, to blame, to
rebuke, to defame, to discredit, to discommend, to reproach, to deface, to
disgrace, to wrong, to disparage, to accuse. Vituperatore, a shamer, a wronger,
a reproouer, a rebuker, a blamer, a defamer, an accuser, a reprehender, a
discommender. Vitupereuole as Vituperoso. Vituperio, shame reproach, rebuke,
blame, discredit, defamation, defacing, disgrace, wrong, discommendation or
dispraise. Vitupero, as Vituperio. Vituperoso, shameful, reproachful,
blameworthie, defaming, disgraceful, that may be blamed. Viua, viuat, god
save, live. Also as Sempreuiuo. Viuacchiare, to rub and hold out, to keep the
woolfe from the door, to make shifts for ones living, to live. Viuace, lively,
breathing, quick, nimble, active, full of life, of long life, strong of
nature, valiant, lusty, green, that lives and continues long. Also gaie,
trim, gallant, brave. Viuacita, liuelines, nimblenes, viuacitie, quicknes,
natural strength or long life. also gayenes, gallantnes, bravery, trimnes.
Viuagno, the hem, skirt or welt of a garment. Viuaio, a pond to keep fresh
fish alive in it. a wear to take fish in. Also any place where wild beasts,
birds or fishes be kept, as a park, a waren, a coniger, a walk for birds, a
pond or poole for fishes. Viuanda, any kind of viands, food, sustenance or
victuals or meat or cates. Viuandiere, a victualer, a prouant man, a cater.
Viuario, as Viuaio. Viuente, living, quick, lively, that always runs,
breathing. Viuere, viuo, vissi, viuuto, or visso, to live, to breath, to have
life, to lead or spend his life. Viuerra, a feret that kills conies. Viuezza,
liuelines, quicknes, viuacitie. Look Viuacita. Viui, a kind of ravenous foul.
Viuido, lively, quick, full of strength or liuelines. Also gay, trim,
gallant, brave. Viuificare, to quicken, to viuifie, to maintain alive, to give
life unto. Viuificatione, a quickening, a viuifying. Viuifico, lively, alive,
quickening. Viuo, alive, quick, living, breathing, that lives, lively, quick
and natural, green. Also strong, vehement or great, running, or that never
stands, having a continual course, light and burning, sparkling, full of
life. Acqua viua, running or living water. Calcina viua, vnslackt lime. Viuola,
a violl of glass. Also a violine. Also a violet: some take it to be also a
pinke. Viuole, a disease in a horse called the viues. Viuuto, lived, breathed.
Look Viuere. Vizza, a wrinkle, a wrimple, a withering, a crumpling. Vizzare,
to wrinkle, to wrimple, to wither, to fade, to droope, to crumple, to cockle.
Vizzo, full of wrimples, wrinkles, as old women's faces, crumpled, faded,
drooped, cokled, as garments will be. Vizzoso, as Vizzo. Vlcera, an ulcer, an
impostumation, a skabbednes, a running or matterie sore, a bile, a botch, a
corrupt matter perishing in the skin and covered with a scab, used also for a
wound, cut, gash, or open place in the bark of a tree. Vlceratione,
vlceration, breaking out into a scab or sore, sorenes. Vlcerare, to grow to an
ulcer, skab, sore, or impostumation, to make full of sores or scabs, to
exasperate or make to grieve, to exulcerate, to raise a blister. Vlceraria, the
herb stinking horehound. Vlcere chironie, ulcers that can hardly be cured.
Vlcere fauine, ulcers that yield and run a kind of matter like honey.
Vlcerino, full of ulcers, sores, skabs, or impostumations, exulcerated, full of
blisters. Vlceroso, as Vlcerino. Vlezzare, to smell, to savor, or to sent, to
yield a savor. Vlice, an herb like rosemary that draws gold unto it.
Vligine, the natural moisture of the earth. Vliginoso, soaked with long abode
of water, always moist, wet, or plas^^e. Vliua, the fruit called an olive
whereof they make oil. Vliuale, enclining to the color of olives. Vliuastro,
brown, or of the color of olives. Vliuetto, a grove full of olive trees.
Vliuigno, as Vliuastro. Vliuo, an olive tree. Vlna, the undermost and lesser of
the two long bones of the cubite which are both joined together between
themselves, as well with the shoulder bone as with the wrist of the hand,
albeit vlna near the wrist is committed to radio only: it is also called
Focile minore. Vlpico, great and wild garlike. Vlteriore, further, beyond,
past, or behind. Vltimamente, lastly, at last, finally. Vltimare, to finish,
to end, to accomplish, to make an end. Vltimatamente, as Vltimamente. Vltimo,
last, final, lag, the furthest or furthermost. Also extreme, chief, or
greatest. Vlto, that has revenged, or that has taken vengeance and
punishment. Vltore, a revenger, he that takes vengeance, a punisher, an
executioner. Vltrice, revenging, reuengefull, a revenger, a punisher, an
executioner. Also she that reuengeth, or takes vengeance. Vlula, an owl or an
howlet. Vlulante, howling, shreeking. Vlulare, to howl as a dog or wolf does,
to yell, to lament. Also to schreeke as an owl. Vlulato, howled, schreeked,
lamented, or full of pitiful crying, a yelling, an howling, a crying, such as
women and wolfes do make in lamenting or crying. Vlulo, as Vlulato. Vlzollo,
Vlzolo, a kid so called among the Grisons. Vmanita, as Humanita. Vmano, as
Humano. Vmbella, Vmbrella, a little shadow, a little round thing that women
bare in their hands to shadow them. Also a broad brimd hat to keep off heat
and rain. Also a kind of round thing like a round skreene that gentlemen use
in Italy in time of summer or when it is very hot, to keep the sun from
them when they are riding by the way. Also the round tuft or head of fenell or
Dill, or other herb wherein the seed is. Vmbilicali artery, two arteries
marching from the nauill thorough Peritoneo unto the sides of the bladder, they
are the first arteries that in the infant are begotten. Vmbilicario, pertaining
to the nauill. Also a little knife or lancer with which midwiues use to cut
away the nauill-strings of infants newborn. Vmbilicato, made in the fashion
of a nauill. Also that has a nauill. Vmbilico, the nauill. Also the middle of
any thing: Also a little round and smooth stone fashioned like a nauill. also a
little circle made like a nauill in the grounds to discern the coasts of the
winds. Also a bullion or bosse, such as are set on the outside of books. Also
the crown, top, or head of the apple just against the stalk. also a kind of
writhen cockle or shellfish wrinkled like a nauill, vmbilico del'annello, the
beazill, colet, head, or broadest part of a ring wherein the stone or sign is
set. Vmbilico del sole, the little circle in the middle whereof the gnomon of a
dyall is fastened. Vmbilico di venere, the herb peniewort, peniegrasse, venus
nauill, or hipwort. Vmbilico del' vuouo, the streine or kenning of the egg: it
is also used for the bosse of a buckler or a shield. in hills it is taken for
that which stands out and swells above the rest. Vmbrina, a kind of fish
which some take to be the halybut. Vmidita, as Humidita. Vmido, as Humido.
Vmidore, as Humidita. Vmiliare, as Humiliare. Vmile, as Humile. Un, the number
of one, but as we say in english a, as un liuomo, a man, or one man. Vna, the
number of one. Vn' altra volta, another time, once more. Vn' altro, another,
one more. Vna fiata, once, one time. Vnanimamente, jointly, of one accord, of
one mind, heart and will, of one consent and accord, or else with one consent
and accord. Vnanimita, concord of mind, consent of heart, unanimity. Vnanimo,
of one consent and accord, of one mind, heart and will. Un batter d' occhio, a
moment, a twinkling of an eye. Un certo, a certain man, a certainty. Vnchie
odorate, a kind of shell fish. Vncinare, to hook, to crook, to claspe, to
drag with a hook, to make crooked as a hook. Also to catch with hooks. Also
to set on tenter hooks. Vncinato, hooked, crooked, armed with hooks. Also
caught with a hook. Also set on tenter hooks. Vncinelli, little hooks,
crookes, or clasps, tenter hooks, or tacks, or nails called trashes, or
tackes. Vncino, any kind of hook, crook, or claspe, or tenter hook. Also a
little club or bat crooked at the end, the crooked head of a shaft, a broad
arrow head. Also a little anchor. Also a fish-hooke. Vncinuto, hooked, crooked,
made hooke-wise, full of claws or pounces, armed with hooks. Vndeci, the
number of eleven. Vndecimo, the eleventh in number. Un di, one day. Un di
auanti, one day before, one day sooner. Vndici, eleven in number. Un di piu,
one day more. Also one moreover. Un di poi, one day after. Vne, the number of
one. Vnedine, the fruit of the arbut or strawberrie tree, it is in show like
an apple, bitter and noisome both to the head and stomach, so that a man
cannot eat above one at a time. Vngelle, as Vnghia, de gliocchij. Vngere,
vngo, vnsi, vngiuto, or unto, to anoint, to grease, to oynte, to ^allow, to
smeare. Vnghia, the nail of fingers or toes, in man, bird, or beast, a claw,
a talon. Also the hoof of a horse, or other beast, Also the talon or pounce
or clawe of a hawk or other ravenous bird. Also a certain hook or crook
that surgeons use, ordained and used for the drawing out of a child that is
dead in the mothers womb. Also a kind of tormenting iron tool with two
p^akes or horns to pinch, cut, and slit the offender with. Also a disease in
the eye called the haw. Also a crooked hook to cut grapes with. Vnghia de gli
occhii, a disease in a horses eye, called the hawes. Vnghia baldano, the paring
of ones nails, a matter of nothing. Vnghia cauallina, as Vnghia di cauallo, or
Tussilagine. Vnghia di cauallo, coltes-foote, foles-foote, horse-hoofe, or
buls-foote. Look Tussilagine. Vnghiare, to hook or crook, or claspe, or
scratch with nails, or claws: to sease on, or catch with nails, claws or
pounces, to hold with a hook, to come to have nails, claws, talons, pounces
or hoofes. Vnghiella, as Vnghietta. Also a pin and a web in ones eyes. But some
take it for the disease called the hawe. Vnghietta, a little nail, clawe,
claspe, hook, crook, hoof, pounce, or talens. Vnghione, as Vngione. Vngione,
the talons, gripes or pounces of a hawk. Also a great nail, a clawe or a
hoof. Vngiume, any manner of ointment, unction, or anointing, grease, seame,
fat, tallow, or sewet. Vngiuto, anointed, nointed, greased, smeared, or
tallowed. Look Vngere. Vnguentaio, an ointment or salve maker. also a
perfumer, one that makes sweet oils and sells them. Vnguentaria, the art
or craft of making sweet ointments or oils. Vnguentare, to salve or anoint,
to use unctions. Vnguento, an ointment or a salve, or an unction. Also a
perfume, or sweet oil, a liquide perfume, ointment, or salve consisting of
grease, fat, and liquors mingled with oil. Vni, used for the number of one.
Vni calamo, that has but one stem or straw growing out of the root.
Vnicamente, only, alone, singularly. Vnicaulo, that has but one stalk
without branches. Vnico, only, alone, singular, one alone. Vnicogenito, an
only begotten child. Vnicolore, of one color. Vnicorno, the beast called an
unicorn. Vnicuba, a woman that lies or companieth but with one man.
Vnifoglio, a kind of lilly commonly called monophylon or single leaf.
Uniform, uniform, of one form or proportion. Vniformita, an uniformity,
agreeing in form, one and the same shape or fashion. Vnigenito, only
begotten, an only child, one child without any more. Vnimano, that has but
one hand. Vnimodo, of one sort or fashion. Union, union, peace, unity,
concord, agreement, atonement. Also the number of one. Also a fair, great,
orient pearl called an union. Vnipede, having but one foot. Vnire, vnisco,
vnito, to unite, to atone, to conioyne in one, to join together and make as
it were one. Also as Onire. Vnisone, a unison in music. Vnistirpe, that has
but one stem, stock, or root. Vnisuono, of one only sound. Vnita, unity,
singlenes, atonement, concord, agreement in one, an union, uniting or joining
of two things or more together. Also the likeness of two things of which one
cannot be discerned from another. Vnitamente, jointly together, of one mind and
accord, together in one. Vnito, united, attoned, conjoined in one, joined
together, made one. Vniualuo, that has but one shale, shell, or husk.
Vniuersalita, an universality, or generality, as Vniuersita. Universal,
universal, general, common, belonging to all. Vniuersalmente, universally,
generally, altogether. Vniuersare, to make universal or general, to publish
to all. Vniuersipotente, that has power over all. Vniuersipotentia, power over
all. Vniuersita, an university, a generality, a whole estate, al in general,
the universal world, the whole frame of the world, an universality.
Vniuerso, universal, general, the whole, public, altogether, all in
general. Also the universe, the whole world. Vniuira, a woman having but one
husband. Vniuoco, signifying but one thing. Vno, the number of one. Vnoculo,
having but one eye. Vno per volta, one at once. Vnpaio, a pair, a couple, a
brace, a cast, a yoke. Un passo e salta, when a horse does take one pace and a
leap, which saultes or leaps ought to be Salti aggroppati, that is, high and
strongly performed on the back. Vnpoco, a little quantity. Vnpopo, a very
little quantity. Vnqua, ever or never, at any time, at no time. Vnquache, as
Vnqua. Vnquemai, ever, or at any time. Vnquanco, as Vnqua. Vnticeio, as Vntume.
Vntione, an unction, a smearing, an annointment, an anointing. Also a
consecration. Also one of the Roman sacraments. Unto, anointed, ointed,
greased, smeared. Also butter, but properly the leaf of a hog, which is the
fat that lies by the back and ribs, good for salues or to fry meat with.
Also fattie, oily, or moist. Also smooth and polished, and glib. Vntoso, fat,
buttrie, greasy, full of fat or grease, oily. Vntosottile, butter. Also seame
of porke. Un tratto, once, one time, one throw, one cast, one trick, one
draught. Vntumo, any kind of grease, fat, butter, ointment, salve, unction,
tallow, sewet, seame or such oily or fattie substance. Vo, the first person
singular of the presentence of the verbes Volere, and the verb Andare, I will,
I desire, I require. etc. Look Volere, I go, I wander, I walk, etc. Look
Andare. Also used for Voi, you. Look Voi. Voarcadumia, a kind of alchimie or
transmutation of metals. Voarcaumena, idem. Vocabolario, a dictionarie, a
register of words. Vocabolista, as Vocabolario. Vocabolo, a word, a name, a
term, a denomination of any thing. Vocabulario, as Vocabolario. Vocabulista,
as Vocabolario. Vocabulo, as Vocabolo. Vocale, that has a voice, that makes a
noise, that resounds or is loud, vocal also a vowell. Vocali nerui, those
noble sinews which have the virtue of forming the speech. Vocalita, a tune, a
sound, a voice, a calling. Vocare, to call, to bid, to will and inuit, to cry
unto or after. Vocatione, a vocation, a calling, a praying, a desiring, a
requesting, or bidding. Vocatiuo, of, or belonging to calling, vocative.
Vocato, called, hight, named, bidden. Also a praying, a desiring, a requesting,
a calling, a bidding. Voce, a voice, a sound or a word, a repercussion of the
air. a brute, a report, a voice, a crying, a tune, a saying, a speaking, a
talk. Voce humana, humane or man's voice. Vocierare, as Vociferare. Vociferare,
to cry out or aloud, to braie, to voice it, to exclaim. Vocina, a little,
small, shrill voice. Vocitare, as Vociferare. Vocolari, the kernels or buttons
under a hogs iawe. Voculatione, the accent of every word, the due moderation
and measuring of the voice in pronouncing a word. Voga, a good hand or maine
at dice or other gaming. also luck or fortune. also a will or desire, or hearts
wish. Also the stroke of an oar in the water when one roweth. Vogare, to row
in a gallie or any bote. Vogata, a rowing, a stroke, a reach or draught with an
oar. Vogatore, a rower, a water-man, a sculler. Voglia, a will, a desire, a
wish, a longing, a purpose, an intent, a list. Voglia Dio, would to god, god
grant, I pray god. Vogliare, to make one willing, to long or list for.
Voglienza, as Voglia. Voglio, I will or am willing, my mind or will is. Look
Volere. Voglioso, willing, listing, longing, desiring, wishing. Also disposed,
lusty, full of will. Vogliuzza, a foolish, squeamish, woman's longing, desire,
list, will, conceit, or humor. Voi, you, your selves. Voi stesso, or
medesimo, your self. Vola, the hollownes of the hand being half open and half
shut, the palm of the hand. Also he flies. Volamento, a flying, a fluttring.
Also a running swiftly. Volandrello, a kind of owl or howlet. Volandole, the
name of a rope-makers tool. Volante, flying, going, or running swiftly. Also
quicksilver according to Alchimists new phrases. Volare, to fly in the air,
to fleet or sail swiftly, to run or go quickly or in haste, to pass apace.
Volarina, the fine flower or dust that flies away in the mill, and sticks to
the walls. Also thistle down. Volatica, a witch, a hagge, a sorceres. Also a
tetter, an itch, a ring-worme, or a dry scab. Also the morphew. Also any thing
that flies or passes away quickly, and lightly, that is fleeting and
unconstant. Volatico, that flies or goes away suddenly, flitting,
unconstant. Verme volatico, a disease in a horse called the bots. Volatile,
that flies or can fly, any kind of bird, or foul, that passes or flitteth,
passing swiftly, flitting quickly. Also any thing that is light, or whatsoever
is easily carried, or flies upward into the air, as ashes, dust, etc. Also
quicksilver according to Chimists new fantastical phrases. Volatiuo, as
Volatile. Volatore, a flier, Look Pesce volatore. Volatura, a flight, or a
flying. Also a train for a hawk. Volazzare, to flutter, to houer up and
down, to purre as a partridge. Volcano, a hill that continually burns and
casts out flame and smoke. Also a melting or hammering worke-man that is
continually about the fire. Volente, willing, voluntary, glad, ready,
desirous. Volentieri, willingly, gladly, wishinglie. Volenza, as Voglia.
Volere, voglio or vo, volli, volsi, voluto to will, to desire, to require, to
mind, or to mean, to purpose, to intend. Also a will, a desire, a meaning, an
intent, a wishing. Voluto, willed, desired, required, minded, meant, purposed,
intended or wished. Voler been, to love or wish well unto. Voler male, to hate
or wish ill unto. Volerla con qualcuno, to pick or seek a quarrel with some
body. Volgare, vulgar, common, public, general, usual. Also vile, base,
much-vsed, belonging to the common people. Volgarmente, commonly, vulgarly,
after the common sort, in every place, for the most part. Volgarita,
vulgaritie, generality, communaltie, the common manner of the wild and common
people. Volgarizzare, to publish, to translate, to make common, to spread
abroad. Also to noise, to bruit or disclose. Volgere, volgo, volsi, or volgie,
volgiuto, or volto, to turn, to ouerturne, to toss, to tumbell, to
transform, to change, to incline, to bend, to stoop, to reuerse, to wry, to
wrest, to addict, to convert, to fold, wrap or roll, to cast or think in
the mind, to consider, to weigh, to cast revolt, or reuolue to and fro, to run
round or as a river does. Volgiuto, volto, turned, ouerturned, tossed tu^bled,
transformed, revolted, changed, inclined, bent, stooped, reuersed, wried,
wrested, addicted, converted, reuolued, folded, wrapped or rouled, cast or
thought in mind, considered or weighed, cast or revolted to and fro, run round
or in and out as a river does. Volgimento, a turning, a tossing, a changing, a
reuoluing, a bending, etc. Volgiuago, pertaining to the common people, poor,
base, mean, of little value, of the common sort, common, unconstant,
uncertain. Volgo, the common sort of people, the vulgar multitude, the
mani-headed-monster multitude. Volo, a flight, a flying, a pitch in flying.
Voloni, they that offer themselves willingly to go to the wars. Volonta, will,
good will, affection, mind, heart, meaning, consent, desire. Volontariamente,
voluntarily, readily, willingly, promptly, with a ready good mind, of ones
free will and accord. Volontario, voluntary or willing, that is of ones own
accord. Also without any occasion given, without procuring, coming of it
self. Herba volontaria, a weed or an herb growing naturally without setting
or sowing, Volonteroso, as Volontario. Volpaia, a foxe-hole, a den, a cave, a
lurking hole. Volpare, to howl, to bray, to yelp, to bark as a fox* also to
squeak, to pule, to shreek, to skreeke. Also as Volpeggiare. Volpe, a f^xe, a
renard. taken also for a crafty man or subtle sneaking companion. Volpeggiare,
as Volpare, to play the fox or renard or crafty companion, to be wily, to
deceive with crafty wiles and deceits. Volpetta, a young fox, a crafty
child, a cubbe. Volpe marino, a fish called a sea fox. Volpicoda, an herb
called fox-taile. Volpino, crafty, sly, wily, subtle, wily-beguily, a young
fox. Also a kind of fish called a sea fox. Volpone, an old fox, an old
reinard, an old crafty, sly, subtle companion, sneaking lurking wily
deceiuer. Volsella, an instrument or pair of pins^rs to pluck out hairs by
the roots. Volta, a time, once, one time. Also a turn or a course. Also a
revolt or return. also a circuit or a compass. Also a flight also a bout.
Also a vault, a celler, an arche, a bent or bow. Also a dance called a Volta.
Also a man's turn or lot. Also the turn that cunning riders teach their
horses. Volta colcata, is when a horse does lean in his turns. Volta
d'occhio, a twinkling of an eye. Volta faccia, a kind of march sounded in time
of war when they should retreat. Voltaccio, a filthy, grimme, ill-favored face.
Volta per volta, time by time, sometimes, at times, now and then. Volta
radoppiata, a double turn in dancing or riding of a horse. Voltare, as Volgere.
Also to built vault-wise or arche-wise. Voltato, as Volgiuto, or built
vault-wise or arched. Voltarella, a silly time alone, one only time. Voltare
sozzopra, to turn, or ouerturne topsi-turuie. Voltatura, a vaulting or arching
or bending. Volteggiare, to vault on horse back. Also to tumble.
Volteggiatore, a vaulter or a tumbler. Voltesini da poppa. Volto, as Volgiuto.
Look Volgere. Also a face, a look, a countenance, a visage, a favor or
cheer of a man. Also a vault, a celler or arch of a bridge. Volto di ponte
sisto, a bold, brazen, vnblushing, shameless face. Voltolamento, a rouling, a
tumbling, a tossing, an ouerturning, a topsi-turuie. Voltolare, to roll up and
down, to tumble, to toss, to ouerturne, to rumble, to wallowe, topsi-turuie.
Voltore, a ravenous bird called a vultur, a geyre or grap. Also a greedy
cormorant. Voltorino, of or belonging to a vulture or cormorant. Also a kind of
graie color. Voltuoso, of a grave and solemn countenance, of a heavy and sad
look, having a big look, a sour man. Volturio, a ravenous fellow, an
extortioner, a cormorant. Volubile, voluble, fickle, unconstant, variable,
wavering, changing, nimble, flitting, rolling, always turning, ever running.
Also that is or may easily be turned, tumbled or rolled. Also having a round
pronuntiation, gathering it self together. Also used for a weed running up by
trees and herbs having red branches, and the leaves biting the tongue, called
commonly roape-weed or weede-binde. Volubilita, volubilitie, roundnes,
mutabilitie, ficklenes, vnco^stancie, nimblenes, flittingnes, the turning of a
thing, facility to turn round, aptnes to roll. Also a round or quick
speaking without impediment or staggering, the falling and round going of words
by measure. Volubilmente, roulingly, roundly, with a certain measure in
falling. Volucchio, the herb called withi-wind, weed-bind or roap-weed. Look
Volubile. Volucra, a vermin that eats tender vines, called a vine fretter,
the Devils gold ring. Volucre, fledge, able to fly. Also any thing that
flies, swift, light, flitting, unconstant. Volucro, all things that do fly,
a^ a foul, a bird, a fly, a waspe, etc. Also the after birth of a woman.
Volume, a volume, a book, a tome, a part of a book. Also a folding, turning
or rouling about. Voluoce, a little worm with many legs, eating the leaves of
vines or other trees, a caterpiller, a vine fretter or the Devils gold ring.
Volura, that in the head or chapter of a pillar which sticks out or hangs
over in manner of a writhen circle or curled tuft, being a kind of work of
leaves, or some such devise turning diverse and sundry ways, caruers and
painters call it draperie or cillerie. Some say it is the square table of stone
set upon the chapters of pillars. Volutare, to turn lying, to wallow, to
tumble. Also to reuolue, cast and toss in the mind. Volutatione, a wallowing,
a tumbling. Volutta, voluptuousnes, sensuality, delight or worldly pleasure,
solace, comfort, delectation, sensual and worldly pleasure. Voluttario,
pleasant, bringing pleasure, delighting in, taking and given to pleasure,
voluptuous. Also of or belonging to pleasures and sensuality. Voluttuoso,
voluptuous, sensual, insatiable in sensual pleasure. Vome, he vomiteth. Vomer
di penna, used by Petrarke in steed of writing. Vomere, Vomero, the sough or
ploughshare or culter, or the iron of the plough that pierces the ground, as
Vomitare. Also taken for a man's priuities. Vomica, a kind of Indian nut. Also a
kind of impostume full of matter. Also quick silver. Vomire, to spue, to vomit.
Vomitare, to vomit, to cast, to spue, to perbreake, to cast up. Vomito, a
vomit, a casting, a spuing, a perbreaking. Also that which is vomited.
Vomitorio, that has the nature or strength to make one vomit, spue or cast.
Vopisco, of two twins or young children in a woman's body, that which comes
to perfect birth is so called. Vopo, need, or necessity. Vorace, ravenous,
greedy, devouring, consuming, a spend-good, a glutton, a rauenour, a great
deuourer, or eater. Voracita, gluttony, excessive eating, ravenous feeding, a
devouring. Also a gulf. Voragine, a swallow, a gulf, a whirlepoole, a
quauemyre, or marvelous deep place that sucketh or swalloweth up even rivers,
and whereout nothing can come again. Also gluttony, insacietie, devouring,
wasting of good, and thrift. Voraginoso, full of gulfes or swallowing pits or
whirlepooles. Also gluttonous, devouring, waste-good, and spend all. Vorare, to
swallow or devour down meat before it be chewed, to eat greedily. Vorra,
he shall be willing, he shall will or list, used for Borra. Vortumino, the god
of changing things, that is of merchandise. Vosatti, buskins, or high clownish
shoes. Vosco, with you, in your company. Vose, as Voce, as Vosatti. Vostrale,
common, or peculiar to you. Vostro, yours, your own, your. Vota cessi, an
emptier of iakes or priuies, or close stools, a iakes-farmer. Votare, to vow,
to make a vow, to promise, to protest. Also to empty, to make void, or
hollow. Also to bequeath and give. Votamento, an empting, the act of empting.
Also a vowing or promising. Votario, a votarie, a vower, a promiser, a
vow-maker. Votatore, a vower, a promiser, a votarie. Votezza, emptines,
vacuitie. Votiuo, that is vowed or promised by vow Also that is or has been
greatly wished or desired. Voto, a vow or promise made to God, a desire, a
prayer, a protestation. Also a wish or a thing much desired, a request. Also an
affection or appetite of covetousness. Also a thing obtained of God by prayer.
Also a consent, voice, or suffrage given to one in any election. Also empty,
hollow, or void. Vottene meglio, I love thee better for it. Vouale, oualle,
like an egg, more long then round. Vouo, an egg. Vozzacchio, a kind of long
wingd hawke. Vpega, a bird called a hoope, or dunghill cock. Look Vpupa.
Vpetala, a kind of speckled stone. Vpilare, to stop, to be bound or costiue in
the belly. Vpilato, stopped, bound or costiue in the belly. Vpilatione, a
costiuenes, or hardness in the belly, an oppilation or stopping of the liver.
Vpilatino, costiue, binding, restringent, stopping. Vpupa, a bird no bigger
then a Thrush, with a crest from his bill to the uttermost part of his head,
which he strouteth out or holds down according to his affections, called a
houpe or a dunghill cock, because it nestleth in man's dung, as writers report.
Some have abusiuely taken vpupa for a chough, a dawe, or a chuet. Also a kind
of beetle, mattock, pickaxe, or such other iron tool to dig stones with out of
a quarrie. Vpupare, to cry as a hoope or dunghill cock. Vraco, the way by
which urine is conuaide from the infant being yet in the womb. Vranoscopo, a
fish having but one eye in his head, and that so placed, that swimming he
seems to look upward. Vrbanita, courtesy, civility, civil life, good
manners, gentle behavior, gentleness in speech and behavior, pleasant talk or
jesting, or pleasant grace in jesting. Also civil affairs. Vrbano, of a
city, borne or dwelling in a city. Also courteous, civil, seemly or
pleasant, civil in courtesy, gentle in speech and gesture, pleasant in
behavior and talk. Also a kind of partridge. Vredine, the blasting of trees
or herbs with cold. Also an itch or burning in the skin. Vrete, Vretro, the
pipe or conduite by which the urine passes from the reins to the bladder.
Vrgente, forcing, urgent, urging, straining, pressing, calling earnestly upon,
sore or hardly pressing. Vrgenza, force, urging, straining, constraint,
importunity, an urging necessity. Vrgere, vrgo, vrgei, vrgiuto, to urge, to
importune, to press on, to provoke, to hasten forth, to enforce, to strain,
to pursue, to solicit, to call upon, to vex, to infest, to be straight or
earnest upon, to hasten forth or forward, to charge earnestly, to lie
earnestly upon one, to labor and travel earnestly. Vrgiuto, urged,
pressed, importuned, provoked, enforced, strained, pursued, solicited, vexed,
infested, etc. Look Vrgere. Vri, a kind of wild beast like an ox, a bugle
or a buff, as Vro. Vrica, a caterpiller or such worm. Also a hurt coming to
all manner of grain by too much moisture. Vrigine, a burning in sores by
occasion of hot medicines, or corrosiues. Vrina, urine, water of man or beast,
piss, stale. Also a kind of wild beast. Vrina genitale, the seed of
generation. Vrinale, Vrinaio, a vrinall, a pispot. Also a medicine to provoke
piss. Also the pipe through which the piss runs from out the bladder.
Vrinare, to piss, to stale, to make water. Also to diue or duck under the
water. Vrinarij, Vritidi, the passages for urine to the raines. Vrinatrice, a
diuer, a didopper, or ducker. Vritare, to burn sore or vehemently. Vrlamento,
a howling, a baying, a barking, a braying, a yelling. Vrlare, to howl, to
baye, to bark, to braye, to yell. Also to hem or welt a garment. Vrlatore, a
barker, a howler, a bayer, a brayer, a yeller. Vrlo, as Vrlamento. Also a hem,
or welt of any seame. Vrna, any manner or kind of earthen pot, or a pitcher.
Also a tomb, a grave, a sepulcre* also a vessel or cophin wherein the ashes
of the dead were kept. Also according to ancient Roman histories a measure of
liquid things containing of our measure about four gallons or gawnes and a
half. Vrnaio, a potter, or maker of pitchers. also a board or shelfe in a
kitchen whereon pots and vessels are kept. Vrnale, of or belonging to a pitcher
or pot. Vro, a kind of wild bull in Hercynia, but bigger then ours in body,
and very swift. Others take it for the bugle or buff. Vropigo, the narrowest
and lowest part of the chine, the rumpe. Vrsa, a shee-Beare. Also a sign of
the stars in the north called Charleswaine. Vrsetta, as Orsetta, as Foracqua.
Vrtare, to shoulder, to push, to shoue, to thrust, to iussle, to encounter, to
but, to shock, to front, to thump. Vrtatura, as Vrto. Vrto, Vrtone, a push, a
shouldring, a shoouing, a thrust, a iussling, an encounter, a shock, a
fronting, a tripping, a stumbling, a iog, a thump. Vrtica, the weed called a
nettle. Also the tickling of letcherie. Also a kind of fish. Vrticare, to
sting, to prick, to tickle, to nettle. Vsante, using, accustomed, wont,
frequenting. Vsanza, use, fashion, guise, custom, manner, wont, habit,
occupation, employment, usage, enurement. Vsare, to use, to enure, to fashion,
to accustom, to be wont. Also to use or take profit of, to occupy, to employ,
to possess. Also to be conversant, familiar, or have to do with one. Also to
behave himself. Vsare diligentia, to use all diligence or endeavor. Vsato,
All'usato, after the common, wonted, or ordinary fashion. Vsatti, buskins,
short, thin boots. Also high clownish shoes. Vsbergo, a vant-plate, a
breast plate. Vscente, issuing, or going out. Also an out-tooth. Vsciali, the
garnishings of doors. Vsciere, an usher or a dore-keeper, or a porter.
Vscietto, Vsciettino, a little door or a wicket, a hatch before a door.
Vscignolo, a Nightingale. Vscio, any kind of door, or entrance. Vscio di
dietro, a back door. Vsciuolo, a little door, or wicket, a hatch before a door.
Vscire, esco, vscij, vscito, to issue, or go forth. Also to prove, to sort, to
effect, to come to pass. Look Riuscire. Vscito, issued, or gone forth. Also
proved, sorted, or come to pass. Vscire del trotto, to go out of ones pace or
trot, to go out of ones byas, used also to become gentle or myld again.
Vscita, an issue, a going forth, an opening, a door, a gap, an egresse, a
regresse. Vsellare, as Vccellare. Vsello, a gudgeon-fish, or a loche fish. Also
as Vccello. Vsia, the substance, or being of a thing. Vsignolo, a Nightingale.
Vsitato, much used or accustomed, wonted, ordinary, common, usual, wont,
customable. Vso, use, usage, custom, fashion, wont, guise, manner or ure. Also
the use, exercise, tenure, or occupation of any thing. Also profit, help,
fruit, service, or possession of any commodity, the occupation or exercise of
a thing. Vsofrutto, as Vsufrutto. Vsolieri, laces, points, or ribands with
tagges, such as women lace or tie their peticotes. Also shirt strings, or
filets. Vssignolo, a Nightingale. Vstione, a burning, a searing. Also a marking
with a hot iron. Vstrigine, burning or smarting in sores. Also blasting of
corn through heat. Vstrina, a place where dead bodies are buried. Also a
melting-house for metals. Vstulare, to burn or sear a thing. Also to frizle
or curle. Vsuale, usual, common, wont, customable, much used, accustomed,
ordinary, wonted. Also as Vsuario. Vsuario, usual, that serves for our use,
that we have the use of, but not the propriety. Also he that has the use of a
thing, but neither the fruit nor the propriety. Vsucapere, to attain and
become master, lord or owner of any thing by long use, custom, or
prescription, or by possession of long time. Vsucattione, the attaining of a
thing by prescription or long possession. Vsucatto, become possessor of any
thing by long use, custom, or prescription. Vsufrutto, the use, fruit, or
profit (but not the propriety) of another man's goods with the consent of the
owner, the stock and substance being saved. Vsufruttuario, he that has the use
and profit of any thing but not the propriety thereof. Vsura, usage, usury,
use, or interest of any thing, money given above the principal sum for the
lone of it. Vsuraio, an usurer. Also that is let to usury. Also he that paieth
usury. Vsuratico, of or pertaining to usury, or the money paid for usury.
Vsuriere, as Vsuraio. Vsurpare, to vsurp, to take against right and reason, to
disturb another possession. Also to use often or much, be it in word or
deed. Vsurpatione, Vsurpamento, often using or practicing, usurping, or
interruption of possession, or disturbing of prescription. Vsurpatore, an
usurper of another man's right. Vt, a note in music vt. Vtello, as Vtrello.
Vtensile, any thing necessary for the use and occupying of a man in a house.
Vterino, borne of the same mother or dam, both of one womb or mother. Fratello
vterino, a half brother, or a brother by the mother and not by the father.
Vtero, a womb, a belly, a panch, the matrix or womb of a woman wherein the
child is conceived: used also for the child in the mothers womb. Vtile,
profitable, commodious, expedient, convenient, good, necessary, prosperous,
wholesome, gainefull. Also as Vtilita. Vtilita, profit, utility, commodity,
gain, good, service, cheuissance. Vtilmente, profitablie, commodiouslie,
conveniently, gainefullie, with profit. Vtraio, a maker of pots, bottles,
bouges, or borachos, or budgets of lether made bottlewise to carry wine or oil
in. Vtrello, a little pot, bottle, bouge, boracho, or budget of lether or gotes
skin wherein wine, water or oil may be carried. Vtria, as Vtro. Vtriaca,
treacle, an antidote against poison. Vtriculo, Vtricolo, the place in a woman
wherein the child lies. Vtro, a pot, a bottle, a bouge, a budget, a boracho,
a bag of gotes skin that they use in Italy to carry wine or oil in from
place to place. Vua, any kind of grape to make wine with. Also a vine or branch
or cluster of grapes. Also a berrie. Also used for the Vuula of a man's mouth,
or rather the disease or falling thereof. Look Vuola. Vua, a disease in the
eyes called a pin and a web. Vua passa, dried reisins or grapes. Also Corans.
Vua marina, sea grape. of some called a Scorpion. Vua moscatella, muskadine
grapes. Vua crispina, as Vua spina. Vua secca, dried grapes or reisins. Vua
spina, goose-berries or thorn berries. Vua spinella, as Vua spina. Vua
taminia, black briony or our Ladies seal. Vua vara, young grapes beginning to
be ripe, a rath grape. Vuatione, infirmita nel occhio. Vuea, like a grape, of a
grape. look Tonica. the fourth thin membrane of the eye, called also Corione,
Chorione, Secondina, Coriforme, or Choriforme, and is the first that clotheth
and covers the optike sinew. Vueo, of a grape or like a grape. Vui, used for
Voi, you or your selves. Vuido, wet, moist. Vuifero, which bears grapes,
bringing grapes. Vulgagine, the herb folefoote, or Asarabacca. Vulgar, as
Volgare. Vulgarizzare, as Volgarizzare. Vulgato, common, public, manifest,
published, commonly used, set out to the use of all men. Vulgo, as Volgo.
Vulna, a wound, a grief, a pinching, a sore or hurt. Vulnerare, to hurt or
wound. Also to nip or grieve. Vulpare, to cry or pule like a kite. Vulsione, a
conuulsion, the twinging or pulling of the cramp. Vulturno, the northeast wind.
Vulua, the matrice, womb or mother, the place of conception in any female.
Also the way or entrance into the same, the womb part or womb passage, the
privy passage. Vuoga, as Voga. Vuogare, as Vogare. Vuogli, has been used for
Vuoi, id est, thou will. Vuola, a little piece of spungeous flesh much like the
spur of a cock, which hanging down in the roof of ones mouth, near to the
passage into the nosthrils, serves for the utterance of voice and
pronuntiation, when, being distempred, the upper part thereof is thin, and the
lower part blackish, like the utmost end of a grape, and then it is called
Staphile or Vua: but when it is swollen as round and big above as below in
form of a pillar, then is called Ciona, or Colomella, or Columella. Vuolaria,
the herb horse tongue. Vuotacessi, as Votacessi. Vuotare, to empty, to void,
to farm. also to make hollow. Vuotatore, an emptier, a voider, a farmer.
Vuoto, void, empty, hollow. Also as Voto. Vuoua, eggs. Vuouale, as Ouale. Vuoua
maritate, eggs in moon shine. Vuouolo, a kind of mazons work so called.
Vurchio, a hulke, a hurk, a crayer, a lyter, a whirrie or such vessel of
burden. Vuula, as Vuola.
Z
ZAbaione, as Zambaglione. Zaburro, a kind of grain or corn growing in India,
which some take to be the ginnie wheat. Zacca, a fowling net, a hay, a bag or
satchell made of net work, a casting net. Zaccara, a common whore, a harlot or
strumpet, a trull. Zaccarare, to daggle, to dash or spot with dirt or mire, to
bemire. Zaccarelle, toys, trifles, vanities, trash, nifles. Also dashings or
spots of dirt or mire. Zaccare, the spots of dirt that a long garment gathers
about the skirts. Also troubles, griefs, vexations or garboiles that a man
has. Also common whores or baudie houses. Zaccaria, fiore di zaccatia, the
flower called blew bottel. Zaccheo, a foolish slouenly dwarf. Zaccherare, as
Zaccarare. Zacchere, as Zaccare. Zaccherelle, trifles, toys, nifles, vanities,
as Zaccarelle. Zaccherette di parole, a huddle of foolish words, a flim-flam
tale without rhyme or reason. Zaccheroso, mirie, bemired, durtie. Also all-to be
dashed with dirt. Zacconare, as Zazzeare, as Anfanare. Zaffara, an iron hook
or drag that dyers use to draw their clothes out of their fattes or vattes.
Zaffarano, saffron. Zaffaria, the order, rout, company or crew of sergeants and
catch-poles or such base officers, a marshals court. Also a catchpoles trick.
Zaffare, to gripe, to snatch, or seize upon with ones paws, to catch or arest
with a sergeant or catch-pole. Zaffatto, griped, snatched, seized on or caught
by a sergeant. Zaffata, a gripe, a snatching or a catching. Also a blow or a
pat with a claw. Zaffeggiare, to play the sergeant or catchpole. Also to pat or
beat with ones paws. Zaffera, a kind of color that painters use. Zaffiro, a
kind of hawk with yellow feet and legs. Also a precious stone called a
sapphire. Also a kind of fish of the kind of the gilthead. Zaffo, a sergeant or
a catch-pole. Also the ears of a tub. Also the working or boiling of new wine.
Zaffora, a kind of soft crumbling stone or mineral. Zaffranare, to dress or
dye with saffron. Zaffrano, saffron. Zafila, Zaphila, as Tanado. Zafiro, a
precious stone called a sapphire. Zagaglia, a turkish cimitarie or short sword.
Also a captains leading staff. Zaganella, a trunk to shoot pellets in. Also
a squib or cracker of wild fire. Zagarella, any kind of list, hem or lace or
welt about the skirts of a garment. Also a curb of leather in stead of an iron
curb or any other thing that is gentle, and in steed of the curb that riders
use to young coults. Zago, a priests clarke that helps him to say mass. Zaina,
any kind of drinking glass. Also a kind of tree growing in America, whereof
they make canoas and boats and call them so by the name of the tree. Zainetta,
a little drinking glass. Zaino, a little leather budget, a palmers scrip. Also
a horse that is altogether of one black or of any one color without any
mark, star or spot about him. Also a certain musical instrument that
shepherds use, as a horn pipe. Zaldone, a kind of flower. Zalolino, a kind of
wan pale color. Zamara, zamarra, a rugge, a freese gown, a sea-mans gown, a
shepherds, frocke or mantle. Also a kind of musical instrument with strings.
Zamarrotto, as Zamara. Zambaglione, a kind of drink made for sick folks
called a caudle. Zambella, a trull, a flurt, a minx, a harlot, a whore.
Zambellaro, Zambelle, Look Ciambelle. Zambellotto, a kind of stuff called
chamblot. Zambetti, that joint of meat we call a spring or pestle of porke, as
Zampetti. Zambra, a close stool. Also a chamber, o^ a closet. Zambracca, a
colmon-hedge-whore, a strumpet, a base harlot. Zambudelli, a kind of dried
sausages or pudding. Zampa, the pawe, the clawe, the clunch or gripe of any
beast. Zampare, to catch or sease on with a paw, a claw or a clunch.
Zampettare, to foot it daintily, to trippe it, to tread the measures fair and
softly. Also to tipple square, to quaffe, to trot to tauerns. Zampette, little
claws, paws, clinches, or gripes. Zampetti, all manner of beasts feet that
are dressed to be eaten, as sheep trotters, or pigs feet, or neates feet.
Zampillare, to purle, to bubble, to sprout, to spring, to spin, or gush forth
as water does out of a spring. Also to sprout, to budde, to peep forth, to
bloome, to blossom, as vines do. Zampillo, Zampilletto, a purle, a bubble, a
spinning, a gushing of waters. also young shoots, buds, sprigs, or yoonge
springs, blossoms, or bloomes of vines. Zampogna, an oaten pipe, a shepherds
pipe, a bagge-pipe. Also a bell that is hung about a goat or bell-weathers
neck. Zampognare, to sound or play upon any kind of reed, pipe, or
bagge-pipe. Zampognaro, a plaier upon any pipe or bagge-pipe. Also a
bell-weather. Zamponare, to rake or dragge with an iron hook, to stir up the
fire. Zampone, an iron dragging hook, or crook, or rake. Also an iron fire
forke. Zampunare, as Zamponare. Zampune, as Zampone. Zana, a country wenches
girdle, or skarfe, or country frocke. Also a cradle for a child. Also a great
cesterne to receive and hold water. Also a barrow to carry things upon between
two. Also a jest, a floute, a fable, or as we say a gull or gudgeon given to
one. Zanada, a foolish zanes trike. Zanaiuolo, as Zane, or Zanuolo. Zanca, the
left side, or hand, as Mano zanca, the left hand. Also used by Dante for a
leg. Also as Zampa. Zancaruto, crookt-legd, having crooked legs. Zanche, as
Strampoli. Zancia, as Ciancia. Zanciare, as Cianciare. Zanciatore, as
Cianciatore. Zanciume, as Cianciume. Zanco, a left handed man, a left handed
blow. Zane, the name of John. Also a silly John, a gull, a noddie. Used also
for a simple vice, clown, fool, or simple fellow in a play or comedy.
Zanfrone, a lusty lad, a young gallant, a swaggrer. Also red ruddocks, pelf,
coin, or crowns. Zangarinelli, a kind of fish. Zangola, a close stool.
Zannare, to bite, to snip, to pinch to tear, or take hold of with tuskes.
Zanne, the tuskes or foretooth of a bore. Zanni, cosening, crosse-byting,
coni-catching knaves. Zannuolo, a silly John, a poor John, a jack, a wagge,
a wanton, a dilling, a darling. Zanzale, a gnat. Zanzana, Zanzara, a gnat.
Zanzauerata, a kind of meat made of green ginger. Also as Fagiolata.
Zanzeare, to be bitten with gnats or flies. Also to go idly loytring and
buzzing up and down, to iet and brave it up and down wantonlie, to mince
it, to play the minikin. Zanzeoni, foolishlie, carelessely, wantonly,
heedlessely. Also idle, foolish, wanton loytrers. Zanzera, a gnat. Zanzerare,
to ingle boys, to play wantonly with boys against nature. Zanzeri, ingles,
ganimeds, cinedos. wanton boys, crafty wags, subtle boys, knauish lads.
Zanzerini, as Zanzeri. Zanzeuerino, as Zazzeatore, as Zanzeri. Zanzola, a kind
of pot, pan, or traie in a kitchen. Zapino, a tree that yields a liquor which
cures the leprosy. Zappa, a mattocke to dig and delue with, a sap.
Zappamento, a digging or a deluing. Zappare, to dig, or delue, or grubbe the
ground, to sap. Zappatore, a digger, a deluer, a grubber, (...) lie, gross,
blockish, rude, carterlike fellow. Zottare, to halt or criple, to limp. Zotto,
a halting, a limping or cripling fellow. Zuane, as Zane, or Zannuolo. Zucca, a
pompion, or a gourd. Also a salt-boxe, for that in Italy they use to make of
dried gourds saltboxes, bottles, or lanternes. It is also taken metaphoricallie
for a man's pate, head, brain, skonce, or nole, or skull. Also a kind of
wyne-measure. Also a skull, a headpiece, or steele-cap. Also a kind of
drinking glass. Zucca al vento, an idle head, a shallow brain, an idle
foolish wit, a witless skull. Zucca da sale, a salt-boxe. Also as Zucca al
vento. Zucca senza sale, a foolish, idle, dull, blockish, ignorant fellow, one
that has no wit. Zuccaio, a place where gourds and pompions grow. Zucca
marina, a pompion or melon. some call it a sea-cowcomber, or turkey pompion.
Zuccarina, a kind of roche allome. Also a kind of drinking-glasse. Zucca
saluatica, as Vitalba. Zucca spadaia, as Vitalba. Zuccata, a meat made of
pompions or gourds. Also a flim-flam tale, a tale without ryme or reason, or
without head or foot. Zucchetta, a little gourd or pompion. Zuccaro, sugar.
Zuccherare, to sugar, to candie, to preserve or dress with sugar. Zuccheraio,
a sugar-maker, a comfetmaker, a preserver, a candier. Zuccherini, a kind of
sweet meat made of sugar like marchpane, of which they make of diverse forms
and fashions, as of beasts and birds. Zucchero, sugar. Zuccheroso, sweet,
candied, full of sugar, sugrie. Zucchetra, a casting-bottle for sweet water.
Also a little skull, or iron cap, or caske. Zucconare, to poule, to nort, to
shave, or cut off ones hair. Zuccone, a shaven pate, a notted poule, a pouled
pate, a gull, a ninnie, a ioulthead. Zuffa, a fray, a quarrel, a braule, a
bickering, a skirmish. Zuffare, to fight, to braule, to quarrel, to skirmish,
to bicker. Zuffo, a whistle, a pipe, a flute, or fife. Also some part about a
horse or of a horse. Zuffolare, to whistle, to pipe, to fife, to blow hard.
Zuffolatore, a whistler, a piper, a fifer. Zuffolini, little whistles or pipes.
Zuffolo, as Zuffo. Zugo, a gull, a dunce, an ass, a doult, a patch or a
noddie. Also a pillicocke, a darling, or a wanton, or a minion. Zugone, as
Zugo. Zui, a kind of bird. Zuppa, a soppe, a toste, a mess of brewes. Also
br^th with bread-sop^ in it. Zuppare, to soppe. Zurlare, to jest, to scoff, to
mock, to fr^^p, to dally with, to carrie-fauour. Zurlatore, a iester, a
scoffer, a mocker, a frumper, a c^r^ie-fauourer. Zurlo, a round turning trick
in da^^ing. also a kind of dizzines or giddi^^s in the head. Also a whip or
scourge to make a top turn round. Also a top or a gig. Also a fool, a ninnie,
a gull. Zurma, as Ciurma. Zurmaglia, as Ciurmaglia. Zurmare, as Ciurmare.
Zurmatore, as Ciurmatore. Zurumbet, a kind of strange tree. Zuzo, Zuso, an
owl. Zuzzare, as Succiare, or Succhiare. Zuzzos, a kind of beast like a co^ie
which carries her young ones in a b^g that hangs at her belly, they be good to
eat. Zuzzulino, a kind of tanney color that painters use.
X
XAgue, a kind of tree in India, the juice whereof dies all things black.
Xenofeggia, the first moon in September so called of the Grecians. Xifio, a
fish called a sword fish, having a beak like a sword. Look Pesce spada. Also
comets or blazing st^^s in the air appearing like swords or glea^es. Also an
herb called Sti^king-gladen or Spurge-woort.
FINIS.
Imprinted at London by Arnold Hatfield, for Edward Blunt: and are to be sold
at his shop over against the great North door of Paul's Church. 1598.


