THE AFFECTIONS OF A PIOUS SOUL, UNTO OUR Saviour-Christ.

Expressed in a mixed Treatise of Verse and Prose.

By Richard Flecknoe.

LONDON, Printed by John Raworth for William Brook, dwelling at the upper end
of Holborne in Turpins Rents, 1640.

To the truly Noble, and Virtuous Lady, The Lady Nevill Brook.
Madame,
BEhold my one weeks Meditation, which is yours all the year; so I presume it
may not come unseasonable to you now, though that dolorous time be past, and a
more joyful one ensued* Even so it is, by the way of sorrow, we must arive to
joy, which none in the next life can perfectly participate of with our Savior
Christ, without part of his pain and sufferings in this, Though not by
Passion, yet by Compassion at least* So, where the effect wants, if the will
want not, it is sufficient.

You (Madam) are (we know) of more Eminency of Fortune, then to feel the one,
but of such Eminent devotion, as the other you are not without tender feeling
of, which makes me with more Confidence, approach this to your fair hands, who
yield to none, in truly honoring you,

RICH: FLECKNOI

To The Towne-Reader.
TO tell thee true, I am both sorry and ashamed, to have spent so many idle
hours with thee; and therefore to avoid the expense of more, have retired me
from the Town. This then to thee, is in part of acknowledgement of it, as of
purpose to amend; and as this shall find acceptance, so expect at convenient
leisure to hear from me again. For my disposition (if thou know it not)
thou may, from this Ode of mine.

(1)
Free as I was borne I Will live,
So should every wise man do:
Only fools they are, that give
Their freedoms to I know not who.
(2)
If my weakness cannot save it,
But 'tmust go; what e're it cost:
Some more strong than I shall have it,
Can make good what I have lost.
(3)
Still some excellency should be
More in the Master, than the Slave,
Which in others till I see,
None my liberty shall have.
(4)
Nor is it excellency enough,
Time nor Chance can mar or make;
But 'tmust be more lasting stuff,
Shall from me my freedom take.
(5)
Wherefore beauty never shall
On my liberty intrude:
And proud greatness least of all,
Cause it is proud, once to conclude.
(6)
Those to whom I Will give away,
That which none too dear can buy,
Shall be made of better clay,
And have better souls than I.
For the Treatise it self, by reason there are but too many of that depraved
palate, to whom all seems insipid and disgustfull, that is, seasoned with any
taste of piety, to occur to such infirm appetites, I have served up their
meat in little pieces, thus cut up unto their hands, which in greater perhaps
they would not like so well. To make it a more spreading work, if I would, I
could have beat it thinner, (the matter was pliable enough unto the hammer) but
I like not works of that raritie, defined by the Philosopher, Sub magna
quantitate substantia parva. And hold in books as in coin, those of most value
in least quantity the best. That I am so frequent in Latin citation, those I
am sure who are verst in the language, will easily pardon it; the rest, I hope,
will not be difficile, when they shall find in the reading, the sense complete
without it. If any demand, why then I inserted it, I answer, works of this
fabric, consolidate and built upon authority of holy Writ, without frequent
Texts of it, for foundation and cement, are worthily esteemed, but weak and
loose-written things. Now that I chose the Latin to any other vulgar; I
presumed, as a builder, they would give me leave to provide my materials, when
I supposed them at best hand to be got. But I detain thee too long in the
porch, unless with Malchus thou think much to have an ear in the passion:
Enter the work, and if thou receivest but as much profit in reading, as I
intended thee in writing, we shall both be happy in it. Farewell:

R. F.

THE AFFECTIONS OF A PIOUS SOUL TO OUR Savior Christ.
UPon that day (never to be forgotten, nor ever without tears to be remembered)
which stands marked to all posterity, with the black note upon it, of his
death, who is the life of all, it chanced a pious soul from those remoter
parts of Gallilee, consining with the sea, came up to Jerusalem in search of
our Savior Christ.

Where being arived, she found all in noise and uprore; most part with
thronging haste, flocking toward the Temple, and whispering somewhat of
strange and admirable as they past along; the rest in the streets effused, and
waving up and down with the tide of several passions, here one exulting with
insolent joy, another there as much depressed with grief: this, silently
weeping; that, lowdly jocund; so as you would have imagined both joy and grief
had inhabited there together (as their extremes, they say, do near confine.)
And if (as Painters note) the same lines serve to delineate both weeping and
laughter too, you had seen them both expressed unto the life, in one piece
there; both yet set off with a deep shadow of admiration.

Whereupon, she meeting with none, of whom seasonably she might demand the
cause of such discrepant affection: And easily conjecturing him she sought (the
exactest rule of order) there, no where to be found where such disorder was,
retired her self to that part of the City, where Mount Calvary, like a
swelling tumor arises on its side, both after so long journey to repose her
wearied limbs, as also in silence and solitude of the place, to recollect a
while from noise and clamor of the City multitude. Here she was no sooner
come, but behold a strange and horrid spectacle met her amazed eye. It was of
three crosses erected on the Mount, whereon Death it seems had affixed in
trophie of that days victory, three persons crucified; one of which (he
whose Cross stood in the midst, more eminent than the rest) as one of more
regard, was circumstanced with a lamentable and lamenting sort of women, weak
of sex, yet of mighty grief, few in number, but equal to many in affliction,
the woes of a thousand being in every one.

At sight of whom she straight drew toward the place; (led by compassion,
animating her on, with this noble thought: how she being a member of the
universal body, the grief of every one was in part her own.) Where being
arived, she might perceive Mary the mother of Jesus, Mary her sister of
Cleophas, and Mary Magdalen to be three of them, with whom being long conjoined
in affection; by holy sympathy, she soon became familiar with their grief,
ere with their cause of grieving; and wept to see them weep.

So long she continued weeping, and as long ignorant, why (grief having so
stopped up the passages of their voices, they could not arive to words, and her
tears drawn such a watery curtain before her eyes, she could not discern
who they bemoaned so, only thus much she might perceive, his face (whosoever
he was) was so defaced with blood, as a cleerer and less clouded eye than
hers, might well be excused, its not reading the contents of it; until at
length, one of that sorrowful company giving first a heave or two, like one
oppressed under some ponderous weight, to raise her words above her woes, burst
forth into this short exclamation, O Jesus, Jesus; and said no more.

At this she strait great with suspicion (as sorrow is ever pregnant of
suspect to be delivered of it, (like those who seek what willingly they would
not find, and but hunt their own fears with curiosity) demanded of another,
who it was they lamented so. When she surveying her with a wondering eye: And
are you alone (said she) so much stranger not only to Jerusalem, but to the
world, to be ignorant who they have crucified here. Can you feel the
earthquake under you, and not know it is for his suffering who made the earth?
Can you behold the Heavens* the Sun and Moon, lost in Cimerian darkness, and
not perceive he who enlightened them is here eclipsed? Look upon yonder rock,
it cleft (senseless as it is) that instant as he died, and what a heart have
you then, not to be so much as sensible of his death? But I forget my self,
and whilst I seek to find you out a grief (by invasion of speech) have almost
lost mine own; wherefore let me tell you in a word, and then make good my
silence; It is Jesus of Nazareth they have crucified here.

At hearing of which, it was no grief, no passion of the living that ceazed
her; but such a stupiditie, as death could not have rendered her more immovable
for the time, so true it is, Curae leves loquuntur ingentes stupent: Senec.
Until at last, as if but then, the floud-gates of her tears were drawn up,
they gushed forth in such abundance, as if each drop had stroven to fall first
to the ground. In so much, as had you beheld Niobe weeping her childrens loss,
you had seen an image, and but an image only of her weeping him; and yet in
this excess of tears and grief, as if she had been all defective to
exstimulate her heart, the more to grieve, and excitate affection to weep the
more: In a sad and mournful accent she delivered this, To excitate the
affection.
Am I a Christian then, or no?
I can behold Christ suffering so,
And feel no woe?
Though none, yet soft humanity
Should make one man commiserate,
When he beholds another die,
Such interest has he in the State:
So very Iufidels we see,
Are not from pity free.
Then am I man, or am I none?
That can consider him as one,
And make no moan?
Yet were I none, the Sun, the Moon,
And such as but his creatures are,
Would cause me feel his sufferings soon,
Unless I were more senseless far,
More dull than very rocks and stones,
That now burst forth in groans.
Am I a creature then, or not?
That my Creators so hard lot
Should be forgot?
For sure I Am none; but nothing I
Can let (yet let not one tear fall)
Both God and man, and Maker dye,
As I were not concerned withal:
Nothing amongst Christians, Creatures, men
Am I? or worser then?
Oh me, the whilst worthy of deepest hell,
If I without a tear can see dim dye,
More Infidel than Infidel,
More stone than stones; les man, the man am I.


Having done this, she began to weep again; then shreek, as if her soul
would with her voice have sallyed forth, accompanying her lamentations now with
wringing her hands, now tearing her hair; Architect Sorrow never contriving
building, where was more variety of sad prospective; until at last Echo
being sooner wearied with repeating her plaints than she with uttering them, to
give it ease a while, though not her self, she set her silent thoughts to
task with the account of what her deerly Beloved had done and suffered for her,
summing up every particular most exact and carefully, as it was delivered her
in Inventory, by one was present there.

As first (and in general) how voluntarily he offered himself to sufferance
for us: Oblatus est quia ipse voluit: Isa. 53. Even to the pointing out
himself unto them, who came to apprehend him with an Ego sum: Whence (said
she) we may collect, (If we would be reciprocal) there is a kind of will and
forwardness requisite on our parts, in suffering for him again.

Next and in particular, what sufferings they were, he offered himself unto;
As how not one part alone, but all, even from head to foot, every sense of
him, and the whole exterior and interior man, was even surfetted (as it were)
with the bread of dolor and affliction Saturabitur opprobriis, etc.

His head crowned with thorns, and those such rigid and sharp-pointed ones, as
the very skin of it was wholly separated from the skull, whilst those cruel
Pioners dug all his blood out of that precious Mine. His face livid and
swollen with the unmercifull soldiers heavy Iron Gantlets bruizing and
buffeting it; His shoulders galled with supporting his heavy Cross, which, Oh
with what excessive pain he did! whilst they (all raw before with their
scourging) were, in that dolorous prease, even squeezed (as it wear) to a flat
cake of congealed blood and gore. Then, to have his arms violently wracked
out, whilst they nailed his hands unto the Cross; What a torment that! For
the nails entering the most sinuous parts of them, and they shrinking (as
things naturally do) at sense of pain, the fleshy, which were nailed to it, and
could not recoyl nor give, must of necessity be violently divulsed from them.
As for his scourged body, it was all torn and mangled with their bloody whips:
Wherefore at one glance of the eye to pass it over, as too pitious a spectacle
long to be looked upon, and come to his boared feet. How those huge boystrous
Nails must needs have torn and riven them, whilst his dying body hung swayed
upon them with all its weight, is not without horror and cold sweat to be
imagined; 'Mean while, what vying was there betwixt his hands and feet, which
should endure most pain and torment (all at his cost, God knows) What tossing
and retossing of his dolorous life with suffering betwixt them? Now this taking
it at rebound, now that, till lighting in death's hazard, the sport ended; A
cruel sport the while!

Then for his Senses, how were they all tormented in him, and he in all of
them! His eyes in seeing-nothing but what disconsolated and afflicted him;
either his Enemies rejoicing at his suffering (which commonly as much
agravates, as pity aleviates the pain of the sufferer) or else his friends
(those few poor friends he had) so extremely grieving at it, as even derived
from them, a fresh grief to him again, and forced him the comforted, to become
their their Comforter. Filiae Jerusalem nolite flere super me, etc. Luke 23.
28. His ears played upon from every side, with whole volleyes of fearful
blasphemies, as: alios salvos fecit seipsum non potest salvum facere, He could
save others, and cannot save himself Matthew. 27. 42. Or else with such bitter
scorns and taunts as these, Si Rex Israel est descendat de cruce etc. Let him
now descend from the Cross if he be the King of Israel. Ibid. which to a man
sensible of his honor had been most grievous, but to a God most intolerable
(unless perhaps he were enamoured of grief as sure he was that day, even to
Espouse it on the Cross and take denomination from thence, of vir dolorum, the
very husband of it, as Esaias had prophesied of him long before) For his
smelling I will not offend the nice and delicate with commemorating the
abominable stench of those filthy and loathsome Crachets (the very Entrails of
the Jews malice) hung clottering in his face, that face in quem desiderant
Angeli prospicere: Which so much delighted the Angels to behold, of which then
they might well say indeed, vidimus eum and non erat ei species neque decor,
that they had seen it, and there was neither feature nor beauty in it. For his
taste, to have nothing administered it to sweeten the bitterness of death, but
Gall and Vinegar; When for other Malefactors most pleasant wines were allowed
and provided at the public cost; O it was cruel! barbarous cruel that! But
he foresaw it necessary for us (whilst we live here where the wheel of
affliction, with variety of new suffering every day fetches its turn about us)
to have for Imitation his great Example of patiently suffering all. For his
feeling, we have spoken of that before, if it were not altogether unspeakeable
what he felt.

But alas all this of the exterior compared to his Interior sufferings, is but
as a single drop of water to the whole Ocean or the Center-point of Earth, unto
the vast circumference of Heaven; for the soul, as an instrument strung with
finer strings than the body, is of more delicate resentment, more sensible of
every little touch; And how rudely did they play upon it? He could not speak
to them, though nothing but sugar and honey, like the Bridegroom in the
Canticles; but in churlish and bitter speech they repartyed again. If in soft
and silken phrase he questioned them, either in pure disdain and spite, they
not vouchsafed him answer: So, Si interrogavero, non respondebitis mihi, etc.
Luke 22. Or else it was in words, as hard as Semai's to David were, every one
accompanied with a stone, so cross, so contrary were they in words unto him:
But in action, it goes a thought beyond imagination, how contrary they were,
putting sinister interpretation still, to disguise the right meaning, on
whatsoever he did. If he cured their sick, it was to break their Sabbath; if
he cast their Devils out, it was in the name of Beelzebub. They held him for
Libertine, if he eat or drunk with them, if not for Samaritan; so well he
might say of them; Cecinimus vobis, and non saltastis; lamentavimus, and non
planxistis; etc. Mat. 11. but they went further yet.

Pericles could say of the Samians (not content with courtesies they received
from those of Athens) that they were, Infantibus similes, qui cibum non nisi
illachrymando admittebant, etc. Plutarch. Like children, who whilst they were
benefited, cried: But what should one say of these? Never men borne in the
disgrace of better Nature, had such antipathy with their best good, as they:
For mark how this perverse, wicked, and viperous generation (out-doing spite
it self) requited him for love with hatred; for good, with ill; and for
honoring them, with dishonouring him again.

And first of their hatreds to him, let this be sufficient argument, that they
could not so much as endure his sight (and when we once withdraw our eyes from
any one, it is sign we have withdrawn our affection before) but whilst he
projected such right and full beams of love on them, as even reflected them to
his very heart; the sons of Jacob never, with more oblique and auerted eyes,
beheld their brother Joseph, than they did him. Now if (as they say) the
chiefest attraction of love be love, and he holds no commercewith humanity,
who will nor give, nor take affection: What should one think or say of this
malignitie? But for more ample declaration of their inhumanitie to him, we are
to note; how that hate and aversion from a thing, which the more civil
creature does express by simple flight and avoydance; the more savage and
effe^ate does by violent assault: So Naturalists observe in the wild Bull, such
hatred and nocivenesse to man, as but object unto it the picture of one, and
presently with horn and hoof it furiously sets upon it. And mark now, if they
did not the like by him, when Pilat proposing him unto them with an, Ecce homo,
Behold the man; they stantly bellowed out, Crucifige, crucifige eum; Let him be
crucified; so as he might well say of them, Tauri pingues obsiderunt me; that
he was encompassed with Bulls on every side. But the proof of love
consisting in action, Probatio (enim) amoris, exhibitio est operis, etc. Greg.
Let us from thence behold his love to them, as their hatreds to him again, and
so consider how they rewarded him, for good with ill.

You know we have compassion for none, but those we have passion for; and
where the soil is hate, there pity never grows. Now what compassion had he
for them? Miserior super turbam, etc. and that not only in words, but in
effect, multiplying bread for the hungry, and for the thirsty, (for those who
were necessitous) he (as we may say) turned stones into water; for the
delicious, he turned water into wine (sweetly violencing all natures but
theirs the while) for their sick, he restored them unto health, their dead unto
life again. (To say nothing of his spiritual benefits, since they were of
nature so carnal, they had scarce a capacity of them) and how did they
requite him? Audite coeli, and obstupescite!

So little compassion had they of him, as when he came to die; at what time
others hate leaves the condemned to pity, these pursue him farther than ever
any's did (within the limits of humanity) not only to death, but even after
it, when, Unus militum lancea latus ejus aperuit et continuo exivit sanguis et
aqua: One of the Soldiers pierced his side with a lance, and presently there
streamed forth blood and water. A barbarism and inhumanitie, no water could
expiate enough, but that which then issued from his sacred side; no fire, but
of that charity which made him then shed his last drop of blood. But to
proceed; for his food, they repayed him with the bread of dolor, panem
doloris, etc. and for his drink, with gall and vinegar. Their infirmities, as
fast as he took them of them, they laid them upon him: Infirmitates nostras
ipse portavit, etc. And lastly, for giving them life, they crucified him to
death, oh unheard of ingratitude! unparalled wickedness, never to be wrapped
up in silence, nor never unfolded in speech, but with detestation! men worthy
to be banished humane society, so little of man they had in them! but whither?
for beasts were less beasts than they, Bos enim cognovit possessorem suum,
etc. Devils, less Devils; for they acknowledged him yet the son of God: Quid
mihi et tibi est Jesus fili Dei altissimi, etc. As things then worse than man,
beast, or Devil; let them still be Jews, sacrilegious in all, both to the God
that made them, and the god they made; which if it were selfe-interest (as of
most wicked mortals it is) most sacrilegious were they even to that. Now how
for honoring them, they repayed him with dishonouring him again; and how
whilst (in a manner) his whole endeavor was to exalt them above all other
people, theirs only was under all others to depresse and abase him for it:
Quasi opprobrium hominum et abjectio plebis, holding him (as the Prophet said)
for the most abject of people, and opprobrious of men; there needs no other
testimony of it, but that one act of theirs, of preferring a Barrabas to him;
Non hunc sed Barrabam, etc. A seditious, to one who instructed them in nothing
but meekness and humility, Discite ame quia mitis sum et humilis cord, etc.
A thief to one who had given them all they had: De cujus plenitudine omnes
accepimus. And a murderer to him, from whom they had received their very lives
and being, In ipso enim vivimns, movemur et sumus, etc. O good God! -- But it
is better to say nothing here, then not to say enough; and let Silence, the
tongue of Admiration, take up, where ours of necessity must leave: This was
such an affront, such an indignity! as (we may imagine) sunk (heavy as lead)
so deep into the bottom of his divine heart* no humane thought has
fathome-line enough to sound the depth of it. Wherefore, as a thing wholly
inscrutable, let us give it over.

Whilst this was discoursed unto her, in that method and order as we have set
it down, you might perceive her, by often varying color; gesture of body, and
motion of the eye, taking all the several forms of grief, of pity, of
indignation, and the like, as in so tender a soul could be impressed, till
ariving to this last period, she was so brimfull of affection, as able to
contain no more: Thus at the foot of the cross she powered it forth.

The Affection.
A Dithyrambus in contemplation of our Savior crucified.
O God, and is it thou
I see here suffering under their hands now,
Under whose feet both heaven and earth do bow,
Annd is it thou? I hear
Them so blaspheme, as my affrighted ear
Even tingles with dire horror often, and fear?
O me,
What do I hear and see?
O ears amazed with hearing, eyes with seeing,
O endless goodness of an endless being!
Dear heart, that had the heart,
With such a life o part:
Dear life that could forgo
A soul that loved thee so,
And O dear soul would take
So sad farewell for my unworthy sake:
And have thou done all this for me?
For all this then, what shall I do for thee?
When thou demand'st it, shall I grutch
Thee this small heart, as twere too much?
Shall I be so peorly near,
To hold my life for thee too dear?
Or think my soul too much for thee,
Who nothing thoughtst enough for me?
Oh no, I am thy thrall,
And here before thee prostrate fall
Offering up heart, life, soul, and all.
And being armed with this strong and virtuous resolve, how she longed like
some young and noble Warrior, to experience her yet untried force and valor,
in the encounter with some adversary pain, perplexity, or distress, might
put her bravely to it; that whilst in any part or sense of her, she, found a
difficulty in the fight, she presently might say: This this my Savior, for my
sake would have made nothing of, and slight it so. Or if she fainted, or lost
heart cry out with that great Champion of the Apostles, Quis nos seperabit a
charitate Christi, etc. What is it can separate us from the charity of Christ?
Tribulatio, an angustia? etc. Encouraging her self, and resuming a strength
from thence to dare and challenge the worst of affliction. And this from no
selfe-presumption neither (she well knowing how of her self she could do
nothing) Non quasi ex nobis aliquid, etc. But from the confidence, or rather
assurance, she had in him who assisted her, Omnia possum in eo qui me
confortat, etc. No, no, (would she say) I can do nothing I, but God and I can
do all: And if any imagine it a presumption to name my self with God, let them
know I hold it a greater presumption for any to name themselves without him.

How gladly for his sake would she have embraced a contumely and scorn, would
have abhorred an eye of flesh and blood (I mean such eyes as the Devil opened
in Paradise long since; not such as our Savior opened on the Cross to day)
how greedily would she have put up an injury and affront, even as a jewel in
the cabinet of her heart, to wear on that general day, when all our braverie
here; shall be quite out of fashion, and they only accounted gloriously brave,
who have such jewels as those to wear: And never stood on such nice terms,
the whilst, as: Had I deserved it, it would never have grieved me; or from any,
but such and such from whom I least expected it, it had been far more
tolerable, etc. And (I pray) from whom could our Savior less have expected
the payment of those injuries and affronts (which past so currantly with him)
than from the Jews, whom he had obliged not only with all the ties of
Humanity, but of Divinity too? Who ever stood more out of the way of contempt
and scorn than he? by birth, above all exception noble, ex stirpe Davidis, etc.
borne of the Royal Stem: of such dignity of aspect, as it was said of him,
Speciosus forma prae filiis hominum: He was fair and lovely above the sons of
men. And to conclude, of life and manners so irreprehensible, as he put his
very enemies to it, with urging them, Quis ex vobis arguet me de peccato? etc.
to find out a blame or fault in him. And let any now that find themselves
agrieved, they are not respected according to their merits and deserts, examine
where they ever have deserved so much of respect as he, and had so little paid;
and if they find it so, I Will say they have reason and just cause to complain
indeed. No, these are but rags of patience the poor and wretched soul puts on,
whilst the gallant and richer scorns to wear such piec'd-up stuff; this is
for those who never endeavor to limb and pourtraiture in the table of their
hearts, any brave and noble piece, because they never take pattern by any but
base and ignoble ones. Inspice and fac secundum exemplar quod tibi in monte
monstratum, etc. Did they but consider our Saviors sufferings, their own would
shrink to nothing in comparison.

Which whilst she considered, it made her so brave in purpose and resolution,
as even death it self would have appeared lovely and amiable to her, which now
since he died for us, to those who truly love him, even seems to have
exchanged darts with love indeed: As thus they fable it: Love and death of the
way once meeting,
Having past a friendly greeting,
Sleep, their weary eyelids closing,
Laid 'em down, themselves reposing:
Love, whom diverse cares molested,
Could not sleep; but whilst death rested,
All in haste away he posts him,
But his haste full deerly costs him.
For it chanced that going to sleeping,
Both had given their darts in keeping
Unto Night, who, Errors mother,
Blindly knowing not one from the other,
Gave Love deaths, and never perceived it,
Whilst as blindly Love received it:
Since which time their darts confounding,
Love now kills in stead of wounding:
Death a joy in hearts distilling,
Sweetly wounds in stead of killing.


And thus in various cogitation she wandered about (Mount Calvary affording a
large and ample field for her devotion to exspaciate in) her pious thought
still going in circle from her Beloved unto her self, and from her self to
him again, until at last it was suddenly surprised by the unexpected arivall
of some new-commers there, who tending directly toward the cross, made her
fear some ill intention in it, till espying Joseph of Aramathea, a principal
amongst them, she assured her fears, there was nothing but good intended; as
indeed their coming only was, to take down the body from the Cross, and
bury it. To which every one lending a ready and pious hand, it had soon been
done, had not this impediment occurred in the doing it, that their griefs for
his death rendered them so nigh dead themselves, as they scarcely could perform
the offices of the living; and those who swouned not for love of him, would
swoune for very sorrow they loved him not enough, confirming what they report
with admiration of the effects of divine love.

O heavenly darts
Of love, unto heaven loving hearts;
Whether ye wound or spare,
How equally ye mortal are?
For if ye wound them, presently
They with the sweetness dye;
And if ye spare 'em, then
With bitterness they dye again.
O sacred flame
To hearts, once melted in the same,
Whether or no ye burn,
How both to their destruction turn?
For if ye burn, they presently
In flames consume and dye:
If not, in tears they then
Consume, and dye again.
So as like two ways that run
Their several course, then join in one;
And whilst diversely they tend,
One and the same is still their end.
So both equally destroy,
Be it sorrow, be it joy;
Or in water, or in flame,
The end of both is still the same.
Neither is it to be so much admired, they thus could dye (as it were) for him;
but the greatest wonder is, that they could live, now he was dead who was
their very life; he who had so many attractive sweets in him, as drew all to
him; but such, who like Scarrebs delighted to live in stench, Curremus in
odorem unguentorum tuorum, etc. He who had such divine magic in his face, as
charmed all that beheld it, and was of so ravishing entertainment besides, he
spoke all flame and fire; Nonne cor nostrum ardens in nobis erat dum
loqueretur, etc. Able to burn and dissolve the ice of as many hearts, as ever
the cold of death, or tepiditie had frozen up, provided that venomous serpent
had not first fixed its black tooth in them; for then the Pollinctori will tell
you, that hearts envenomed will not burn. No wonder then (I say) that him who
they so loved living, they so lamented dead: It being by Natures Laws decreed,
we then should love things most passionately and dearest, when we were
deprived of them: Whether because the appetitive and irrascible power, then
jointly move more strongly toward the object, than can joy alone in the
fruition of it; or that our sharp appetite of things we want is soon blunted
with the enjoying them. Certain it is, whatsoever the cause be, such is the
effect, as they well experienced every one of them; his blessed mother, whilst
she called to mind, what a dear and amiable son; his friends, what a true and
constant friend; and what a kind and loving Master his Disciples had lost of
him: In remembrance of which, when they had buried him (as with all due rites
and ceremonies of grief they did: his sacred mother embalming him with her
tears, the holy Magdalen with her sweet unguents, for which her memory is so
precious in the Gospel, as there never occurs mention of any, but her name
enters as an Ingredient.) They departed each one with somewhat to foment their
memories of him: One, with the thought of his sweet and gentle conversation of
life; another, with that of the excessive love he declared unto them in death.
Amongst the rest, our pious Soul, ever to have a memorial of his passion,
dug him a new monument in her bosom, and buried him in her heart.

FINIS.

