AN ADIOYNDER TO THE SVPPLEMENT OF FATHER ROBERT PERSONS HIS DISCVSSION of M.
Doctor Barlowes Answer etc.

CONTAINING A Discovery, and Confutation of very many foul Absurdityes,
Falsities, and Lies in M. D. Andrews his Latin Book entitled, Responsio ad
Apologiam Cardinalis Bellarmini etc. An answer to the Apology of Card.
Bellarmine.

WRITTEN By F. T. Author of the Supplement, to justify certain places, and
authorities alleged, as well by him in the said Supplement, as by the
Cardinal in his Apology, and pretended to be answered by M. D. Andrews.

ALSO An Appendix touching a Register alleged by M. Franc. Mason for the
lawful Ordayning of Protestant Bishops in Q. Elizabeth's Reign.

Mentita est iniquitas sibi.

Psalm. 26. Iniquity has lied to it self.

Imprinted with License, M. DC. XIII.

THE PRINTER to the Reader.
GENTLE READER, Albeit the Author of this Work designed the same to be
printed, and published together with his Supplement to Fa. Persons his
Discussion of M. Barlowes Answer etc. by reason of the relation that the one
has to the other (in which respect also this is entitled an Adioynder:)
nevertheless for as much as afterward, when this came to my hands, I understood
that M. Barlowes credit was already quyte crushed with the Disscussion of Fa.
Persons, and every where so decried, that most men were fully satisfied,
concerning his ignorance, absurdity, and folly, and therefore might be more
desirous to see this Adioynder in Answer of M. Doctor Andrews (as well in
respect of his far greater reputation, as for that he has not yet been
answered by any in our tongue:) And considering also that this Adioynder is
grown to a far greater volume, then the Author at the first intended, and
that therefore many may desire to have it a part, both for the better commodity
of carryage, and also for other good respects; yea, and that the separation
thereof from the Supplement cannot hinder, but that such as desire to have them
both, may easily be satisfied, and cause them to be bound either together, or
a sunder, as they shall best like; I therefore resolved, with the good leave of
the Author, to print, and publish them both in several volumes.

For although this Adioynder, has indeed a great connection with the
Supplement, and in some sort depends thereon, (as being written only to
justify the same, and specially concerning matters incident thereto:) yet the
points treated therein are so clearly handled, and discussed, that the truth of
the Catholyke cause, and M. Andrews his notable frauds, and cauils, may
sufficiently appear thereby, without the help of the Supplement,
notwithstanding the frequent references thereto.

I shall not need to say any thing concerning the intention, and drift of the
Author, for that the same may fully be seen, partly by the titles of the
Chapters which follow immediately, and partly in the 3. first paragraphs of the
first Chapter, and therefore all that I think good to advertise thee, good
Reader, is, that albeit this Author has not had either the occasion, or the
intention to answer all M. Andrews his Book (but such points only, as are
some way incide^t to the foresaid Supplement) nevertheless this Adioynder may
serve for a sufficient answer to the whole, seeing it contains a confutation
of at least an hundred Positions, Assertions, Paradoxes, Answers, and
Objections of M. Andrews; in all which he is proved to be either most Idle,
and Impertinent, or egregiously fraudulent, and false, or else to argue directly
for the Catholics, against the common doctrine of his own fellows, whereby
thou may easily judge of the rest of his Work, and what a number of like
frauds, and follies might be discovered therein, if the whole were as thoroughly
sifted, and examined as these points have been, which have occurred to this
Author by the occasion of his Supplement. And so vvishing thee abundance of
Gods grace for the discovery of Falsehood, and knowledge of the Truth, to the
everlasting good of thy own soul, I take my leave.

THE TABLE OF CHAPTERS.
THE Authors intention is declared, and M. D. Andrews his interpretation of
Pasce oues meas, examined, and confuted. S. Augustine, corrupted S. Ambrose,
notably abused S. Cyril, vainly carped at a Law in the Code, and foolishly
approved the unlawful proceeding of Justinian the Emperor against the Pope.
CHAP. I. Page 1. The Answers of M. Andrews to certain places of the Council
of Calcedon are examined, and con^uted. His notable fraud in Canon of that
Council is discovered: and the supreme authority of the Sea Apostolic
clearly proved out of the same Council and Canon. CHAP. II. Page 39. M. D.
Andrews his answers to three places of the Fathers are Iouinians heresie^ and
M. Andrews truly charged therewith. Finally all that which we teach concerning
the Popes authority, is necessarily deduced out of M. Andrews his own
doctrine and express words. CHAP. III. Page 98. Four other places of the
Fathers are debated, and M. Andrews his Answers thereto confuted. With a
Discovery of notable corruption and 8. Popes who lived in S. Augustines time,
had, and excercised an universal and supreme Authority. CHAP. IIII. Page 133.
M. Andrews his answers to three other places, alleged by the CHAP. V. page
193. A further manifestation of M. Andrews his trifling, wrangling, Prayer to
Saints, which he deuideth into three ranks, whereof the two first are examined
in this Chapter. CHAP. VI. Page 218. M. Andrews to the Fathers of the third
rank, are examined, and sound to be either impertinent, fraudulent, or most
injurious to them; namely to S. Ambrose, whom he most egregiously abuses. Also
it is evidently showed, that the Invocation of Saints was generally practiced,
and approved as well by the ancient Fathers, as by all other faithful
Christians, in the Primitive Church. CHAP. VII. Page 258. M. Andrews against
Prayers to Saints are answered, and by the way, an imposture of the pretended
Bishops, and Clergy of the Province of Canterbury in a Synodicall Canon of
theirs is discovered. And finally M. Andrews is proved to have notably
wrangled, iugled, and trifled throughout this whole Controversy. CHAP. VIII.
Page 306. M. Andrews with M. Barlow; as to change the state of the question,
dissemble that which most imports in the Cardinals text and argument; to
abuse wrest, belly and falsisy not only the Cardinal, but also the ancient
Fathers, Counsels, and holy Scriptures: and finally to face out matters
impudently for lack of proofs. CHAP. IX. Page 361. M. Andrews overthrows his
own cause, and fortifieth ours, granting many important points of Catholic
Religion: That he is turned Puritan in the point of the Kings Ecclesiastical
Supremacy. and betrayeth his Majesty's cause underhand, pretending to defend
it: and therefore is neither good English Protestant, nor yet good Subject.
Lastly what is the opinion of learned strangers concerning him, and his book:
with a good advise for a friendly farewell. CHAP. X. Page 329. An Appendix
touching a Register alleged by M. Franc. Mason for the lawful Ordayning of
Protestant Bishops in Q. Elizabeth's Reign.
THE AVTHORS INTENTION IS DECLARED, AND M. D. Andrews his interpretation of
Pasce oues meas, examined, and confuted. FVRTHERMORE It is showed, that he has
belyed S. Augustine, corrupted S. Ambrose, notably abused S. Cyril, vainly
carped at a law in the Code, and foolishly approved the unlawful proceeding of
Justinian the Emperor against two Popes.
CHAP. I.
WHEN I had well-neere ended my Supplement, and already sent away the greatest
part of it to the print, it was my chance to have a sight of M. D. Andrews his
Answer to Cardinal Bellarmines Apology; and considering that the subject
thereof was in effect the same that Father Persons, The reason that moved the
Author to add this Adioynder to the former Supleme^t.
and I had handled, and debated with M. Barlow; I easily persuaded my self
that I should find many things treated by M. Andrews, which I had touched in
my Supplement. In which respect I determined to take a speedy Survey of his
work; and finding that he pretended now and then to answer some places,
authorities, and arguments which had been objected, as well by me, as by the
Cardinal, I resolved to examine, and confute his Answers, in respect not only
of my self, but also of the most Worthy Cardinal; not for that I think he
needs any defense, (who like an inexpugnable fortress trenched on every
side, and fortified with bulwarks of truth, does of himself sufficiently
resist the assaults, and daunt both the courage and force of his enemies) but
that in discharge of the obligation which all true Christians owe him, for his
singular merits toward the Church of Christ, I may for my part, out of my
poverty, pay with the poor widow, my two mytes; and therefore having offered
one of them in my Supplement, I think good now to add the other; and the
rather, for that I hope by the same means to prevent the Cauills of my
Adversary M. Barlow, who otherwise might perhaps in his reply (if he be
disposed to make any) blame me, for not taking notice of such a worthy work (as
that of M. Andrews) and either turn me over to him for satisfaction touching
those points, or else make use of his answers himself; which being esteemed as
a precious fruit of the fine wit and curious pen of the greatest Rabbin in the
English Synagogue, are held (no doubt) by his friends, and followers for no
other then oracles of Apollo, I mean, both infallible and irrefragable: for
which cause I am the more willing to enter into the examination of them. And
therefore to the end thou may, The Authors intention in this Adioynder.
good Reader, know how far I mean to proceed therein, thou shall understand,
that seeing my Supplement is already under the press, and that I have no more
time to bestow on this Adioynder, but until the said Supplement be printed, I
make account, that I shall have opportunity to handle but a few points: in
which respect I think good, to make choice of such only as concern some of the
most important matters, co^trouersed betwixt M. Barlow, and me, not doubting
but that the same shall suffice to show ex vngue Leonem, that is, to give the
Reader an abundant taste and trial of M. Andrews his good spirit, and
sincerity in the defense of his cause.

1. Well then to come to the matter. For as much as one of the chiefest points
debated in my Supplement What question is specially handled in this Adioynder.
(by occasion of the new Oath) is the question concerning the supreme and
universal Authority of the Apostolic Roman Sea (which authority I deduced
specially from the Pastoral commission given by our Savior to S. Peter) I
think good to examine of what worth, Suppleme^t chap. 1. nu. 58.59. and seq.
and weight M. Andrews his Answers are touching the same, especially in his
16. and 17. page, where he labors seriously to prove three ways against
Cardinal Bellarmine, that our Saviors words to S. Peter, D. Andr. Respons. ad
Apolog. ca. 1. page 16.
Pasce oues meas (alleged, and learnedly urged by the Cardinal) do make
nothing for us.

2. First, he says, that S. Augustine affirms that S. Peter had no peculiar
increase by the word Pasce, and that S. Ambrose affirms the like of the words
oues meas. And to the end that this may appear, he pretends to lay down the
very words of those two Fathers. Aug. de Agon. Christ. c. 30.
Of S. Augustine thus; Cum Petro dicitur, ad omnes dicitur, Ambros. de sacerd.
dignitate cap. 20.
Pasce oues meas: when it is said to Peter, it is said to all, Feed my sheep.
Of S. Ambrose thus: Eas oues non solum Beatus suscepit Petrus, sed and nobiscum
eas suscepit, and nos cum illo accepimus omnes. Those sheep not only the
blessed Peter received, but also he received them with us, and we all received
them with him. And then M. Andrews adds: Nempe dictum illi Pasce etc. for it
was said unto him, Feed, as well in the person of others, as in his own, atque
vel sic iacebit Cardinali ratio sua: and so shall the Cardinals reason serve
him to no purpose. Thus argues he.

3. But to the end, thou may ( good Reader) see, and note with what fidelity
and conscience this man alleges the Fathers, I will lay down the place of S.
Augustine somewhat more amply then he has done, S. Augustine lamely and
fraudule^tly alleged by M. Andrews.
whereby thou shall easily discover his notable fraud. S. Augustine in the
place alleged by him says thus: Non enim sine causa inter omnes Apostolos
etc. For not without cause does Peter sustain the person of the Catholic
Church amongst all the Apostles, for to this Church the keys of the Kingdom
of heaven were given, when they were given to Peter, August. vbi supra.
and when it is said to him, Do thou love me? Feed my sheep, it is said to
all, and therefore the Catholic Church ought willingly to pardon her Children
when they are corrected, and strengthened in piety, seeing we see, that to Peter
himself, bearing the person of the Church, pardon was granted both when he had
doubted upon the sea etc. and when he had thrice denied his Master etc. Thus
says S. Augustine, declaring that Pasce oues (which our Savior said to S.
Peter) was said to all the Church, because S. Peter bare the person of the
Church: Which he did, by reason of the supreme authority that he had over the
Church.

4. For else why should rather he, then others of the Apostles be said to
represent the whole Church, but because he was Head or supreme Governor
thereof; Cic. offic. l. 1.
which we may learn even in Cicero, How S. Peter did bear the person of the
Church when he received the keys.
who says that, Est proprium munus Magistratus etc. It is the proper office or
duty, of the Magistrate, to understand that he bears the person of the City.
So he; speaking of the chief or supreme Magistrate: whereby it appears, that
whatsoever is given to the King, as King, and Head of the Commonwealth, the
same is given to the Commonwealth, whereof he bears and represents the
person: and so in like manner what was given to S. Peter as Head of the Church,
the same was given to the Church which he represents. For which cause also S.
Cyprian says, that Ecclesia est in Episcopo, the Church is in the Bishop; and
the reason is, because the Bishop is Head of the Church; and as this is true in
every particular Bishop, in respect of the particular Church which he
governs. So also is it most truly verified in the supreme and universal
Pastor, in respect of the whole Church whereof he is Head.

5. That this was S. Augustines meaning, it is evident by his own doctrine in
other places, S. Augustines meaning declared out of his own doctrine.
where he shows plainly, that S. Peter bare the person of figure of the
Church, in respect of his Primacy: Cuius Ecclesia, says he, Petrus Apostolus
propter Apostolatus sui primatum gerebat figurata generalitate personam etc. Of
which Church Peter in respect of the primacy of his Apostleship, did bear the
person, Tract. vlt. in Joan.
figuring, or representing the generality thereof. For if we respect what did
belong properly to himself, he was by nature one man, by grace one Christian,
and by a more abundant grace, vnus, idemque primus Apostolus, one, and he the
chief Apostle: but when it was said unto him, Tibi dabo claues, I will give
thee the keys etc. he signified the universal Church. Thus says S.
Augustine, teaching evidently, that S. Peter bare the person of the Church, by
reason of the Primacy of his Apostleship, that is to say, because he was the
chief Apostle; which the same holy Father signifies also more plainly in
another place, saying, Idem in Ps. 108.
Cuius Ecclesiae ille agnoscitur gessisse persona^ propter Primatum quem in
Discipulis habuit: Of which Church he is acknowledged to have borne the person
for the Primacy, which he had amongst the Disciples. And to the same purpose he
says also elsewhere, Idem ser. 13. de verb. Dom.
Petrus a petra cognominatus etc. Peter taking his name from a Rock, was happy,
bearing the figure of the Church, having the principality of the Apostleship.

6. Lo then, for what cause S. Augustine said, that when Christ gave to S.
Peter the keys of heaven and pastoral authority to feed his sheep, M.
Andrews fraud against the intention of S. Augustine.
he gave the same to all the Church, to wit, because S. Peter having the
principality, or primacy of the Apostolical dignity (and being consequently
chief Pastor, and head of the Church) did bear, and represent the person, or
figure of the whole Church. So that you see the place which M. Andrews
brings out of S. Augustine against the Primacy of S. Peter, makes notably
for it, if it be considered with the circumstances thereof, which he cunningly,
and craftily concealed. But in the other place which he cites out of S.
Ambrose, he is more fraudulent, having plainly corrupted the text, which as it
is in S. Ambrose, is very conform to this doctrine of S. Augustine, signifying
nothing else but that all the lawful Pastors in Gods Church, S. Ambr. de
Sacerd. dignit. c 1.
received their Pastoral authority over their flocks, with S. Peter: and
therefore he says, Quas oues, and quem gregem non solum tunc Beatus Petrus
suscepit, sed and cum, illo eas nos suscepimus omnes: Which sheep, and which
flock not only the Blessed Peter then received, but as so we all received them
with him. Thus says S. Ambrose, which all Catholics do grant and teach in
like manner, because (as I have said) S. Peter representing the person of the
whole Church (whereof he was head) received not that Pastoral authority for
himself alone, but also for the Church.

7. In which respect S. Ambrose says very well, The meaning of S. Ambrose
declared.
that all the Pastors of the Church received their authority with him, though
not in equal degree (as M. Andrews would have it) who therefore bodgeth into S.
Ambrose his text, these words of his own, Et nobiscum eas suscepit: and he
(that is to say S. Peter) received those sheep with us; as if S. Ambrose should
mean, that S. Peter had no prerogative in that point, but that he and other
Pastors received them all alike, he with them, and they with him; for to that
purpose does M. Andrews also allege the words of S. Ambrose afterward, in a
different letter thus: Andr. ca. 3. page 74. Verum
Et ille nobis^um, and nos cum illo oues illas pascendas suscepimus, which
manner of speech does indeed enforce a greater equality betwixt S. Peter, and
other Pastors, then the true words of S. Ambrose do import, or then he ever did
imagine, who taught expressly elsewhere the Primacy of S. Peter, not only above
all other inferior Pastors, but also above the Apostles themselves, saying,
Ambr. in 2. Cor. 12.
that albeit Andrew was called before Peter, yet Primatum non accepit Andraeas,
sed Petrus: Andrew did not receive the Primacy, but Peter: yea, and in another
place he proves it by these very words of our Savior, which are now in
question, to wit, P^sce oues meas.

8. For having said, that our Savior asked Peter thrice whether he loved him (
not to learn, Ide^ lib. 10. comment. in cap. 24. Eua^g. Luc.
says he, any thing of him, but to teach him, whom he meant to leave to us,
velut amoris sui Vicarium, as the Vicar of his love) he alleges our Saviors
words to S. Peter, S. Ambrose proves S. Peter's Supremacy out of the words
Pasce oues meas.
to wit, Simon the son of John, do thou love me etc. Pasce agnos meos,
feed my Lambs, and then shortly after he infers thereupon thus, Et ideo
quia solus profitetur ex omnibus, omnibus antefertur; and therefore because he
alone of all the rest professed his love, he is preferred before them all: and
after a while he concludes, that our Lord asked him the third time, whether he
loved him: Et iam, says he, non agnos, vt primo, quodam lacte p^scendos etc.
And now Peter is commanded, not to feed Lambs with a certain milk, as the
first time, nor to feed the little sheep, as the second time, but, oues pascere
iubetur; perfectiores, vt perfectior gubernaret, he is commanded to feed the
sheep; to the end that he being more perfect, might govern the more perfect.
Thus says S. Ambrose.

9. Wherein it is to be noted that he teaches 3. things: Three things taught
by S. Ambrose.
The first that our Savior left S. Peter unto us, as the Vicar, or Substitute
of his love, that is to say to succeed him in that fatherly love, and care of
his Church which he himself had; the second, that when our Savior gave to S.
Peter the Pastoral commission, and authority to feed his Lambs, and sheep, he
preferred him therein before all the rest of the Apostles; Quia solus (says S.
Ambrose) profitetur ex omnibus, omnibus antefertur: The third is, that whereas
S. Ambrose observes three degrees of Christians, to wit Lambs, little sheep,
and sheep, all recommended to the Pastoral care of S. Peter, he gives to
understand, that all sorts of Christians were committed to his charge, and
government, and not the weak only, but the most holy also, learned, and
perfect, yea even the Apostles themselves, and therefore he says: vt
perfectiores perfectior gubernaret.

10. This then being S. Ambrose his sense, and doctrine concerning the
Pastoral commission given to S. Peter, it is most evident, that when he
teaches that all Pastors received their flocks with S. Peter, he teaches it
in the same sense that S. Augustine does, to wit, that because S. Peter (being
supreme Pastor) represented the whole Church, and received the Pastoral
authority not for himself alone, but also for all those who were either at
that time, or ever should be subordinate unto him, D. Andrews can help the dyce
when he is put to his shifts.
therefore all other Pastors received their authority not only in him (as S.
Augustine speaks) but also with him, that is to say, in, and with their
chief Pastor, and head. And therefore, whereas D. Andrews, to make a greater
show of parity, or equality betwixt S. Peter, and other Pastors, has added to
S. Ambrose his text those words of his own, and nobiscum eas accepit, it may
pass for a piece of coggery, and well discovers his skill to help the dyce
when he is put to his shifts.

11. Besides that, his vanity and folly notably appears, in that having gained
nothing, A vain. brag of D. Andrews.
but rather lost his cause by alleging these two places of S. Augustine, and
S. Ambrose, yet he braggeth thereof afterward, as if he had got a great
victory, saying in the 214. page that although, Andr. cap. 8. page 214. and 215.
pasce oues, was said in the singular number, and to one (to wit S. Peter) yet
it passed to all, and that clarius id loquuntur Ambrosius and Augustinus, quam
vt obstrepere possint nouitij nostri. Ambrose, and Augustine do speak (or
affirm) it more plainly, then that our nouices can any way contradict it. So
he; meaning by our nouices, the Catholics, as I take it, though I know not why
he so calls them, neither do I mean here to discuss it, but will remit to
the indifferent Reader to judge, what cause he has so to brag of these two
Fathers, and what fidelity he has showed in alleging them, dissembling the
clear doctrine of the one, and corrupting as well the text, as the sense of
the other: and thus much for his first answer.

12. In his second, he seeks to retort the Cardinals argument upon him, The
second argument and answer of M. Andrews which he takes to be so sharp that it
will prick the Cardinal.
and to prove the Kings Supremacy by the word, pasce, which he says he knows
will touch the Cardinal to the quick: quod scio, says he, punget Cardinalem.
Let us hear then this sharp argument which I think will prove a very blunt
one. Thus then he says: Negat Cardinalis Primatum Regis etc. The Cardinal
denies the Kings Supremacy, and yet God said to a King, tu pasces populum meum
Israel, thou shall feed my people Israel: Where no man can deny, but that a
King was made the Pastor of all Israel, Andr. c. 1. page 16.. Veru^ vim
videamus.
yea of the Priests, except he will deny them to be part of Israel. Thus
argues this learned and sharp Doctor, overthrowing his own argument
sufficiently by his own conclusion, granting in effect, that if the Priests
were not a part of the people of Israel, the King was not their Pastor.

13. To this purpose then, it is to be considered what I have amply debated in
the first Chapter of my Supplement, See Suppl. Chap. 1. n. 18.19. and sequ.
concerning the exemption, and sepation of the Priests and Leuits from the
temporal, and politic State, by the express words of Almighty God who gave
the Leuits (not to the temporal Prince, Number. c. 8.
but) to Aaron and his children, tradidi eos dono Aaron, and filijs eius de
medio populi, I have given them (says Almighty God) for a gift to Aaron and
his children, out of the midst of the people. Besides, that God ordained
expressly that the Tribe of Leui should not be numbered, Number. 1.
neither yet have any part, or inheritance with the rest of Israel, because he
had reserved the same for his own service, and therefore would himself be
their possession, Deuteronomy. 10. and 18.
portion, and inheritance. So that this being very clear in the express words
of the Law, Supplem. c. 1. n. 22.23. and 24.
(which, as I also proved, was never altered but rather confirmed at the
institution of the Kings, who were expressly bound to observe the whole law, and
to obey the high Priest) I may say to the Doctor, as he said before to the
Cardinal, atque vel sic iacebit Doctori ratio sua.

14. But put the case this were not so, yea and that the Priests of the old law
had been subject to the Kings in spiritual matters (whereof I have already
proved the contrary) will M. Andrews infer thereon, Suppl. cap. 1. vbi supr.
that therefore Kings have also the spiritual Supremacy in the new law, without
any new institution, or ratification thereof by our Savior Christ, In what case
Christians may ground upon the law of Moses.
or his Apostles? Does not this great Doctor know, that the Mosaycal law was
abrogated by the law of grace, and that whereas it was divided into three parts
(to wit, Judicial, Cerimoniall, and Moral) the two former utterly ceased, and
the third (I mean the Moral part, containing the Commandments) remains
only in force, not because it was instituted then, but because those
Commaundments being grounded on the law of Nature, are always in force, and
therefore ordained again to be kept in the new Law. In which respect the
commandment concerning the Sabbath, does not now bynd Christians, as it was
then ordained and practiced.

15. And therefore M. Andrews might as well introduce Poligamy practiced in the
old Law, as the spiritual supremacy of Kings (if we should grant that they
then had any such) and with much more reason might he teach abstinence from
puddings, and other meats made of blood; seeing that we find some
commandments, or ordinance thereof, in the Acts of Apostles, whereas there is
no one syllable in all the new Testament, M. Andrews his beggarly proof for a
temporal princes spiritual Supremacy.
to prove that Kings have any spiritual authority over the Church; it being
most evident that al those places of Scripture, which he or any other does, or
can allege out of the new Testament to that purpose, do concern only
temporal obedience to the pagan Emperors, or Princes, who were then
Persecutors of the Church, and therefore could not be spiritual heads or
Governors thereof, nor obayed by Christians in spiritual matters. And this I
say the rather, because M. Andrews does not only here, but also throughout his
whole book, seem to ground his doctrine of the Kings spiritual Primacy,
specially upon the law of Moses (as I shall have occasion to show further
hereafter) which sufficiently bewrays the beggary and misery of his cause,
See infra. cap. 6.
and his want of proofs for the same by the law of Christ.

16. And although as well the ancient Fathers, as we, do ordinarily produce
testimonies of the old Testament, not only for matters in controversy, but also
for instruction in matters of morality, yet neither they, nor we ever do it, to
other end, but to confirm things instituted, and taught in the new law, by the
ordinance, and commaundment either of Christ, or of his spouse the Church; M.
Andrews proofs of the temporal Princes supremacy, savor of Iudaisme.
and this we do only in respect of the conformity that is in many things
betwixt the figure, and the Verity (I mean betwixt the old law, and the new,
Moses, and our Savior Christ, the Synagogue, and the Church) and not to the
end to prove any thing to be necessary now, because it was ordained, or
practiced then; which were rather a point of Iudaisme, then of Christianisme.
And therefore this and other arguments of M. Andrews grounded only upon the
Judicial laws of Moses, may show him to be rather a Jew then a Christian,
except he can bring some other ground for the same out of the new Testament, or
some Apostolical, or Ecclesiastical Canon or Tradition; which he neither
does, nor ever shall be able to do.

17. But who sees not, how he tryfleth in this point, as commonly he does in
all? For how does it follow, that if it be true which we teach (to wit, that
Christ made S. Peter supreme Pastor of the Church by commanding him to feed
his sheep) then he gave the same spiritual authority to David, when he bad him
feed his people of Israel? 2. Reg. 5.
Is it not manifest, that although the word pasce, feed, as it was spoken to
them both, does signify to govern, D. Andrews does equivocate egregiously.
yet it is Equivocal, being to be understood of a different manner of
government in them both, that is to say, in the one spiritual, and in the
other temporal? what consequence then can he draw from the one to the other,
except it be this, that as when God bad David (who as a temporal man) to feed
his people of Israel (which was a temporal people) he gave him temporal
authority, making him head of a temporal Kingdom? So when he bad S. Peter
(who was a spiritual man, a Priest, an Apostle, and Prince of the Apostles)
feed his sheep (that is to say) all the faithful contained within his
Sheepfold (which is a spiritual congregation) he gave him a spiritual
authority, and made him supreme Pastor, and head of a spiritual Kingdom, that
is to say, of his Church. And this no doubt is the most direct inference that
can be made of the word Pasce, when it is applied in the old Testament either
to David (if we respect him, as he was a King, and not a Prophet) or else to
any other temporal Prince.

18. And therefore whereas M. Andrews says, Narro autem Cardinali etc. I
declare to the Cardinal that the title of Pastor was given in the holy
Scriptures to Princes long before it was given to the Bishop, Andr. vbi supra.
and much more often, as to Iosue before, and more often every where in the
holy-history, and in the Prophets. This his narration, I say, is very idle, D.
Andrews argues impertinently.
and impertinent, seeing it proves not any thing which we deny, but that which
we willingly grant, to wit, that the words Pascere, and Pastor, are often
applied in the old Testament to temporal Princes; but that they signify
spiritual government in them as Kings, M. Andrews will not prove in have, and
the contrary is manifest enough in Cyrus a Pagan, Isa. 44.
and Idolatrous King, whom God called Pastormeus, and no man I think will be
so absurd to imagine that he had any Ecclesiastical authority, or was Head,
and chief member of Gods Church, whereof he was no member at all: besides, that
the example which he gives us of Iosue out of the book of Numbers does not
any way help his cause, but flatly confound him.

Number. 27.
19. For albeit in the Chapter which he quoteth, to wit the 27 it is declared
that God commanded Moses to assign and ordain Iosue for his Successor in
the government of the people (least they should be like to oues sine Pastore,
D. Andrews confounded by an instance of his own.
sheep without a Shepherd) yet it is evident there, that he was not to have
any authority over the High Priest, but rather the clean contrary, to wit,
that he should depend wholly upon the High Priests direction; and therefore
whereas Moses was commanded there by almighty God to give part of his glory to
Iosue, Theodoretus does very well observe (as I have noted before in the
Supplement) that Moses did distribute his dignity, Theodor. quast. 48. in Number.
See Suppl. nu. 21.
and authority (which was both spiritual, and temporal) betwixt Iosue and
Eleazar the High Priest, yet in such sort, that Iosue should be directed in all
his affairs by Eleazar, Pro hoc, says the Scripture, si quid agendum erit
etc. Number. 27.
For him (that is to say Iosue) if any thing be to be done, Eleazar shall
consult the Lord, and at his word, he (to wit Iosue) shall go out, and in, and
all the children of Israel with him, and all the rest of the multitude. Thus
says the holy Scripture, whereby it appears that albeit Iosue was Pastor
populi, M. Andrews pricking argument does wound none but himself.
yet he was but a temporal Pastor, or Governor, and to be directed even in
temporal affairs by the spiritual Pastor Eleazar, whom Almighty God did
illuminate and instruct in his consultations, for the direction of Iosue. Now
then, does this example prick Cardinal Bellarmine trow you, or M. Andrews?
Truly though he meant to prick the Cardinal, yet you see, he has wounded
none but himself. The third answer of D. Andrews examined.
Thus much to his second answer.

20. His third is in substance, that albeit S. Augustine, and S. Cyril have
amply co^mented upon the Gospel of S. John, and upon those very words of our
Savior to S. Peter, Pasce oues meas, yet neither of them (says he) saw,
illustrem hunc fidei articulum de primatu Petri temporali, Andr. vbi supra page
17. lin. 4.
this notable article of faith concerning the temporal primacy of Peter etc.
So he. As if the Cardinal did teach, or affirm, that S. Peter's primacy is a
temporal primacy; which is a mere fiction of M. Andrews to frame matter for
himself to impugn; for seeing the spiritual primacy of S Peter is so evident
in the holy Scriptures, that he is now and then forced to grant it in some
sort, yea See after c. 3. n. 36.37. and seq.
sometimes as far forth in effect as we demand; though at at other times he
labors utterly to overthrow it (as I shall have occasion to declare more
largly Cap. 5. n. 18.19.20.
her after) he will now needs presuppose that we teach the Popes Primacy to be a
temporal primacy, and why forsooth? Marry because the Cardinal, as also all
the Catholics do teach, that the spiritual authority which our Savior gave S.
Peter, and his Successors, may, and does in some cases extend it self to
temporal things, so far forth, as it is, or may be necessary for the execution
of their spiritual power, and for the benefit of souls, the public good of
the Church, and gods glory, whereof I have given sufficient reason in the first
Chapter of my Supplement cap. 1. nu. 59. and sequent.
Supplement.

21. Therefore I will only say for the present, that if the Popes spiritual
Primacy may for this cause be called a temporal primacy, If the Popes primacy
be a temporal Primacy, M. Andrews is a pecuniary Pastor.
then may M. Andrews (who takes himself to be a Bishop, and a spiritual
Pastor) be justly called, and nicknamed a corporal Bishop, and a pecuniary
Pastor, because he does punish men sometimes in his spiritual court, not only
in their bodies, but also in their purses: and if he would think him absurd,
who should so style, and intytle him, he is no less absurd himself in calling
the Popes Primacy, for the like reason, a temporal Primacy. And although
neither S. Augustine, nor S. Cyril, do in the places cyted by M. Andrews speak
of any such extension of spiritual power to temporal matters (whereof they
had no occasion to treat) yet it suffices that they do not deny it, yea and
that they do both of them sufficiently teach there, the spiritual Primacy of
S. Peter, whereof the other is a necessary consequent.

22. S. Augustine in that very Treatise (whereto M. Andrews appealeth, I mean
upon the Gospel of S. John, and the last Chapter) has that express
doctrine, and those very words which I cyted a little before, S. Augustine
acknowledges S. Peter's supremacy in the place alleged by M. Andrews.
concerning the person, and figure of the whole Church, represented in S.
Peter, propter Apostolatus sui Primatum, by reason of the Primacy of his
Apostleship (or as he says else where) propter Primatum quem in discipulis
habuit, for the Primacy which he had amongst the Disciples. For which cause he
called him also twice in the same place, primum Apostolorum, the chief
Apostle, and says, that the Church received the keys in him, which as I have
showed does evidently prove him to be head and supreme Pastor of the Church,
S. August. Tract. 124. in Euang. Joan. Idem. in psalm. 108.
whereof only he, and no other of the Apostles is said to represent the person,
and figure; so that S. Augustine sufficiently acknowledges S. Peter's
spiritual Supremacy in the place alleged by M. Andrews.

23. The like does S. Cyril also in his co^mentary upon S. John's Gospel, S.
Cyril comment. in Cap. vlt. Joan.
and in the same place which M. Andrews cyteth, for there he calls S. Peter
expressly Prince, and head of the Apostles, saying: Vt Princeps Caputque
ceterorum primus exclamauit, Tu es Christus filius Dei viui: S. Cyril also
acknowledges S. Peter's supremacy in the place which M. Andrews alleges
Peter as Prince, and head of the rest, first exclaymed, Thou art Christ the
Son of the living God. So he: whereby he teaches evidently, that S. Peter was
head, and supreme Pastor of the Church, in that he acknowledges him to be
Prince, and head of the Apostles, who were the chief Magistrates, and Pastors
thereof; and therefore it is to be considered, how this agrees with that which
follows presently after in M. Andrews his text, who having affirmed as you
have heard, that neither of these Fathers saw the article touching Peter's
temporal Primacy, Andr. vbi supra.
adds, Id tantum vident, nec praeterea quid, quia etc. They see this only and
nothing else, that because Peter had denied his Lord not once, but thrice he was
asked concerning love, not once but thrice, and so when he had abolished his
triple negation, with his triple confession, he was restored to the place or
degree of Apostleship, from the which he was fallen: for touching the Primacy
they are altogether silent. Thus says M. Andrews.

24. Wherein it is to be noted, that whereas he says, that these Fathers saw
only this, which he here sets down, nec praeterea quid, and nothing else,
it is evidently false, for two respects; the one, for that they saw more then
he mentions, yea more then he listed to see, to wit, the Primacy of S. Peter,
as I have showed out of them both; the other is, because they saw not that
which he affirms in their behalf, I mean, that S. Peter was by those words
of our Savior restored to his place in the Apostleship which he had lost; for
if they should have said so, M. Andrews makes S. Augustine and S. Cyril favor
a pernicious heresy.
they should seem to hold (or favor at least) the pernicious heresy of
Wycliffe, that Magistrates loose their dignity, and authority by mortal sin,
which pestiferous opinion, those holy Fathers, no doubt, would have abhorred,
if it had been set abroach, or taught by any in their time; seeing that it
shakes the very foundation of all obedience either to Civil, or
Ecclesiastical Magistrates; because it does not only make all obedience
uncertain (for no man knows who is in the state of Grace) but also gives
occasion to Subjects upon every offense of their Prince to call his authority
in question.

25. Therefore to the end thou may, good Reader, know as well the integrity of
these Fathers in this point, S. Augustine belyed by D. Andrews.
as M. Andrews his fraud, and bad conscience in alleging them, thou shall
understand that S. Augustine says nothing at all, that may be so much as
wrested to any such sense in that place, Aug. Ep. 50.
and does elsewhere expressly teach the contrary, as when he says: Sanctus
David de criminibus mortiferis etc. Holy David did penance for mortal sins,
and yet remained in his honor, or dignity: and when blessed Peter shed most
bitter tears, he repented that he had denied his Lord, and yet remained an
Apostle^ (and again a little after) when Peter the Apostle denied our Savior,
and wept, and remained still an Apostle, he had not yet received the holy
Ghost. Thus says S. Augustine; and could he teach a doctrine more contrary to
that which M. Andrews fat^ereth upon him?

26. Let us now see how he handles S. Cyril, S. Cyril notably abused by M.
Andrews.
upon whom it may be he principally relyeth for this matter; for indeed that
holy Father says somewhat concerning the same, though far otherwise then M.
Andrews would make his Reader believe, for thus says S. Cyril: Cyril vbi supra.
Dixit, pasce agnos meos, Apostolatus sibi renoua^s dignitatem, ne propter
negationem quae humana infirmitate accidit labefactata videretur. He (to wit
our Savior) said (to Peter) feed my Lambs, renewing to him his dignity of the
Apostleship, least it might seem to have been decayed by his denial, which
happened by humane infirmity. Thus far S. Cyril; who you see, neither says,
nor means that S. Peter fell from his Apostleship by his denial of Christ,
but rather signifies the contrary, to wit, that Christ would not have it so
much as to seem, or be supposed, that he had lost his dignity by his fall, and
therefore renewed it by that new, and express commission, ne labefactata
videretur, lest it should seem to have been decayed, or lost.

27. Wherein also it is to be observed, that the dignity whereof S. Cyril
speaks, was not the bare office, or degree of an Apostle, but that which was
peculiar, and proper to S. Peter, and so acknowledged by S. Cyril himself a
little before in the same Chapter, when he termed him Principem, and Caput
ceterorum, the Prince and head of the rest of the Apostles, as also S.
Augustine (as you have heard) calls it Primatum and principatum Apostolatus,
the Primacy and principality of the Apostleship, and therefore I say, the
Dignity which according to S. Cyrils doctrine our Savior renewed in S. Peter,
was his Primacy, and Sovereignty in Gods Church, and the renouation thereof was
a confirmation, or rather an increase of it, as of a thing which he had never
lost, and being then renewed, was made more eminent then before. But perhaps
some will say, that M. Andrews does not here plainly affirm as his own
opinion, that S. Peter fell from the Apostleship, but relates the doctrine of
S. Augustine and S. Cyril, who seemed to him so to say. Therefore let us hear
what he says himself in another place concerning the same.

Andr. page 215.. No^ vero.
28. Pasce oues, says he, express faternur vni dictum etc. we confess
expressly that pasce oues was said to one, yea thryce said to one, because he
had thrice denied, atque ea voce muneri restitutum etc: and that he (to wit
Peter) was by that word, or speech restored to his charge, and not constituted,
or appointed in a charge above others. So he, showing evidently, that his
opinion is, M. Andrews worthily suspected to hold that Magistrates fall from
their dignity by mortal sins.
that S. Peter lost his office, and authority by his fall, and that he was
restored thereto by those words of our Savior: which, as I have said,
sauoureth greatly of that damnable and pernicious heresy, whereof I have spoken
before except he can tell us (which he shall never be able to do) how, and why
S. Peter (rather then all other men) lost his place, and office by his fall,
which (though it was most grievous) yet proceeded not of any infidelity,
heresy, or malice, but (as S. Cyril well notes, and no man I think doubts
of it) contigit humana infirmitate, happened by humane frailty; so that if he
lost his dignity thereby, the like must needs be thought of others in like
fraylties, and much more in cases of more greiuous, and malicious sins, which
would be an evident confirmation of Wickliffs Heresy.

29. But howsoever M. Andrews shall be able to purge himself of this
suspicion, it cannot be denied but that he has most impudently abused and
belyed both S. Augustine and S. Cyril, in making them affirm, that S. Peter
fell from his Apostleship by his denial of Christ, whereof the contrary is
clearly gathered out of S. Cyrils own words, and expressly taught by S.
Augustine, as you have heard before, which may also be confirmed by the
testimony of the other S. Cyril Bishop of Jerusalem, and of Optatus
Mile^itanus, who do both of them, not only teach in express words, that S.
Peter did not loose his Apostleship by his fall, but do withal acknowledge his
preeminent authority over the rest of the Apostles. S. Cyril says thus: Petrus
princeps Apostolorum excellentissimus etc. S. Cyril Hierosol. Cathech. Mystag.
2.
Peter the most excellent prince of the Apostles, did not only receive pardon
of his denial (of Christ) verum etiam dignitatem Apostolicam non ablatam
retinuit, but also retained his Apostolical dignity not taken from him. So he.
And Optatus having signified that, Optat. l. 7. de Schismate Donatistaru^^
B. Petrus praeferri omnibus Apostolis meruit, Blessed Peter deserved to be
preferred before all the Apostles, yea and that, solus accepit claues ceteris
communicandas, he only received the keys to be communicated to the rest (which
was done bono vnitatis, says he, for the good of unity, in which respect, he
also calls him a little after, caput Apostolorum, the head of the Apostles) he
concludes after a while, that albeit Peter did alone deny Christ, yet, bono
vnitatis de numero Apostolorum separari non meruit: for the good of unity he
did not deserve to be separated from the number of the Apostles. Thus says
Optatus, to show the benefit and necessity of Unity in Gods Church. And this I
hope may suffice for this point.

30. Now then, to draw to the Conclusion of the premises, it appears plainly
thereby, that our Catholic doctrine, and arguments grounded upon the words of
our Savior to S. Peter, The pla^ces of 3. Fathers alleged by M. Andrews do
confute him.
Pasce oues meas, do remain good and sound, notwithstanding M. Andrews false
gloss thereupon; yea, and that they are much confirmed by these very places of
S. Augustine, S. Ambrose, and S Cyril, which he has produced against us. For
whereas all his drift is to prove out of those Fathers, that S. Peter had
nothing more by that Pastoral commission, then the rest of the Apostles; you
have heard out of S. Augustine, that in receiving that commission, he
represented the person and figure of the whole Church, by reason of his Primacy
amongst the Apostles: and out of S. Ambrose, that he was thereby preferred
before all the Apostles: and lastly out of S. Cyril, that he was Prince, and
Head of the Apostles, and that the same dignity (for he speaks of that which
he acknowledges to have been in him before his fall) was renewed by that
commission. S. Chrysostom for S. Peter's Supremacy.
Whereto may be added the testimony of S. Chrysostom, who in his book de
Sacerdotio treating of those words Pasce oues meas, says, that our Savior
would have S. Peter to be auctoritate praeditum, Chrysostom. de Sacerd. l. 2.
ac reliquis item Apostolis long praecellere: endued with authority, and also
far to excel the rest of the Apostles.

31. And again, in his Homilyes upon S. John's Gospel, and the same words of
our Savior, he says; that Christ asked S. Peter whether he loved him, because
he (to wit Peter) was the mouth of the Apostles, and Prince, and Head of the
Congregation: and further teaches, that by those words, Christ committed unto
him curam Fratrum, the charge of his Brethren (for so he explicateth Pasce oues
meas) Neque negationis meminit, Ibidem.
says he, neque exprobrat; tantum dicit, si amas me, fratrum curam susciptas,
that is to say, neither does Christ remember Peter's denial, neither does he
upbraid him with it, but only says, if thou love me, take the charge of thy
Brethren. So he: and that by S. Peter's Brethren our Savior meant the Apostles,
it appears evidently afterward in the same Homily, where S. Chrysostom note
(...) that albeit at Christ's last Supper, S. Peter did not presume to ask our
Savior a question, Ibid.
but willed S. John to do it, yet now after this commission was given him,
commissa sibi fratrum cura, says he, vicem suam alt^ri non mandat, sed ipse
Magistrum interrogat: the charge of his brethren being committed unto him, he
does not now delegate any other, but himself asks their Master. Thus says
S. Chrysostom, giving plainly to understand, that S. Peter having by this
commission received the charge of his brethren the Apostles, was more confident
then before, and would not use the interuention of any of them (because they
were under his charge) but himself asked our Savior, as the mouth, Prince,
and Head of the Apostolical Congregation, for so you have also heard S.
Chrysostom term him before, in the same Homily.

32. So that you see this holy Father teaches the same, that the others before
mentioned do, to wit, that S. Peter had by this commission, a pre-eminence, and
prerogative above all the Apostles; yea, and that the charge, or government of
them (no less then of all inferior Pastors in Gods Church) was committed to
him; S. Leo. ep. 89.
which S. Leo also testifyeth expressly, saying that the charge of feeding the
sheep of Christ, was more specially committed to Peter. Idem. ser. 3. de
assumpt. sua ad Pontif.
And in another place, that, Peter was chosen out of the whole world to have
the chief charge of the vocation of the Gentills, and of all the Apostles, and
of all the Fathers of the Church: Supplem. cap. 5. nu. 25.26. and 27.
vt quamuis in populo multi sunt sacerdotes etc. that albeit there are many
Priests amongst the people, and many Pastors, yet Peter may properly govern
them all, quos principalit^r regit and Christus, whom Christ does also
principally govern.

Eusebius. Emis. ho. de natiuit. Joan. Euan. Theophil. in cap. vlt. Joan.
33. So (...) says this famous, holy, and ancient Father, of whose great
authority in Gods Church I have spoken amply before, in answer of M. Barlows
blasphemous speeches, and exceptions against him: and now to conclude, though I
might add to these Fathers the clear testimonies of Eusebius Emissenus,
Theophilactus, S. Bernard, S. Ber. l. 2. de consider.
and diverse others concerning S. Peter's prerogative in his Pastoral commission
above the rest of the Apostles, yet I will content my self with these already
cyted, not doubting, but that they may suffice for answer to M. Andrews his
idle cauills, Psalm. 1.19. Psalm. 63.
where with he meant (...) prick the Cardinal, imagining himself belike to
be the mighty man that shoots the sharp arrows, M. Andrews his sharp
arrows do prove but shuttlecocks, or fools bolts Eccl. 19.
whereof the Psalmist says, Sagittae potentis acutae; but you see his sharp
shafts do prove to be no better then sagittae paruulorum, the shuttlecocks of
little children, or rather to say truly, to be that fools bolt, which as the
Proverb says, is soon shot, whereof Solomon says, sagitta in fe^ore canis,
sic verbum in cord stulti: as an arrow in the thygh of a dog (who never can
rest until it be out) so is a word in a fools heart, which truly I would have
forborne to have said of M. D. Andrews (were his folly far more exorbitant then
it is) if he did not show so much virulency, and malice toward the worthy
Cardinal, Prou. 16.
as he does every where, treating him most injuriously with such opprobrious
and contumelious terms, Concerning a law in the Code of Justinian.
that he deserves to be answered (as the Wyseman aduyseth) secundum stultitiam
suam etc. according to his own folly, lest he may think himself to be wise.

34. But let us now pass to some other matter, which shall be a law in the
Code, Supplem. Chap. 1. nu. 99.
beginning inter Claras, which law is an Epistle of Pope John the second, to
Justinian the Emperor, and another of Justinian to him, wherein the Pope is
acknowledged to be Caput omnium Ecclesiarum, Apol. Car. Bellar. c. 3. page 17.
the Head of all Churches. This law is cited by me in my Supplement, to prove
the dutiful respect and obedience of the ancient Emperors, showed to the
Apostolic Roman Sea, and to the same purpose it is also alleged by Cardinal
Bellarmine in his Apology, Andr. Resp. ad Apolog. cap. 3. page 81.
to whom M. Andrews answers thus: Poterat Cardinalis abstinere a lege, inter
Claras, citanda etc. The Cardinal might well have forborne to cite the law
inter Claras, which he knows not to be cyted inter Claras leges, amongst the
clear laws, but amongst the obscure, and counterfeit: he might also have
abstayned from mentioning Justinian (the Emperor) who showed himself to be
Superior to the Pope ( aliqua ex part) in some part, first in Siluerius the
Pope and after in Vigilius, of whom he banished the former, and imprisoned the
later. So he: wherein you see two things affirmed, the one that the Cardinal
knows the law of Justinian which begins inter Claras, to be cyted amongst
the obscure, and counterfeit laws; and the other, that Justinian showed
himself to be in some part superior to Popes, The law Inter Claras proved to
be a most true and clear Law, though M. Andrews hold it for obscure and
counterfeit.
because he banished Pope Syluerius, and imprisoned Vigilius; I will briefly
examine both these points.

35. As for the first, truly I cannot but wonder at M. Andrews his confidence
and boldness, or rather his impudence, so boldly and confidently to affirm (as
he does without any proof in the world) that the Cardinal knows the
foresaid law to be cyted amongst the obscure, yea counterfeit Laws, whereas the
Cardinal knows it to be held and esteemed not only inter Claras, but also,
inter clarissimas leges, amongst the most clear laws, for so the most famous
Lawyer Baldus terms it; The testimony of Baldus.
who upon this very law, makes this Gloss, Clarissima est lex, in qua Dominus
Imperator etc. This is a most clear law, wherein the Emperor writes to the
Pope concerning the faith which he professes. see the Code l. 1. tit. de su^m.
Trin.
So he. And this may be confirmed with the authority of Accursius, who glosseth
it no less then all the other Laws in the Code, without making the least
doubt or scruple in the world of any obscurity or defect therein. Accurfius


36. But perhaps M. Andrews will say that it cannot be denied, The testimony
of Alciat.
but that some have doubted of it, and impugned it. Whereto I answer, that
true it is, that some heretics of these latter ages have either ignorantly, or
maliciously called it in question, Alciat. l. 4. Parergo^ cap. 25.
of whom the learned, and eloquent Lawyer Alciat says thus: Sunt qui
suspectam habent Ioannis Pontificis epistolam etc. There are some who do
suspect Pope John's Epistle, which is in Justinians Code, under the Title De
Trinitate, and say, that it is not found in some books, which as I think they
do in favor of those who depresse the Popes authority; as also I have found
other Authors corrupted by them to the same end (to wit, the Chronicles of Otho
Frisingensis, and certain verses of Ligurinus the Poet.) But I do know it to
be extant in very many old copyes, and that it cannot with any suspicion be
impeached, and if one or two books have it not, it is to be ascribed to the
negligence of the Writers, who somtymes omitted it, because they thought that
it does not much concern the Science of the Law; nevertheless it is not to be
doubted, quin genuinus germanusque Ioannis sit foetus, but that it is the
proper and true work of Pope John. Thus says Alciat, who not only testifies,
as you see, that he had himself seen it in very many old copyes, but also
yields a probable reason why in some other copyes it might be left out.

37. I could confirm this also by the testimony of the learned Lawier Cuiacius
and others, Pope Nicolas the first cyted this law above 800. years ago.
if it were needful, as it is not, seeing that Pope Nicolas the first of that
name (who lived above 800. years ago) cyteth the Epistle of Justinian the
Emperor to Pope John, beginning, Reddentes honorem (which he says, Justinian
himself inserted into his Laws) and lays down some part of it word for
word, Nicol. ep. ad Michael Imperat.
as it is yet to be seen in the law inter Claras, whereof we now treat (which
law is, as I have already declared, an Epistle of Pope John to Justinian,
wherein that other of Justinian cyted by Pope Nicolas is inserted) whereby it is
evident that the said Law was, The same confirmed out of Liberatus who lived in
Justinians days. Liberat. in breuiar. c. 20.
as it is now in the Code 800. years ago, and held for a clear Law of
Justinian, whereof there are also other most pregnant, and conuincing
testimonies; for Liberatus who lived in Justinians time, witnesses that he was
himself at Rome when Hypatius, and Demetrius came thither, sent from Justinian
the Emperor, to consult with the Sea Apostolic, against the messengers of
certain Nestorian and Eutychian Bishops, concerning two, or three points then
in controversy betwixt the Catholics in the East parts, and them (which
points also Liberatus sets down) and adds that Pope John did write to the
Emperor, Et epistola sua firmauit quid confitendum; and confirmed by his
Epistle what was to be professed, or believed touching the same; and this was
done, says Liberatus, nobis ibi positis, whylest we were there.

38. So that it is evident enough that the Epistle of Pope John, whereof
Liberatus speaks, is the same that is now in question, as well because the
contents are the same, that Liberatus testifyeth, as also for that Hypatius,
and Demetrius are mentioned therein to be the Ambassadors of Justinian, who
brought it to the Pope; besides that Justinian himself writing to Agapetus the
Pope, Tom. 2. Council. ep. Justin. ad Agapetu^ vide Bi^niu^.
makes mention of his own Epistle to Pope John, and of Pope John's to him; as
also Pope John does the like in his Epistle to diverse Senators: finally
Justinian in a constitution of his directed to Epiphanius Bishop of
Constantinople, and set down in the Code in Greek, Ibidem ep. 2. Joan. 2. ad
Senatores.
relates the substance of his Epistle to Pope John, to the effect abouesaid,
showing also the great care he had to conserve the unity of all the Churches in
the East parts: L. 6. Tit. de sum. Trinit.
Cum ipso, says he, Sanctissimo Papa veteris Romae ad quem similia hisc^
perscripsimus, with the most holy Pope himself of old Rome, to whom we have
written the like to these. So he. And then adds further thus. Nec enim
patimur etc. For we do not suffer that any of those things which belong to the
state of the Church, be not related (...).
to his Beatitude as being the head of all the most holy Priests of God, and
specially because, as often as there has risen any Heretics in these parts,
they have been corrected by the sentence, and Judgment of that venerable Seat.
Thus says Justinian in that co^stitution.

39. Wherein first he testifyeth, that he had written to the Pope of Rome (who
was then John the second, as it is evident:) secondly he signifies, that the
substance of his letters to the Pope was the same in effect, that he wrote to
Epiphanius; and this is so clear by the contents of both the Epistles, that
the one (to wit that to Epiphanius) is set down in the Code in Greek, without
any translation, because the other to Pope John which follows in Latin, See
the Code vb^ supra.
is the same in effect: in which respect the former in Greek needed not to be
translated, as the gloss witnesses. Thirdly Justinian in this Constitution to
Epiphanius, not only acknowledges the Pope to be head of all the holy Priests
of God (as he did in like manner in his Epistle to the Pope) but also gives
another most notable testimony as well of the Universal authority, A clear
testimony of the universal authority, and perpetual^ integrity of the Roman
Sea:
as of the perpetual intergrity of the Roman Sea, seeing he confesses that
all the heresies which ever sprung in the East, or Greek Church, had been
condemned by the Judicial sentence of that venerable Seat.

40. Therefore can any man desire either more clear proofs then these, that
the law inter Claras, is a clear, and no obscure or counterfeit law? or more
pregnant testimonies of the Primacy of the Bishop of Rome by the Civil or
Imperial law in the days of Justinian? Or yet a more evident demonstration of
M. Andrews vanity, and folly, in seeking to obscure the perspicuous, and clear
light of this ancient law, with such a frivolous and vain exception so clearly
convinced, as you have seen? Whereby he also worthily incurreth the
malediction of the Prophet, Vae qui dicitis etc. VVo be to you who call good
bad, Esa. 5.
and bad good, and make light darkness, and darkness light. And thus much for
this point.

Two facts of Iustinia^ the Emp. against 2. Popes examined and reproved.
41. The other point which now rests to be discussed is, that M. Andrews
says, that the Cardinal might also have abstayned from mentioning Justinian,
because he showed himself to be Superior some way to the Pope; first in
banishing Siluerius, and after in imprisoning Vigilius; and whereas the
Cardinal had also produced the testimony of the Bishop of Patera, Liberat. in
Breuiar. c. 22.
who upon the banishment of Pope Siluerius came to Justinian, and protested
Gods judgment against him, saying, that though there were many Kings, yet there
was not one alone as he, who was expelled from his Seat, was Pope over the
Church of the whole world (meaning that there was not one King alone over the
whole world, as there is one Pope, or universal Pastor over the whole Church)
M. Andrews answers thereto: Andr. vbi supra. page 81.. Vt nobis.
Non tam curandum etc. It is not to be so much regarded, what the Bishop said,
as what Justinian did. And again presently after; Facta cum videamus, verba
quid audiamus, vel Paterensis, vel Cardinalis? seeing we see the facts (of
Justinian) why should we harken to the words, either of the Bishop of Patera,
or of the Cardinal?

42. So he; arguing as you see, far more simply, and absurdly then it could
have been believed, or imagined of D. Andrews, if he had not himself published
this in print. For if this kind of argument may pass for good, A most absurd
argument of M. Andrews.
what has there ever been in the world so wickedly done, that may not be
justified? For howsoever it has been, or may be reprehended by holy, grave, or
learned men, those that list to maintain the fact, may say with this Doctor,
facta cum videamus, verba quid audiamus? And when our Savior Christ said to
the Jews, of those who sat upon the Chair of Moses, Matthew. 23.
Quae dicunt facite etc. Do what they say, but not what they do, might not some
have answered (according to this Doctors rule) facta cum videamus, verba quid
audiamus? But to the end that his absurdity may the better appear, let us
consider a little the manner, and quality of these facts of Justinian. Thus
then passed the matter.

43. Agapetus the Pope, Anast. in Agapeto Hist. miscel. and Paul. Diac. l. 16.
Liberat. in Breuiar. c. 22.
Predecessor to Syluerius, being at Constantinople, and having in the presence
of the Emperor Justinian convinced the heretical Bishop of, that City called
Anthymus, deposed him and ordained Mennas Bishop in his place, wherewith the
heretical and wicked Empress Theodora, wife to Justinian, (and special
Patroness of Anthymus) was so highly offended, Platina Blond. dec. ^. lib. 3.
Niceph. l. 17. cap. 18. Naucler. Gener. 18. anno 510.
that she never rested to seek the restitution of Anthymus, and the expulsion
of Mennas: and to that end ( Agapetus being shortly after deceased) she made
great instance to Siluerius his Successor, to obtain it of him, and being
flatly denied, she practiced his overthrow, and caused him to be falsely accused
by counterfeit letters, to have intelligence with the Goths against the Roman
Empire, The wicked practice of the heretical Empress Theodora against Pope
Syluerius.
and to betray unto them the City of Rome. Upon which pretense he was by her
order taken by Bellisarius, and sent into banishment. Lo then one of the two
facts, which M. Andrews justifies with his rule or maxim of facta cum
videamus, verba quid audiamus? But can there any thing be more shameful, or
more shamefully defended? And so I may likewise say of the other fact, which
passed in this manner.

44. Syluerius the Pope being banished, the wicked Empress intruded Vigilius
into his Seat, upon assured promise on his part, Liberat. i^ Breu. c. 22.
to satisfy her desire. And although Vigilius (as some write) began to publish
Decrees in favor of her heresy, Paul. Diacon. in Ius^iniano. Amoyn, de reb.
gest. Franc. l. 2. cap. 2.

Marian. Scotus and Platina in Vigilio Blond. dec. ^. l. 6.

Petrus de Natal. l. 6. c. 12.

S. Greg. l. 2. ep. 36. Baron. an 547. page 357.


during the life of Siluerius (that is to say, whiles he himself was an
Intruder, and no true Pope) yet such was Gods merciful providence for the
preservation of S. Peter's Seat in the integrity of the Catholic faith, that
Siluerius deceasing shortly after, and Vigilius being by the means of
Bellisarius canonically chosen (whereby he became of an Usurper to be true
Pope, and successor to S. Peter) he utterly changed his mind, and former
course, and not only refused to perform his promise to the Empress, in the
restitution of Anthymus, but also coming afterward to Constantinople (where
the Emperor received him with great honor) he excommunicated her, and other
her adherents, as S. Gregory witnesses, who lived at the same time.

45. And albeit some write that she procured his banishment, Idem An. 538. and
Liberat. in Breniar. c. 24.
yet others affirm (with more probability) that the same happened after her
death, and was procured by the instigation of Theodorus Bishop of Caesarea in
Cappadocia, who was a very firebrand of Schism and sedition, and a perverse
heretic, though he cunningly cloked it a long time, being secretly an
Origenist, and one of the Sect called Acephali (who impugned the Council of
Chalcedon, and were Eutychians;) finally he was the man who in the end wholly
seduced the Emperor, and made him a flat heretic, as I have signified Suplem.
cap. 1. nu. 108. Justinian the Emperor was so ignorant that he could neither
write nor read, and therefore easily deceived by subtle heretics.
before. So that it is no meruail that the Emperor being himself so ignorant,
and unlearned as he was (not having so much skill, as either to writ, or read,
being as Suydas testifies Analphabetus, one that never learned his
Christ-crosse, and therefore easy to be abused by the practice of subtle
Heritiks) it is I say no meruail that he transgressed the bounds, Suydas in
Iustiniano
and limitts of his Imperial authority, Euagr. l. 4. cap. 40. Idem lib. 5.
cap. 1.
as well in these two Acts concerning these two Popes, as also in diverse
others. In which respect Euagrius a famous Historiographer (who wrote his
history at the same time) having signified that God struck him with suddayne
death, The Judgment of Euagri concerning Justinians death, and the state of his
soul.
for punishment of his wickedness, made no doubt to conclude, concerning him, in
these words: Iustinianus cum omnia omnino turba, atque tumultu compleuisset
etc. When Justinian had filled all the world with trouble, and tumult, and
received in the end a due reward for the same, he passed from this life to
endure the penalty thereof in hell, according to Gods just judgment.

46. Now then, these being the facts of Justinian the Emperor, toward these
two Popes, let us ponder a little what reason M. Andrews has to prefer the same
before the Bishop of Patera's censure thereof, which he utterly rejects, as
not meriting any consideration. It is therefore to be considered, that these
facts of the Emperor were no less repugnant to all the Catholic Emperors
his predecessors (of whom I have treated amply See supplem. cap. 1 nu. 90.
and seq.
before) then to his own course and procedings from the beginning of his
Empire, until the time of Siluerius the Pope, as it does evidently appear not
only by his public Decrees and letters written to the Popes John the second,
and Agapetus, and to Epiphanius Bishop of Constantinople (whereof I have spoken
sufficiently already: Anastas. in Agapeto. Blond dec. 1. l. 3. Naucler Genesis 18.
an. 510.
) but also by the great honor he did, and the reverent respect which he bare
to Agapetus the next predecessor to Siluerius, whom as the Historiographers do
testify, he received into Constantinople, cum summa veneratione, with
exceeding great veneration.

47 And when Agapetus had convinced and confounded the Eutichian Bishop
Anthymus, Anastas^ in Aga^eto. Naucle. vbi supra, Nouel. 42.
he (I mean the Emperor) not only renounced the Eutichian heresy, wherewith
he had been before somewhat infected, but also^ humiliauit se, says
Anastasius, Sedi Apostolicae, ac Beatissimum Agapetum adorauit, humbled
himself to the Sea Apostolic, The two facts of Iustiniana a^gainst two Popes,
ouerwayd with ma^ny other of his own in honor and favor of the Sea Apostolik.
and adored the most blessed Agapetus, yea and approved his deposition of the
heretical Bishop Anthymus, and willed him to ordain and consecrate Mennas in
his place, which he also did, as I have signified before. Therefore, I say, if
Justinians fact against Siluerius, and Vigilius be so much to be esteemed (in
M. Andrews his judgment) as to be preferred before the words and judgment of
a learned Bishop of the same ages, why shall not all these former facts of his
(I mean his public Decrees, letters and most humble submission to Agapetus,
all which were conform to the belief, and practice of the whole Church at
that time) why shall they not, I say ouerweygh M. Andrews his words, and
approbation of only two facts done in favor of Heretykes, and by their
instigation, who notably abused Justinian, and circum^ented him, as it is
evident in the histories? May not we therefore with much more reason say of
this Doctor, then he said of the Bishop, facta cum videamus, verba Doctoris
quid audiamus? The importance of the Bishop of Patera his reprehension of
Justinians fact against Pope Syluerius.


48. But now if we weigh the words of the Bishop of Patera, of what weight they
ought to be, yea, and were indeed with Justinian, we shall easily see how
vain, and idle this Doctors words, and conceits are, who so little esteems
them as you have heard. It is therefore to be understood that this Bishop was a
Grecian by birth and habitation, and not bound to Siluerius the Pope by any
temporal obligation, of country, Liberat. in breuiar^ ca. 22.
kindred, benefit, or former acquayntance, (seeing that for ought that is
known to the contrary, they never saw one another before Silver, came to
Patera, which was the place assigned for his banishment) whereupon it
follows, The Bishop of Patera Protested Gods Judgment against Justinian.
that nothing else but mere conscience and the regard of his duty to God, and
to the Roman Sea (even by the instinct of that holy spirit which inspired the
prophets in like cases) did move this Bishop to go to the Emperor, and so
freely, and sharply to reprehend him for his fact, as he did, with
protestation of Gods Judgments against him; for so says Liberatus, Idem^
ibid^.
who then lived and wrote the story: Iudicium Dei, says he, contestatus est de
tantae Sedis Episcopi expulsione. See Card. Apol. page 27.
The Bishop of Patera called to witness (or rather protested) Gods Judgment
against him for expelling the Bishop of so great a Seat: which words being
also related by the Cardinal out of Liberatus, M. Andrews thought good to nipp
out of the Cardinals text, belike because he thought that those words might
make the Reader the rather to reflect upon the prophetical zeal and spirit of
this holy Bishop, and the importance of his grave and serious reprehension of
the Emperor.

49. But whether he did it of negligence or malice, I leave it to God, M.
Andrews discovers an heretical spirit in his Judgment of Justinians fact.
and his own conscience to judge, and will only say of him, that preferring,
as he does the inconsiderate act of the ignorant, and unlearned Emperor
(misled by heretics) before the zealous, and grave speech and cesu^e of a
Catholic, and learned Bishop, he sufficiently discovers his own heretical
spirit, especially seeing that he could not but see in Libera^us, of what
moment, and weight the Bishops words were, which appears by the notable
effect that they wrought in the Emperor himself, Liberat. vbi supra.
who was moved thereby to recall his fact^ as Liberatus testifies in these
words: Quem audiens Imperato^^ reuocari Roman Silu^rium (...) etc. The Emperor
hearing the Bishop of Pater^; Justinian revoked his sentence against Pope
Siluerius upon the reprehensi^ given him by the Bishop of Patera.
commanded Siluerius, to be called back to Rome, and the matter to be examined
and tried, conce^ning his letters (meaning the letters whereof he had been
falsely accused) visi appr^^^^^tur ab ipso fuisse scriptu^^ in quacumque
Cauitate Episcop degeret etc. to the end that if it were proved that he had
written them, he might liue^ or remain Bishop in any other City, and if they
were found to be false, then he might be restored to his seat. Thus says
Liberatus, wherein it is to be noted, that although the Emperor upon the
Bishops admonition, commanded that the matters whereof Siluerius was accused,
should be better examined; yet he did not presume to ordain, that in case he
should be found guilty, he should be deprived of his Dignity, but only that
(for the security of the City of Rome) he should live in any other City, and
there exercise his function and charge.

50. And Liberatus does also further declare, that as Siluerius was returning
to Rome according to the Emperors order, Bellisarius caused him (at the
instance of Vigilius, Idem ibidem.
who then usurped his Seat) to be delivered into the hands of two of Vigilius
his servants, in whose custody he perished shortly after with famine and
misery, in an Island called Palmaria; whereby it appears how the Emperors
reuocation of his fact was frustrated, to wit, not by his own fault, but by
the sinister practice of his officers, and ministers, who by the help of the
wicked Empress Theodora, easily deluded him. So that M. Andrews might learn
by this relation of Liberatus how potent were the Bishops words, which he so
little esteems; and the reader may note as well M. Andrews his folly, M.
Andrews hi^ folly in approving an act which the author of it did after disallow
and repent.
as his bad conscience: his folly, in that he makes more account of the
temerarious, and erroneous act of the Emperor (which he himself acknowledged
for such, and recalled) then of the Bishops admonition, which made him see and
repent his error; his bad conscience, in that he dissembled all this, though
he could not but see it in Liberatus^ for no man can imagine that he would be
so negligent as to answer to this objection of Cardinal Bellarmine, and not
to search the Author alleged by the Cardinal, to see whether there were any
corruption in the allegation; and therefore thou may see, good Reader, with
what sincerity he uses to treat matters of Religion (though the same import no
less then the eternal salvation, The bad conscience of M. Andrews in
dissembling the truth which he could not but see in Liberatus.
or damnation of men's souls) not caring what he says or dissembleth so that
he may shift of the matter for the time with some show of probability, whereof
we shall see much more experience hereafter in him, as we have already seen
the like in M. Barlow. For truly it is hard to say whether of them is more
fraudulent, and absurd in this kind.

51. In the mean time two things are evident by this which has been here
debated; the one, how weakly M. Andrews argues when he says, that the
Emperor Justinian showed himself in these two acts to be superior to the Pope
aliqua exparte, for it may well be granted in some sense, A weak and foolish
argument of M. Andrews, to prove Justinian superior to 2. Popes.
and he gain nothing by it, seeing the like may be said of Nero, who put to
death S. Peter, and S. Paul; of Herod, who killed S. John Baptist; and of
Pilate, who gave sentence of death against Christ, for they and all other
persecutors of Gods Church (yea Justinian also himself in the end of his reign
when he declared himself an heretic, and expelled Catholic Bishops from their
seats, M. Andrews must deuyse new answers to the Cardinal, concerning the law
inter Claras, and the Bishop of Patera his reprehension of Justinian.
because they would not subscribe to his heresies) they all, I say, showed
themselves to be Superiors ( aliqua ex part) over those whom they killed,
banished, and persecuted, having by Gods permission power over them, and
exercysing the same power upon them: nevertheless I hope no good Christian man
will say that because they did this, ergo, it was lawfully done, which must
either be the conclusion of M. Andrews his argument a facto, or else he
concludes nothing to the purpose.

52. The other thing which I say is clear by the premises, is, that as well
the testimony of the Bishop of Patera, produced by the Cardinal, as also the
other, grounded upon the law inter Claras (alleged both by the Cardinal, and
by me) are good, and solid proofs for the Popes Universal authority over the
Church of God, notwithstanding the idle exceptions of M. Andrews against the
same, and therefore he must now deuyse some other answer thereto, or seek some
other shift, seeing this has failed him, and served to no other purpose, but
to show his conformity of spirit, rather with the heretics, who deceived and
seduced Justinian in the banishment of two Popes, then with such Catholic and
holy Bishops, as the Bishop of Patera, or those others, M. Andrews his words of
the Cardinal justly retorted upon himself.
whose advise he used in making his Catholic laws, in favor and honor of
the Sea Apostolic. Finally, thou see, good Reader, that it may be justly
said of him, as he said of the Cardinal, to wit that he might have abstayned
from mentioning Justinian, and the law inter Claras, seeing that he has gained
thereby nothing else, but to manifest his own folly to bewray the weakness of
his cause, and to fortify ours.

THE ANSWERS OF M. ANDREWS TO Certain places of the Council of Calcedon are
examined, and confuted. His notable fraud in diverse things, and especially in
the allegation of a Canon of that Council is discovered: and the supreme
authority of the Sea Apostolic clearly proved out of the same Council, and
Canon.
CHAP. II.
IN the second Chapter of my Supplement I have produced certain clear
testimonies out of the Council of Calcedon, Supplem: cap. 2. nu^ 15 and 16.
Apolog. Car Bellow, page 92. cap. 7.
for the Popes Universal, and Supreme authority over the Church of God, and
Cardinal Bellarmin also in his Apology has alleged the same; Whether the
Popes authority be established, or overthrown by the council of Calcedon.
whereto M. Andrews has framed an Answer, such a one as it is, and so
perhaps may seem to some to have answered us both. In which respect I think
good to examine what he says concerning that matter, the rather because he
holds it for a paradoxe in the Cardinal, to affirm that the Popes Supremacy
is manifestly gathered out of that Council, and adds further, that the
Cardinals authority is not yet so great in the world, as to make men believe
that the Popes Primacy is established by that which they know does specially
overthrow it. Andr. page 170. cap. 7.. Quod ibi.
So says M. Andrews; and therefore this point seems to me right worthy to
be discussed.

2. Thus then he says: Legate action vna totaventilatum etc. Ibidem.
Let a man read the matter debated in one whole action (of the Council) and
renewed, and confirmed in another, and finally decreed by a Canon, that the
privileges of the Bishop of Constantinople shall be, ne maiora, sed aequalia per
omnia, not greater, but equal in all things with the privileges of the Bishop
of Rome, the Roman Legates crying in vain against it, and the Bishop of Rome
himself s^ying also afterward by his letters in vain to the Emperor,
Empress, and Anatolius. Thus says M. Andrews; wherein two things specially
are to be noted for the present (for afterward I will ad a third:) one is,
that the Council granted by that Canon to the Bishop of Constantinople equal
privileges, per omnia, in all respects, with the Bishop of Rome: The other
that Pope Leo, and his Legates resisted, and contradicted it in vain.

3. For the first, whereas he says that the Council of Calcedon did by that
Canon give to the Bishop of Constantinople, M. Andrews his shameless dealing.
ne maiora, sed aequalia per omnia priuilegia, not greater privileges, but
equal in all things with the Bishop of Rome (as though the Council had
exempted the Church, and Bishop of Constantinople from subjection to the Roman
Sea, for, par in parem non habet potestatem, an equal has no authority, or
power over his equal) truly I must needs say, that if M. Andrews had any care
what he says, or spark of shame, he would not have affirmed this so resolutly
as he has done, seeing that the very words, and text of the Canon it self do
euince the contrary. In which respect he thought good to give us only some
patches and pieces thereof with his corrupt sense, and understanding of it, and
not to lay down the Canon it self, whereof the drift, and whole scope is no
other, but to give to the Bishop of Constantinople the second place after Rome,
before the Bishops of Alexandria, Antioch, and Jerusalem, which Churches in
former times had always had the precedence before the Church of
Constantinople. Council. Chalced. Act. 15. Can. 28.


4. The words of the Canon are these: Sanctorum Patrum decreta vbique sequentes
etc. Following every where the decrees of the holy Fathers, and acknowledging
the Canon of an hundredth and 50. Bishops, which was lately read, we do also
decree, and determine the same, concerning the privileges of the Church of
Constantinople, which is new Rome. For the Fathers did worthily give
privileges to the Throne of old Rome, because that City did raygne (or had
the Empire) and the 150. Bishops most beloved of God, being moved with the same
consideration, gave equal privileges to the most holy Throne of new Rome,
judging rightly, that the City which is honored as well with the Empire, as
with the Senate, and does enjoy equal privileges with the most ancient Queen
Rome, should be also extolled, and magnifyed, as she is, even in
Ecclesiastical things, secundam post illam existentem, being the second after
her etc.

5. Thus says the Canon, adding also certain privileges which were in
particular granted to the Church of Constantinople, whereof I shall have
occasion to speak after a while, when I shall first have explicated this that
I have laid down already, which, as you hane seen, has no other sense, or
meaning, then to renew, or confirm a former Canon pretended to be made by 150.
Bishops in the Council of Constantinople some 60. years before, which Canon
was a confirmation of the Decrees of the Council of Nice, not only concerning
matters of faith, but also touching the limits, and jurisdiction of certain
Metropolitan Churches, yet with this exception in favor of the Church of
Constantinople, Council. Constant. Can. ^.
that it should have Primatus honor^m post Romanum Episcopum, propterea quod
sit noua Roma, the honor of Primacy after the Bishop of Rome, because it is
new Rome.

The sense and meaning of the Canon of the Council of Call. alleged by M.
Andrews.
6. This then being the effect of that Canon of the council of Constantinople,
it is clear that this other of the Council of Calcedon which renewed, and
confirmed it, was also to the same purpose, to wit, to give to the Church of
Constantinople the second place after the Roman, that is to say, the
pre-eminence before the Churches of Alexandria, and Antioch, which according to
the Canons of the Council of Nice, had the second, and third place after the
Church of Rome; and this, I say, is evident in the Canon it self alleged by
M. Andrews, where it is said expressly of the Church of Constantinople, Can. 28.
that it should be magnified, and extolled as old Rome was, secundam post illam
existentem, being the sesecond after her, which clause was yet more clearly
expressed in the same Canon, as it was related in the Council the day after it
was made in these words, Council. Calced. Act. 16.
Et in Ecclesiasticis sicut illa maiestatem habere negotijs, and secundam post
illam existere, that is to say, we judged it convenient that the City of
Constantinople should have a Majesty in Ecclesiastical affairs, Relatio
Synodi ad Leon. in fine Cocil.
as Rome has, and be the second after her; besides, that the relation which
the whole Council of Calcedon made to Pope Leo of the substance, and effect of
this Canon, may put the matter out of all doubt, declaring it thus:
Confirmauimus autem, and centum quinquaginta sanctorum Patru^ regulam etc. We
have also confirmed the rule, or Cano^ of the 150. holy Fathers, which were
assembled in Constantinople, under Theodosius the elder of pious memory,
whereby it was ordained, that after that most holy, and Apostolical Seat, the
Church of Constantinople should have the honor, which is ordained to be the
second etc. Thus wrote the whole Council of Calcedon to Pope Leo.

7. Now then can any thing be more clear then that the drift, and meaning of
that Canon is no other then to give the second place to the Church of
Constantinople, after the Sea Apostolic? Why then does M. Andrews affirm so
confidently, that this Cano^ made the^ equal in all things? M. Andrews
corrupts the text of the Canon, adding unto it per omnia.
For although it gives to the Bishop of Constantinople equal privileges with
the Bishop of Rome, yet it neither says nor means that their privileges
should be equal in all things or in all respects, as M. Andrews corruptly, and
fraudule^tly affirms in a different Letter, as though he laid down the very
words of the Cano^. Besides that, the equality mentioned in the Canon, is
sufficiently explicated by the Canon it self, which having signified that the
Fathers in that Council thought good to grant the second place unto the Church
of Constantinople, and to give it equal privileges with the Church of Rome,
adds presently (for the explication thereof) vt and Ponticae, and As^anae,
and Thraciae Dioecesis Metropolitani etc. That the Metropolitans of Pontus,
Asia, and Thracia, and also the Bishopps of the same Diocese amongst the
Barbarous (so were all called, that were no Graecians) should be ordained by
the Bishops of Constantinople.

8. So says the Canon, giving to understand that whereas the Church of
Constantinople had been in times past but a private Bishopric (and subject to
Heraclea) it should hereafter be not only a Metropolitan, What manner of
Equality the Church of Constantinople should have with the Roman Church.
but also a Patriarchall Sea, and have Metropolitans under it, yea and that as
the Church of Rome was the chief Church of the West, so also the Church of
Constantinople (being now made the second after Rome) should be the chief
Church of the East, and preferred before the Patriarchall Seas of Alexandria,
Antioch, and Jerusalem, yet with this evident exception, and reservation, that
nevertheless it should be still inferior to the Roman Sea, being the second
after it, that is to say, it should have the same place and privilege that the
Church of Alexandria had in former times, which though it was the chief Church
of the East, and the second after Rome, Sozom. hist. l. 3. cap. 7.
yet was always inferior and subject thereto, as it is evident by the appeal
of the famous Athanasius Bishop of that Sea, to Pope Julius the first of that
name, above an hundredth years before the Counsel of Calcedo^.

What pre-eminence the Church of Co^sta^tinople sought to have in the Counsel
of Calcedon.
9. Therefore the pre-eminence which the Church of Constantinople was to have by
this Canon, was to be preferred before the Churches of Alexandria and Antioch:
and the equality that it was to have with Rome, was no other, but to be a
Patriarchall Sea, and head of all the Patriarchall, and Metropolitan Churches
of the East, as Rome was in the West, yet with reseruatio^ of the right of
Primacy due to the Roman Sea. Besides that, it is to be noted that the Greek
word (...) which in our latin Copies is translated aequalis, does signify also
similis, like, not only in profane Authors (as every man may see in the
Thesaurus of Henricus Stephanus) but also in diverse places of holy Scripture,
both in the old and new Testament. And he that list to see more to this
purpose, may read the Parallel of Tortus, and his Tortor, written against M. D.
Andrews, by the Reverend and Learned Father Androas Eudaemon-Ioannes, who has
sufficiently handled, See Paral. Torti. ac Tort. cap. 4. p. 157. edit. Colon,
1611.
and explicated this point, and has also produced a clear testimony out of
Theodorus Balsamon a very learned Grecian, and Patriarch of Antioch, to prove
that the mention of paria priuilegia, equal privileges granted to the Church
of Constantinople in the Counsel of Calcedo^, does not any way derogate from
the supreme dignity of the Roman Sea.

10. Whereto I also add, that the word aequalis in the Scripture does not
always signify a true, and just Equality in all respects, but somtymes also an
Equality in a certain proportion, How Equality is understood sometimes in the
Scriptures.
as in the Apostle to the Corinthians, who exhorts them to supply the
temporal wants, and necessityes of the poor, with their store, and
abundance, vt fiat aequalitas, says he, that there may be an equality,
meaning an equality in a certain similitude, and proportion, as it appears
by that which he adds for the further explication thereof, saying: sicut
scriptum est, qui mulium non abundauit, and qui modicum non minorauit, as it is
written, he which gathered much, 2. Cor. 8.
had no more, then was necessary for him, and, he that gathered little, had no
less. So says the Apostle, alluding to the history in Exodus of those who
gathered Manna in different quantity, Exodus 18.
and yet found that they had it in a kind of equality (because every one had so
much as was needful for him, See S. Tho. in ep. 2. ad Cor. cap. 8.
and no more) so that equality does not signify here an Arithmeticall equality
(as the Philosophers, Item Joan. Gagnaeus in hunc locum.
and Schoolmen term it) which is equal in every respect, and is used in
commutatiue Justice, that is to say, in buying, and selling and the like
(wherein the just and true value of every thing is equally considered) but a
Geometrical equality, keeping only a certain proportion according to
distributive Justice, which (as Aristotle, and the Schoolmen do teach) does
always respect equality in the distribution of honors, privileges, and
rewards; yet so, as due proportion be observed correspondent to the different
dignity and quality of every one. Two kinds of equality correspo^ding to two
kinds of Justice.
And therefore when two persons of different quality and degree (as the
Captain, and his soldier) are to be rewarded for some one service to the
common wealth, their rewards, or privileges are truly equal, when they are
privileged, Aristot. Ethic. 5. S. Thom. 2.2. q. 16.
and rewarded in a due proportion to their degrees, without impeachment to the
difference that is betwixt them. And so a subject may be said to have equal
privileges with his King, and yet be his subject still: and in this manner the
words equal, and equality are to be understood in the Counsel of Calcedo^ (as
is evident by the Cano^ it self) wherein you see, it was ordained that the
Bishop of Constantinople should have equal privileges with the Bishop of
Rome, and yet have the second place after him.

11. But now to deal somewhat more liberally with M. Andrews in this point,
let us put the case that the Fathers in the Council of Calcedon did mean to
give to the Church of Constantinople that equality with the Roman sea, The
Canon which granted the privileges to the Church of Constantinople abrogated
by Pope Leo.
which he affirms; should he, trow you, gain any thing thereby? Or could he
any way prejudice the universal, and supreme authority, either of Pope Leo at
that time, or of the other Popes his Successors ever since? Truly no; but
rather should notably confirm their primacy, and utterly overthrow his own
cause, seeing that it is most evident, that the authority of Pope Leo was such,
that his only opposition to that Canon, and his abrogation thereof sufficed to
overthrow, and disanull it; which I will take a little pains to prove by the
whole course, and practice of the Church, even from that Council, until the
ruin of the Greek Church and Empire, which though it be needless in respect
of the learned, yet I hope it will not be altogether fruitles to the more
ignorant, and unlearned, and may serve for an abundant conviction of M.
Andrews his impudency, and malice, who is not ashamed to avouch such a manifest
falsehood, and impugn such a known truth, as he does.

12. To this purpose I wish it to be noted, what Gelasius (who lived at the
same time, and was Pope about 30. years after Leo) wrote to the Bishops of
Dardania, Four things to be noted in an Epistle of Pope Gelasius for the
inualidity of the Cano^.
concerning a schism raised by Acatius Bishop of Constantinople in the time of
Pope Felix his Predecessor, in which Epistle he signifies 4. things specially
to be noted for this purpose. First, that the Emperor Martian (though he had
made great instance to Pope Leo for the advancement of the Church of
Constantinople, yet) did highly praise, and commend the said Pope, for that he
would not by any means suffer the rules of the Canons to be violated in that
point. Secondly, that Anatolius the Bishop of Constantinople, in whose favor
that Canon was made (being most severely reprehended by Pope Leo for his
ambitious attempt) excused himself, laying the fault upon the Clergy of
Constantinople, and affirming, in Apostolici Praesulis totum positum potestate,
that all the matter was in the power of the Apostolical Prelate, that is to
say of Pope Leo. Thirdly, that the Emperor Leo who succeeded Martian before
Pope Leo dyed, attempting within a few years after to obtain the same
privileges for the Church of Co^sta^tinople in the time of Pope Simplicius,
was flatly denied them, and that it was declared unto him by Probus Bishop of
Canusium the Popes Legate, nullatenus posse tentari, that it might by no means
be attempted.

13. Finally Gelasius also signifies, that Acatius Bishop of Constantinople,
who raised the Schism whereof he writes, and was therefore excommunicated by
Pope Felix, was himself so subject, and obedient to the Roman Sea, before he
fell into that schism, that he procured the Pope to censure, and deprive the
Bishops of Alexandria, and Antioch, yea and was himself executor of the Popes
sentence against them, and that therefore falling also himself afterward into
the fellowship of the condemned Bishops (upon whom he had executed the Popes
sentence of condemnation) he deserved no less to be condemned then they. All
this witnesses Gelasius; whereby it appears evidently that from the time of
the Council of Calcedon to his reign, which was about 40. years, the Canon
whereupon M. Andrews relyeth, was not held to be of any weight, for the
exemption of the Church of Constantinople from the subjection of the Church to
the Roman Sea. For if the Canon had then had any such force, neither would the
Emperor Martian have hyghly commended Pope Leo for resisting it, nor Anatolius
(in whose favor it was made) would have excused himself for procuring it, and
acknowledged the matter to depend wholly upon Pope Leo's determination: neither
should Leo the Emperor have needed to have renewed that suit to Pope
Simplicius; neither yet would Acatius have yielded, as he did, for a time, to
obey the Pope, and to execute his sentence upon other Grecian Bishops.

14. Furthermore albeit this schism raised by Acatius continued in the Church
of Constantinople some years after his death (during the reign of two
Heretical Emperors, The East Church acknowledged to be subject to the Sea of
Rome.
to wit Zeno, and Anastasius, which was about 40. years) yet diverse Grecian,
and Oriental Bishops which were partakers of the said schism, made earnest,
and humble suit in the mean time to Pope Symmachus in a general, and common
letter (with the title, or superscription of Ecclesia Orientalis etc.) to be
restored to the union of the Roman Sea, Ep. orient. Episcop. ad Symmachu^. To.
2. Council.
acknowledging Symmachus not only to be the true Successor of S. Peter, Prince
of the Apostles, but also to feed Christ's sheep committed to his charge per
totum habitabilem mundum, throughout the whole habitable world. And as soon as
the wicked Emperor Anastasius was dead (who was stricken, by Gods just
judgment, with a thunderbolt) and the worthy, and Catholic Emperor Justinius
chosen in his place, as well Justinius himself, as also a Synod of Bishops
assembled in Constantinople, together with John Bishop of that Sea, demanded
of Pope Hormisdas (who succeeded Symmachus) to be reconciled to the Sea
Apostolik; and afterward the said Bishop of Constantinople sent a profession
of his faith to Hormisdas, Exemplar libelli Joan. Ep. Co^stantin. To. 2. Council.
acknowledging that the Catholic Religion is always kept inviolable, and
sincere in the Apostolical and Roman Sea, by reason of Christ's promise to S.
Peter, when he said, Tu es Petrus, and super hanc petram etc.

15. Moreover he further protested that he would during his life, admit and
follow all the doctrine, and decrees of that Sea, and remain in the communion
thereof; In qua, says he, est integra Christianae Religionis, and perfecta
soliditas, wherein there is sincere^ and perfect solidity of the Christian
Religion. Finally, having promised to raze the name, Vide etiam Ep. Iustini
Imperat. ad Hormisdam ^ P. To. 20. Council.
and memory of Acatius (who had been cause of the former schism) out of the
holy Tables (that is to say out of the number, and Catalogue of the Bishops of
Constantinople, which was wont to be read in the time of the divine Mysteries)
he concluded, that if he should at any time vary from this his profession, he
understood himself to be comprehended in the number of those whom he had
anathematiz^d, and condemned. This I have laid down the more largely, to the
end we may consider here, whether this Bishop of Constantinople, and the other
Grecian, The Primacy of the Roman Sea acknowledged by the Greek Church, to be
grounded upon the express words of Christ.
and Oriental Bishops, that is to say, all the Greek Church, together with
the most Catholic Emperor Justinius (all which so earnestly sought to be
reconcyl^d to the union and obedience of Pope Hormisdas) whether they, I say,
had not more regard to the Primacy of the Apostolical Roman Sea, grounded (as
themselves confessed) upon the express words, and commission of our Savior to
S. Peter, then to the pretended, and supposed equality of privileges which M.
Andrews says, were granted to the Church of Constantinople by that Canon of
the Council of Calcedon.

16. The like may be said, Libe^at. in Breu^ario c. 22. Nicephor. li. 17. c. 9.
Anastas. in Agapeto. Paul Diacon. l. 16.
and clearly verifyed in the ensuing ages, for otherwise why would Justinian
the Emperor (who, as it is evident in the histories, and in his own decrees,
favored exceedingly the Bishops and Church of Constantinople) suffer Pope
Agapetus to depose Anthymus Bishop of that Sea, as I have signified before? Why
did not either he, or the heretical Empress Theodora his wife, or at least
Anthymus himself stand upon the equality granted by the Council of Calcedon?
Nicepho. li. 17. c. 26. vide etiam Constit. Vigilij apud Binium to. 2. Council.
p. 5^2. Baron. An. 551.552. and 553.
Or how can it be imagined that Theodora would afterward labor by all means
possible, as she did, perfas, and nefas, to induce the two Popes Siluerius and
Vigilius to the restitution of Anthymus, if she had thought, that they had no
jurisdiction over him, by reason of that Canon? Moreover Mennas Bishop of
Constantinople being excommunicated together with Theodorus Bishop of Caesarea
in Cappadocia by Pope Vigilius, pretended not this Canon, or the equality
supposed by M. Andrews, but submitted himself, as also Theodorus did, to the
authority of the Roman Sea, craving absolution, and restitution to the
communion thereof.

17. Also Eutychias who succeeded Mennas, claimed so little privilege for
himself, or his Sea by this Canon, Ep. Eutychij ad Vigilium To. 2. Council. in
Council. 5. Generali collat. 2.
that when the fifth General Council was to be assembled, and held there, he
wrote to Vigilius the Pope, requesting him that there might be an Assembly^ and
conference had, praesidente nobil, says he, vestra Be^atitudine, your
Beatitude being our president. And although some years afterward John Bishop
of Constantinople made a new schisme^ and opposed himself to the Roman Sea,
taking upon him the title of Universal Bishop (which schism lasted only
during his life) yet it is evident by the Epistle of Pope Pelagi^s written to
him, ^p. 8. Pelag. To. 2. Council.
and to the Schismatic Synod gathered by him, that as well he himself, as
his predecessor, non semel, sed saepissim^, not once, but very often had written
to the Sea Apostolic protesting that if they had at any time presumed to do
any thing against the authority of the said Sea, they acknowledged themselves
to be anathematized, or accursed by their own sentence.

18. And after the death of the said John, S. Gregory the great in an Epistle
of his to a Sicilian Bishop, testifies that the Bishop of Constantinople in
his time being accused of a great delict, acknowledged himself to be subject to
the censure, or chastisment of the Sea Apostolik, in case he were guilty;
whereupon S. Gregory says, S. Greg. lib. 7^ ^p. 65^
Nam quod se dicit Sedi Apostolicae subijci, siqua culpa in Episcopis inuenitur
etc. For whereas he says that he is subject to the Sea Apostolik, if any fault
be found in the Bishops, I know not who is not subject unto it. Idem ibid. ep.
64.
And in another epistle to the same Bishop, he says: Quis dubitet eam Sedi
Apostolicae subiectam etc. Who doubts but that the Church of Constantinople
is subject to the Sea Apostolyke, which as well the most pious Emperor; as
Eusebius Bishop thereof do continually profess? So he, wherein it is to be
noted that these Bishops of Constantinople professed this their obedience to
the Roman Sea, at such time as the Church of Rome was most miserably oppressed
by the tyranny of the Goths, and Longobards, in such sort, that it would have
been utterly contemned (especially by the Greek Church) if it had usurped a
greater authority, then was generally believed to be due unto it, and to have
been given by our Savior to S. Peter, and his Successors.

19. To this may be added the excommunication, and deposition of many Bishops
of Constantinople by Bishops of Rome, Many Bishops of Constantinople deposed by
the Popes of Rome.
as it appears in an Epistle of Pope Nicolas the first to the Emperor
Michael, wherein he names 8. Bishops of that Sea deposed by his predecessors;
and afterward he himself also gave sentence of excommunication, and deposition
against Photius Bishop of the same Sea, which sentence Basilius the Emperor
executed for fear of incurring the censures of the Sea Apostolic, Ep. Nicolai
1. ad Michael. Imperat.
as he himself testified in the 8. general Council. And when Photius was
afterward by his own subtle practice restored to his Sea, he was again
deposed by Pope Stephanus: To. 4. council in 8. Synodo gener. in appendice ex
Act. 6.
and such was the reverence, and respect that the Clergy, and Nobility of
Constantinople bare to the Sea Apostolic, that they would not admit one of the
blood Royal called Stephanus to succeed Photius, until they had written to
the Pope to have his confirmation thereof. Moreover three general Councels, to
wit the 6.7. and 8. being after S. Gregoryes time assembled, and held in
Greece, and two of them in Constantinople it self, the Popes Legates, and not
the Bishop of Constantinople were Presidents thereof, which neither the Greek
Emperors nor those Bishops would have permitted, if they had been persuaded
that the Council of Chalcedon had exempted the Church of Constantinople from
the Popes Jurisdiction, or made the same equal with the Roman Church.

20. And albeit after S. Gregory's time diverse heretical Emperors, and the
Bishops of Constantinople, during their reign, caused diverse schisms, and
separated them selves from the union of the Roman Sea, yet when Catholic
Emperors, and Bishops succeeded, they returned to the union, and obedience
thereof; in so much that not only the Ambassadors of the Emperor Petrus
Altisiodorensis, but also the two Patriarchs of Constantinople, S. Antonin.
Tit. ^9. cap. 1.. 6. Naucler. gener. 41. Blood. lib. 6. dec. 2. in fine.
Platina in vita Innocen. 3. To. 3. Council. in Concilio Lateran.
and Jerusalem, with the Delegates of the two other Patriarks of Alexandria,
and Antioch, came to the great Council of Lateran held at Rome in the year of
our Lord 1215. and subscrybed to the Catholic doctrine concerning the
Universal Authority, and Primacy of the Sea Apostolic.

21. And again 200. years after in the year 1459. the Greek Emperor
Ioannes Paleologus, and Joseph Bishop of Constantinople, together with the
Legates of the other 3. Patriarchs of Alexandria, Antioch, and Jerusalem,
besides many Grecian Bishops, Abbots, and other learned Prelates, See Suplem.
cap. 2. n^. 1. and 2.
came to a General Council held by Pope Eugenius at Florence, and there
having first maturely debated amongst themselves the question of the Popes
Supremacy according to the testimonies not only of the holy Scriptures, S.
Antoninus Tit. 22. cap. 13.. 1.2. and seq. Item Council. Florentin. sess. vlt.
but also of the ancient Greek Fathers, they received, and with their hands
and seals confirmed the Catholic doctrine, as well concerning that point, as
all other wherein they had in the time of the former Schisms dissented from
the Roman Church, as I have signified more at large in the first Chapter of my
Supplement, where I proposed also to be considered, See Suplem. cap. 1. nu.
114. and 115.
that presently after their revolt from this solemn union made at Florence,
God punished the Empire, and Church of Constantinople with that lamentable, and
miserable captivity wherein it has ever since remained.

The just Judgments of God upon the Church of Constantinople.
22. And thereto I will now also add for the conclusion of this point, what S.
Antoninus observes in his history concerning the just Judgments of God upon
the Church of Constantinople, before the fall of the Greek Empire, to wit,
that whereas the Bishops of that Sea had diverse times most ambitiously, and
proudly impugned the authority of the Roman Church, by the favor, and help of
the heretical Emperors, God so disposed, that in the end the said Emperors
became the instruments of his justice, to punish their pride, especially from
the time of the Emperor Constantin called Monomachus, who though in despyte,
and hatred of the Roman Church, he graced the Bishop of Constantinople called
Michael, not only with extraordinary privileges, and ensygnes of honor (which
he granted as well to his person and successors, as to his Sea) but also with
the title of Universal Patriarch of the whole world, and all Papal authority
(leading also his horse by the bridle to his palace, because he had understood
that the Emperors of the West had done the like honor, and service to some
Popes) nevertheless perceauing afterward that the people did, by this occasion,
bear such reverence, and respect to Michael, that the Imperial state might be
endangered (as he conceived) in case any controversy should fall out betwixt
the Church, and the Empire, he publicly degraded, and disgraced him, depriving
him of all those ensigns, tytles, and privileges, wherewith either he, or any
other of the Emperors his predecessors had endowed the Church, or Bishops of
Constantinople.

23. And from that time forward, as S. Antoninus testifies, the Patriarks of
that Sea became very slaves to the heretical Emperors, and were put out, and
in by them at their pleasure, whiles in the mean time the Roman Church
ouercomming all her enemies, tryumphed over the malice, and tyranny of her
oppressors, enjoying the stability, security, and majesty which she still
possesses; wherein the providence and justice of Almighty God is evidently
seen, Matthew. 16.
as well in conseruing the Sea Apostolic according to his promise to S. Peter,
as also in depressing, and punishing the pride of the Bishops of
Constantinople, who had so often maliciously impugned the same, which may serve
for a Caveat to other rebellious Children of the Church. For, Eccli. 5.
although Almighty God is patiens redditor, a slow paymaster, yet he pays
home in the end; and as Valerius says, Valor. Maxim. l. 1. cap. 1.
tarditatem supplicij grauitate compensat, he recompenseth the slownes of his
punishment, with the weight, or grieuousnes thereof. This I have thought good
to touch here by the way, upon so good an occasion, and will now conclude
concerning M. Andrews his Canon, alleged out of the Council of Calcedon.

24. Therefore I say that it being evident by all this discourse, that the said
Canon was never able to equal the Church of Constantinople with the Roman Sea
(to which end M. Andrews says it was enacted) he must needs coufesse, that
either there was no such Canon at all, to the purpose that he mentions, or
else that the small force, and authority thereof may serve for an evident
argument of the supreme power, and authority of Pope Leo, and his successors,
seeing that their only resistance, and contradiction sufficed to overthrow it,
notwithstanding the great authority of the Council of Calcedon which ordained
it. Andr. cap. 7. p. 170.
Whereby it also appears how vainly and untruly he says, that Pope Leo
contradicted it in vain; yea, and which is more absurd, that he made suite,
Bad dealing of M. Andrews.
and intercession in vain, Frustra (says he) Romano ipso Pontifice apud
Augustum, Augustam, and Anatolium per litteras suas intercedente; The Bishop of
Rome himself making intercession, or sueing in vain by his letters to the
Emperor, the Empress, and Anatolius. So that you see, he makes Pope Leo's
case very desperate, and his authority very feeble, seeing that he was feign to
make such intercession, and suite, not only to the Emperor and Empress, but
also to Anatolius himself.

25. Therefore albeit I am not ignorant that intercedere has diverse senses,
and amongst the rest signifies to withstand, prohibit, or hinder a thing
proposed or intended; and that some perhaps may say that M. Andrews uses it
here in that sense: yet because it signifies also to make intercession, and
suite, and is so used commonly in Ecclesiastical Authors, and will be so
understood in this place by every common Reader; yea and for that M. Andrews
himself so takes, and uses it diverse p. 177. and p. 35.. de Inuocatione. and
p. 45. ^ Locus.
times, and would be loath (no doubt) to have men think that Pope Leo did, or
durst oppose himself to the Emperor, and Empress (but rather that in this
case he behaved himself toward them, and Anatolius as an humble suppliant,
and yet all in vain) therefore I say, I cannot let this point pass
unexamined, to the end thou may see, Liberat. in Breuiar. cap 13. Ep. Leo.
53.54.55.59.70.71.
good Reader, as well M. Andrews his vanity, as also what kind of suit and
intercession Pope Leo made unto these whom he names, and what effect, and
success it had with them. But first I think it not amiss to declare here how
this Canon was made in that Council, and why it was contradicted by the Legates
of Pope Leo, How the Canon for the B. of Constantinoples priuiledgs was made.
and afterward disanulled by Leo himself.

26. Therefore it is to be understood that Anatolius then Bishop of
Constantinople, ambitiously thirsting after his own promotion (namely to be
preferred before the Bishops of Alexandria, and Antioch, and considering that
Dioscorus Bishop of Alexandria was deposed by the Council for heresy, and the
Bishop of Antioch much disgraced for having adhered to Dioscorus, thought that
a good opportunity was offered him to accomplish his desire, and thereupon
practiced with the Bishops in the Council for the furtherance of his pretense,
and having gained so many of them, that it seemed to him their very number, and
authority, might extort the consent of the rest (yea of the Popes Legates
themselves) procured, that when the last session of the Council was ended, and
as well the Judges, or Senate, as the Legates were departed, all the Bishops of
his faction either remained behynd, or else after their departure returned
again to the place of the assembly, and there made the Canon whereof we now
treat. Whereupon the Legates having notice of it, Council. Calced. act. 16.
caused the whole Council to be assembled again the next day, and finding
Anatolius, and his faction (who were the far greater part of the Council)
resolute in their determination, protested their own opposition, and
contradiction to the Canon, as well in respect, that it was repugnant to the
Council of Nice, as also for that the other Concerning the inualidity of this
Canon see Baron. To. 4. page 4^3. an. 381. edit. Romae an. 1593.
Canon which was pretended to be made in the Council of Constantinople to the
same effect, was not to be found amongst the Canons of the said Council sent
to Rome, neither had been ever put in practice by the Bishops of
Constantinople.

27. Finally they reserved the determination of the matter to Pope Leo
himself, whom they called Apostolicum Virum, Vniuersalis Ecclesiae Papam. The
Apostolical man, and Pope of the Universal Church, vt ipse, say they, aut de
suae Sedis iniuria, aut de Canonum euersione possit far sententiam. That he
may give sentence either of the injury done to his Sea ( by the abuse of his
Legates) or of the breach of the Canons. Relat. Synodi ad Leo. in fine Council.
Thus said the Legates; signifying that it was in his hands, and power to
ratify, or abrogate as well this Canon, as all the other Canons of that
Counsel, Leo. ep. 61. ad Episcop. in Synodo Chal. congreg. Item ep. 55.70. and
71.
which also the whole Council acknowledged sufficiently in a common letter
written to him, wherein they craved of him the ratification of this Canon, most
humbly, and instantly, (as it will appear hereafter) which nevertheless he
flatly denied, confirming only the condemnation, and deposition of Dioscorus,
and the rest of their decrees concerning matters of faith (for the which only
he said the Council was assembled) and in fine he disanulled the Canon for
diverse causes specifyed in his Epistles. First because it had no other ground
but the ambitious humor of Anatolius, who inordinatly sought thereby to have
the precedence before the Patriarks of Alexandria, and Antioch. Secondly,
because it was not procured, or made Canonically, but by practice, and
surreption in the absence of his Legats^ Thirdly, for that the other See more
concerning this Canon in Binius. To. 1. Council. page 517. edit. Coloniae an.
1606.
Canon of the Council of Constantinople, upon the which this seemed to be
grounded, Leo ep. 53. ad Anatolium. Idem ep. 55. ad Pulcher.
was of no validity, having never been sent to the Sea Apostolic, nor put in
practice by the predecessors of Anatolius. Lastly, for that it was flatly
repugnant to the Canons of the Council of Nice.

28. For these causes, I say, Pope Leo abrogated this Canon, which nevertheless
it is like he would have admitted, and confirmed, if it had proceeded from any
good ground, and tended to any vtility of the Church, and had been withal
orderly proposed, and Canonically made; Council. Nicen. Can. 6.
for, albeit the Council of Nice had already ordained: the (...), and
jurisdiction of the Patriarchal Churches of Alexandria, Antioch, and
Jerusalem, with the consent of Pope Siluester, who was the head of that
Council (without whose ratification, nothing could be of force that was
decreed therein, no more then our Acts of Parliament without the Kings
approbation) nevertheless, for as much as the Canons of the Nicen Council
touching those Churches, and this Canon also, whereof we now specially treat,
did not ordain, or concern any thing which was de iure diuino, but only the
privileges, and jurisdiction of Churches pertaining to Ecclesiastical Laws,
it is evident that Pope Leo (being the head of the whole Church) might dispose
of them, as he should see just cause, yea and it is not to be doubted but that
he would have ratified this Canon, had he not seen such sufficient cause to
the contrary, as has been declared; and therefore the Popes his successors
being moved with such other occasions, and urgent reasons, as change of time
produced, not only permitted the Bishops of Constantinople to have the second
place after them, but ordained it also by a Canon, as I shall have occasion to
show See after in the end of this Chapter.
hereafter. In the mean time I conclude concerning this point, that although
Thedorus Balsamon, and Zonaras, and some other Grecian collectors of the
Counsels, do set down this Canon in favor of the Churches of Constantinople,
yet it is not to be found either in the Collections of Dionysius and Isidorus
gathered out of the Greek above a thousand years ago, or yet in the old
Greek manuscripts, or the ancient Latin copies of the Counsels, which we have
in these parts: and thus much for the making, and abrogation of this Canon.

29. And now to come to the assertion of M. Andrews concerning Pope Leo's
intercession, What manner of intercession Pope Leo made to Martian the Emperor
against Anatolius.
made (as he says) in vain to the Emperor, Empress, and Anatolius, true it
is, that Pope Leo wrote to them all three, but whether as a suitor or
suppliant, or yet in vain, let the Reader judge, and accordingly give credit
to M. Andrews hereafter. First then he wrote to the Emperor, that whereas he
(I mean Pope Leo) might have called Anatolius to account long before, for
being consecrated Bishop by an heretic, Leo. ep 54. ad Martia^.
he had borne with him at the Emperors request, and that by the Emperors help
and by his (I mean Pope Leo's) favorable consent, Anatolius had obtained that
great Bishopric, and that therefore he might have contented himself with
those favors, and not have presumed thereupon the rather to encroach upon the
dignities of other Bishops. Also he signified to the Emperor, that Anatolius
should never be able to make his Sea an Apostolical Sea, or yet to increase it
by the injury, and offense of others; that the privileges of Churches being
instituted by the Canons, and Decrees of the venerable Council of Nice, could
not be impeached, or changed by any impious attempts of his; that it pertayned
to him (I mean to Pope Leo) in respect of his office, and charge, to look to
the observation of the Canons, and not to prefer one man's will before the
common benefit of the whole Church; finally presuming as he says, of the
Emperors pious disposition to conserve the peace, and unity of the Church, he
besought: him to repress the ambition, and wicked attempt of Anatolius (if he
persisted therein) and to make him obey the Canons of the Council of Nice, for
other wise the issue would be, that Anatolius should but work his own
separation from the communion of the Universal Church.

30. To this effect wrote Pope Leo to the Emperor, craving indeed with great
reason, his help and assistance, for the correction, and amendment of
Anatolius, yet with great gravity, and authority as you see, and not in vain,
as M. Andrews would have us to suppose; for albeit the Emperor had favored
greatly the pretense of Anatolius, Relatio Synod. Chalced. ad Martian. in fine
Council.
to prefer the Church of Constantinople before Alexandria, and Antioch,
nevertheless upon Pope Leo's letters to him, he not only yielded therein, but
also greatly approved it in the said Pope, that he defended the Canons of the
Council of Nice with such constancy, and resolution, as he did; which is
manifest by another letter of Pope Leo to the Emperor, Leo. ep. 59. ad Martia^.
wherein he signified the contentment, and joy that he received, when he
understood by the Emperors letters, that he not only approved his defense of
the Canons, but was also himself determined to defend them, and to conserve
the privileges of the Churches, according to the decrees of the Nicen
Council. So that I hope M. Andrews cannot now say, that Pope Leo's
intercession to the Emperor was in vain. Let us then see what manner of suite
he made to the Empress.

31. He wrote also to her diverse Epistles, and in one of them having first
taxed Anatolius of immoderate pride, Leo ep. 55. ad Pulcheriam.
for seeking to pass the limits of his own dignity, to the prejudice of other
Metropolita^s; signfying withal, that he might have contented himself to have
been advanced to the Bishoprike of Constantinople, as well by his favorable
consent, and approbation, as by her, and the Emperors grant, he adds
touching the Canon now in question, Consensiones, says he, Episcoporum Canonum
apud Nicaeam conditorum regulis repugnantes, vnita nobiscum vestrae fidei
Pietate, in irritum mittimus, and per auctoritatem B. Petri Apostoli generali
prorsus definitione cassamus. The piety of your faith being united with us, we
do utterly make void, and by the authority of the Blessed Apostle Peter, do
with a general definition wholly disanull the consents (that is to say the
Decrees) of the Bishops, which were repugnant to the rules of the Canons made
in the Council of Nice. So he, speaking, as you see, not like a suppliant, sed
tamquam potestatem habens, like a man that had power, and Apostolical
authority, to disanull, and abrogate this Canon, as he did.

32. Now it rests that we see, What intercession Pope Leo made to Anatolius
what manner of petition, or supplication he presented to Anatolius, which
truly was such, that it made him stoop, as stout, and proud as he was. First
then, Pope Leo blames him for taking the occasion he did, to seek not only to
prefer himself before the Bishops of Alexandria Leo. ep. 53. ad Anatol.
and Antioch (as though their Churches had lost their privileges by the fall
of their Pastors) but also to subject them and all other Metropolitans of the
Greek Church to his jurisdiction; which he terms inauditum, and numquam
antea tentatum excessum, an excess never heard of, nor attempted by any man
before. And further signifies, that this attempt being quite contrary to the
most holy Canons of the Council of Nice, was too wicked, and impious; that his
haughty pride tended to the trouble of the whole Church; that he had abused his
brethren the Bishops in the Council, who being assembled only for the
definition, and decision of matters of faith, had been drawn by him, partly by
corruption, and partly by fear, to favor, and further his ambitious desires;
that he accused himself sufficiently when he acknowledged that the Legates of
the Sea Apostolyke (whom he ought to have obayed) publikly contradicted, and
resisted him in the Council.

33. Moreover he aduertiseth him, that the Canon pretended to have been made
some 60. years before in the Council of Constantinople, could not serve his
turn, seeing that the same was never sent, or intimated by any of his
predecessors to the Roman Sea, and therefore he wished him to remember what
Christ threatens to them, who scandalize any one of his little ones, and
thereby to consider what he deserves, who fears not to scandalize so many
Churches, and Priests. Finally he exhorts him to leave his ambitious desires,
concluding with this sentence of the Apocalypse: Apoc. 3.
Tene quod habes, ne alius accipiat coronam tuam, hold that which thou have,
lest another take thy Crown; for, si inconcessa quaesieris etc. if thou seek,
says he, those things that are unlawful, thou shall deprive thy self of the
peace, and union of the universal Church by thy own work, and judgment. So
he. And do thou not see good Reader what an humble suppliant Pope Leo was to
Anatolius? If one should write a letter to M. Andrews in this style, and
form, would he take it, trow you, for a supplication?

34. But now let us see what effect it had, and whether it was in vain, What
effect Pope Leo's intercession had.
or no, as M. Andrews affirms of it. This will be evident by the epistles of
Pope Leo to Iulianus Bishop of Coa, to the Emperor, and to Anatolius himself.
To the Bishop, he signifies that the Emperor had written unto him,
interueniens says he, pro Anatolio, vt nostri illi animi gratia praebeatur,
quoniam correctionem eius promittit etc. Leo. ep. 68.
Requesting in the behalf of Anatolius, that we will bestow upon him the
grace, or favor of our affection, The Emperor made suite to Pope Leo for
Anatolius.
because he promises his amendment etc. So that you see now, Iordanis
conuersus est retrorsum, for whereas Pope Leo (according to M. Andrews his
assertions) was a suitor both to the Emperor, and to Anatolius, the Emperor
is now become a suitor to Pope Leo for Anatolius, which will yet more clearly
appear by another Epistle of Pope Leo to the Emperor himself, Idem ep. 70.
ad Martian.
wherein he promised that Anatolius should find in him sincerae gratiae animum,
an affection of sincere grace, or favor, in case he followed sincerely the
Emperors advise, and counsel, and performed in heart, that which he promised
in words; for that otherwise he would resolutly proceed against him, to
chastise him for his pride; whereby it is evident, that the Emperor had written
to Pope Leo in the behalf of Anatolius, and that Pope Leo would not otherwise
promise him his grace, and favor, but upon condition of his hearty repentance,
and sincere amendment.

35. And will you now see all this confirmed by Pope Leo's letters to Anatolius
himself? Leo. ep. 71. ad Anatol.
Therefore whereas Anatolius had written a letter of submission to him, not only
acknowledging his fault in that attempt, Anatolius his submission to Pope Leo
but also yielding him an account of the state of his Church of Constantinople,
Pope Leo answering the same, first commended greatly certain predecessors of
Anatolius, to wit John, Atticus, Proclus, and Flauianus, exhorting him to
imitate them, and blaming him by the way for his scandalous attempts, and
having also signified how glad he was to understand by his letters that he had
reformed certain abuses in the Church of Constantinople, he gave him order
withal to make two priests (called Andreas, and Euphratas) and to admit some
others to Ecclesiastical dignities, upon certain conditions which he
prescribed him; and lastly coming to speak more particulerly of his
presumptuous attempt, he says, that whereas he laid the fault upon the evil
counsel, and persuasions of the Clergy of Constantinople, who urged him unto
it, he might have given better satisfaction if he had also blamed his own
consent thereto, and not have laid the fault upon others: nevertheless, says
he, gratum mihi, frater charissime, est etc. It is gratfull to me (most dear
brother) that you profess now to be displeased with that which then also
should not have pleased you. Your own profession together with the
attestation of the Christian Prince, is sufficient for our reconciliation,
neither does your correction (or amendment) seem to me to be ouerlate (or out
of season) cui tam venerabilis assertor accessit, who have so venerable a
surety.

36. Thus wrote Pope Leo to Anatolius, whereby it appears that M. Andrews
saying that he did by his letters intercedere frustra apud Augustum, Augustam,
and Anatolium, has in two words made two lies, the one in intercedere (for
that the Pope made no intercession, or suite, especially to Anatolius, but was
sued unto by the Emperor in his behalf:) The other in frustra; for though it
should be granted that the Pope made suite, yet it was not in vain. And
therefore if M. Andrews should seek to quit himself of one of the lies, A
manifest and sound lie of M. Andrews.
by saying that he took intercedere, for to make opposition, and not
intercession, yet he cannot rid himself of the other lie (which is a sound
one) seeing that Pope Leo's opposition was so far from being in vain, that it
brought Anatolius, as I may say, upon his knees, and forced him to humble, and
submit himself, to acknowledge his fault, to promise amendment, yea to procure
the Emperor to be a suitor, and intercessor for him; and finally to receive,
and execute Pope Leo's commandments, laws, and ordinances in the Church of
Constantinople, as though he had been some Italian Bishop within the Suburbs of
Rome. So that I hope, thou see good Reader, that I have now clearly proved
2. things. The one that M. Andrews has sought notoriously to delude thee, in
telling thee, that Pope L^o contradicted this Canon, in vain. The other that
the Emperor, and the whole Christian world had at that time a firm belief of
the supreme authority of Pope Leo over the Council of Calcedon, and the whole
Church of God, seeing that his only opposition to this Canon sufficed to
overthrow it.

37. Whereupon it also follows that although it were true which M. Andrews
most falsely, Pope Leo his supreme authority proved by the overthrow of the
Canon alleged by M. Andrews.
and absurdly affirms (to wit, that the Fathers in the Council of Calcedon
meant by this Canon to make the Byshoprik of Constantinople, equal in all
respects, with the Apostolical Sea of Rome) yet it little imports, yea
rather makes for us, then for M. Andrews, seeing that the C^non was as I have
showed, presently overthrown, and ^ade void by the authority of the Roman Sea,
and that ^ot only Anatolius himself (who procured it) acknowledged his error
therein, but also, as well he, as other Catholic Bishops his successors lived
in the union, and subjection of the said Roman Church, as I have sufficiently
showed by the experience, and practice even of the Greek Church, until it was
utterly ruined by the Turks.

38. Therefore it shall be now convenient to see how well M. Andrews answers,
and satisfyeth the places alleged by the Cardinal, and my self out of the
Council of Calcedon; whereby I shall also have occasion to confute certain
reasons of his, which he further urges out of the circumstances of the
foresaid Canon. Apol. Bellar. page 92.
The first place, or authority, which he undertakes to answer, is, that in
many Epistles, or rather supplications addressed to Pope Leo, and the whole
Council, Council. Calced. Act. 3.
he is named before the Council with this title: Sanctissimo and Deo
amantissimo, and universally Archiepiscopo, and Patriarchae Magnae Romae Leoni,
and Sanctae, and universally Chalcedonensi Synodo, The name of Universal Bishop
given to the Pope by the general Council of Calcedon.
quae voluntate Dei congregata est: To the most holy, and most beloved of God,
and universal Archbishop, and Patriarch of Great Rome Leo, and to the holy and
universal Synod of Calcedon, which is assembled by the will of God. In which
title it is to be observed not only that the name of Pope Leo is set before the
name of the Council (whereby he is acknowledged to be superior to the
Council) but also he is called Universal Archbishop, and Patriarch of Rome,
in respect of his universal authority over the whole Church of God: besides
that it is to be noted heerin, that the title of Universal Bishop, so much
impugned now by the Sectaries of this time, was vsualy given to the Bishops of
Rome in the time of that Council, seeing it was in the Council it self
diverse times used, and given to Pope Leo, without the contradiction of any.

39. Hereto M. Andrews answers thus: Cur huc illuc oberret quis etc. why
shall a man go up and down hither, Andr. page 170.. Quod ibi.
and thither, throughout all the corners of the Acts (of this Council)
searching the deskes, and looking on the backsyde of letters to find somewhere
that whereof he reads there the contrary in express words? let him read (not
in any title, or superscriptio^ of a letter, or memorial wherein every man
knows how suitors are wont to extol, and magnify those to whom they sue)
but let him read the matter ventilated, or debated in one whole action, and
renewed, and confirmed in another, and finally enacted by a Canon etc. so he:
and then follows that which I have set down out of him, and confuted before
concerning the contents of the Canon.

40. Here now thou see, good Reader, that this answer of his contains 3.
points: the first that all this objection is taken, as it were, out of the
book, being grounded on nothing else but on the superscriptions of letters, and
memorials. The second, that the manner and style of the letters, and memorialls
of suppliants, is always to extol, and magnify those to whom they make
suite. The third, that a Canon of the same Council decreed the contrary to all
this in express words (giving to the Bishop of Constantinople equal
privileges in all things with the Bishop of Rome) this being the whole
substance of his answer, and the last point concerning the Canon (which most
imports) being by me already fully confuted to his shame, it will easily be
seen how he tryfleth in the two former. M. Andrews his tryfling answers.
For as for the first, what skilleth it whether those tytles were written on
the insyde, or outside of the supplications, seeing that they were taken, and
set down by the Notaries of the whole Counsel, no less then the Canons, and
Actions themselves, and not reproved, or contradicted by any? Is it not
therefore clear enough thereby, that the title of universal Bishop was in
those days usually given to the Bishop of Rome? and seeing his name is set
down before the name of the Council (though he himself was not present, but
only his Legates) was not he sufficiently acknowledged thereby to be the
President, and head of the Council?

41. But I would be glad to know of M. Andrews what reason those suppliants had
to address, and present their petitions rather to Pope Leo by name, M. Andrews
hardly urged.
then to the Bishop of Constantinople, or to other Grecian Bishops, and
Metropolitans of their own country? Let him tell me, I say, what other reason
they could have, but because they held him not only to be the chief, and
universal Pastor (that is to say, to have universal authority) but also to be
acknowledged by the whole Council, as their head? For if the Council had not
so esteemed him, those suppliants might be assured that by naming him alone,
and giving him extraordinary tytles that were not due unto him, they should
offend the Council, and consequently hurt their own cause.

42. Moreover let M. Andrews tell us, if it please him, why those suitors should
exceed in the title rather to Pope Leo, then to the whole Council, seeing that
they addressed their petitions to both? Why did they not, I say, magnify and
extol the Council with some excessive title, as well as the Pope? For, if it
were needful for them to use excess, and flattery to either of both, for the
better success of their petition, it is like they would have done it rather to
the whole Council then to him, if they had not assured themselves, that the
grant of their petition depended principally on him, as on the head of the
Council; so that the supplications being directed indifferently to both, and
no excess, or flattery so much as imagined by M. Andrews in that part of the
title which concerns the Council, he must either acknowledge the like of the
other part that touches the Pope, or else ^ell us some reason of the
difference, whereof no other can be conceived, but only his greater authority
then the Counsels in respect that he was their head and the universal Pastor
of the Church. And thus much touching his answer to the first place.

43. The second place alleged by Cardinal Bellarmine out of that Council,
Bellar. Apol. vbi supra.
is, that in the Epistle of the whole Council to Pope Leo, he is acknowledged
in express words to be the head of all the Bishops assembled there, and they
his members, for thus they wrote speaking of themselves: Relat. Synodi ad Leon.
in fine Co^cilij.
Quibus tu sicut membris caput praeeras: over whom thou were President, as
head over the members, in those which held thy place etc. So they. And what
does M. Andrews, trow you, answer to this? Marry, Andr. vbi supra.
forsooth, he says, that, vtcumque tum praefuit sicut caput etc. howsoever he
then governed as head, yet he could not hinder, but that another head was made
equal to this head. A weak and idle answer of M. Andrews.
So he; meaning that the Canon (whereof we have hitherto treated) made the
Bishop of Constantinople, equal with him in all things, and so made two heads.
But how weak, and idle this answer is, thou may judge, good Reader, by the
weakness of this Canon, which I have sufficiently showed, as well by the
inualidity, and nullity of it (being abrogated by Pope Leo) as also by the
false sense that M. Andrews has given us of it: so that the foundation of his
answer (I mean the Canon) failing him, his answer must needs fall to the
ground, and be altogether impertinent, and the place alleged by the Cardinal
remain in full force.

Card. Apolog. vbi supra.
44. The third and last place, which he undertakes to answer, is, that the
whole Council also testified in the same Epistle to Pope Leo, that our Savior
had committed to him the keeping of his vineyard, Relat. Synodi ad Leon.
that is to say, of his Church; whereto M. Andrews answers, that the vineyard
was indeed committed to him, but not to him alone, Andr. vbi supra.
sed cum alijs in vin^a operarijs, but toge^ther with other workmen in the
vineyard, wherein he says very truly, for no man denies, but that there were
other Pastors in the Church besides Pope L^o, though we affirm that all other
Pastors were inferior, and subordinate to him; and I think no man doubts but
that when the charge, or government of a temporal Commonwelth is committed to
a King, or other sovereign Prince, he does not exercise it alone, but
together with other Magistrates subordinate and subject to him: and the like we
say of the supreme Pastor of the Church, that he is not the only Pastor, though
he be chief, and supreme; which point I have debated in the former Chapter,
See cap. 1. nu. 3.4.5. and sequent
where I confuted the like answer of M. Andrews to our objection of the
Pastoral commission given by our Savior to S. Peter.

45. Therefore I remit him, and the Reader to what I have discoursed there,
touching that poynt^ and will also ad further here concerning Pope Leo, that
whereas M. Andrews grants his Pastoral authority, together with other
Pastors (meaning that he had no more, nor other authority over the Church then
other Bishops had) he is easily convinced by the circumstances of the same
place which the Cardinal obiecteth, Relat. Synodi ad Leon.
and he pretends now to answer; for there Dioscorus is accused of three
things: the first, that he had taken upon him to condemn, and depose Flauianus
Bishop of Constantinople, and Eusebius Bishop of Doryleum against the Canons of
the Church. The second, that whereas Pope Leo had deprived Eutyches the heretyk
of his dignity in the Church of Constantinople (where he was Abbot of a
Monastery) Dioscorus had restored him thereto, and so, irruens in vineam etc.
breaking into the vineyard which he found notably well planted, A clear
testimony for Pope Leo's supremacy.
he overthrew it etc. The third was, that, post haec omnia, says the Council,
insuper, and contra ipsum etc. And after all this, he did moreover extend his
madness against him to whom the charge, or keeping of the vineyard was committed
by our Savior, id est, contra tuam quoque Apostolicam Sanctitatem, that is to
say, also against thy Apostolyke Holiness, meaning Pope Leo, for to him the
Council wrote this.

46. Whereby it is evident that the Council distinguishes clearly betwixt
the authority of Pope Leo, and of the two other Bishops Flauianus, and
Eusebius, seeing that all three of them being named (as greatly injured by
Dioscorus) the offense against Pope Leo is exaggerated much more then the
injury done to the other two, and held to proceed of mere madness, and fury.
And albeit mention be made of the vineyard (as broken down, and overthrown by
Dioscorus, in the depositio^ of those two Catholic Bishops) yet only Pope Leo
(who is honored with the title of Apostolical Sanctity) is acknowledged to
have had the charge of the vineyard committed to him by our Savior: which had
been said very impertinently of him alone, if those other two Bishops had as
much charge of the vineyard as he Besides that the Council testifies in the
same place, that Pope Leo deprived Eutiches (who was an Abbot in
Constantinople) of his dignity, which he could not have done out of his own
Diocese in the Church of Constantinople, if as well the Bishop of that Church,
as Eutiches had not been subject to him; whereto it may also be added, that, as
Liberatus testifies, this Flauianus Bishop of Constantinople (for whose
injurious deposition Dioscorus is here accused by the Council) appealed for
remedy to Pope Leo, Liberat. in Breuiar. cap. 12.
acknowledging thereby that Leo was his superior, and had also an universal
authority; for otherwise the appeal from the Greek Church to him had been in
vain. So that M. Andrews his gloss, allowing to Pope Leo no more authority,
then to all other Pastors, is very absurd, and easily convinced by the text it
self.

47. After this, he idly carpeth at the Cardinal, for saying that the Council
acknowledged Pope Leo to have the charge totius vineae, Andr. vbi supra p. 171.
of the whole vineyard, because totius is not in the text of the Council: Nec
totius vineae dicitur (says M. Andrews) sed commoda vox (totius) Cardinali
visum est adijcere: Andr. vbi supra.
neither is it said, of the whole vineyard, but the Cardinal thought good to
add totius, because it is a commodious word for his purpose, whereby it seems
that he would have some unwary Reader to imagine that the Cardinal had
corrupted the text, by adding the word totius, whereas there is no such matter;
for having alleged the words of the Counsel, as they are (to wit, cui vineae
custodia a Saluatore commissa est) he does afterward in his own discourse,
and for the explication thereof, add totius, saying, vbi fatentur totius vineae
custodiam etc. where they (to wit the Fathers of the Council of Calcedon) do
confess that the charge of all the vineyard, Apolog. C. Bellar. page 92.
was committed to the Pope. Thus says the Cardinal, signifying that the
Council did mean, that Leo had the charge of the whole Church (which as I
have showed) is most evident even by all the circumstances of the place.

48. And therefore M. Andrews supecting with great reason, Andr. vbi supra.
that this deuyse would serve him to little purpose, thought best to grant, that
totius vineae might be said in some sense. Et vel si totius, says he, nihil
iuuaret etc. Yea, and if it had been said, totius vineae, it would help him
nothing, seeing that whatsoever does either violate the unity, or trouble the
peace of the whole Church, ad curam omnium ex aequo pertinet, non Leonis solum,
does belong to the care of all men equally, and not of Leo only. So he;
signifying that albeit Pope Leo might be said to have had the Charge of the
whole Church, yet it were to be understood, that he had it no otherwise, A
strange paradoxe of M. Andrews.
then all other men have. And why? Marry, forsooth, because all men are equally
bound to have care of the unity and peace of the Church; which truly may pass
for a very strange paradoxe, howsoever he understands it, I mean, whether he
extend the word omnium, to all men in general (as he seems to do) or limit
it to all Pastors only.

49. For if he mean that all men ought to have care of the unity, and peace of
the Church alyke, or in equal degree, he is most absurd, confounding all
order, government, and subordination in the Church, seeing that one special
cause (if not the chiefest) why God ordayneth Pastors, and Governors therein,
was to avoid schisms, and to conserve it in peace, and unity, as I have proved
amply in my See Supplem. c. 4. nu. 3.4.5. and 6.
Supplement. I have also showed that M. Ibid. nu. 7.8.
Barlow urges the same, in defense of his pretended Episcopal authority
against the Puritans; whereto I may add, that M. Andrews himself also approves
it else where, granting that S. Peter was appointed head of the Apostles, Andr.
cap. 8. page 219.
by our Savior, vt schismatis tollatur occasio (as S. Hierome says) that the
occasion of schism may be taken away: Hieron. li. 1. cont. Iouin.
yea and confesses moreover, that S. Peter had so much authority given him, as
was necessary, for avoiding of schism, and for the maintenance of peace and
unity: of which point I shall have somewhat to say unto him Chap. 3. nu. 37.
and seq.
here after.

50. If then Pastors, or governors are (by his own confession) instituted in
the Church to conserve the same in unity, and have special authority given
them to that end, he must needs confess also, that they ought to have more
care thereof, Pastors are more bound to have care of the Church then private
men.
then those who have not any special institution, or authority to the same
end; and therefore I would be glad to know, how he agrees with himself in this
point, teaching here as he does, that the care of the peace of the whole
Church, does belong to all men alyke? For if he say that Pastors are more
bound, then their subjects, to care for the unity of their own particular
Diocesses, but not of the whole Church, he is too to ridiculous, seeing that
every Pastor ought to have, not only as much care of the whole Church, as every
other man, but also much more then others, by reason of his function, and
office, which does extend it self to the whole Church, it being evident that
what authority soever any man has in any part of the Church, it is given him
for the good of the whole, and finally tends thereto.

51^ And who knows not, that all heresies, and schisms which violate the
unity of the whole Church, do first spring in some part thereof, and are to be
suppressed, not in respect of that part only, but much more in regard of the
whole Church? As in like manner we see in our bodies that the care of the
health, and conservation of every member, tends more to the good of the
whole, then of the part it self, that is, or may be particulerly interessed;
and therefore every part does willingly expose it self to danger for the
conservation of the whole. Whereupon I infer, that if Pastors have more
obligation, then laymen, to have care of a part of the Church, they are
consequently more bound to have care of the whole, whereto (as I have said) the
care of every part is specially to be referred.

52. Moreover whosoever is Pastor in any one part of the Church, is capable of
Pastoral jurisdiction in any other, though he be restrained, and limited to a
certain part, to avoid confusion: in which respect the Priests in every
Diocese are Priests throughout the whole Church, and may minister Sacraments
any where in cases of necessity; and a Bishop in any place is euerywhere a
Bishop, and one of the Magistrates, and Pastors of the Church, and therefore
has a voice, and right of suffrage in all General Counsels though they be
held out of his Diocese; whereas none of the Laity has any voice, or suffrage
therein at all, as it is manifest by the testimony of Theodosius the Emperor
in his Epistle to the Council of Ephesus; Ep. Theodo^^j ad Synod. Ephesin. To.
1. Council.
saying; Nefas est etc. It is not lawful that he who is not one of the number
of the most holy Bishops, should meddle in Ecclesias^icall consultations, and
affairs. So he. And the like said Basilius the Emperor in the 8. General
Council, To. 4. Council. in 8. Council. general. ex act. 6.
with a notable advertisement to laymen, of what degree soever, not to presume
to deal in Ecclesiastical matters, as I have showed at large in my Supplement.
Besides that we read in the Council of Calcedon, Suppl. cap. 1. nu. 112. and
113.
that, Concilium Episcoporum est, a Council consists of Bi^^ops; whereupon
it follows evidently, Act. ^^
that all men have not equal obligation to care for the peace and unity of the
whole Church; for if they had, then might every Cobbler, and Tinker challeng as
much right of suffrage, as any Bishop in a General Council assembled for the
suppression of heresy, and schism, which I think M. Andrews will be ashamed
to say.

53. Therefore he must confess, that albeit every member of the mystical body
of Christ be bound to have a special care of the unity of the whole, 1. Cor.
12.
vt not sit schisma in corpore, sed in idipsum pro inuicem sollicita sint
membra: That there be no schism, or division in the body, but that the members
together be careful one of another: yet this obligation extends no further
then the condition, quality, and degree of every one requires, which we may
learn by the Apostles doctrine to the Romans, Romans 12.
who having signified that we have many members in one body, and that all the
members have not the same action, adds: ita multi vnum corpus sumus in
Christo etc. So we being many, are one body in Christ, and each one another
members, and having gifts according to the grace, that is given us different
either Prophesy according to the rule of faith, or ministry in ministering, or
he that teaches in doctrine he that exhorts in exhorting, he that gives in
simplicity, he that rules in carfulnes, Pastors bound more then other men to
have care of the Church according to the doctrine of the Apostle.
he that shows mercy in cheerfulnes.

54. Thus far the Apostle, who exemplifying here, as you see, the different
gifts, and graces that God bestows upon sundry members of his mystical body,
and ascribing to every one of them the proper talent which is requisite thereto,
requires specially in the Governor Solicitude and Carefulnes, giving plainly
to understand, that although every member of Christ's Church, ought to be
sollicitous, and careful for the public good thereof; yet a Pastor, or
Governor is most bound thereto, as to that which most properly pertayneth to
his charge, and vocation. As for example in the time of the Apostles the heresy
of the Nicolaits did violate the union, and trouble the peace of the whole
Church; and albeit there were in the Church of Pergamus, as well Prophets,
Doctors, Preachers, and Priests, as other faithful people, who were all bound
to have care of the unity of the whole Church (as all Christians are)
nevertheless we see in the Apocalypse that none of them but the Bishop only,
Apoc. 2.
was reprehended for negligence, and want of due care to find and cast out the
Nicolaits from amongst them, because the solicitude, and care of the unity,
and public good of the Church did specially belong to the Pastor, or Bishop,
in which respect he alone was severely reproved, and commanded to do penance.

55. So that whereas M. Andrews imposes an equal obligation of the same care
upon every member, what does he else but make, as I may say, a gally-maufrey, M.
Andrews galli-maufrey or hotch-potch.
or hotch-potch of the different members of Christ's mystical body confounding
their several functions, and making them all eyes, or heads, requyring the
obligation of a Pastor, or Governor in every particular man? And truly if this
doctrine were generally embraced in England, M. Andrews teaches seditious
doctrine.
what other fruit could be expected thereof, but confusion, tumult, and
sedition, whiles every gyddy-headed fellow persuading himself, that he were as
much bound to care for the public good of the Church, as the Pastors thereof
(yea as the supreme head, or Governor himself) might intrude himself to
intermeddle in Ecclesiastical affairs for the discharge of his conscience,
and obligation? For if his band in that behalf were equal with the band of
Pastors, he could not with reason be denied equality with them in charge, and
commission; seeing that equality of obligation requires equality and parity of
power to perform it, Equality of obligation requires equality of care.
for when power of performance wants, the obligation cease. So that a
greater power and dignity induces an obligation of greater care; and therefore
let M. Andrews consider what a wise, and learned proposition he has made, and
published to the world, and what a good and vigilant Pastor he is, who
teaches such dangerous, and seditious doctrine.

56. And albeit (to avoid this absurdity) he should restrain his general
proposition to Pastors only, and say, that whatsoever violateth the unity of
the whole Church does belong equally to the care of all Pastors; yet he were no
less ridiculous then before, seeing that he must needs acknowledge an
inequality of obligation, and care even amongst them, according to their
different degrees. For if a Patriarch have jurisdiction over Metropolitans, and
they over Bishops, and Bishops over Priests, it is clear, that as their
charge, and degree is unequal; so also is the obligation of every one of them
different, and conform to his dignity, degree, and authority. And therefore
although the office and duty of every Pastor, is, as I have said, to have
special care of the unity, and peace of the Church, yet his obligation in that
behalf must needs be so much the greater, by how much his power, and authority
is greater, and he more able to perform it then others his inferiors, to
which purpose the Prophet says of a Prince, or supreme Pastor: Princeps ea
quae sunt digna Principe cogitabit, Isa. 32.
and ipse super Duces stabit: The Prince shall think those things which are
worthy of a Prince, and he shall be over Dukes, or captains. So says Isay of
our Savior (as some expound it) or, as others say, of Josias King of Judah.

57. But of whom soever it is to be understood, it is manifest enough, that the
form of a good Pastor, or Governor is prescrybed therein, showing that the
Prince being the supreme Governor, is to embrace cogitations, and thoughts
fit for his estate, and as much excelling the cogitations of his Dukes, or
Captains (that is to say of his inferior, or subordinate Magistrates) as he
excels them in degree; and what thought is so worthy of a Prince, as the
care of the unity, and peace of his estate, wherein consists the publyke, and
general good of every Commonwealth? And the like is to be said of Pastors, and
especially of the supreme Pastor of the Church, If M. Andrews his position be
true he must lay away his title of Lord Bishop.
who ought (according to the Prophet) to have cogitations worthy of his
sovereignty, that is to say, as much to surpass other inferior Pastors in the
care of the public good of the Church, as he surpasses them in power, and
dignity. Well then to conclude, if M. Andrews his position may go for current,
he may shake hands with the Puritans, and lay away his title of Lord Bishop,
and become follow Minister with his Ministers in the Diocese of Ely; seeing
that there is no reason why he should have a greater degree, and dignity in the
Church then they, if they be bound to have as great a care of the Church as he.

58. But let us see how he proceeds to fortify his assertion, Andr. cap. 7.
page 171.
in hope utterly to overthrow the Popes Primacy. Thus then he says: Quod enim
totius vineae, id est, Ecclesiae, custodiam ab ipso Christo ait Pontifici
commissam, id est Primatum etc. For whereas the Cardinal says that the charge
of all the vineyard, M. Andrews corrupts the text of the Council of Calcedon.
that is to say of the Primacy of the Church, was committed by Christ himself
to the Bishop, see how it contradicts the Council, and the sentence of all
the Fathers that were there present, who with one voice, said: Siqua essent
Romanae Sedis priuilegia, ea illi (non a Christo, nesciebant hoc Chalcedonenses
quin) a Patribus concessa esse etc. If the Roman Sea had any privileges the
same were granted unto it (not by Christ, for they in the Council of Calcedon
knew not that) but by the Fathers etc. So he: grounding still, as you see, all
the force, and weight of his arguments upon no better foundation then his own
fraud, I mean his fraudulent allegation, and exposition of that Canon of the
Council, whereof I have amply treated before; and now he secondeth his former
fraud with a new corruption of the text, setting this down in a different
letter for the very words of the Council, M Andrews groundeth his arguments
upon his own fraud.
siqua essent Romanae sedis priuilegia, ea illi a Patribus concessa esse, if
there were any privileges of the Roman Sea, they were granted to it by the
Fathers: whereas neither those words, nor yet the sense thereof are to be found
in the 28. Canon, which he alleges, no nor in all the Council of Calcedon.

59. For in these general words of his are included all the privileges that
the Sea of Rome had any way either by divine, or human law, for any respect or
cause whatsoever, but the Canon speaks with great restriction, Act. 15. ca^.
28.
to wit, of privileges granted upon one consideration only; for thus it says:
Etenim antiquae Romae throno, quod Vrbs illa imperaret, iure Patres priuilegia
tribuere: For the Fathers did worthily give privileges to the throne of old
Rome, because that City did govern. Thus says the Canon, far otherwise then
M. Andrews affirms, who with his (siqua) comprehends all privileges
whatsoever; whereas you see the Canon speaks only of privileges given to the
Roman Church, in respect of the Imperial Seat; so that other privileges might
be given thereto for other respects, for ought we see in this Canon; and the
reason is clear, why that consideration of the Imperial Seat was only
mentioned, and no other, to wit, because those that penned the Canon, saw well
enough, that the Church of Constantinople could pretend no other reason to
demand extraordinary privileges, but only because the Imperial Seat, which
was wont to be at Rome, was then removed to Constantinople.

60. Therefore I beseech thee (good Reader) consider a little M. Andrews his
silly discourse, concerning this point, who (having said, as you have heard,
that the Fathers in the Council of Calcedon knew not any privileges granted
to the Roman Sea by Christ) adds: Quare autem concessa etc? A silly
collection of M. Andrews.
And why were they granted? Was it because Christ said to Peter, Tibi dabo
claues, aut, Pasce oues meas? I will give thee the keys, or, feed my sheep?
No; but because Rome was then the Seat of the Emperor, and governed the rest.
So he; and a little after he concludes thus: A difference to be noted betwixt
the primacy of S. Peter, and the priuiledgs granted to the Roman Sea.
Quod ergo habet Roma de Primatu etc. Therefore that which Rome has of the
Primacy, is not from Christ, but from the Fathers, and in respect of the
Emperors Seat, and not for the Sea of Peter.

61. VVhereto I answer, first that M. Andrews must learn to distinguish
betwixt the Primacy of S. Peter, and the privileges granted to the Sea of
Rome, for that the said Primacy could not be from any, but from Christ
himself; whereas the Roman Church may have, and has privileges from men,
that is to say not only from general Counsels, but also from temporal
Princes, as from Constantine, Pepin, Charles the Great, and other Catholic
Princes, and therefore M. Andrews argues most absurdly from the Privileges,
to the Primacy, denying that the Primacy was from Christ, because the
Privileges were from men, and some of them given for humane respects; wherein
he shows himself as wise, as if he should deny the regalty, and sovereignty
of our Kings, by reason of the prerogatives, and privileges granted to them by
the Parliaments; or as if he should say, that the Church of Christ (which is
his Spouse) was not instituted by him, but by men, because as well temporal
Princes, as general Counsels have given great privileges thereto.

62. Secondly I say, that M. Andrews is very simple if he see not, Why those
which penned the Cano^ alleged by M. Andrews, made no mention of the keys, and
Pastoral commission given to S. Peter.
that the pe^ners of the Canon had great reason to avoid therein all mention of
the keys, and of the Pastoral commission given by our Savior to S. Peter, as
also of the Privileges granted to the Roman Church in respect of S. Pet^rs
Sea; seeing that the same could not any way further the pretense of the Bishop
of Constantinople, but rather hinder it. For what could he demand for any of
those respects? Would M. Andrews have had him to say that because Christ gave
S. Peter the keys and commission to feed his sheep, therefore it was
convenient that the Council should also give the like authority to the Bishop
of Constantinople, or prefer him before the Bishop of Alexandria, and Antioch
(which was in deed his demand?) how would this conclusion follow of those
premises? Whereas the other consequent was not so evil, to wit, that because
the Roman Church had been in times past privileged by reason of the Imperial
Seat, it was convenient, that also the Church of Constantinople should have
like privileges for the same reason.

63. Again, what should the Bishop of Constantinople have gained by mentioning
privileges granted to Peter's Sea? Should he not have hindered his own cause
thereby, and pleaded against himself for Alexandria, and Antioch? For who
knows not, that S. Peter was Bishop of Antioch, some years before he came to
Rome, and that he made his disciple S. Mark Bishop of Alexandria, in which
respect those two Churches had always the pre-eminence before all other next
after the Roman? seeing then the Bishop of Constantinoples pretense was no
other, but to be preferred before the Bishops of Alexandria, and Antioch, he
had no less reason to forbear all mention of Peter's Sea, M. Andrews his fraud
in alleging the Canon
and of the privileges granted thereto, then M. Andrews had in setting down
the substance of the Canon, to conceal, and omit all that which would have
discovered his fraud, and overthrown his cause (I mean that the second place
after Rome was granted by that Canon to the Church of Constantinople) and
therefore he was not so simple to touch that string, which would have mard all
his music, as it has been partly signified before, and will further appear
by that which follows.

64. For having said that which you have heard before concerning privileges
granted by the Fathers to the Roman Sea (because Rome was then the Imperial
City) he adds: Andr. vbi supra.
in sua autem iam potestate esse, ex eadem ratione etc. The Fathers of the
Council signified that it was now in their power for the same reason, (seeing
that Constantinople did enjoy both the Imperial Seat, and Senate) to advance
it also to equal dignity; and for as much as it was equal in all other things,
to make it equal also in Ecclesiastical matters, and, to use their own words,
(...), that is to say, to be magnifyed as Rome was. So he: wherein he not only
falsifieth the sense, and meaning of the Canon (in that he makes it to give an
absolute equality to the Church of Constantinople, with that of Rome) but also
craftily leaves out all mention of the second place after Rome, Can. 28.
which was granted to the Church of Constantinople by that Canon, and does
immediately follow the Greek words which he alleges, and overthrow all the
equality that he pretends, to be mentioned there; for after (...), these
words do follow immediately in the Greek, (...), which in our Latin copyes is
very well translated word for word, secundam post illam existentem, that is to
say, being the second after it: whereby it is signified, that the Church of
Constantinople (which had wont to have an inferior place to diverse other
Churches) should from thenceforth be the second after Rome. And did not M.
Andrews, trow you, see this in the Greek, and Latin? And if he saw it, with
what conscience could he so deeply dissemble it, as not only to leave out all
mention of it, but also to make an equality, and parity in dignity, and in all
things else betwixt the Churches of Rome, and Constantinople? Whereas the words
which he concealed do make it clear, that the equality mentioned in the Canon,
must needs be understood only according to distributive justice, that is to
say, without impeachment, or prejudice of the different degrees, and dignityes
of the two Churches, as I have amply declared before.

65. And as for the Greek words which he cyteth to fortify his forgery, they
do not extend so far, as he would stretch them (I mean) to make a parity, and
equality in dignity; for whereas the Greek text says, that Constantinople
should be magnifyed, as Rome was, the same may very well stand with the
foresaid equality, which distributive Justice ordayneth (to wit, with the
reservation of the different dignityes of the one, and the other) as when a
Noble man, and a mean man do concur in one act, or service to the Commonwealth, and both of them are rewarded, and advanced according to their different
qualityes, it may truly be said that the mean man is advanced as the Noble man
is, though not to the same degree, for both of them are advanced, as well the
one, as the other, and yet they are not made equal in dignity.

66. But now if we take the Greek words alleged by M. Andrews, or the Latin
in our translation, with the restriction that immediately follows (whereby the
second place after Rome is assigned to Constantinople) it is most clear, M.
Andrews streyneth the Greek text to make it serve his turn.
that they cannot possibly signify (as he would have them) parificare, and, ad
parem dignitatem euehere, and, ad paris magnitudinis instar efferre, which
words and manner of speech do exclude all that diffe^rence of degree, and
dignity which is expressly reserved in the Canon, giving the second place to
Constantinople: so that you see, he is in all this matter most fraudulent, and
has notably corrupted the Canon, as well by concealing that which most
imported, to show the full drift thereof, as also by perverting both the words,
and the sense of it.

67. It rests now, that I say somewhat more to his conclusion, Andr. page 171.
which is this: Quod habet ergo Roma de primatu etc. therefore that which Rome
has of the primacy, it has not from Christ, but from the Fathers, and in
respect of the seat of the Emperor, A very false and foolish conclusion of M.
Andrews.
and not for the seat of Peter; and forasmuch as the Fathers in advancing new
Rome to equal greatness, exercised the same power which they used in honoring
old Rome, therefore he is far from the faith, who affirms, that the primacy
of the Bishop of Rome is according to the faith, and religion of the Council
of Chalcedon. So he; concluding as you see two things, the one concerning the
primacy of the Roman Sea (which he says was not given by Christ, but, by the
Fathers, and not in respect of Peter's Seat, but, for the seat of the Emperor:)
whereto I have said enough in effect already, having taught him to distinguish
betwixt the Primacy of the Roman Sea granted by Christ to S. Peter, and the
privileges which the Fathers, or temporal Princes have given thereto; for of
the former, to wit, the Primacy of S. Peter's Sea, the Canon speaks not at all
(because the mention of it would have been nothing to the purpose of the Canon,
but rather against it, as I have sufficiently declared:) and therefore this part
of the conclusion is clean from the matter, and cannot possibly be drawn from
the Canon whereupon he groundeth all his arguments.

68. The other part is also no less frivolous then the former, for whereas he
concludes that the Fathers of the Council of Calcedon held not the Primacy of
the Bishop of Rome for a matter of faith, or Religion, because they made the
Church of Constantinople equal with the Roman Sea, you see that all the
equality whereupon he buyldeth, is but his own fiction, and repugnant to that
very Canon, which he lays for his foundation; and yet forsooth, he is not
ashamed to triumph and insult against the Cardinal, exacting of him some Canon
of the Council of Chalcedon for the Popes Primacy, as though he himself had
knocked him down with a Canon: for thus he says for an vpshot, and final
conclusion of all this matter.

69. Nec alieunde igitur tamquam e vepreculis extrahat nescio quid, Andr. vbi
supra.
and arrodat etc. Therefore let not (the Cardinal) draw, I know not what, out
of some place, as it were, out of the briars, and gnaw upon it; let him give us
a Canon (for the Canons are the voice of the Council) not out of the
superscription of an Epistle, Wisely forsooth.
or some corner of a period, or perhaps some piece of a title, or fragment of a
little clause. So he; wherein thou see, good Reader, how he bestirreth
himself with his diminitiues, or (to use a phrase of M. Barlows) with his
Hypocoristicall alleuiations, extenuating all that the Cardinal has objected,
as mere tryfles, and calling for a Canon, because the Canons are the very
voice of the Council, and so he would have us to suppose of his counterfeit
Canon (I say counterfeit, in respect that he has abused, mangled, and
perverted it as you have seen) which therefore is so far from being the voice
of the Council, that it is nothing else but a loud, and lewd lie of his own.

70. For the Canon it self, being taken as it is in the Council, utterly
overthrows his cause, seeing that it gives the second place to
Constantinople after Rome, The Cano^ alleged by M. Andrews overthrows his
cause^
and therefore acknowledges the Primacy of the Roman Sea: besides that although
it had been such as M Andrews would have it to be, yet Pope Leo's authority
sufficed to disanul it even in the Judgment of Anatolius himself, who having
been the cause, and author of it, acknowledged his error therein and craved
pardon for the same, as I have amply declared before. And although after the
earnest endeavors of diverse as well Catholic, as Heretical Emperors to
advance the Church of Constantinople, and some schisms also raised for that
cause, the Popes permitted the second place to the Bishops of that Sea,
whithout further opposition (especially from the time of Justinian the
Emperor, which was about a 100. years after the Council of Calcedon, yea and
afterward also Pope Innocentius the third ratifyed, Council. Lateran. sub
Innocent. 3. cap. 5.
and confirmed it by a Canon in the great Council of Lateran) yet the supreme
authority of the Sea Apostolic was no way prejudiced thereby, as it appears
evidently by the relation, which I have made before of the subjection, and
obedience of the Catholic Emperors, See before from number. 1^. to nu. 24.
and Bishops of Constantinople to the Sea of Rome from time to time, until the
Greek Empire was utterly ruyned by the Turks. So that it is every way
manifest that the Canon of the Council of Calcedon alleged by M. Andrews
has served him to no other purpose, but to bewray his impudency, fraud, and
folly.

Relatio Synod ad Leo.
71. And whereas he demands of the Cardinal some Canon of that Council, for
the proof of the Popes Supremacy, he shows himself very idle to exact a
Canon, for a matter that was not then in question, but professed by the whole
Council, as it evidently appears by their Epistle to Pope Leo wherein they
acknowledge that he being ordained to be the interpeter of the voice of Blessed
Peter to all men, The Cou^^ell of Calcedon acknowledged Pope Leo's supre^acy.
had conserved, and kept the true faith, which had been deduced from Christ's
time to theirs; and that under his conduct (as being the author of so great a
good) they published the truth to the children of the Church; that Christ had
prepared for them that spiritual banquet (meaning their Synod) by his Letters;
that he by his Legates had governed them in that Council, as the Head
governs the members; that the keeping of the Vineyard was committed to him by
our Savior; and that he had deprived Eutyches the heretic of his dignity in
Constantinople, See before nu. 45. and 4^.
which as I have declared before, he could not have done, if his authority had
not been universal.

72. And then coming to speak of the Canon which they had made in favor of
the Church of Constantinople, they signified the trust and confidence they had,
that as he was wont by his careful government to cast forth the beams of his
Apostolical light even to the Church of Constantinople, so he would now
condescend to confirm, that which they had ordained concerning the said
Church, for the avoiding of confusion, and mayntenance of Ecclesiastical
Discipline, which Discourse they end with this most humble, and submissiue
petition: Haec sicut propria, and amica, and ad decorem conuenientissima,
dignare complecti Sanctissime, and Beatissime Pater: most holy and blessed
Father vouchsafe to embrace these things, as your own, and friendly, and most
convenient, or fit for good order.

73. Ibidem.
And afterward having declared that the three Legates of Pope Leo did
contradict this Canon, The Counsel ascrybed their determination of matters of
faith to the authority of Pope Leo
they yield this reason thereof: Proculdubio, say they, a vestra Prouidentia
inchoari and hoc bonum volentes, desyring without all doubt, that this good
should also proceed from your Providence, vt sicut fidei, it a bonae
ordinationis vobis deputetur effectus, to the end that the effect as well of
good order, or Ecclesiastical discipline, as of faith, may be ascrybed to you.
In which words it is to be noted, that the Council ascrybed the effect, and
forc^ of their determinations not only concerning matters of discipline, but
also touching matters of faith, to the authority especially of Pope Leo: to
which purpose they also added further, that for as much as the Emperor,
Senate, and all the Imperial City desired it, and that it seemed also
convenient to the whole Council (yea and that whatsoever is well done by the
children, does redound to their fathers, who account, and make the same their
own) therefore, Rogamus (say they) and tuis decr^tis nostrum ^onor^ iudicium:
we beseech thee, honor also our judgment with thy decrees, and sicut n^^ (...)
capiti in bonis adiecimus consonantiam, sic and (...)
Summitas tua filijs (quod decet) adimpleat: and as we have yielded conformity,
on our parts to (you) our head, so let your Highness fulfill, or accomplish, to
(us) your children that which is convenient. Sic enim and pij Principes
complacebunt etc. For so shall the pyous^ Princes receive contentment, or
satisfaction (who have ratified the judgment of your holiness as a law) and
Seeds Constantinopolitana suscipi^t praemiu^, and the Church of Constantinople
shall receive a reward, or benefit, which Church has always performed all
endeavor toward you, to the cause of piety, and conjoined it self with you,
How effectually and clearly the Council of Calcedon acknowledged Pope Leo's
supremacy, in their general letter to him.
to the conservation of concord and unity with the same z^ale. Thus wrote the
whole Council to Pope Leo.

74. And now I report me to M. Andrews himself (though I take him for very
partial in this cause) whether any thing could be written in this kind more
effectually to show the belief, and faith of the whole Council touching the
supreme authority of Pope Leo, seeing that they do not only expressly call him
their head, and themselves his members, him their Father, and themselves his
children; but also do a^knowledge that he was accustomed to cast forth the
light of his Apostolical beams to the Church of Constantinople ((...),
consuete soliciti, say those Fath^rs, speaking of him in the plural number,
for the reverend respect they bare him) and signifying that his wonted care,
and authority was so general, that it extended it self to the Greek Church,
and particulerly to the Church of Constantinople: furthermore they testify that
the effect of their decrees both in matters of faith and of discipline,
depended principally on him, and therefore do, as I may say, beg at his hands
the confirmation of their Canon in favor of the Church of Constantinople, as a
special grace, benefit, and reward for the merits of the said Sea toward the
Sea Apostolic; and this in such earnest, and humble manner, that it is
evident, they acknowledged the whole matter to depend on his will, to be
granted, or denied, ratifyed, or disanulled by him, which also the issue
thereof made most manifest, seeing that his own denial, and opposition was
sufficient to overthrow it, as has been See before from nu. 29. to nu. 39.
declared.

75. And now, I hope, M. Andr^ws will not say that this is taken out of some
corner of a period, or some piece of a title, Other proofs that Pop^ Leo's
supremacy was acknowledged by the Counsel of Calcedo^^
or fragment of a little clause, seeing that this is (as he said of his Canon)
the very voice of the whole Council, being the substance of their public, and
general letter to Pope Leo himself; which may also be confirmed with their
other public testimonies of their belief concerning his authority, as that
they acknowledged not only that he was successor to S. Peter (saying in their
general acclamation to an Epistle of his, Act. 2^
Petrus per Leonem locutus est^ Peter has spoken by Leo) but also that he had
Peter's authority, yea and that S. Peter, was petra, and crepido Ecclesiae, the
rock and top of the Church; and, rectae fidei fundamentum, the foundation of
the true faith.

76. To which purpose it is to be considered that one of the chief causes of
the assembly of that Council, was to depose Dioscorus, Ac^. ^.
Bishop of Alexandria, which done by the sentence of Pope Leo, pronounced by
his Legates in these words: Dioscorus Patriarch of Alexandria deposed by Pope
Leo.
Sanctissimus, and Beatissimus Archiepiscopus magnae and senioris Romae Leo,
per nos, and per presentem sanctam Synodum, vna cum ter beatissimo, and omni
laud digno beato Petro Apostolo, qui est petra and crepido Ecclesiae, and ille
qui est rectae fidei fundamentum, nudauit eum tam Episcopatus dignitate, quam
etiam ab omni Sacerdotali alienauit ministerio. The most holy, and most blessed
Archbishop of the elder and great Rome Leo, has deprived him (to wit
Dioscorus) as well of all Episcopal dignity, as priestly ministry, by us and
this holy Synod, together with the thrice most blessed, and prayse-worthy
Peter the Apostle, who is the rock and top of the Church, and he which is the
foundation of the true faith. This was the sentence given by the Popes Legates
against Dioscorus; which sentence every Bishop in the Council not only
approved particulerly with his suffrage, or voice, but also confirmed with his
subscription, Three things to be noted in the depositio^ of Dioscorus proving
Pope Leo's supremacy.
as it appears in the 3. Action of the said Council.

77. Wherein it is to be observed. First; that Pope Leo deposed Dioscorus by
the Synod, whereupon it follows, that he was president, and head thereof, and
that the said Synod was but, as it were, his instrument, in that deposition.
Secondly, that he deposed him by the authority which he had, as successor to S.
Peter; in which respect it is said here that he did it, together with the most
blessed Apostle Peter. Thyrdly, that for as much as S. Peter is here
acknowledged to be the head of the Church (as being the rock, and top thereof,
and the foundation of the faith) the like must needs be granted of Pope Leo who
was his successor, and exercysed his authority. Lastly, seeing that this
sentence of deposition given against Dioscorus in this manner, and with these
circumstances, was received particulerly, and subscrybed by every one in that
Counsel, without any contradiction, or exception taken to any part thereof, it
is evident, that the whole was conform to the faith, and belief of the
Council, and consequently that they held Pope Leo not only for S. Peter's
successor, Concil^ Calced. Act. ^.
but also for head of the whole Church; and this I trust cannot be said to be
taken out of the briars, or corner of a period, or fragment of a clause, but
out of one of the most principal, and important Acts of all the Council.

78. Also it appears in the same Council that Theodoretus Bishop of Cyrus
(who being deposed by Dioscorus, appealed to Pope Leo) was by his authority
restored to his seat, Ep. Theodor. ad Leonem.
and admitted into the Council: Ingrediatur, say the Fathers, and
Reuerendissimus Episcopus Theodoretus etc. Let also the most Reverend Bishop
Theodoretus enter, that he may be partaker of our Synod, because the most holy
Archbishop Leo has restored to him his Bishopric. Theodoretus restored to
his Bishoprike by Pope L^o.
So they; whereby they gave sufficient testimony of the soueraygnty of Pope
Leo, acknowledging his power to restore Bishops to their Bishopriks in the
Greek Church. Finally if there were nothing else in that Council to prove Pope
Leo's supreme, and universal authority over the Church of God, it might
suffice for an evident proof thereof, Pope Leo was undoubtedly the head and
president of the Counsel.
that he was undoubtedly the president, and head of the Council, as you have
heard before, and may be confirmed by the subscriptions of his Legates set
before all other Bishops, though one of them was but a Priest, and no Bishop.

79. For what reason can be imagined why Pope Leo should be president of a
Council in Greece, so far from his own seat (as well he himself as his
Legates being Romans, Calvin confuted concerning the cause why Pope Leo was
president of the Council.
and of the Latin Church) but that it belonged to him to be head thereof, in
respect of his universal authority? Will M. Andrews absurdly say as Calvin
does, that there was no Bishop in all Greece at that time, held to be worthy of
that Honor? How then was Anatolius Bishop of Constantinople able to procure
such a Canon, as he did, in his own favor? Can any man believe that he was
(as M. Andrews says) esteemed worthy to be made equal in dignity, and all
things else with the Bishop of Rome, and yet not fit to be President of a
Council in his own country, yea less fit then a stranger, who was held to be
but his ^qual? Besides that howsoever Pope Leo himself might be esteemed more
worthy of that Charge, then the Bishops of Greece (in respect of his eminent
learning, wisdom, and virtue) yet there is no probability in the world, Pope
Leo head of the Counsel of Calcedo^ in respect of his supreme authority over
the whole Church.
that the Emperor, and all the Bishops of that Council (which were above
600.) had the like conceit of the sufficiency of his Legates, or that they would
all of them yield as well to them, as to him (one of them being but a Priest:)
This, I say, is so improbable that M. Calvin, and M. Andrews must either give
us some other probable reason for it (as they shall never be able to do) or else
confess that Leo was President of that Council by right of his sovereignty,
and supreme authority over Gods Church.

80. Therefore now to conclude this matter, thou see, good Reader, what was
the belief of the Fathers in the Council of Calcedon concerning the Popes
supremacy, and how far M. Andrews is from their faith, and Religion, yea and
what a seared conscience he has, What a seared conscience M. Andrew^ has.
not only to deny such an evident truth as this, but also to impugn it, with
so much fraud, and impudency as he does against his own conscience (no doubt:)
for he could not possibly see in the Council, that which he himself alleges
and the Cardinal obiecteth, but he must needs see all this which I have cyted
out of it: neither could he allege some part of the 28. Canon, and urge it as
he does (laying down the words even of the Greek text) but he saw as well
that which follows immediately (and clearly conuinceth his fraud, and
forgery) as that which went before, and seemed to make for him; whereby it is
evident that he not only wittingly dissembled, and concealed the whole drift of
that Canon, but also maliciously perverted, mangled, and falsified it, to the
end to deceive his Reader, for the mayntenance of his miserable cause; for so I
may well term it, seeing it dryueth him to such miserable and desperate
shifts.

M. D. ANDREVVS HIS ANSWERS TO three places of the Fathers are examined. AND
By the way the Cardinal is cleared from a false imputation of Iouinians
heresy, and M. Andrews truly charged therewith. Finally all that which we teach
concerning the Popes authority is necessarily deduced out of M. Andrews his
own doctrine, and express words.
CHAP. III.
HAVING occasion in my Supplement to prove the necessity of a visible head in
Gods Church to co^serue the same in unity, Suppl. cap. 4. nu. 3. and 4.
I alleged two places of S. Cyprian, and S. Hierome, which the Cardinal also
cyteth in his Apology, together with diverse other testimonies of the Fathers,
to prove the Primacy of S. Peter, and for as much as M. Andrews his answer
thereto (if it have any force at all) makes as much against me, as against the
Cardinal, Apol. Card. Bell. cap. 8. p. 125. Cypria^. de unit. Eccles.
I will examine here what force, and pith it has. The Cardinal says thus of
S. Cyprian. Fecit Cyprianus Petrum etc. Cyprian made Peter the head, fountain,
and root of the Church: and in his Epistle to Quintus: Peter, says he, whom
our Lord first chose, and upon whom he buylt his Church etc. Where S. Cyprian
does not only say, Idem ep. ad Quintum.
that Peter was first chosen, but also adds that the Church was buylt upon
him; and truly the foundation in a buylding, and the head in a body are all
one. Thus says the Cardinal, alleging, as you see, two places of S. Cyprian,
to both which M. Andrews means to say somewhat.

2. To the first he says thus, Andr. Resp. cap. 8. page 217. ^in. penult.
Fecit Cyprianus etc. Cyprian made Peter the head, fountain, and root of the
Church, not Peter of the Church, but rather makes the Church it self the
fountain from whence many brooks, M. Andrews grave discourse in answer to
the Cardinal.
the light from whence many beams, and the root from whence many boughs are
propagated. Learn this even of himself; Sic and Ecclesia Domini luce perfusa
etc. So the Church being wholly resplendent with the light of our Lord, casts
forth her beams throughout the whole world (lo, he says the Church, and not
Peter) yet the light is one, and the self same which is spread every where (is
this light Peter? or is he every where spread abroad?) and the unity of the
body is not separated. The Church through the plenty of her fertility
stretches forth her branches over the whole earth, and does amply spread
abroad her abundant flowing brooks, yet the head is one, the beginning one,
and one mother, copious with the prosperous success of her fecundity, or
fruitfulnes. Caligauit hic Cardinalis etc the Cardinal was spurre-blynd, or
dim sighted here, for (I think) he will not say, that Peter is the mother,
and therefore not the head.

3. This is M. Andrews his grave discourse, supposing, as it seems, that
because the word matter is applied to the Church by S. Cyprian, therefore Caput
cannot be applied to S. Peter, but to the Church. Therefore to the end M.
Andrews may understand that S. Peter (and not the Church it self) is in this
place worthily termed by S. Cyprian, caput, fons, radix, and origo, the head,
the fountain, the root, and the spring, he shall do well to consider the
ground and drift of all S. Cyprians discourse, which the Cardinal in his
Apology omitted for breuityes sake, and therefore although I have laid it down
in my Supplement, to prove the necessity of a visible head in the Church, yet I
will take pains to repeat it here, to ease the Reader of the labor to seek
it there.

4. S. Cyprian meaning to show the cause, why the Church is troubled with
heresies, The drift and meaning of S. Cyprian.
and schisms, and withal to give the remedy, says thus: Hoc eo fit etc. This
happens, because men do not return to the beginning of truth, nor seek the
head, nor observe the doctrine of the heavenly Master, Cyprian vbi supra.
which if any man will well consider, and examine, he shall not need any longer
treatise, or arguments to prove it; the proof is easy to be believed by the
compendiousnes, or breuity of the truth; our Lord said to Peter, Matthew. 1.6.
I say unto thee, thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will buyld my Church,
and the gates of hell shall not overcome it etc. Joan. 21.
To him also he says after his resurrection, Feed my sheep: upon him being
one, he buylt his Church, and to him he recommended his sheep to be fed, and
although after his resurrection he gave equal power to all his Apostles, Ibid.
20.
and said, as my Father sent me, so I send you, receive the holy Ghost etc.
nevertheless to manifest, and show a unity, he ordained one chair, and by his
authority disposed, that the beginning of the same unity should proceed from
one. Truly the rest of the Apostles were that which S. Peter was, endued with
like fellowship of honor, and power, but the beginning proceeds from unity;
the Primacy is given to Peter, that one Church of Christ, and one chair may be
showed. So he.

5. And prosecuting still the same matter, proves notably the unity of the
Church, by the unity of the head, S. Cypria^ proves the unity of the Church by
the unity of the head thereof.
from whence all the unity of the body is derived, which he shows by three
excellent similituds of many branches of one tree springing from one root,
many brooks of one water flowing from one fountain, and many beams of one
light derived from one sun, concluding his discourse, that notwithstanding
the amplitude of the Church, by the propagation, and numerosity of her
children, and the extension of her parts, and members all over the world, vnum
tamen caput est, says he, and origo vna etc. yet the head is one, and the
origin, or beginning one (that is to say Peter) upon whom he said before (as
you have heard) that our Savior buylt his Church, and to whom he reco^mended
his sheep to be fed, yea gave him Primatum, the Primacy, vt vna Christi
Ecclesia, and vna cathedra monstretur, to show thereby one Church of Christ, and
one chair; and this must needs be the true sense of S. Cyprian in that-place,
if we will make his conclusion conform to his premises, and to the whole
scope of his intention.

6. So that M. Andrews making the Church it self to be the root, fountain,
and head whereof S. Cyprian speaks, does most absurdly confound the tree with
the root, the rivers with the spring, the body with the head, and lameth all
that most excellent discourse, of S. Cyprian, yea overthrows the very
foundation thereof, denying all that which S. Cyprian laid for his ground, to
wit, the Primacy, and supreme authority of S. Peter, from whence he expressly
deryueth the unity of the Church, as he does also most clearly else where,
saying in his Epistle to Iubaianus: Idem ep. ad Iubaian.
Nos Ecclesiae vnius caput, and radicem tenemus: We have, or do hold the head,
and root of one Church (and after declaring what root, Ibid.
and head he means, he says:) nam Petro primum Dominus super quem etc. For
our Lord gave this power (of binding, and loosing) to Peter, upon whom he
buylt his Church, and vnde vnitatis orig^nem instituit, and ostendit: and from
whence he ordained, and showed the beginning of unity. And again after in the
same Epistle: Ecclesia quae vna est, super vnum qui claues accepit, voce Domini
fundata est. The Church which is one, was by the speech of our Lord founded
upon one, who received the keys. So he. Whereby it evidently appears, that
his constant, and manifest doctrine is, that all the unity of the Church,
proceeds from the unity of her head (to wit S. Peter, and his chair) and
that the Cardinal affirming that S. Cyprian made Peter the head, fountain,
and root of the Church, gave us his true sense: and M. Andrews making the
Church it self to be the head, A foolish gloss of M. Andrews upon the text of
S. Cyprian.
fountain, and root of it self, is very absurd, and wholly repugnant to S.
Cyprians doctrine or meaning.

7. And this will be more clear, if we examine a little better M. Andrews his
gloss upon the text of S. Cyprian, whereby he labors to prove, that the
Church it self, and not S. Peter is the head, fountain, and root whereof S.
Cyprian speaks. Andr. vbi supra page 218. lin. 2.
For having laid down S. Cyprians words (to wit, sic Ecclesia Domini luce
perfusa etc. so also the Church shyning with the light of our Lord, reaches
forth her beams over the whole world) he notes that the Father says,
Ecclesia, non Petrus, the Church, not Peter; and no marvel, seeing he had no
occasion then to name Peter, but the Church only; for although the Church,
being a visible body, has always a visible head under Christ, to wit Peter,
and his successors; yet S. Cyprian does speak of it here, as of a body
considered a part, not including the head, meaning afterward to speak of the
head (as he had in like manner done before) declaring from whence the unity of
that body is derived, as it will appear further hereafter.

8. In the mean time, let us see how M. Andrews goes on with the text; Vnum
tamen lumen est etc. Yet it is one light, which is every where spread, neither
is the unity of the body separated; here now he asks two questions, the one
whether Peter be the light, How S. Peter might be called the light of the
Church.
and the other, whether he be every where dispersed? whereto I answer, that
although he is not the light of the Church, as he was a particular man, yet he
may well be so called, not only as he was an Apostle (seeing that our Savior
said to all the Apostles, Vos estis lux mundi, you are the light of the world)
but also much more as he is the Vicar, Matthew. 5.
and substitute of our Savior, who being lux vera, Joan. 11.
the true light, imparteth unto him his own excellencyes, so far forth, as is
necessary for the government of his Church, which he has committed to his
charge; in which respect it may truly be said, that the light of the Church
proceeds not only from Christ, but also from him, as from the head thereof
under Christ, and that by his authority it is spread every where throughout the
Church.

9. And this is sufficient to make good the similitude according to the
intention of S. Cyprian, who only speaks here of the Church, as of a body
receiving all the unity of her several and many parts from the head, as the
light which is spread thoughout the world, receaueth unity from the sun; and
therefore he argues thus in substance: The vinity of the Church notably proved,
and deduced by S. Cyprian from the unity of the Head.
As the light of the sun dispersed over the earth (though it have many
beams, yet) is but one light by reason that it proceeds from one sun, so
also the body of the Church dispersed by many members over the whole world, is
but one body, because it proceeds from one head; which reason he gives yet
more expressly in the two other similituds that immediately follow (of a tree
spreading forth many boughs, and of many brooks flowing from one fountain)
for of the former he says, that though the boughs are many, and spread far
abroad, Robur tamen vnum tenaci radice firmatum: yet the strengeth is one
fastened in the strong, and stiff root; and of the later he says in like
manner, that notwithstanding the abundant, and copious plenty of water
dispersed by many brooks, yet it is but one water, because vnitas, says he,
seruatur in origin, the unity is conserved in the spring. Who then sees not,
that to apply this similitude to the Church, we must needs say, that albeit the
said Church has very many members, and parts spread over the whole world yet
it is but one body, because it has but one head wherein the unity of all the
parts is conserved.

10. And to this is also conform the rest of S. Cyprians text, which M.
Andrews proceeds to lay down thus; Ramos suos Ecclesia etc. The Church,
through her abundant fertility, stretches forth her branches over the whole
earth, and largely spreads abroad her copious rivers, or brooks, yet the
head is one, the origin, or beginning one, and one mother etc. So says S.
Cyprian, teaching, as you see, nothing else in effect, but that the Church being
a body dispersed over the whole world in her members, is united in one head,
and therefore he says, vnum tamen caput, and origo vna, yet the head is one,
and the origin, or beginning one: and so having spoken as well of the head of
the Church, as of the body, and declared from whence the unity of the whole is
deryued, he had great reason to add vna matter, one mother, Why the Church is
called one Mother.
giving to understand that as the Church has one head, so she is one mother;
one, in respect of her unity deryued from her head, and mother, because she is
the spouse of Christ, and has children dispersed throughout the world.

11. And thus may M. Andrews see, that albeit S. Peter is not called in S.
Cyprian a Mother, M. Andrews fraudulent in his lame allegation of S. Cyprian.
yet he is acknowledged to be the head, from whence the unity of the whole
Church our mother is communicated to us her children, which would have been as
clear as the sun, if he had laid down the similituds themselves, as well as
he gave us only the application of them out of S. Cyprian (beginning his
allegation, with Sic and Ecclesia: so also the Church etc.) for he knew full
well that his false gloss would have been easily discovered if he had set
down the similituds, as they are delivered, and urged by the Father himself.
Therefore now let the Reader Judge, Quis caligauit hic? who was blind here?
the Cardinal, or M. Andrews? Thus much concerning the first place of S.
Cyprian.

12. The other place is; Petrus super quem Dominus fundauit Ecclesiam: S. Cypr.
ep. ad Quint.
Peter upon whom our Lord did found his Church; whereupon the Cardinal
infereth that S. Cyprian teaches, that the Church is buylt upon S. Peter,
Card. Bellar. Apolo. c. 8. p. 125. Andr. cap. 8. page 218.
and that therefore he is the foundation of the Church, and consequently the
head thereof, because the foundation in a buylding, and the head in a body is
all one: whereto M. Andrews answers thus. Alter vero illi ex Cypriano locus
praecidendus erat etc. A shifting answer of M. Andrews, falsely charging the
Cardinal with fraud.
He thought it necessary to cut of the other place of Cyprian where it seemed
little to favor the Primacy; for thus it is, nam nec Petrus (quem primum
Dominus elegit) etc. For neither did Peter, whom our Lord chose the first,
challenge any thing insolently to himself, nor take upon him arrogantly to say
that he had the Primacy, or that he ought to be obayed of those that were
younger, and later then he: Wherein the mind or sense of Cyprian seems to be,
that if Peter had said that he had the Primacy, he had insolently challenged
somewhat to himself, and therefore the Cardinal suppressed this part of the
text warily, The Primacy of S. Peter is notably proved, by those words of S.
Cypria^, which M. Andrews says the Cardinal fraudule^tly left out.
because it made little for the Primacy, and rather took hold of the former
part, where Cyprian says, that the Church was buylt upon Peter etc.

13. Thus says M. Andrews, with somewhat more, which I will also lay down
after a while, when I shall first have examined this; wherein you see he would
feign make the Reader believe that the Cardinal had used some art, or fraud,
in leaving it vncyted, as not favorable, but rather prejudicial to S. Peter's
Primacy; whereas in truth it does notably prove it, and no way impair, or
infringe it, as he may see in the Cardinals controuersyes, where amongst very
many other places alleged for the Primacy of S. Peter, he urges this,
fortifying it notably with the authority of S. Augustine, who also cyteth those
words of S. Cyprian, though upon another occasion. Therefore I will set down
the Cardinals own words to the end that he may answer for himself: who
having brought the testimonies of a whole Jury (as I may say) of Greek Fathers
(to wit Origin, Eusebius, S. Basil, S. Gregory Nazianzen, S. Epiphanius, the
two S. Cyrils, S. Chrysostom, Euthymius, Theophilact, Occumenius, and Hugo
Etherianus, all of them expressly acknowledging the supremacy of S. Peter
above all the other Apostles) adds as many more of the Latin Fathers, and
begins with S. Cyprian thus. Bellar. d^ Romano Pout. l. ^. cap. 25.


14. Ex latinis S. Cyprianus in Ep. ad Quintum etc. Of the latin Fathers S.
Cyprian in his Epistle to Quintus says, that Peter, when he was reprehended by
Paul, would not say that he had the primacy, and that he ought to be obayed, S.
Cypria^ clearly explicated by the Card. out of S. Augustine.
whereby he signifies that Peter had the primacy, and might command all
others. And lest perhaps our adversaries may say, that Cyprian means that
Peter did not say he had the Primacy, because he should therein have affirmed
that which was false, let us hear Augustine expounding this place of Cyprian
lib. 2. S. Peter being head of the Apostles suffered himself to be reprehended
by S. Paul.
de Baptismo cap. 1. etc. Thus says the Cardinal, and after having laid down
S. Cyprians words alleged by S. Augustine (being the same that you have heard
before) he adds the words of S. Augustine which are these: Ecce vbi
commemorat Cyprianus etc. Behold how Cyprian does show that Peter the Apostle
(in whom the primacy of the Apostles is preeminent with such an excellent
grace) corrected by Paul a later Apostle, when he dealt concerning Circumcision
otherwayse then truth required. So says S. Augustine, whereby it evidently
appears, how he understands S. Cyprian in this place, to wit, that albeit
Peter was preeminent, and far excelled the Apostles by reason of his Primacy,
yet when he erred, he patiently suffered himself to be corrected by Paul, and
did not insolently, and arrogantly defend his error, standing upon the
authority of his Primacy, and challenging obedience of S. Paul and others.

15. This then being so, and the Cardinals opinion concerning the meaning of
S. Cyprian in this place being so ^ell fortified, Bellarmine cleared from M.
Andrews imputatio^.
as you have now heard, by S. Augustines construction, and judgment thereof,
what reason has any man to think that the Cardinal did, as M. Andrews
charge him, purposely, and craftily suppress those words of S. Cyprian, as
not making for Peter's Primacy; whereas you see he takes them to make much for
it, and does urge them notably to prove it? Therefore can any reasonable man
imagine any fraud in the Cardinal? Or any other cause why he did not eyte them
in his Apology, but partly for breuityes sake (which every may sees how much
he affects in all his works) and partly because he thought he had alleged
sufficient already out of that Father to prove his intent?

16. So that, whereas M. Andrews says, Ea Cypriani men's videtur etc. The mind
or sense of Cyprian seems to be, that if Peter had said he had the Primacy,
he had insolently challenged somewhat to himself (that is to say more then was
due unto him) he did very well to say videtur, it seems; for if he had
absolutely affirmed it, he had ouerlashed very far. Besides that he may learn
if it please him to make a great difference betwixt insolenter, How a man may
speak of his own authority insolently, and yet truly.
and ^also, insolently, and falsely; for a man may take upon him a true
authority, and speak of it insolently, that is to say without just cause, or
in defense of some evil act, and yet not falsely, because it is true that he
has the authority which he pretends. And therefore I say, that if S. Peter
should have stood upon his Primacy in defense of his erroneous act, and said,
that S. Paul ought to follow and obey him therein, because he was the Primate,
and head of the Apostles^ he had both said, and done insolently, which
nevertheless, in defense of a truth, or upon some other just occasion, he might
both say and do, without all note of insolency, yea justly, and necessarily,
because he had indeed the Primacy, and therefore was to be obayed, and followed
in all good, and just actions.

17. But now M. Andrews goes forward: and whereas the Cardinal concluded that
Peter being the foundation of the Church was therefore the head of it, Andr.
v^^ supr.
M. Andrews grants, How S. Peter is termed the foundation of the Church by
S. Cyprian.
that S. Peter was fundamentum quidem vnum, sed non vnicum, one, but not the
only foundation: esse enim illiusce aedificij duodecem fundamenta, for that
there are twelve foundations of that building. But M. Andrews is here short of
his account, for he should rather have said that there are thirteen, except he
will exclude Christ, of whom the Apostle says, Fundamentum aliud nemo potest
ponere etc. no man can lay any other foundation then that which is already
laid, 1. Cor. 3.
Jesus Christ: of whom also the Prophet says, Ecce ego ponam in fundamentis
Sion lapidem etc. Isa. 28.
Behold I will lay a stone in the foundation of Sion, an approved stone, a
corner, and precious stone, founded in the foundation etc.

18. And this I am sure M. Andrews will not deny, seeing that it is one of the
most special arguments whereby his fellows are wont to exclude S. Peter from
being the foundation of the Church (to wit because Christ is the foundation of
it:) if therefore M. Andrews will admit twelve foundations of the Church,
without prejudice to Christ, he may also admit eleven without prejudice to
Peter. For albeit the twelve Apostles are all founded upon Christ, who is the
first and principal stone, yet Peter may have the first place in the
foundation next after Christ, being immediately founded on him (as head and
ordinary Pastor of the Church) and the rest upon Peter, as extraordinary, and
subordinate to him. Besides that Peter, and the rest of the Apostles are called
foundations in different manner, as I will declare See after nu. 24.25. and 2^.
more particulerly in the discussion of M. Andrews his answer to the place of
S. Hierome.

19. And now to conclude concerning S. Cyprian, whereas the Cardinal argues
upon his words, that because S. Peter was the foundation of the Church, he was
therefore the head thereof (in respect that the head in a body, A bad inference
of M. Andrews about twelve heads.
and the foundation in a buylding is all one) M. Andrews answers thus: Vix
illuc vsquequaque etc. That is scantly true every way, for I do show the
Cardinal a buylding, whereof there are twelve foundations, but hardly can the
Cardinal show me one body, whereof there are twelve heads. So he, very well to
the purpose (I assure you) overthrowing himself with his own answer; for if
that buylding (which he says has twelve foundations) be the Church, as indeed
it is (and so it appears by his quotation of the 24. Chapter of the Apocalypse
Apoc. 24.
) then may the Cardinal very easily show him also a body that has twelve
heads, even according to the doctrine, and opinion of M. Andrews himself, who
can not deny but that the Church is a body (I mean such a body as here we
treat of, to wit not a natural, but a mystical body) neither can he deny
that the Apostles were heads of that body seeing all of them had (as M. Andrews
still tells us) the charge, and government of the Church alike; and
therefore being twelve governors, they were also twelve heads.

20. Is it then so hard a matter for the Cardinal to show him a body with
twelve heads? Nay, which is more, and touches more our case, does not M.
Andrews think it possible that such a body may have a hundredth heads, A
political or mystical body may have many heads subordinat to one head.
and all of them subordinate to one head? What will he say of the state of
Venice? Will he deny that the Senators (who are many hundreths) are heads
thereof? or that they are subordinat to one Doge, or Duke? So that it is to be
understood, that in respect of the rest of the Commonwealth, the Senators are
all heads, though in respect of the Doge, they are but members subordinate to
him. And so in this spiritual buylding of the Church, or mystical body of
Christ, though the twelve Apostles were twelve foundations, and consequently
twelve heads, yet, as all the twelve were subordinate to Christ, so were eleven
of them subordinate to Peter, whom Christ made their Primacy or Head, which,
as you have heard, is the express doctrine of S. Cyprian, teaching that albeit
the Apostles had equal power, yet Primatus, says he, Petro datur, vt vna
Ecclesia Christi, and vna Cathedra monstretur, The Primacy is given to Peter,
that one Church of Christ, and one chair may be showed. Whereby he gives to
understand, that although the Apostles were all of equal power in respect of
all other Christians, who were subject to them, M. Andrews so writes as he
does much help his Adversaries cause
yet they were not equal in respect of Peter to whom our Savior himself gave
the Primacy to conserve unity amongst them, and in his whole Church. And this I
hope may suffice for answer to M. Andrews his gloss upon the 2. places of S.
Cyprian; only, I cannot omit to thank him, for the pains he takes still to
corroborate our cause with his answers, and objections, for truly if he write
many books in this vain, we shall not need any other champion to fight for us
but himself, as it will also further appear by his answer to the place of S.
Hierome whereof I am now to treat. Card. Bellar. Apol. c. 8. page 126 Hierom.
l. ^. aduers. Iouinian.


21. The Cardinal cyteth out of S. Hierome these words, Inter duodecem vnus
eligitur, vt capite constitut^ schismatis tollatur occasio: one is chosen
amongst twelve, to the end, that a head being made, the occasion of schism may
be taken away, Touching the place of S. Hierome.
by which words of S. Hierome, spoken expressly of S. Peter, it is clear that
according to S. Hieromes doctrine our Savior made S. Peter head of the
Apostles, and consequently of the whole Church of God; Supple. c. 4. nu. 3.
to which purpose I have also urged the same in my Supplement.

Andr. vbi supra page 219.. Hieronymus.
22. Now then M. Andrews answers the Cardinal thus: Hicronymus idem hic a
Cardinale patitur etc. Hierome suffers here at the Cardinals hands the same
(injury) that Cyprian suffered before; both their places (or texts) are lamely
cyted, for Hi^rome says thus: At dices (tu scilicet Iouiniane) super Petrum
fundatur Ecclesia etc. M. Andrews bad gloss upon S. Hieroms text.
But thou (to wit Iouinian) wilt say, the Church is founded upon Peter (which
the Cardinal does now so often, and earnestly inculcate unto us, well following
Iouinian therein:) but what says Hierome? Although, says he, the same is in
another place done upon all the Apostles, and all of them receive the keys,
and the strength of the Church is equal consolidated, or established upon them
all, yet (neither in respect of the keys, nor of the foundation, which are so
much esteemed at Rome, but) for this cause one is chosen amongst twelve, that a
head being made, the occasion of schism may be taken away. Thus far does M.
Andrews allege the words of S. Hierome, and gloss them, as you see, wherein
two things are specially to be observed for the present, the one that he taxes
the Cardinal for wronging S. Hierome now, no less then he wronged S. Cyprian
before, in the lame, and corrupt citation of their places. The other, that he
would make the Reader believe, that to hold the Church to be buylt upon Peter
was one of Iouinians heresies, and not S. Hieromes doctrine; and that therefore
the Cardinal teaching, and often inculcating the same, does follow Iouinian; of
these two points I must needs say somewhat before I pass further; for truly
they deserve to be well examined, and the good conscience of M. Andrews to be
laid open to the world.

23. In the first point I must needs say he has some reason, to wit, in saying
that S. Hierome is as much wronged by the Cardinal, Supra nu. 15.
as S. Cyprian was before; which is most true; for neither of them both receive
any wrong at all by the Cardinal, The Cardinal falsely charged by M. Andrew^
with fra^d in the cita^ion of S. Hierome.
as you have already seen in the place of S. Cyprian, and will easily see also
in this place of S. Hierome, if you confer that which the Cardinal left
vncyted (and is laid down by M. Andrews) with that which follows, and is
cyted by the Cardinal: for albeit S. Hierome do teach in the words which M.
Andrews cyteth, that the Church was equally buylt upon all the Apostles, yet it
is evident by that which the Cardinal alleges, that the same is so to be
understood, that it does not any way prejudice the Primacy of S. Peter, seeing
that S. Hierome affirms expressly (notwithstanding the equality, whereof he
speaks) that S. Peter was made head of the Apostles; and therefore it is
manifest that M. A^drews does understand this equality in other manner then S.
Hierome does, who indeed says, with great reason, as also diverse other Fathers
do (and no Catholic will deny it) that the Church was buylt upon all the
Apostles ( ex aequo, equally) but in what sense the same is to be understood,
Psalm. 86. Apocal. 21. Ephesians. ^.
I would wish Mr. Andrews to learn of Cardinal Bellarmine himself in his
controuersyes, where he declares the same very learnedly, Bellar. de Romans
Pont. lib. 1. c. 11.
perspicuously, and briefly, as he is wont.

24. Thus then he says, answering to this very place of S. Hierome and
certain others taken out of the Scriptures, and objected by Luther: Respondeo,
tribus modis Apostolos omnes fuisse Ecclesiae fundamenta etc. How the Church
according to Cardinal Bellarmine is buylt equally upon all the Apostles.
I answer that all the Apostles were three ways the foundations of the
Church, yet without any prejudice to Peter. The first is, because they were the
first that did found Churches every where, for Peter did not himself alone
convert the whole world unto the faith of Christ, but some Nations were
converted by him, others by James, and others by the rest. And therefore S.
Paul Romans 15. says: Sic praedicaui etc. I have so preached this Gospel where
Christ was not named, least I should buyld upon other men's foundation. And 1.
Cor. 3. vt sapiens architectus etc. I have laid the foundation like a wise
Architect, and another buyldeth thereupon. And in this manner all Apostles are
foundations alyke, which I think is meant in the 21. Chapter of the Apocalypse.

25. The Apostles and Prophets are also said another way, to be foundations of
the Church, to wit, because all Christian doctrine was revealed unto them,
seeing that the faith of the Church is grounded upon the revelation which the
Apostles, and Prophets had from God; for new articles of faith are not always
revealed to the Church. But the Church rests, and continues in that doctrine
which the Apostles, and Prophets learned of our Lord, and delivered to their
posterity by preaching, and writing, and by this means we are, as the Apostle
says, Ephesians. 2. buylt upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, and
according to these two ways, Peter is no greater then the rest. But as Hierome
says, the strength of the Church is equally established upon them all.

26. The Apostles also are said a third way, to be foundations of the Church,
to wit in respect of their government; for all of them were heads, governors,
and Pastors of the universal Church, but not in the same manner that Peter
was, for they had a chief, and most ample power as Apostles, or Legates; but
Peter had it as ordinary Pastor; besides that they had their full power in such
sort, that nevertheless Peter was their head, and they depended of him, and
not he of them: and this is that which was promised to Peter Matthew. 16. when it
was said unto him in presence of the rest, Upon this rock I will buyld my
Church, which besides the other Fathers before cyted, S. Hierome teaches in
his first book against Iouinian; where explicating what is the meaning of
buylding the Church upon Peter, he says thus: Licet super omnes Apostolos etc.
Although the strength of the Church be established equally upon all the
Apostles, yet therefore one was chosen amongst the twelve, to the end, that a
head being made, the occasion of schism might be taken away.

27. Thus far the Cardinal, which I hope may suffice to teach M. Andrews how
the Church was founded equally upon the Apostles, to wit, the two first way,
(whereof the Cardinal speaks as mentioned in the Apocalypse, and the Epistle
to the Ephesians, where not only the Apostles, but also the Prophets are called
foundations of the Church) which may well stand with the Primacy of S. Peter,
and S. Hieromes doctrine concerning the same; whereas M. Andrews making S.
Hierome impugn S. Peter's Primacy by the equality that he mentions, makes
him contradict himself, and overthrow his own doctrine in the very next words
after, wherein he expounds (as the Cardinal notes very well) what is meant
by the buylding of the Church upon S. Peter, signifying that it is to be
understood thereby, that our Savior made S. Peter head of the Apostles, as I
will show further hereafter, by M. Andrews his own confession. So that it is
clear enough that the Cardinal left not those words of S. Hierome vncyted, See
after nu. ^6. and sequ.
as prejudicial to Peter's primacy, but only for breuityes sake; M. Andrews
calumniateth Bellarmine.
and that therefore M. Andrews has notably calumniated him, as well in this
place as in the former, seeking to cast upon him some suspicion of fraudulent
dealing in the cytation of Authors, which is indeed the proper talent of M.
Barlow, and M. Andrews, as you have hitherto seen sufficiently proved in them
both, and shall see further exemplyfied hereafter in M. Andrews, to his
confusion.

28. The second point which I wished to be observed in his Gloss upon S.
Hieromes text, M. Andrews second charge against the Cardinal touching
Iouinianisme refuted and retorted^
is that he says the Cardinal follows Iouinian in affirming, that the
Church was founded upon S. Peter, as if the Cardinal did teach therein so^e
heresy of Iouini^n, and not S. Hieromes doctrine: but this surpasses all
impudency. For, no doubt, he speaks against his own conscience, and
knowledge, seeing he cannot be ignorant of the contrary, if he have read, and
examined that very place in S. Hierome which he obiecteth, where it is evident,
that the matter then in controversy betwixt S. Hierome, and Iouinian was about
the merit of Virginity, S Hier. li. 1. contra. Iouinian.
because Iouinian equalled mar^ryage with it, which heresy S. Hierome in that
place labored to confute^ and for as much as the heretyke had objected the
marriage of the Apostles (inferring thereupon that if Virginity were to be
preferred before marriage, Christ would not have chosen married men, but
Virgins to be his Apostles, and the Princes, and Captains of Christian
discipline) therefore S. Hierome answers, that it appears not in the
Scriptures that any of them had a wife except Saint Peter, and that he being
married whiles he was under the law, lived continent from his wife after his
vocation to the Apostleship; and that if any of the rest had wives before their
vocation, they abstayned from them ever after; and that S. John Evangelist
being chosen a Virgin, was singularly beloved, and specially favored of our
Savior above the rest for his Virginity.

29. And whereas Iouinian also urged the supreme dignity of S. Peter, as that
the Church was founded upon him, being a married man, and not upon S. John who
was a Virgin (wherein it is evident that Iouinian sought to fortify his heresy
by an argument drawn from a point of known Catholic doctrine) S. Hierome was
so far from denying the Church to be founded on Peter, that he notably
confirmed it, declaring that Peter was made thereby head of the Apostles; for
having taught that the Church was also founded equally upon all the Apostles
(in the sense that I have declared) he gave a reason not only why S. Peter was
made head of the rest (to wit to take away the occasion of schism) but also
why he (being a married man) was endowed with that power, and dignity, rather
then S. John who was a Virgin, whereof he yielded this probable reason, that
respect was had to the age of them both, because Peter was a man of years, and
John very young; and therefore to avoid murmuration against John himself (which
would have happened in case he being the youngest of them all should have been
made their head) Peter was worthily preferred before him. Why S. Peter was
preferred by our Savior to the supremacy before S. Io^n.
This is briefly the substance of S. Hieromes discourse in that place. Whereby
it is evident that he notably confirms our Catholic doctrine concerning the
Supremacy of S. Peter, acknowledging him to be made the head as well of S.
John, as of all the rest.

30. And to the end that M. Andrews may evidently see that S. Hierome did not
impugn, or disallow this proposition, the Church is founded upon Peter (but
rejected only the false consequent that Iouinian drew thereon, against the
merit of Virginity) I wish him to read S. Hieromes Commentary upon the 16.
Chapter of S. Matthew, and particulerly upon these words of our Savior, super
hanc petr^m aedifi^abo Ecclesiam meam etc. upon this rock will I buyld my
Church etc. where he shall see that the proposition, which Iouinian objected,
S. Hier. in 16. cap. Matthew.
is also the clear, and express doctrine of S. Hierome, who says thus in the
person of our Savior to S. Peter: Because thou Simon have said to me, thou art
Christ the Son of God, S. Peter^ supremacy acknowledged by S. Hierome, and
grounded upon our Saviors own^ word^.
I also say to thee (not with a vain, or idle speech that has no operation,
or effect) sed quia meum dixisse fecisse est, but because my saying is a doing
(or making) therefore I say unto thee, thou art Peter (or a Rock) and upon this
rock I will buyld my Church. As Christ being himself the light, granted to his
disciples that they should be called the light of the world, so to Simon who
believed in Christ the Rock, he gave the name of Peter (that is to say, a Rock)
and according to the metaphor of a Rock it is truly said to him, I will buyld
my Church upon thee.

31. Thus far S Hierome, teaching expressly that Christ buylt his Church upon
Peter, Idem ep. a^ Marcella^^ ep. 54.
which also he teaches in diverse other places, as in an Epistle to Marcella,
where he has these words, Petrus super que^ Dominus fundauit Ecclesiam etc.
Peter upon whom our Lord founded his Church; and in another Epistle to Pope
Damasus he affirmed the same, not only of him, but also of the chair of Peter
saying: Ego nullum primum nisi Christum sequens Beatitudini tuae, id est
Cathedrae Petri, Ibid. ep. 5^.
communione consocior: super illam Petram, aedificatam Ecclesiam scio; I
following no first, or chief but Christ, Li. 1. contra Ioui^.
do communicate with thy Beatitude, that is to say, with the chair of Peter;
upon that Rock I know the Church is buylt. Finally in the self same book
against Iouinian, where he answers the former objection, he calls S. Peter,
Petram Christi, the Rock of Christ, saying: O vox digna Apostolo, and Petra
Christi! O speech worthy of an Apostle, and the Rock of Christ! signifying
thereby, that S. Peter was the Rock whereupon Christ buylt his Church.

32. So as it cannot be denied, that S. Hierome both firmly believed, and
expressly taught that our Savior buylt his Church upon Peter, wherein you
have already See before nu. 4.5. and seque^t
seen, that he agrees with S. Cyprian (who wrote long before him) and with
the whole Council of Calcedon, which calls S. Peter, Petram, and crepidinem
Ecclesiae, See before cap. 2. nu. 76.
the rock, and top of the Church, and rectae fidoi fundamentum, the foundation
of the true faith. Besides that you may also see in Cardinal Bellarmins
controuersyes, Bellar. de Romans Pontif. l. 1. c. 10.
that he agreed therein with Origin, S. Athanasius, S Basil, S. Gregory
Nazianzen, S. Epiphanius, S. Chrysostom, S. Cyril, Tertullian, S. Hilary, S.
Ambrose, S. Maximus, S. Leo, S. Gregory the Great, and other learned Fathers.

33. Whereupon it follows that Iouinian did not object the same, as his own
singular opinion (which he knew well would be little esteemed, and was to be
proved, and not objected) but as a matter generally acknowledged by Catholics,
and that therefore he only sought to draw some consequence out of it (as out of
a known principle of the Catholic faith) for the confirmation of his heresy,
How shameless M. Andrews is to charge the Cardinal with Iouinianisme, which he
himself professes, except he dissent from his fellows of the English clergy.
as all heretykes do also seek to do the like, not only out of Catholic
opinions, but also out of the Scripture it self. What then may we think of M.
Andrews, who is not ashamed to tax the Cardinal as a follower of Iouinian for
teaching that the Church was buylt upon Peter? Can we think that he has any
conscience, or care of what he says, especially seeing that he himself is a
true scholar, and follower of Iouinian, except he dissent not only from
Luther, Calvin and other Archsectaries his great Masters, but also from his
brethren of the present English Church.

34. Ambros. ep. li. 1. ep. 6. and 7.
For who knows not that they all hold, and teach that marriage is of equal
merit with virginity and viduall continency, which is the proper heresy of
Iouinian, condemned for such in his own time, first by Pope Siricius,
Hieronym. contra Iouinian.
and a Synod of Bishops held at Rome, and afterward by another Synod held at
Milan, where S. Ambrose was present? Besides that, the same is learnedly
impugned, Aug. li. de bono coniug. and de virginit.
and clearly confuted by S. Hierome in his books written purposely against
him; as also by S. Augustine, in his treatises de Bono coniugali, and de
Virginitate, which he wrote expressly for the confutation of that heresy, Idem
Retract. lib. 42. cap. 22. and 23.
as he testifyeth himself in his Retractations, where he calls Iouinian a
monster for teaching that doctrine, and registreth him for an here^tike in his
Tract, and Catalogue of heresies, as well for that opinion, Idem. de haeres. ad
Quoduul^. haer. 82.
as for impugning the custom, and use of the Catholic Church, in fasting, and
abstinence from certain meats wherein also the forenamed sectaries of our
days and the English Church at this present, and consequently M. Andrews
himself (except he will disclayme from all his brethren) do follow Iouinian.
Whereto I might add other heresies of his taught by many Archsectaries of our
time (wherein, Aug. vbi sup. and Ser. 191. de temp.
it may be, M. Andrews has his share amongst the rest) as that merits, and
rewards of the lust are equal; and that the corporal virginity, and integrity
of the Blessed Virgin Mary, was corrupted, and lost by the birth of our Savior.

35. All which opinions being heresies of Iouinian, and registered for such by
S. Augustine, Idem. de haeres. haer. 82.
have been reuyued in these our days, partly by Luther, and Calvin, and partly
by the Magdeburgenses, Bucer, Molinaeus, and others, Bellar de notis Eccles. l.
4. cap. 9.
as Cardinal Bellarmine shows out of their own works, in his
controversies. Therefore I remit it now to the judgment of the indifferent
Reader, who is the follower of Iouinian, the Cardinal, or M. Andrews, and his
fellows? seeing that the Cardinal holds nothing else with Iouinian, but only
that Catholic doctrine which Iouinian held, and professed together with S.
Hierome, and all other Fathers of his time (as all heretics have always
agreed with Catholics in some points) and condemns all those heresies which
the Fathers aforesaid, and the whole Church of their time condemned in him, and
his followers, whereas M. Andrews, and his fellows expressly profess, and
teach those very heresies, for the which Iouinian, and his followers were by
the ancient Fathers censured, and condemned as monstrous heretics, as has been
before declared: so that I think of this there can be no further controversy.

The answer of M. Andrews to the place of S. Hierome examined.
36. Now then let us proceed with the examination of what he says further to
the place of S. Hierome alleged by the Cardinal, which is this: Propterea
inter duodecim etc. Therefore amongst twelve one is chosen^ that a head being
appointed, the occasion of schism may be taken away: whereto he answers
thus: Inter duodecim vnum eligi etc. that one be chosen amongst twelve, or some
number which some one man may be able to govern, Andr cap. 8. page 219.
Hieronymus.
and provide for, or else to take away schism, who does forbid a head to be
chosen? or so much power to be given him, as may suffice for the end, or
purpose for the which he was ordained? But the question is how far that power,
and that number extends, lest the head become caput heteroclitum (an
extrauagant head, or a head out of course) and not so much the occasion of
schism taken away, Four things to be noted in M Andrews his answer.
as an occasion given of tyranny. So he, all which I beseech thee, good Reader,
well to note, and particulerly that he grants these points following: The
first, that S. Peter was chosen head of the Apostles: the second, that a head
is necessary for avoiding of schism: the third, that the same head is

37. But if M. Andrews consider well what he grants, M. Andrews large grant,
concerning the primacy of S. Peter.
he may consequently decyde the question, or doubt that he makes, and shall
see that he has granted as much in effect as we teach, or demand con^cerning
the authority of S. Peter, and his successors. For if S. Peter were made head
of all the Apostles to whom Christ left the government of his Church, it
cannot be denied, but that he was made head of the Church; for who is head of
any commonwealth, but he that is head of all those that have the
administration, charge, and government of it? And if the reason why he was
ordained head of the Apostles, was to avoid and prevent the danger of schism,
it must needs be granted, that so long as the same cause, and reason (I mean
the danger of schism) continues in the Church, What follows of M. Andrews
hi^ gra^nt.
so long also the remedy is to continue therein; and that the greater the danger
is, the more necessary also is the remedy; whereupon it follows that seeing
the danger of schism does, and ever shall continue in the Church, the remedy
also of one head is ever to continue. And for as much as the danger of schism
in the Apostles time was not so great (they being all of them most holy men,
One ^ead more necessary now in the Church then in the Apostles time, and why
and particulerly guyded by the holy Ghost) as it is, and^ always has been
ever since. Therefore the remedy of one head which our Savior ordained for the
same, is more necessary now, then it was in their days, yea and was more
specially intended by his divine providence for all ensuing ages after the
Apostles time, then only during their li^es.

Psalm. ^7. and 8^. Isa. 61.
38. Moreover it being evident in the holy Scriptures that our Savior planted
his Church to stand to the worlds end, it were absurd to say that he ordained
that form of government under one head to last only during the Apostles time,
Matt^^ 16. and vlt. Luc. 1. Ephesians. 4.
as though he had less care of the unity of his Church in future ages then in
the beginning when (as I have said) the danger of schism should be far less,
then it would be afterward. Therefore I conclude that seeing S. Peter was made
head of the Apostles, Our Saviors providence in the conservation of the Roman
Church when all other Apostlicall Churches have failed.
and consequently of the whole Church, to avoid schism, M. Andrews can not
deny the same authority to S. Peter's successors for the same reason; especially
seeing that our Saviors providence therein is evident (to the very eye of
every man that list not to be wilfully blind) in that he has permitted the
succession of all the Apostles to fail in all the Churches where they
governed, excepting only the succession of S. Peter in the Roman Church, which
he has miraculously conserved, to make it manifest to the world, that S.
Peter, and his chair (as you have heard out of S. Cyprian and S. Hierome) is
the Rock whereupon he promised to buyld his Church, ^. Aug. in Psalm. co^tra
part. Donati.
and that as S. Augustine says: Ipsa est Petra, quam non vincunt superbae
inferorum portae, that is, the Rock which the proud gates of hell do not
overcome.

39. Furthermore, whereas M. Andrews grants also that a head appointed in the
Church for the remedy of schism is to have so much power, as is necessary for
that end, he must needs consequently grant all that power which we require, and
acknowledge it in S. Peter and his successors to the same end; Power to punish
and to define, necessary in the head of the Church to remedy schisms.
I mean, not only a power and authority to define, and decyde controversies
(without the which no schism, or division concerning matter of doctrine can be
conveniently compounded) but also power, and jurisdiction to punish such as do
obstinatly infringe and violate the vni^ty, and peace of the Church; for how
can the head sufficiently remedy schism if he cannot punish those which do
cause, and maintain it? and if M. Andrews will say that Christ has therefore
left authority to his Church to punish only by excommunication, and spiritual
censures, I must demand of him, what remedy the head of the Church can give
thereby, when his censures are contemned, and specially by an absolute Prince?
shall he have then no further power to remedy the inconvenience? how then is
his power such as M. Andrews himself grants it to be, to wit quanta rei
satis si^, cui constitutus est, as much as may be sufficient for the thing, for
the which he was made head, that is to say, to remedy, and take away schism?

40. Whence the greatest danger of schism commonly aryseth.
And who sees not that the greatest harm that grows to the Church by
schism commonly is, when secular Princes do either raise it themselves, or
maintain it in others? Shall not then the head of the Church have sufficient
power to remedy this greatest danger, and mischief that can hap to the Church?
Or shall he not have means as well to correct his greatest and most powerful
subjects, See Supplem. cap. 1. nu. 61.62
as the least, and meanest? Then (as I have said in my Supplement) the power of
the Church should be no better then a cobweb, that holds the little flies,
and lets go the great ones, and consequently the providence of Almighty God
should be very defective, in ordayning a head to conserve his Church in unity,
and not giving him sufficient power to perform it, which no wise temporal
Prince would do, if he should make a Lieutenant to govern in any part of his
dominions. Whereto it may be added, that the Lawyers teach, that he which
grants jurisdiction, is presumed to grant all things necessary for the
execution of it; which is also conform to the Philosophers Maxim, to wit, Qui
dat esse, dat consequentia ad esse, he which gives a being, gives together
with it all those things which are consequents thereof, or necessarily required
thereto, as I have amply proved in my Ibidem a nu. 60. ad nu. 67.
Supplement, where I have deduced the necessity of this consequent from the
very Law of Ibid. nu. 67. and s^qu.
nature, and light of reason.

41. Besides that, I have also declared Ibid. nu. 63. and 64.
there that he which has power over the soul for the benefit thereof, Power
over the soul necessarily implies some power over the body.
must needs have also power over the body, and goods, which by the very Law of
nature are subject to the soul, and ordained to serve it, and therefore to be
disposed by the spiritual Governor, or Pastor, so far forth, as is necessary
for the salvation of the soul, in which respect the Church has always used
(and still does) to impose not only fasting, and other bodily penance, but
also imprisonments, and pecuniary mulcts upon her disobedient children, when
the benefit of their souls, and the public good of the Church does require
it, which is also used by our Adversaries themselves in their Ecclesiastical
discipline, who in their spiritual Tribunals, and Courts do punish the
disobedient, as well by pec^niary penalties, as by corporal imprisonements.
Whereupon it follows, that when Princes (who are members of the Church) do
violate the union thereof, and are incorrigible by excommunication, they may be
chastised by their supreme head, or spiritual Pastor even in their temporal
states, so far as shall be necessary for the good of their souls, and the
benefit of the whole Church; for otherwise the head of the Church should not
have that sufficient power to remedy schisms, and other inconveniences, which
M. Andrews himself grants, and it cannot indeed be denied.

42. This then being so, M. Andrews his first question, or doubt is
sufficiently solued, A doubt of M. Andrews sufficiently solued.
to wit, How far the power of the head, whereof S. Hierome speaks, does
extend; that is, to the direction, government yea and chastisment (when
occasion requires) of all his inferior members, of what degree soever, and
consequently of Kings and Princes, so far forth as shall be needful for the
co^seruation of unity in the Church; and that therefore when only
excommunication will not suffice to reduce them to unity, and obedience, the
head may extend his spiritual power to chastise them in their bodies, goods,
and states, as far as shall be convenient for the good of souls, and the glory
of God, whereto all men's temporal states, goods, lands, and lives are
principally ordained. Touching the number committed to S. Peter's charge.


43. And now to come to his other question concerning the mumber, which this
head may govern to avoid and remedy schism, let M. Andrews well ponder what
he has already granted, and of this there will be no doubt at all. For if
Peter was head of the Apostles (as S. Hierome teaches, and M. Andrews
confesses) then consequently he was head of as many in number, as were subject
to them; which was no less then all the world, whereof they had the spiritual
charge, and government, in which respect the Royal Prophet says of them and
their successors, pro patribus tuis nati sunt tibi filij etc. Psalm. 44.
For thy Fathers, children are borne unto thee, thou shall ordain them to be
Princes over all the earth. So says the Prophet of the Apostles, and of
Bishops who succeed them in their charge, and are therefore Princes and
Governors of the Church as S. Augustine, In Psalm. 44.
S. Hierome, and other Fathers expound this place; which therefore is verified,
especially in the Apostles, who being the Princes, and Governors of the
Church, did not only plant, but also propagate throughout the world in their
own time, according to the commission, and commaundment of our Savior, who
said unto them: Euntes in vniuersum mundum etc. Going into the universal world
preach the Gospel to every creature; Mar. vlt.
which also the Royal Prophet foretold of them saying, In omnem terram exiuit
sonus eorum etc. Psalm. 18.
The sound of them went forth into all the earth, and their words into the
bounds thereof.

M. Andrews granting S. Peter to be head of the Apostles grants that he was
head of the whole Church.
44. Seeing then the Apostles were Governors of the whole Church, and yet
subject to S. Peter, as to their head, it must needs be granted that he was
supreme head, and governor of the whole Church, propagated, and dispersed
throughout the world under their government; for which cause S. Chrysostom
says with great reason (not only of all the Apostles in general, that they
were to have orbis terrarum curam, the charge of all the world, but also much
more) of S. Peter in particular. Idem. ho. 5. in Petris Apost. and Eliant.
That, Petro Apostolo orbis terrarum Ecclesiae, the Churches of all the world,
and the multitudes of people were to be committed to Peter the Apostle; and
therefore even in the former place, where he says, that the Apostles were to
receive of Christ the charge of the world, Idem. ho. 87. in Joan.
he acknowledges that S. Peter was Princeps Apostolorum, and vertex totius
coetus, the Prince of the Apostles, and the top, or head of all their
congregation, and that Christ committed unto him curam fratrum, the charge of
his brethren (that is to say of the Apostles) and finally that Christ
recommended unto him orbis terrarum curam, the charge of the whole world.
Finally, comparing S. James the Apostle with S. Peter in the same place (by the
way of objection, demanding why then James was made Bishop of Jerusalem, and
not Peter) he answers: Hunc totius orbis magistrum praeposuisse, that our
Savior preferred Peter to be the Master of the whole world, giving to
understand, that whereas S. James was only Bishop of Jerusalem, and the
Countries adjoining (as also the other Apostles had every one of them some part
of the world allotted unto him to govern) S. Peter had the charge of the whole.

45. By all which it is evident that albeit the Apostles had the government of
all the Church, yet they were but subordinate to S. Peter, who had a commission
peculiar, and singular to himself, which was to have the care, charge, and
government of them, as well as of all others subject to them: So that his power,
and authority was wholly independent on them, whereas theirs must needs depend of
him, as of their immediate head under our Savior, whereby it may appear what
an idle head M. Andrews has, to exclude no less S. Peter then every other
particular man from the government of the whole Church, M. Andrews head very
idle.
for no better reason, then lest he might become heterochtum cuput (an
extrauagant head) or perhaps prove a Tyrant, through the excess either of
power, or of the number of subjects: wherein he shows himself no less
profane, then absurd, attributing as it seems, no force, or effect to our
Saviors promise of his continual assistance to his Apostles, and Church for
ever: besides that he erreth gros^ely if he make the multitude of subjects a
notice^ or cause of Tyranny, Matthew. 16. and vlt.
it being evident that the greater the number of the subjects is, A paradox of
M. Andrews.
the greater also is the difficulty to oppress them by Tyranny, and the
greater the fear, and danger to attempt it.

46. And therefore we see more frequent tyranny in small States then in great
Monarchies, Tyranny more frequent in small stats then great Monarchies.
and when great Monarchs are Tyrants, they commonly exercise their Tyranny
upon some part of their Dominions and not upon the whole, whereas a small State
containing a few subjects, is easily Tyrannized universally; so that the
multitude of subjects is not properly a motive, but rather a bridle to Tyranny,
though it is properly a cause of schism, when they are not governed by one
head, which M. Andrews acknowledges sufficiently, when he confesses, M.
Andrews acknowledges by a necessary co^sequent that one head is necessary for
the whole Church.
that one head is necessary to take away the occasion of schism amongst
twelve, or some other small number: for if that be true, then the greater the
number is, the greater is the danger of schism, if they have many heads
independent one of another; whereupon it follows that one supreme head is
most necessary for the whole Church, consisting of an innumerable multitude of
the faithful, dispersed throughout the whole world, who being all visible
members of one visible body, could not possibly be conserved long in unity if
they had not one visible head (whom they were all bound in conscience to obey)
as I have See suppl. cap. 1. nu. 81. and cap. 4. a nu. 3. ad nu. 18.
showed more at large in my Supplement, even by the testimony of M. Barlow
Ibid. nu. 7.8. and 9.
himself.

47. For which cause not only S. Cyprian (as you have heard before in this number.
2.3.4. and sequent.
Chapter) but also S. Hierome in this place teaches with great reason that our
Savior made S. Peter head of the Apostles, to avoid and remedy the schisms,
which might grow (not so much amongst them, as) in the whole Church; for in
them (after they had received the holy Ghost) there was no danger thereof,
though in the whole Church, which was to be propagated by them over the world,
the danger of schism was very great, not only in their time, but also much
more afterward (as I have signified nu. 37.
before) in which respect it was needful to be prevented by the institution
of one head over the whole Church; The conclusion concerning the place of S.
Hierome.
and therefore when S. Hierome answering Iouinian, says, that S. Peter was
made head of the Apostles, he means that he was made head of the Church,
which was represented in them, as in the Governors thereof; for seeing that
the objection of Iouinian which S. Hierome answers, concerned the foundation
of the Church upon S. Peter, his answer must needs also concern the same: to
which purpose it is to be considered, that he denies not Iouinians proposition
(as I have proved nu. 29. and s^qu.
before) but explicateth what is the meaning of super Petr^m fundatur Ecclesia,
signifying that it means nothing else in effect, but that Peter was made head
of the Apostles, which is as much so say, as that he was the foundation of the
Church, or that the Church was founded upon him, because, as Cardinal
Bellarmine says very well, the foundation in a buylding, and the head in a
politycall, or mystical body is all one: so as S. Peter being made head of the
Apostles (who represented the Church as Governors thereof) he was consequently
made the head, and foundation of the Church; and this being so, it appears
that this place of S. Hierome is clear for us, and directly proves that our
Savior made S. Peter head of the universal Church.

48. And whereas M. Andrews in his gloss upon S. Hieromes text note^h with a
parenthesis, that S. Peter was made head of the Apostles ( not for the keys,
says he, Andr. vbi supra.
or for the foundation, which are so much este^med at Rome, but to take away
the occasion of schism) I know not what else he impugneth thereby, M. Andrews
has granted by co^sequent as much as we demand co^c^rning the s^preme
authority of S. Peter^
but his own idle conceit: for no man says at Rome, or any where else for
ought I know, that S. Peter was made head of the Church for the keys, or for
the foundation, other ways then that in receiving the keys, and being made
the foundation of the Church he was made head thereof, to take away the
occasion of s^hisme. And this is S. Hi^romes doctrine, so evident, that M.
Andrews himself is forced thereby to confess that S^ Peter was made head of
the Apostles, yea, and that he had so much power, and authority given him as
was necessary for the prevention, and remedy of schism, whereupon all our
do^trine concerning the Popes autho^ity necessarily follows, as I have See
before nu^ 17^ 38. and sequent.
showed: so that you see, he still pleads for us, and well deserves his fee
(if not for his good will, yet at least) for his pains in defending our cause
against his will.

FOUR OTHER PLACES OF THE FATHERS ARE DEBATED: And M. Andrews his Answers
thereto confuted. With a Discovery of notable corruption and falsity in him:
and of three manifest lies within little more then three lines. AND By occasion
thereof, it is also proved, that 8. Popes who lived in S. Augustines time, had,
and exercysed an universal and supreme Authority.
CHAP. IIII.
THOU have seen good Reader in the last Chapter how well M. Andrews has
satisfied the Cardinals objection out of S. Cyprian, and S. Hierome; and now
in this Chapter I will examine his Answers to diverse other places of the
Fathers, namely of S. Basil, and S. Gregory Nazianzen, S. Chrysostom, and S.
Augustine, which albeit he pretends to answer together with the former; yet
I have thought good to separate them, because I have alleged them separatly in
my Supplement.

Card. Bellar. Apolo. c. 8. page 125 Suppl. cap. 4 nu. 15. S. Basil. in sermon.
de iudicio Dei. Andr. cap. 8. p. 218.. Ex Basilio.
2. First out of S. Basil, the Cardinal, an I object these words to prove the
supremacy of S. Peter over the rest of the Apostles: Ille beatus qui ceteris
praelatus discipulis fuit, cui claues regni caelestis commissae. That happy, or
blessed (Peter) who was preferred before the rest of the disciples, to whom
the keys of the heavenly Kingdom were committed etc. Hereto M. Andrews
answers thus: Ex Basilio, ceteris discipulis praelatum Petrum, sed an vt
esset Monarcha? etc. The Cardinal obiecteth out of S. Basil that Peter was
preferred before the rest of the Disciples; but was it to the end that he
should be a Monarch? is there no other prelacy but of a Monarchy? he was
preferred (...) in the testimony (that was given him by Christ) as Basil has
there, and (...), blessedness: add also (if you will) that he was preferred in
order, and place; the King does also attribute the same unto him, yea that he
may be the Prince of Apostles, yet without a Monarchy. Thus says M. Andrews to
the first part of S. Basils place: whereto I will say somewhat before I add the
rest. Here then you see he grants that S. Peter was preferred before the
rest of the Apostles in order, and place, yea and that he was the Prince of the
Apostles, and forsooth no Monarch.

How S. Peter may be said to be a Monarch.
3. But if we consider what he has granted in the last Chapter, we shall find
that he must needs acknowledge him to be a Monarch, how much soever he mislyke
the word: for if a Monarch do signify him that is one chief Prince, and
s^preme head or governor of others, not for his own particular benefit, but
for the public and general good of those whom he governs (for so is a
Monarch distinguished from a Tyrant) he cannot with any reason deny S. P^ter to
be the Monarch, that is to say, the supreme Prince, and head of the Church,
whom he acknowledges together with S. Hierome to have been made by our
Savior, head of the Apostles, to prevent and remedy schism, and to have had
not only the precedence of place, and order (as now he says) but also so much
power as suffyced, for the conservation of Unity in the Church, whereupon
follows all that power, Chap. 3. nu. 39.40. and 41.
and authority which we do attribute to S. Peter, and his successors, as I have
declared briefly in the last Chapter.

4. For S. Peter having by this commission of our Savior, authority to
ordain, command, and punish as far as was necessary for the good of the
Church, it must needs be granted that he had the power and authority of a
Monarch: and although M. Andrews had not been forced by ^he evidence of S.
Hieromes testimony to grant it, yet this very place of S. Basil which he
pretends here to answer, does prove it sufficiently, signifying as much in
effect as S. Hierome teaches; seeing that S. Basil not only says that Peter
was preferred before the rest of the Disciples, but also declares wherein,
that is to say (not in place and order only, but) in authority also, and
jurisdiction; adding, cui claues Regni caelestis commissae sunt, to whom (to
wit Peter) the keys of the heavenly Kingdom were committed; giving to
understand, that he had by this particular commission of the keys, a
particular Jurisdiction more then the rest, in respect whereof he was Boatus,
happy, or Blessed, and preferred before the rest.

Andr. vbi supra. A vain cavil of M. Andrews.
5. Whereby it may appear how vainly M. Andrews seeks to elude the force of
this place, by that which he adds, saying, Nam claues ei commissas quis
dubitat etc. for who doubts that the keys were committed to him, but whether
the same was done in his person, or in the person of the Church, Basil does not
declare here, but Augustine does in many places. So he: as though S. Basil did
not sufficiently explicate himself, and show that S. Peter had by the keys a
greater jurisdiction then the other Apostles, for else to what purpose did he
add, that the keys were committed to him, but to show how, and wherein he was
Blessed, and preferred before the rest? And whereas M. Andrews says, that
Augustine declares in many places, that the keys were given him in the person
of the Church, and not in his own, I have sufficiently showed the vanity of
this evasion in the first Cap. 1. nu. 3.4. and 5.
Chapter of this Adioynder, where I have evidently proved out of S. Augustine
himself that S. Peter received the keys, and Pastoral authority for the
Church, no otherwise, but as the supreme head, and Governor thereof, in which
respect he represented the person of the whole Church, wherein consists his
pre-eminence, and preferment before the rest, whereof S. Basil speaks. So that
you see M. Andrews has said nothing to any purpose in answer of the place of
S. Basil.

6. Now then let us see what he says to a place of S. Gregory Nazianzen
objected as well by the Card. Bellar. Apolog. vbi supra.
Cardinal as by Suppl. cap. 4. nu. 10. S. Greg. Nazianzen orat. de moderat.
etc.
me: Vides (says he) quemadmodum etc. Thou see how amongst the Disciples of
Christ (all of them truly great, and high, and worthy to be chosen) this, to
wit Peter, is called a Rock, and has the foundations of the Church committed
to his charge etc. Andr. vbi supra.
Thus says this ancient and holy Father: whereto M. Andrews answers thus: Ex
Nazianzeno, Petrum and Ioannem aliquo prae ceteris priuilegio donatos etc. Out
of Nazianzen (he obiecteth) that Peter, and John had some privilege more then
the rest: Peter that he had a new name taken from a Rock, and that John was
beloved more then the rest, and might layne upon Christ's breast, and the rest of
the Apostles did not take it ill; what was there here singular in Peter more
then in John? and therefore there is either here no Primacy, or else a double
Primacy. So he.

7. Wherein thou may easily see, A place of S. Gregory Nazian. explicated and
urged.
good Reader, how he paltreth and iuggleth, if thou notest well the objection,
and how he answers it, partly dissembling those very words which most import,
and partly seeking to blind the Readers eyes with the mention of a privilege
given to S. John, which indeed is also related in that place by S. Gregory
Nazianzen, but nothing at all preiudiceth the far greater privilege of S.
Peter, I mean his supreme authority signified by S. Gregory in the words
objected by the Cardinal. For when S. Gregory says, that Peter was called a
Rock, and had Ecclesiae fundamenta fidei suae credita, the foundations of the
Church committed to his charge, what else does he affirm therein, but that the
Church was buylt upon Peter, as upon a Rock; and that the charge, or government
thereof was given more particulerly to him then to the rest. For if M. Andrews
will say here (as he is wont) that they were all foundations and governors of
the Church alike, why was he called a Rock more then they? or what was the
privilege of Peter whereof Nazianzen speaks here, according to M. Andrews
his own confession, who grants that Nazianzen testifies that Peter and
John were aliquo priuilegio prae ceteris donati, privileged in some things
above the rest?

8. Therefore if M. Andrews will allow any particular privilege to S. John's
layning upon Christ's breast, as he must needs do (for I think he will not be so
absurd to say that the same is also to be understood of all the rest) he must
needs grant that Peter had also a particular privilege not only in the name
of a Rock, but also in that which was signified thereby, that is to say, in
that the foundations of the Church were committed particulerly to his charge
(as Nazianzen speaks) by which Metaphore he signifies sufficiently that S.
Peter was made supreme Governor of the Church, as has been declared
heretofore, and therefore those words of Nazianzen (atque Ecclesiae fundamenta
fidei suae credita habeat) wherein consists the force of the objection,
seemed to M. Andrews as sore as a byle, and not to be touched in his answer,
though he set it down in his margent together with the rest of the Cardinals
text.

9. But what shall we say of his absurd inference or conclusion, M. Andrews
impertinent trifling.
when he says, that because a privilege was given to John, as well as to
Peter, therefore there was either nullus, or duplex primatus, a double primacy,
or none at all? Shall we think so great a Doctor, as M. Andrews, to be so
simple, as not to see how impertinently he try fleth therein? For what
coherence is there betwixt those two privileges whereby he should make that
inference in them both? especially seeing that he himself will, I am sure,
deny one part thereof (to wit the double primacy) no less then we, and the
other part is also sufficiently contradicted, not only by S. Hierome, but also
by himself, as I have showed amply in the last Chapter, where I have declared,
how S. Hierome answered Iouinians objection, that the Church was founded upon
Peter, and not upon John, by occasion whereof S. Hierome teaches, that
although John was more favored and beloved of our Savior then the rest of the
Apostles for his Virginity, yet Peter was preferred before him in the primacy,
being made head of them all to take away the occasion of schism, and thereby
overthrows this his inference of a double primacy or none.

10. For if Peter were head of the Apostles, he was also head of the Church,
and consequently there was one primate, or head, and not two, notwithstanding
that John layned upon Christ's breast, and was more beloved of Christ then the
rest; so as M. Andrews does notably contradict himself; besides that he
argues as wisely, as if he should say that when his Majesty shows more
particular favor, and affection to any man then to my L. of Canterbury, he
makes either two Primates of England, or none at all. Whereby thou may see
(good Reader) what an absurd, and as I may term it, a sleeueles answer he
has made here to the place of S. Gregory Nazianzen.

11. After this there follows another place of the Cardinal, Suppl. cap. 4.
nu. 15. Card. Apol. vbi supra.
taken out of S. Chrysostom, which I have also objected in my Supplement. The
words laid down by the Cardinal are these: Sanctus Ioannes Chrysostomus ho.
55. in Matthaeum etc. S. Chrysost^ ho. 55. in Matthew.
S. John Chrysostom in his 55. homily upon Matthew says: (Christ) made Peter
Pastor of his future Church. And a little after: God alone can grant that the
future Church shall remain immouable, notwithstanding so many, and so great
waves (of persecution) violently bre^^ in upon it: of which Church a fisherman,
and of mean parentage is the Pastor and head etc. Here we read expressly,
that Peter was head of the Church. Thus far the Cardinal.

12. Heereto M. Andrews answers thus: Ex Chrysostomo, Cuius Pastor and caput
homo piscator etc. Andr. cap. 8. page 219.
Out of Chrysostom he obiecteth thus, Whereof the Pastor, and head was a
fisherman: but these words (whereof the pastor, and head) are crept into the
text, and added in the Latin in favor of (...) (he means the Pope) for they
are not in the Greek, where we read (...) a fisherman, but the word head
appears no where, nor in that place so much as Pastor, albeit no man will
deny that Peter was pastor of the Church, yea, and a chief or principal
pastor, but yet a pastor together with other Pastors his fellow-Apostles, and
not alone without others etc. So he: wherein you see he takes exception to the
words cuius pastor and caput, which he says are not in the Greek. Whereto I
answer, that put the case they be not now in the Greek copies which M.
Andrews has seen, yet it little imports, seeing that the latin translatour
found them (as it is most probable) in the Greek copy which he followed, and
that S. Chrysostom says as much in effect, as well in the same homily, as in
other places.

13. Whereby it is evident that it is conform to his doctrine, and not added
in favor of the Pope, as M. Andrews would have his Reader to suppose. For S.
Chrysostom says in the same homily: Petrus Apostolorum os and vertex,
Chrysostom. vbi supra.
cum omnes interrogati essent, solus respondit etc. Peter the mouth and head of
the Apostles, when they were all asked, answered alone etc. In which words S.
Chrysostom does plainly acknowledge S. Peter to be head of the Church, seeing
that he called him head of the Apostles. And in the same place alleged by the
Cardinal, having said, that a poor fisherman (by the power, Idem ibid.
and virtue of Christ's grant) surpasses in strength and solidity the nature
of the dyamond, he prefers him far before Hieromy the Prophet, saying; that
whereas Almighty God made Hier^my like a pillar of iron, and a brazen wall, and
gave him power, and authority over one Nation, hunc autem vniuerso terrarum
orbi Christus praeposuit, Christ gave him (to wit Peter) power, and authority
over the whole world. So he.

14. And because, M. Andrews will be like here to fly to his common place, and
to say, that all the Apostles had power, and authority over the whole world, as
well as S. Peter, and that therefore this comparison of him with Hieremy
proves not, that he had any more authority then the rest of the Apostles, M.
Andrews must consider that S. Chrysostom cannot here mean that his authority
over the whole world was no other, then that which the other Apostles had,
seeing he has taught before in the same homily that he was their head; and I
think M. Andrews will not be so absurd to say that the authority of the head,
and of the members is all one: besides that S. Chrysostom teaches most
clearly else where, that S. Peter was head not only of the Apostles, but also
of the whole Church, as it may appear by that which I have alleged out of him
to that purpose, both in the first, and also in the precedent Chapter of this
Adioynder.

15. Whereto I will now add a most clear testimony thereof, out of his learned
Commentary upon the Acts of the Apostles, where discoursing upon the election
of Matthias the Apostle in the place of Judas, and particulerly upon those
words, Et in diebus illis surgens Petrus, he notes not only the favor of
Peter, but also his authority over the rest, as over the flock committed to his
charge. Quam est feruidus, says he, quam agnoscit creditum a Christo gregem
etc. How fervent is Peter, how well does he acknowledge the flock committed to
him by Christ! Lo how he is Prince in this company or congregation, and every
where begins first to speak etc.

16. And again afterward prosecuting the same matter, Idem. ho. 3. in Acta
Apost.
he says: Quid? an non licebat ipsi eligere? Licebat and quidem maxim etc.
What? and was it not lawful for him to choose (Matthias?) Yes truly it was
most lawful, but he did it not, because he would not seem to gratify any.
Also again after a while, he says thus, Primus hic Doctorem constituit etc.
he (to wit Peter) did first here make a Doctor; A notable discourse of S.
Chrysostom proving S. Peter's Supremacy.
he said not, we are sufficient to teach etc. quamquam autem habebat ius
constituendi par omnibus, tamen haec congruenter fiebant etc. Albeit he had as
much authority to appoint him as they all, yet this was done very conveniently.
So he, giving to understand, that notwithstanding Peter's absolute power to
choose Matthias himself alone, yet out of prudence he determined rather to do
it by the general consent of all the Apostles, which he also signified no
less plainly afterward in these words: Merito primus omnium etc. he does
worthily first of all the rest use, or exercise his authority in this business,
as one that had all the rest in his hand, or power, for to him Christ said: and
tu aliquando co^uersus, confirma fratres tuos, and thou being sometime
converted, confirm they brethren.

17. All this says S. Chrysostom, concerning the the election of Matthias the
Apostle, whereby it appears plainly, that he held S. Peter to be head of the
Apostles, and of the whole Church, seeing he teaches not only that he was the
Prince in that Congregation, but also that he had as much authority, to make an
Apostle, as they all, and might have done it of himself (if he had thought it
fit, and convenient) because he had them all in his hand. So as it is clear,
that when S. Chrysostom in the 55. homily upon Matthew (which the Cardinal
alleges) calls S. Peter verticem Apostolorum, the head of the Apostles, and
says that Christ made him power of the Church, and that he gave him authority
over the whole world, he means, and teaches manifestly that he was supreme
head, and Pastor of the universal Church: which is the same in substance, and
effect, that those words, Cuius pastor and caput, do signify.

18. Therefore the doctrine being S. Chrysostomes, as well in that homily
alleged by the Cardinal as else where, and the words also themselves (which
perhaps may be wanting in some Greek copy) being extant, as they are cyted by
the Cardinal, in all our Latin translations, it is but a vain shift of M.
Andrews to say, that they are thrust into the Latin in favor of the Pope, it
being more probable (as I have said) that they were in the old Greek copies,
which the Latin translatours followed, and that either the Grecians themselves
in the time of their schism from the Roman Church, or perhaps some of our late
heretics (who have taken upon them to print the Greek in these days) have
purposely left out the same, in hatred of the supreme authority of S. Peter,
and his successors. But howsoever it is, you see the doctrine of S. Chrysostom
is clear to the purpose that those words (which M. Andrews says are not in
the Greek) do import: and this suffiseth to prove by the testimony of S.
Chrysostom, that S. Peter was supreme Pastor and head of the universal Church.

A stale trifeling conceyt touching the word (...) again brought in by M.
Andrews
19. And as for M. Andrews his stale, and tryfling deuyse to call the Pope (...)
(alluding to the name of the beast in the Apocalypse, according to the
interpretation of Irenaeus, as he would have his Reader to suppose, albeit he
use it far otherwise then Irenaeus meant it, who applied it only to the
temporal Empire, and not to the Roman Sea) I willingly omit it, as not
pertaining to the place of S. Chrysostom whereof I now specially treat, and
therefore do remit him for his satisfaction in that point to Cardinal
Bellarmines controversies, Bellar. de Romans Pon. lib. 3. cap. 10.. Secunda
opinio.
where the same is so sufficiently answered, that he, and his fellows may be
ashamed still to repeat it, and not to impugn the manifold, and solid reasons
which the Cardinal produces to confute their ridiculous, and absurd
application of that name to the Pope.

20. And now to end concerning the testimony of S. Chrysostom; whereas M.
Andrews for conclusion of his answer thereto says, that no man will deny that
Peter was Pastor of the Church, yea and a principal pastor, sed cum alijs
pastorem coapostolis suis, non solum sine alijs, A dreaming fancy of M. Andrews.
but Pastor together with other his fellow Apostles, and not alone without
others; I think he was in a dream when he wrot^ it, impugning no man therein
for ought I know. For I never heard tell of any man yet, who taught that S.
Peter was Pastor of the Church alone, or that the other Apostles were not
Pastors as well as he, Chap. 3. n^. 39.40. and 41.
albeit we teach with S. Chrysostom, and others, as you have heard, that they
were subordinate to him, as to the supreme pastor, and their head; Card. Bell.
Apolog. vbi supra. Supple. chap. 4.
which also M. Andrews himself does acknowledge sufficiently, as I have showed
amply in the last Chapter. And this I hope may suffice concerning S.
Chrysostom.

21. There remains now only S. Augustine of the 4. Aug. Ser. 124. de tempore
quiest primus feriae^ 4. post Domin. Palma.
Fathers alleged by the Cardinal and my self for the proof of S. Peter's
Primacy: his words are these: Totius corporis morbum in ipso capite curat
Ecclesiae etc. he (to wit Christ) cures the disease of the whole body in the
very head of the Church, and co^poundeth the health of all the members, in ipso
vertice (that is to say) in the very crown, or top of the head: Thus says S.
Augustine: whereupon the Cardinal says: Andr. vbi sup.
Sanctus Augustinus aperte vocat S. Petrum caput corporis Ecclesiae. S.
Augustine does planily call S. Peter head of the body of the Church. M.
Andrews bold assertion without all proof.
To this M. Andrews says thus: Concludit testes suos cum Augustino, non
Augustino, cuius tempore non fiebant Sermones de tempore. He (to wit the
Cardinal) concludes his witnesses with an Augustine, who is not Augustine; in
whose time there were not made any Sermons de tempore. So he, taking exceptions
to the authority of this allegation, because in S. Augustins time (as he would
have us suppose) there was no such custom in the Church, to make Sermons de
tempore (that is to say of the ordinary feasts that do occur thoughout the
course of the year) and that therefore the Author of those Sermons de
tempore, out of the which the Cardinal takes this place, could not be S.
Augustins, but of some other later writer, who set them out in S. Augustins
name.

22. But now if you ask how M. Andrews proves that there were no Sermons de
tempore in S. Augustins time, you must take his bare word for a proof, for you
neither have, nor are like to hear any other of him. But for the trial of
this matter I must remit thee, good Reader, to some better, and more
authentical witnesses then M. Andrews, namely to Possidius a learned Bishop,
who being a familiar friend of S. Augustine forty years together (as he
signifies himself) wrote his life, Possidius in vita Augustine. Indic. Possid.
cap. 9. and 10.
and making a Catalogue of his works does mention amongst the rest diverse
Sermons, or Treatises of his made of some of the principal feasts of the
year, as of Christmas, Ascension, Pentecost, Lent, and 23. Tracts, or Sermons
per Vigilias Paschae, in the Eues of Easter (whereof by all likelihood this
very Sermon was one, being made on the Wednesday before Easter:) whereto may be
added also diverse other particular feasts of Saints, mentioned in like manner
by Possidius, as namely the Nativity of S. John Baptist, of the Apostles S.
Peter and S. Paul, Ibidem.
of S. Laurence, S. Cyprian, S. Perpetua and Felicitas, S. Saluius, S. Vincent,
and some others which I omit, for that these I trow may suffice to convince M.
Andrews of great ignorance, or malice in that he denies that there were any
Sermons de tempore, in S. Augustins time. Sermons were made de tempore both in
the Latin^ and in the Greek Church in S. Augustins time.


23. For although it is like enough that neither S. Augustine, nor any other
Father of that age, wrote any work under the title of Sermones de tempore (but
that such sermons being made at diverse times, and dispersed in diverse parts of
their works, have been since their days gathered into one volume, and set out
under that title for the ease, and commodity of the Readers) yet no man that
has been conversant in the Fathers can be ignorant that such were usually made
both in the Latin and in the Greek Church in S. Augustins time; Ambros. To. 5.
Sermon de tempore.
which may evidently appear (besides the testimony of Possidius aforesaid) by
the works of S. Ambrose, wherein there are Sermons upon almost all the great
feasts from Aduent to Pentecost: S. Maximus.
and in the same time lived also S. Maximus Bishop of Turin, who wrote diverse
homilies upon the principal feasts of the year, Gennadius de viris Illustrib.
as testifyeth Gennadius a famous writer of that age, whereof I shall have
occasion to speak further hereafter. Besides that it cannot be denied that the
like custom was also in the Greek Church in those days, Gregor. Nyssen.
seeing that we find in S. Gregory Nissen (who was S. Basils brother) diverse
Orations made upon the feasts of the Nativity of our Savior, Gregor. Nazian.
S. Stephen, Easter, and the Ascension; And others also in S. Gregory Nazianzen
upon the feasts of Easter, Chrysostom. To. 3.
Pentecost, the Nativity of Christ, the Epiphany (which amongst the Greeks was
called Sancta Lumina.) In like manner diverse homilies in S. Chrysostom of the
fifth feria in Passion week, and of the Resurection, and Ascension of our
Savior, and of Pentecost, besides diverse others of particular Saints, as S.
Fulgentius S^ Augustines schooler, and others. So that this exception of M.
Andrews to the authority of this place of S. Augustine is tooto cold, and
frivolous, and far unworthy of a man that professes to have read the ancient
Fathers, and therefore truly he had reason to seek out another answer that
might be of some more weight, which he frames in these words: Sed nec si
tempori cedamus, hic tamen testis satis in tempore venit etc. Andr. vbi supra.
But though we should yield to time (he means that albeit we should grant
that Sermons were made de tempore in those days) yet this witness comes out
of time, or season, and very unluckily, who does not tell us of any other head
but of a sickly head, nor of any other crown of a head, but a crazed, M.
Andrews rauing fit.
or cracked, crown, which therefore might very well have been passed with
silence.

24. Thus raueth M. Andrews, having his head so crazed with the frenzy of
heresy, that he utters such braynsick, and idle stuff, as this, which truly
no man that were well in his wits, would utter to the purpose he does, that is
to say, to prove that S. Peter was not head of the Church. For else why does he
say it? seeing that the Cardinal cyteth this place to no other end, but to
prove that S. Peter was head of the Church, S^ Peter's fall no prejudice to his
Primacy.
and therefore M. Andrews giving this for his second answer (having as you
have seen great reason to mistrust the former) must needs conclude thereupon,
that S. Peter was not head of the Church. But how does it follow, that because
S. Peter by fraylty denied our Savior, Ergo, he was not head of the Church? Do
those that hold, and teach his primacy, deny his fall? Or teach that his
successors cannot also err in matter of fact, as he did, though not in
definition of matters of faith?

25. Truly if M. Andrews either had a sound brain, or else were guyded by the
same spirit that S. Augustine and other fathers were, he would have made
another manner of construction of this place then he does, and rather have
sought to confirm S. Peter's Primacy by his fall, then to impugn it thereby,
for so does S. Augustine in this place, showing that it was convenient, that
almighty God should suffer him to fall, because he was to be the governor and
head of the Church, which S. Augustine teaches expressly in these words.

26. Ideo B. Petrum paululum Dominus subdeseruit etc. S. Aug. ser. 124. de temp.
Our Lord did therefore forsake blessed Peter for a while, to the end that all
humane kind might know in him, that without the grace of God it could do
nothing, and thereby a rule might be given also to him (who was to be governor
of the Church) to pardon sinners; for the keys of the Church were to be
committed to Peter the Apostle, yea the keys of the Kingdom of heaven were
recommended unto him: as also in like manner there was to be committed to his
charge an innumerable multitude of people, S. Augustine teaches that S. Peter
was permitted to fall because he was to be supreme head of the Church.
which in respect of the vices and passions of their nature were wrapped in
sins, and offenses. And again after a while: Idcirco, says he, diuinae
prouidentiae secretum etc. Therefore did the secret of Gods providence so
dispose, and permit, that he (to wit Peter) should himself first fail and
fall into sin, that by the consideration of his own fall he might temper the
rigor of his sentence toward sinners: Quantum igitur diuini inuneris etc.
Therefore note what great bounty, and goodness, and how much care and
solicitude God shows heerin toward the salvation of man, he c^reth the
disease of the whole body in the head of the Church, and compoundeth the health
of all the members in the very crown of the head, and in the very top of the
confession of Christ, in the very fou^datio^ of an immovable faith, that is to
say, in that Peter, who said, although I should dye with thee, yet I will not
deny thee.

27. All this says S Augustine, and much more to the same purpose, which I
omit for breuityes sake, for that this may suffice to teach M. Andrews that S.
Peter's Primacy was so far from being preiudyced by his fall, that it may rather
be in some sort confirmed thereby, seeing it appears, that it was convenient
in respect of his Primacy, that he should fall for the benefit that should
ensue thereof, The same also taught by S. Chrysostom.
as well to himself, as to the Church which is also the express doctrine of
S. Chrysostom, who having said, that Orbis terrarum Ecclesiae etc. the
Churches of the whole world, S. Chrysostom. hom. in S. Petrum and Eliam.
and the multituds of people were to be committed to his charge. And having
also called him Apostolorum verticem, the head of the Apostles, the immouable
foundation, the steedfast rock, the pillar of Churches, and master of the
whole world, he adds, Peccare permissus est etc. he was suffered to sin,
for this cause chiefly, because the multitude of people was to be committed
unto him, lest he being severe and innocent might be unwilling to pardon the
offenses of his brethren. S. Greg. ho. 21. in Euangel.
So he: to whom I may also add S. Gregory the Great, who makes the same
construction of S. Peter's fall that these two other Fathers do, affirming that
God suffered him to fail, quem praeferre cunctae Ecclesiae disposuerat, whom
he had determined to make governor of all the Church, that he might learn by
his own fraylty to have compassion of other sinners.

28. And to the end M. Andrews may see that S. Augustine does also else where
plainly acknowledge the Primacy of S. Peter notwithstanding his fall; Another
place of S. Augustine acknowledging S. Peter's supremacy notwithstanding his
fall. See Andr. cap. 1. page 16. lin. 17.
he shall do well to read a place alleged by himself in his first chapter,
to prove that S. Peter had nothing peculiar to himself by his pastoral
commission; which place if he had laid down at large (as he curtolled, and
maimed it after his manner) it might have sufficed to convince him, as well in
the matter for the which he produced it, as also in this. For there S. Augustine
having taught that S. Peter receiving the keys, and the commission of Pastor,
represented the person of the Church, infers that the Church ought to pardon
repentant sinners, seeing that Peter bearing the person of the Church was
pardoned when he had denied his master. Aug. de agone Christ. cap. 30.


29. Wherein S. Augustine not only deduceth a pious document out of S. Peter's
offense (as you see he does in the other place) but also acknowledges
sufficiently his supreme Dignity, See before Chap. 1. nu. 3.4. and 5.
teaching that he bare the person of the Church, which he did no otherwise, but
as he was supreme head, and Governor thereof, as I have declared at large in
the first Chapter of this Adioynder, where I have laid down the words of S.
Augustine, Cyril. in cap. vlt. Joan.
and discovered M. Andrews his fraud more particulerly, Vbi supra nu. 23. and
24.
and produced also a clear testimony of S. Cyril concerning the Primacy of S.
Peter (whom he calls Principem and Caput Apostolorum: the Prince and head of
the Apostles) though he do there grant his fall which he says happened by humane
infirmity, Bellar. de Romans Pont li. 1. c. 25.
whereof M. Andrews cannot be ignorant, seeing he cyteth also that place of S.
Cyril, no less then the other of S. Augustine, though with greater fraud, as I
have also showed in the first Chapter.

30. Finally I may add to these, those other testimonies which I have now
lastly examined, and debated with M. Andrews out of S Cyril, S. Hierome, S
Basil, and S. Chrysostom, as also the rest of that grand Jury of 24. Fathers,
Greeks, and Latins alleged by Cardinal Bellarmine in his controversies to
prove the supreme authority of S. Peter over the Apostles, all which most
learned, and ancient Fathers, being the lights of the Church, knew as well as
M. Andrews, that S. Peter had denied our Savior, and yet nevertheless did not
take the same to be any prejudice to his Supremacy. Whereupon I conclude, that
if their heads were sound, then M. Andrews his head must needs be very sick and
crazed, seeing his sense, and judgment is so far different from theirs, as to
seek to overthrow, or disprove S. Peter's Primacy by his fall, and to speak of
him so contemptibly, and opprobriously, as he does.

31. But will you hear how well he mendeth the matter? Mark him well, I pray
you, and you shall see that as his head has been hitherto somewhat cracked, so
now he is become wholly distract, talking as idly, as if he were more fit for
Bedlam then for a Bishopric. For having said, as you have heard before, that
this testimony of S. Augustine was unluckily produced by the Cardinal, because
it gives us notice of no other head, but of a sickly head (to wit S. Peter)
and that therefore it might very well have bin pretermitted, he goes forward
thus: O caput elleboro dignum!
Praesertim cum eumdem morbum in capite vestro notarint diu iam medicorum
filij. et si omnes non ego, id est, plus ego quam omnes: especially seeing that
the Physicians children have now a long time noted the same disease in your
head, although all not I, that is to say, I more then all. Thus says he, so
mystically I assure you, that he seems to propound a riddle, and therefore
may do well to explicate his meaning, and let us know who were those
Physicians, and their children that have noted the same disease in our head.

The later heretics do follow the old.
32. Nevertheless for as much as it may be presumed, that by the children he
means Luther, Calvin, Beza and himself, with other Sectaries of this age, we
may also make a reasonable conjecture who were the Physicians, seeing that we
are not ignorant that the true progenitors of all the Sectaries aforenamed,
were diverse old heretykes, whose herefies they have reuyued; namely the Aug. de
Unit. E^cl. ca. 12.
Donatists, whose doctrine they profess concerning the fall of the visible
Church; Epipha^. haer. 75.
Aerius whom they follow in denying Sacrifyce for the dead; Hieron aduers.
Vigilant.
Vigilantius with whom they impugn the reverend use of relics; Idem. contra
Iouin.
Iouinian who taught diverse points of their belief touched particulerly in the
last See before chap. 3. nu. 34. and 35. Aug. de vtilitate credendi cap. 17.
Chapter, and other Arch-heretikes condemned by the Church in ancient time, who
(as S. Augustine witnesses) used also to bark (though in vain) against the
Sea Apostolic, no less then these their children do.

33. But although we may guess who were the Physicians, and their children,
yet it will not be so easy to conjecture what he means by etsi omnes non ego,
id est plus ego quam omnes: although all not I, that is to say, I more then
all; for truly I have showed it to diverse, and have not found two that agree
in the interpretation of it, but the most probable seems to be the one of
two; one is, that he alludeth to the words of S. Peter, Marc. 14.
Matthew. 26.
when he said etsi omnes scandalizati fuerint sed non ego: Although all shall
be scandalized, yet not I, who nevertheless was scandalized more then they
all, because he alone denied his master: which sense has great difficulty,
because it neither has connection with that which goes immediately before, nor
is truly applicable to the Pope (of whom M. Andrews seems there to treat)
but is only contumelious to S Peter (being a taunting kind of exprobration of
his fall) and therefore me thinks M. Andrews should not admit it to be his
meaning, as sauouring too much of impiety.

34. The other sense is, that it should be referred to M. Andrews himself, and
that there is some little fault in the print, I mean in the points, though not
in the words, which therefore should be pointed this, and si omnes, non ego?
and if all, not I? that is to say, if all have noted this disease in your head,
why should not I note it? Giving to understand, that he will not yield to any
of his brethren for zeal, and skill in noting the faults of Popes, but rather,
plus ego quam omnes, that is to say, therein will I go beyond them all: M
Andrews zeal greater then his wit.
which sense has at least some good coherence with the precedent clause and
well befitteth M. Andrews his zeal to the Gospel and hatred to the Pope, and
so may pass for his meaning. But whatsoever his meaning is, I cannot forbear
to tell him, that seeing his brayn is so intoxicated that he cannot write
intelligibly, and yet will take upon him to play the Physician, and to cure the
Popes diseases, I will say to him with our Savior Medice cura teipsum, and
wish him to purge his own head, A good recipe for M. Andrews.
with some good quantity of a drug called Catholicon, and a little Helleborum to
restore him again to his right wits, before he presume to be the Popes
Physician, and to judge of the diseases of the head of the Church.

35. And whereas he goes forward to show us a difference in the cure of Peter's
disease, and of the diseases of his Successors, let us follow him a while, and
you shall see him run as well out of his honesty, as out of his wit. For thus
he says: Sed ab eo morbo sanatum hoc caput etc. But this head (to wit S.
Peter) was healed of this disease, but your head (he means the Pope) neither
will be healed, nor yet is curable: yet if he ever be healed, let him be the
head of the Church of Rome, Three notorious lies.
as he was in Augustines time, but, let no man appeal to him from beyond the
sea, or if any appeal, he is to be excommunicated by Augustine, who was far
from acknowledging Zosimus, Bonifacius, and Celestinus for heads of the Church,
in whom nevertheless he cured the same disease. So he, which I beseech thee
good Reader, well to note, and thou shall see his conscience no less cracked
then his brain, joining extreme falsity with folly, abusing the authority not
only of S. Augustine, but also of the whole Council of African Bishops (though
he name S. Augustine only, and none of the other) and finally uttering 3.
notable lies in little more then 3. lines. The first is, that the Rome in S.
Augustines time. The second, that no man Africa. The third, that S. Augustine
was far Zosimus, Bonifacius, and Celestinus to be heads of the Church, yea and
that he cured S. Peter's disease in them. Of these 3. points, the first will be
fully cleared by the discussion of the second and the third.

36. First then concerning the second, whereas M. Andrews affirms that all
Appeals from Africa to Rome were forbidden by S. Augustine, Concerning the
prohibition of appeals from Afrike to Rome objected by M. Andrews.
under pain of excommunication, we shall need no other witness to convince
him, but S. Augustine himself, who teaches the flat contrary not only in
express words, but also by practice, as it will evidently appear after a
while; for albeit there was a controversy betwixt the Church of Africa, and the
Roman Sea, in S. Augustins time, partly about appeals to Rome, and partly
about the Canons of the Nicen Council, for that a Canon related by the Popes
Legate, as out of the said Council, was not found in the Copies that were then
in Africa (whereof the causes may be seen at large as well in Cardinal
Bellarmins Controversies, Bellar. de Romans Pont l. 2. c. 25. Baron. an. 419.
as in the history of Cardinal Baronius, who do fully answer all our
adversaries cauills concerning the same:) albeit, I say, this controversy
continued some 4. or 5. years, A controversy betwixt the Bishops of Africa,
and the Sea of Rome concerning the prosecution of Appeals.
and grew in great part, by reason of abuses committed by some of the Popes
legates, in the rigorous, and violent execution of the Popes sentences (which
may suffice to prove the common use of Appeals from Africa to Rome in those
days) nevertheless it is evident that during the time of this controversy there
was no prohibition of the appeals of Bishops from Africa, to Rome; for that
all the African Bishops agreed to continue the wonted course of Appeals
without innovation, until they should have answer out of Greece, concerning
the Canons of the Nicen Council.

37. And when they had received the same, they were so far from excommunicating
such as should appeal to Rome, or from prohibiting the same, by a Synodicall
Decree, that they only wrote a common letter to Pope Celestinus, wherein they
did not impugn the right of Appeals to Rome, but showed their dislike of the
manner, and means that had been used in the prosecutio^ thereof. And whereas
there were 3. ways used by the Sea Apostolyke in the prosecution, and decision
of appeals, Three ways used in the prosecution and decision of appeals.
the first, by calling the parties and witnesses to Rome; the second, by
sending Legates to the place from whence the appeals came, with commission to
hear, and determine them, sometimes with the assistance of the Bishops of that
province, and sometimes without them; and the third, to remit the matter wholly
to the determination of the Metropolitan, or of some Provincial Synod of the
same country (as S. Gregory the great did in Africa diverse times, whereof I
shall have occasion to lay down some examples infra nu. 47.48. and 49.
hereafter:) of these 3. ways I say, the African Bishops held the two former
to be very inconvenient for them, but took no exception at all to the third
way (which was to remit the causes to be tried at home by the Metropolitans or
by Provincial Synods) and therefore the reasons which they urged, tended
especially to prove that it was most convenient, and conform to the Council
of Nice, that causes should be decyded by the Metropolitans, and Synods of the
same Country, where the controversy should rise; and this the Pope might have
granted (if he had thought it convenient) and yet have reserved to himself
the right of appellation, and have decyded Appeals also by his commission, as
it shall further appear after a while by the practice of S. Gregory.

38 But put the case, Ibid.
that S. Augustine, and the Bishops of Africa had required of Pope Celestinus
to be quite rid of Appeals, what will M. Andrews infer thereon? Will he say,
that therefore they decreed, vt transmarinus nemo appellet, and si appellet
excommunicandus, that no man appeal out of Africa, and that if he do, he
shallbe excommunicated? Will he infer this upon their demand, or petition? I
say their petition, for that when they come to treat of that matter in their
Epistle, To. 1. Council. in Council. Africano ca. 10^.
they begin it thus: Praefato debitae salutationis officio impendio deprecamur,
vt etc. The office or duty of due salutations premised, we do most earnestly
beseech you, that you will not over easily give ear to such as come from hence
etc. Will then M. Andrews make no difference betwixt demands, and decrees?
petitions, and prohibitions? must he not rather confess that the African
Bishops acknowledged that Pope Celestinus had power to dispose appeals? For
otherwise why did they rather seek satisfaction by letters to him, then
resolve by some Synodicall decree to exclude his authority, and to debar him
from further meddling in those affairs? as it is like they would have done, had
they had been persuaded that his authority in that behalf was usurped. But let
M. Andrews take the request of the African Bishops in what sense he list (I
mean either for the exclusion of Appeals, or for moderation in the
prosecution of them) yet he can never make good his forgery of transmarinus
nemo appellet etc. it being most evident, M. Andrews his forgery.
that neither these petitions of theirs, nor any Canon of the African Synods,
nor yet any one word in S. Augustine did ever prohibit all Appellation from
Africa to Rome, or yet cause any surcease, or interruption thereof, nor yet
hinder the moderate and convenient prosecution of appeals; for the proof
whereof I shall not need (as I have said) to produce any other witness then S.
Augustine himself, and his own practice not past 5. or 6. years before his
death in the cause of a Bishop called Antony, whom he had made Bishop of
Fussula.

39. It is therefore to be understood that this Antony being deprived of his
Bishopric by a Synodicall sentence of African Bishops (for his outrageous
misdemeanors) appealed to Rome to Pope Bonifacius, S. Aug. ep. 261. The case
of Antony Bishop of Fussula appealing to Rome.
whereupon the Pope being moved partly with the Primats letters, and partly with
such other testimony as Antony had cunningly produced for his purgation,
resolved to return him to his Bishopric (yet with this express condition,
as S. Augustine witnesses, if the information which he had given, were found
to be true) but before it could be executed, it chanced that Pope Bonifacius
dyed, and Celestinus succeeded him.

40. And for as much as many rumors were spread in favor of Antony, that he
should be restored by the Popes sentence, and the same executed by violence
with the help of secular power, if need were (as the like had been also used in
former occasions) the people of Fussula were so exasperated therewith, that
they were like to fall to tumult, and conceived no small indignation against S.
Augustine himself, complaining of him to the Pope, because he had made Antony
their Bishop, wherewith he was so afflicted, that he wrote a most pitiful
letter to Celestinus successor to Bonifacius lame^ting greatly his own mishap
in that he had made such an unworthy Bishop; Ibid.
and recommended the decision of the case to his wife, and charitable
consideration, saying thus amongst diverse other things: S. Augustine his
dutiful respect to Pope Celestinus.
Collabora nobiscum pietate venerabilis, Domine beatissime, and debita
charitate suscipiende sancte Papa etc. Most blessed Lord venerable for thy
piety, and holy Pope, to be received with due charity, labor together with
us, and command that all those things which are sent, be read, or related unto
thee. So he.

41. And whereas Antony being deprived of the Bishopric, and remaining still
with the title, had greatly urged, that seeing he had still the title of Bishop
of Fussula, he ought also to have the Bishopric, Ibid.
S. Augustine made instance on the other side, that the sentence given against
Antony might stand, for that it was conform even to former sentences given in
like cases by the Sea Apostolic, and therefore he says: Existat exemplo ipsa
Sede Apostolica iudicante, vel aliorum iudicata firmante etc. Let it serve for
an example, the Sea Apostolic either judging so it self, or else confirming
the judgments or sentences of others. So he, and then adds diverse examples of
Bishops, who being deprived of their Bishoprikes retained still their title;
and says moreover thus.

Ibid.
Ego Fussulenses Catholicos filios in Christo meos etc. I do recommend to the
benignity of the charity of your Holiness, as well the Catholic people of
Fussula my children in Christ, as Antony the Bishop my son also in Christ,
for that I love them both etc. Let both of them deserve your mercy; they, that
they may suffer no ill, he, that he may do no ill; they, lest they may hate the
very name of Catholic, if they receive no help from Catholic Bishops,
especially from the Sea Apostolic against a Catholic Bishop; and he, lest he
may commit so great a wickedness as to alienate those from Christ, whom he
seeks to make his own against their wills etc. Finally S. Augustine
concludes thus: Si autem membra Christi quae in illa regione sunt etc. If you
do relieve the members of Christ which are in that quarter (he means Fussula)
from the deadly fear and sorrow wherein they live, and do comfort my old age
with this merciful justice, he will reward you, as well in this present life,
as in the future, who does by you succor us in this our trouble, and has
placed you in that seat.

42. Thus wrote S. Augustine to Celestinus the Pope, and much more to the same
purpose, entreating most earnestly for the people of Fussula, especially that
there might be no violence used to restore Antony, and therefore having
signified what was reported and feared in that behalf, Ibid.
he said, non sinas ista fieri per Christi sanguinem etc. suffer not these
things to be done for the blood of Christ, and for the memory of Peter, who
admonished the governors of Christian people not to exercise a violent
dominion amongst their brethren. So he; giving a necessary advise to Pope
Celestinus, though with all humility, as you see, to prevent the inconveniences
that were feared, and had happened before by the indiscreet, and violent
proceeding of some of the Popes Legates in like cases. And so far was he from
any meaning to oppose himself to the Popes authority, Ibid.
or to the restitution of Antony (in case the Pope should have ordained it)
that he resolved for his part, as he signified, that, if he could not obtain
his suit of Celestinus he would renounce his Bishopric, and retire himself to
a private life, to do penance, for having been partly the cause of so great a
scandal, in making Antony Bishop.

43. By all which it appears how far S. Augustine and other Bishops of
Africa, The primate of Numidia in Africa approved the Appeal of Antony to Rome.
were from denying the Popes authority to admit Appeals, seeing that the
primate of Numidia himself assisted Antony in his Appeal to Pope Bonifacius;
and S. Augustine wrote also to Celestinus concerning the same with such
submission, as you have heard, not threatening to excommunicate Antony for his
Appeal to Rome (as M. Andrews would have us to suppose, saying: si appellet,
ab Augustino excommunicandus, if any man appeal he is to be excommunicated by
Augustine) but most humbly, craving merciful justice, and moderation in the
decision of the cause. So as we must needs say, that either S. Augustine
contradicts himself and his own actions (which is not credible) or else that
M. Andrews has belyed him in this point, as indeed he has; and therefore he
had reason not so much as to quote in his margent any place of S. Augustine for
the proof, or confirmation of his assertion.

44. Nevertheless for as much as he mentions an excommunication threatened by
S. Augustine to all such as should appeal from Africa to Rome, Council. Mileu.
Can. 12.
he seems to aim at a Canon of a Counsel held at Mileuis, where S. Augustine
was present, in which Synod it was indeed ordained under pain of
excommunication, that no Priests or Deacons, or other Clergy men of the
inferior sort should appeal from their own Bishops and Memetropolitans in
Africa to Bishops beyond the seas. And to the end M. Andrews his cosenage may
the better appear, I will set down the Canon it self, which is this:
Placuit, vt Presbyteri, Diaconi, vel inferiores Clerici etc. we have ordained
that Priests, deacons, and other inferior Clergymen, if in the causes which
they shall have, they complain of the judgments of their Bishops, they may be
heard by the Bishops their neighbors etc. And if they shall think it
necessary to appeal from them, that they appeal not to any, but to the
Counsels of Africa, or to the Primats of their own Provinces; Ad transmarina
autem qui putauerit appellandum etc. and he that shall think it convenient to
appeal to the parts beyond the seas, shall not be admitted to the communion of
any within Afric. Thus says that Canon. And who sees not, that those words
( qui putauerit appellandum etc. he which thinks convenient to appeal) are
to be referred only to those of whom the Canon expressly speaks immediately
before (to wit, M. Andrews Transmarinus nemo.
Priests, and Deacons, and other inferior Clergymen) and therefore do not any
way concern Bishops, and much less exclude all Appeals, as M. Andrews does
with his transmarinus nemo.

45. To which purpose it is to be considered that this Canon is conform to
another made many years before in the great general Council of Sardica,
Council. Sard. ca. 17.
approved by Pope Julius the first (in which Council also the Appeals of
Bishops to Rome were expressly confirmed) besides that the very Council of
Mil^uis in which this Canon was made, S. Aug. ep. 92. and 93.
was received, and confirmed by Pope Innocentius the first, as it shall appear
further after a while. So that this Canon which concerns only the appeals of
inferior Clergy men, and not of Bishops, and was admitted by the Popes
themselves did not any way prejudice the right of Appeals to Rome, or the
authority of the sea Apostolic; and this also may be clearly proved out of
S. Augustine himself, who writing to the Donatists, and reprehending them for
their temerarious presumption in excommunicating, and conde^ning Caecilianus
the Catholic Bishop of Carthage, advertised them with all of their folly, in
that they considered not how vain their attempt was therein, and how little
cause Caecilianus had to care for their sentence, seeing it was free for him to
reserve his cause to the judgment of other Bishops beyond the seas, and
especially of the Apostolyke Church, meaning there by especially the Apostolyke
Sea of Rome, which he always called the Apostolyke seat, or Apostolic Chair,
per antonomasiam, as it may be noted in diverse places of his works (whereof I
have alleged some already, and shall have occasion to allege others
hereafter) insomuch that when he speaks of the Apostolic Church, or
Apostolic seat, or Apostolic chair, without naming any in particular, he
speaks undoubtedly of the Roman Church

46. And therefore he says in the same Epistle to the Donatists that
Caecilianus might well contemn the multitude of his enemies, ^. Aug. ep. 1.62.
seeing that he held communion, as well with the Roman Church) in qua semper
Apostolicae Cathedrae viguit principatus, wherein the principality, or
soueragnity of the Apoctolike chair has always flourished) as with other
Catholic countries from whence the Gospel was brought to Africa etc.
Moreover in the said Epistle he makes plain distinction betwixt the Appeals
of Bishops, and Priests, saying: neque enim de Presbyteris etc. S. Augustine
testifyeth that appeals to Rome were allowed to the Bishops of Africa though
prohibited to the inferour Clergy.
Neither was the question here concerning Priests, or Deacons or other Clergy
men of the inferior sort, but concerning our colleagues, who may reserve their
cause entyre, and whole to the judgment of other their colleagues, and
especially of the Apostolic Churches. So he: whereby it appears, that
albeit he signifies that there was a restraynt of Appeals of Priests, and
inferior Clergy men (according to the Canon of the Council of Mileuis) yet he
grants that Bishops had free liberty to appeal out of Africa to the
Apostolic Churches, and especially to the Roman Church, wherein (as you have
heard him say before) Apostolicae Cathedrae semper viguit principatus, the
sovereignty of the Apostolic chair has always flourished.

47. And to the end it may appear, that neither the Council of Mileuis,
Examples of Appeals from Africa to to Rome.
nor yet the petition of the African Synod to Pope Celestinus, did hinder the
course of appeals to Rome, or the decision of them in Africa by the Popes
authority, I will conclude with some examples very notable for this purpose.
The first shall be of Lupicinus a Bishop of Mauritania in Africa, restored to his
seat shortly after S. Augustines time, by the sentence of Pope Leo, S. Leo ep.
87. ad Epis. Maurit.
who also sent thither a Bishop called Potentius, as his Legate, and the
Bishops of Africa admitted him, albeit the African Synod had requested Pope
Celestinus to send no more Legates thither.

48. Another example may be of a commission sent by Pope Gregory the Great to an
Agent, or officer of his in Africa, S. Greg. Regist. lib. 1. ep. 82.
called Hilarious, to assemble a Provincial Synod there, for the examination of
a complaynt made to him by two deacons Felicissimus and Vincentius, against
Agentius their Bishop, in which commission order was given to Hilarious
punctually to execute the sentence of the Synod. Idem ibid. lib. 10. ep. 31.
and 32.
Also the same Pope, having heard the complaints of certain Priests in Africa
against Paulinus their Bishop, committed the hearing, and decision of the cause
to Victor the primate of Numidia, and Columbus, with other Bishops, giving them
commission to hear and determyn it amongst themselves, Ibid. lib. 10. ep. 8.
except they should think the assistance of his officer Hilarious needful for
the better determination of the cause. Ibid. ep. 35.
In like manner a complaynt being exhibited to the said Pope by Donadeus a
Deacon, against Victor his Bishop, he deputed the foresaid Columbus, and other
Bishops to examine the cause, and to punish the Bishop if he were found in
fault. And the like commission he gave also to a Synod of Bishops held at
Bizacium in Africa, for the trial of the cause of Clementius their Primate.

49. Now then in these examples two things are to be noted, the one that the
Popes used to decyde appeals, and other controuersyes, in diueres manners,
sometimes ordayning and disposing thereof by their Legates or other officers,
and sometimes giving no other commission to their said Legates, and officers,
but to assemble some Provincial Synod, and to see the sentence thereof
executed: and sometimes again giving all power, and authority to the
Metropolitan, and Bishops of that country to decyde the causes; which last way,
and manner of trial was no way repugnant to the request of the African Synod
in their letter to Pope Celestinus, Supra nu. 36.
as I have signified before.

50. The other thing to be noted, is, that the Popes used still iure suo, The
request of the African Bishops to Pope Celestinus concerning appeals, neither
did nor could prejudice the right of the sea Apostolic.
their own right (notwithstanding the forsaid request of the African Synod)
yea, and that the Bishops of Africa approved, and acknowledged the same by
their obedience, knowing full well that the petitions of their predecessors to
Celestinus rested wholly in his will and pleasure, to be granted, or denied, as
he should see cause, whereof ^here fell out shortly after an evident example,
and proof in the Council of Calcedon: for albeit the Fathers of that famous
general Council not only made earnest suit to Pope Leo by a common letter to
obtain the second place after Rome for Constantinople, but also ordained, and
decreed it by a special Canon, nevertheless Pope Leo denied their suit,
disanulled their decree, and forced the Authors thereof to acknowledge their
error, as I have amply proved in the second See cap. 2. nu. 24. and seq. vsque
ad nu. 28.
Chapter; and therefore much more might Pope Celestinus deny the request of a
Provincial Synod, and might also have disanulled their decrees, if they had
made any prejudicial to the Roman Sea, as they did not.

51. And now to conclude upon these premises 3. things do evidently follow
thereon. The first, that Africa to Rome were never prohibited, or so much as
interrupted by any decrees, or Canons, and much less by the letters of the
African Synod to Pope Celestinus. The second that Mileuis which M. Andrews
seems to allege (as forbidding appeals to Rome, under pain of
excommunication) did only concern Priests and Deacons, and other Clergy men of
the inferior sort, and therefore did not prohibit the Appeals of Bishops,
and much less of all men in general, besides that being made with the Popes
consent it was not any way preiudicall to the authority of the Sea Apostolic.
The third, that M. Andrews iugleth Augustine, M. Andrews makes no bones to
falsify whole Synods and belly the Fathers.
Ad eum transmarinus nemo appellet etc. To him (that is to say to the Bishop of
Rome) let no man appeal from beyond the seas: or if he appeal, he is to be
excommunicated by Augustine, for neither those words nor the sense thereof are
to be found any where in S. Augustine, who, as you have seen, expressly
taught and practiced the contrary. So that transmarinus nemo being set down by
M. Andrews in a different letter to be noted, is indeed worth the noting for a
notable falsity, and a flat corruption of the Canon, and abuse of S. Augustine,
and of all the Bishops in that Council. What then shall we say of this man's
truth, and fidelity who makes no bones to belly the Fathers, It is proved S.
Augustine acknowledged the Popes Zosimus, Bonifacius and Celestinus, for heads
of the Church.
and corrupt whole Synods? Can any man think that he has any regard of
conscience, or shame? Thus much for the second point.

52. And now to say somewhat of the third, he affirms as you have heard, that
S. Augustine was far from acknowledging the Popes Zosimus, Bonifacius and
Celestinus for heads of the Church, whereof you have already seen the contrary
in two of them, to wit Bonifacius, and Celestinus, whose power, and custom to
admit, and determyne Appeals from Africa, S. Augustine clearly acknowledged,
and approved in the cause of Antony Bishop of Fussula (as I have amply See
before nu. 38.39. and seq.
showed) which power could not otherwise be due to Bonifacius, and Celestinus,
but only in respect of their supreme, and universal authority over the whole
Church. S. Aug. ep. 157. ad Optat.
And that S. Augustine had also the same opinion of Zosimus, it appears
sufficiently in an Epistle of his to Optatus, to whom he writes, that he
received his letters at Caesarea, quo nos (says he) iniuncta nobis a
venerabili Papa Zosimo Apostolicae sedis Episcopo Ecclesiastica necessitas
traxerat; whither we were drawn by an Ecclesiastical necessity, enjoined, or
imposed upon us by the venerable Pope Zosimus, Bishop of the Apostolical seat.
So he; which may also be confirmed out of Possidius, who writes, that Litterae
sedis Apostolicae compulerunt etc. The letters of the Sea Apostolic compelled
Augustine with other Bishops to go to Caesarea in Mauritania, Posidius in vita
Augustini
to consult and determyne of diverse necessityes of the Church.

53. Whereby it is manifest that S. Augustine acknowledged in Pope Zosimus an
Ecclesiastical power, and authority to impose upon him, and other Bishops a
necessity to obey his commandments in matters concerning the service of God,
and the Church, which Zosimus could not do otherwise then as supreme and
universal Pastor, or head of the Church, for that the Church of Africa was not
otherwise subject to him, then as all other Churches were. But of Pope Zosimus,
and of S. Augustines opinion concerning his Primacy I shall have occasion to
speak further after a while: and in the mean time this I hope may suffice to
prove that S. Augustine was so far from impugning these three Popes, that he
acknowledged their supreme and universal authority, and consequently that they
were heads of the universal Church, notwithstanding M. Andrews his peremptory
assertion of the contrary, which therefore may pass for another untruth.

54. Whereupon it also follows, that he forgot himself much more when he so
confidently affirmed in the first point, as you have heard, that the Bishops of
Rome in S. Augustines time, were but only heads of the Church of Rome, which I
noted before. For the first of the 3. untruths, though I remitted the
particular answer thereof until I had discovered the other two, because they
would not a little help to the discovery of the first, as you may have already
noted; for it being clear by all this former discourse that Appeals from
Africa to Rome were usual, frequent, and never prohibited in S. Augustines
time; and again that he acknowledged an authority and power in Pope Zosimus to
lay injunctions, and commandments upon him, and other Bishops in Africa, it
must needs follow that the Bishops of Rome had a more ample authority in his
days then over the particular Church of Rome. 8 Popes. who lived in S.
Augustins time, exercysed a supreme and universal authority.
And to the end thou may yet have, good Reader, a more abundant satisfaction
in this point, I will say somewhat of all the Popes that lived in S. Augustines
time who were 8. in all, to wit Liberius (in whose time he was borne) Damasus,
Siricius, Anastasius, Innocentius, Zosimus, Bonifacius, and Celestinus. And
first of Liberius.

55. We read in the Ecclesiastical history, that certain Arian heretykes
being excommunicated, Pope Liberius.
and deposed from their Bishoprics by the Catholic Bishops of the East Church
sent their Legates to Pope Lib^rius craving to be restored by his authority, and
for as much as they craftily dissembled their heresy, and faygning to be
repentant, made open profession of the Catholic faith, according to the
belief, and doctrine of the Council of Nice, they obtained his letters for
their restitution, ^. Basil ep. 74. and 82.
which they presented at their return in a Synod held at Tyana, and by virtue
thereof were restored, as S. Basil witnesses, saying, that Eustathius Bishop
of Sebasta (who was the chief of that Legacy) brought an Epistle (from
Liberius) by the which he should be restored, and when he had presented it to
the Synod at Tyana, in locum suum restitutus est, he was restored to his place.
So he.

56. Whereby it appears that the authority of Liberius extended further then
to his own Church of Rome; seeing he could restore Bishops to their seats in
the East Church, as also his predecessor Pope Julius had done not long before,
upon the appeals of the famous Athanasius deposed by the Arians, and of Paulus
Bishop of Constantinople, Marcellus Bishop of Ancyra, Asclepa Bishop of Gaza,
and Lucian Bishop of Hadrianopolis, all of them unjustly expelled from their
seats upon diverse pretenses; whose causes Julius discussing (says the Story)
tamquam omnium curam gerens propter propriae Sedis dignitatem singulis reddidit
suas Ecclesias, as having a care of all for the dignity of his own seat
restored their Churches to every one of them. Tripartit. hist. lib. 4. ca. 15.
So says Sozom^n in the tripartite history, which I have thought good to add
to the former example of Liberius. For although it fell not out in S.
Augustines time (whereof I now specially treat) yet it was not above 14.
years before him, and therefore may well be applied to his time, as the Eve to
the Feast. Besides, that does demonstrate what was the belief of the Catholic
Church at that time concerning the supreme dignity of the Roman Sea, seeing
that not only other Catholic Bishops, but also Athanasius himself (who was
the mirror of sanctity, zeal, and integrity in that age) had recourse
thereto, as to the supreme tribunal on earth, for the reparation of his
wrongs; but now to proceed.

57. After Liberius succeeded Damasus, P. Damasus.
whose universal authority is sufficiently testified even by the African
Bishops, whom M. Andrews makes most opposite to the Roman Sea. This may be
veryfied by an Epistle of 3. Counsels of Africa, and the Archbishop Stephanus,
who wrote to Pope Damasus, giving him the title of most Blessed Lord, raised to
the heyght of Apostolical dignity, Council. To. 1. inter ep. Damas.
holy Father of Fathers, Damasus Pope, and chief Bishop of Prelates, and in the
Epistle it self they do clearly acknowledge the supremacy of his sea,
co^playning of certain Bishops their neighbors who without his consent, or
knowledge had presumed to depose Bishops, which they said was against the
decrees of all the Fathers, and ancient rules, and Canons of the Church, by the
which (say they) sancitum est, vt quicquid horum vel in remotis etc. it was
decreed, that whatsoever should be treated, though in remote, and far distant
Provinces, concerning these matters (that is to say the deposition of Bishops,
and other important affiayres of the Church) the same should not be received,
nisi ad notitiam almae Sedis vestrae fuisset deductum etc. except it were
brought to the knowledge of your holy seat, to the end, that whatsoever should
be resolved might be confirmed with the authority thereof: thus wrote they, S.
Ambros in ca. 3. ep. 1. ad Timoth.
and much more to the same purpose, calling him also, ipsum Apostolicum
verticem Praesulum, the very Apostolical top (or head) of Prelates.

58. And therefore no marvel, that another Father of the same time, S. Hier.
ep. ^7. To. 2.
calls him the governor of the Church of God; expounding these words of the
Apostle to Timothy: Ecclesia est domus Dei viui etc. whereupon he says,
Ecclesia domus Dei dicitur, cuius rector hodie est Damasus: the Church is
called the house of God, the governor whereof at this day, is Damasus So he;
whereto I may add a notable testimony of S Hierome, who writing also to Damasus
to know of him, with whom he might communicate in Syria, and whether he might
use the word hypostasis, affirmed that he held Co^m^nion with his Beatitude,
that is to say (says he) with Peter's Chair, and that he knew the Church to be
buylt upon the rock, inferring thereupon, that whosoever did eat the Lamb out
of that house (he means the communion of Damasus, or of Peter's Chair) he was
a profane man, and out of the Arck of Noe: whereupon I infer, that S. Hierome
affirming the Church to be built upon Damasus, acknowledges him to be head
thereof, for the reason urged Chap. 3. nu. 17.18.19. and 20.
before by me in the last chapter, to wit, because the head of a mystical, or
political body, and the foundation in a buylding are all one; besyds that he
also acknowledges the same, by excluding all those from the unity of the
Church, who did not hold communication with Damasus, because the unity of the
body is derived principally from the unity of the head thereof, according to
the express doctrine of S. Cyprian, which I have also amply laid down in the
last nu. 4.5.6. ^ sequent.
Chapter.

59. Finally, S. Hierome demanding resolution from Damasus with whom he should
communicate in Syria (where was then a great Schism) and whether he might use
the word hypostasis, shows, that Damasus had authority to determyne, What
authority S. Hierome did attribute unto Damasus.
and decyde controversies and resolve doubts, or difficult questions in matter
of religion; and therefore S. Hierome says unto him, Discernite, siplacet,
obsecro, non timebo tres hypostases dicere, si iubetis: I beseech you judge, or
determyne, if it please you, for I will not fear to say that there are three
hypostases, if you command me. And again afterward; Quamobr^m obtestor
Beatitudinem tuam per crucifixum etc. Therefore I beseech your Beatitud for
Christ's sake crucified, and for the consubstantiall Trinity, that authority may
be given me by your letters, either to use, or to forbear the word hypostasis
etc. as also that you will signify unto me, with whom I may communicate at
Antioch; for that the Campenses, and the heretics called Tharsenses being
united together, nihil aliud ambiunt, quam vt auctoritate communionis vestrae
fulti etc. do seek nothing more, or with greater ambition, then that being
vpheld with the authority of your communion, they may use the word hypostasis
in the old sense. So he.

60. Wherein two things are to be noted, the one that S. Hierome does not ask
counsel or advise of Pope Damasus, but a definitive sentence ( vt auctoritas
detur, that authority be given him) that is to say, that Damasus should by his
letters determine and ordein what S. Hierome should do in those cases. The
other is that not only the Catholics in the East parts (as S. Hierome and the
Egyptians, whom he also called the colleagues of Damasus) but also the
heretyks sought to fortify themselves, by the communion and authority of the
Sea Apostolic. Whereupon two things do also follow evidently: the one, that
Damasus had power to decyde and determyne controversies even in the East
Church; and the other, that his authority was not restreyned to his own Church
at Rome, as M. Andrews seems to suppose, but was universal, and therefore
acknowledged as well in the East, as in the West.

61. This may be notably confirmed by the restitution of Peter Bishop of
Alexandria to his seat, who immediately succeeded Athanasius, and being
oppressed by the Arians, followed the example of his worthy predecessor, and
fled to Rome to Pope Damasus, Socrat. lib. 4. ca. 30.
and returning with his letters (which confirmed as well his creation, as the
Catholic faith) was restored by the people, qui illis confisus (says
Socrates) expollit Lucium, and Petrum in eius locum introducit; who by the
virtue of those letters expelled Lucius the Arrian Bishop, and put Peter into
his place.

62. Also Vitalis an heretic in Antioch being accused to Pope Damasus of
heresy, was forced to come to Rome to purge himself: Elias Cretens. in ep. 2.
ad Cledo^. Greg. Nazian. Baron. an. 373. To. 1. Council. ep. 1. Damas.
and albeit after he had there professed himself to be a Catholic, he was
remitted by Pope Damasus to Paulinus Bishop of Antioch for his final
absolution, yet Damasus prescribed to Paulinus a form of abiuration, whereto
Vitalis should subscribe; which being done Paulinus absolved him. Whereby it is
evident that Damasus had a supreme authority as well in the East, or Greek
Church, as in the West; for otherwise neither would Peter Bishop of Alexandria
(who was a very holy man) have appealed unto him, nor the people have received
Peter by the virtue of his letters; neither yet would Vitalis have gone from
Antioch to purge himself at Rome, nor Paulinus Bishop of Antioch permitted
that Damasus should intermeddle in matters pertaining to his charge.

63. And this may yet further appear by the earnest endeavors of S.
Chrysostom then Bishop of Constantinople, and Theophilus Bishop of Alexandria
to pacify Damasus toward Flauianus Bishop of Antioch; Sozom. li. 8. cap. 3.
who had committed perjury, and been the cause of a great division and trouble
in the Church, for the remedy whereof they sent Ambassadors to Rome to persuade
Damasus that it was necessary for the good of the Church, Socrat. li. 5. c. 15.
that he should pardon the offense of Flauianus, for the concord and peace of
the people; which being granted by Damasus: and communione (says Socrates)
Flauiano ad hunc modum reddita: and Flauianus being by this means restored to
the communion of the Church, the people of Antioch were in time reduced to
concord, and union with him.

64. Whereto Theodoretus adds, Theodor. lib. 5. cap. 23.
that the Emperor Theodosius in the time partly of Pope Damasus, and partly of
his successor Syricius and Anastasius, labored to procure the reconciliation
of Flauianus with the sea Apostolic, and commanded him to go to Rome to
answer for himself which he promised to do in the spring following, though
he did not perform it. Finally the Emperor made his peace with the Pope in
the end, upon condition that Flauianus should send his Ambassadors to Rome,
which he did (says Theodoretus) with a sollemne embassadge of Bishops,
Priests, and Deacons, under Acacius Bishop of Berroea, who was at that time a
man of great fame; whereupon all the Bishops of Aegipt (who until then would
not communicate with him) admitted him to their communion. So that albeit the
Historiographers do differ concerning the time when Flauianus was reconcyled
with the Pope, yet they all agree, that he could never be fully restored to the
peace, and communion of the universal Church, until he had submitted himself
to the Roman Sea, which shows evidently that the Bishops of Rome had far
greater and more ample authority, then M. Andrews does affoard them. Thus much
concerning Damasus.

P. Syricius.
65. And now to come to his successor Syricius, it is evident even in this cause
of Flauianus (by the testimony of S. Ambrose) that his authority extended it
self to the Greek, and Eastern Church, no less then to the Latin, and West
Church; seeing that in a Synod held at Capua, ^. Ambrose ep. 78. See Binius To.
1. Council. Baron. an. 389.
the hearing of Flauianus his cause was committed to Theoph^lus Bishop of
Alexandria, and to the Bishop of Aegipt, with this limitation (as S. Ambrose
witnesses) that the approbation, and confirmation of their sentence should be
reserved to the Roman Sea, and the Bishop thereof, who was then Syricius. In
like manner we find that his authority was admitted and acknowledged not only
in Spain, and France, but also in Africa, To. 1. Council. inter Siricij ep. and
decret.
as it may appear by his Decretall Epistle written to Himerius, or Himericus
Bishop of Arragon in Spain, in answer of diverse demands of his, in which
epistle he ordained that those his decrees should be sent by Himerius, as well
to Carthage in Africa, as to Portugal, and France, and that they should be of
no less force there, and else where, then in Arragon.

66. To this will I add a testimony of an African Father that lived in the time
of Siricius, Optat. li. ^. contra Parmen.
to wit of Optatus Bishop of Mileuis, who clearly deduceth the primacy of
Syricius from the primacy of S. Peter: for writing against Parmenian the
Donatist, and urging him that he could not deny but that Petrus omnium
Apostolorum caput, Peter the head of all the Apostles sat first in the Roman
chair (whereof he also yields these reasons, viz. that in the said chair
unity might be kept of all men, The argument of Optatus Mileuitanus.
that the rest of the Apostles should not every one of them defend or callenge
to himself a single chair, and that he might be held for a Schismatik, and a
wiked man who should set up a chair contra singularem Cathedram, against the
singular, or principal chair) having, I say, urged this, he reckons all the
Popes from S. Peter to his time, ending with Syricius, and concluding, that
because the Donatists held not communion with him, therefore they could not
have the true Church.

67. In this discourse it is manifest that as he acknowledges Peter for head
of the Apostles, and his chair for the singular, and principal chair, so he
also acknowledged Syricius for head of all other Bishops, and his chair (which
was Peter's) for the principal chair; for otherwise his argument against the
Donatists grounded on Peter's supreme authority, had been to no purpose. Besides
that he says also a little after (prosecuting the same argument:) Legimus
Principem nostrum etc. We read that Peter our Prince received the wholesome
keys against the gates of hell etc. Vnde est ergo etc. How chances it then
that you strive to usurp to your selves the keys of the Kingdom, who with
your audacious presumption do sacrilegiously make war against the chair of
Peter? So he.

68. Therefore (omitting here how aptly this may be applied to M. Andrews and
his fellows as well as to the Donatists) that which I wish specially to be
observed, is, that Optatus being an African acknowledged the same sovereignty
in Syricius which he affirmed to be in S. Peter: for whereas he calls him not
only the head of the Apostles, but also Principem nostrum, our Prince; it is
clear that the principality, and sovereignty of Peter in the time of Optatus,
could not be otherwise understood, but in his successor Syricius, who
consequently was Prince, and head of the Church as Peter was.

69. The very same is taught also by S. Augustine concerning Pope Anastasius,
Anastasius.
who succeeded Syricius; for S. Augustine presses the Donatists with the same
argument that Optatus does, and naming all the Popes until his own time, Aug.
ep. 165.
he ends with Anastasius, having first derived their lineall succession from
S. Peter, Cui, says he, totius Ecclesiae figuram gerenti etc. to whom bearing
the figure of the whole Church our Lord said: Upon this rock I will buyld my
Church: wherein it is to be noted, that S. Augustine acknowledging the primacy
of S Peter, in saying, that the Church was built upon him, and that he bare the
figure of the whole Church (which he did not in any other respect but because
he was head thereof, as I have proved in the first Chapter of this Adioynder)
he acknowledges the same in his successors, and namely in Anastasius, whom
therefore he draws by lyneall succession from S. Peter: and to this purpose
it may be also observed, that elsewhere he ascribes the great prerogative of S.
Peter (to wit his being the rock, or foundation whereupon the Church was buylt)
to his chair, or seat, and to the succession of Bishops derived from him,
bidding the Donatists reckon the Priests, Idem in psalm. contra part. Donati.
that had succeeded one another in Peter's seat, and then concluding, Ipsa est
Petra etc. that is the rock which the proud gates of hell do not overcome:
whereby it is evident, that S. Augustine acknowledged Anastasius, and all other
successors of S. Peter for heads of the universal Church, seeing he affirms
them to be the foundation thereof.

70. This may be confirmed also by a Canon of an African Synod, where it was
decreed, that letters should be sent to their brethren and fellow-Bishops
abroad, Council. African. can 35. vide ^innium page 637. edit. Colon. 1606.
and especially to the Sea Apostolic, to inform Anastasius, who then was
Pope, how necessary it was for the Church of Africa, that such Donatists as
being Clergy men should return to the unity of the Catholic Church, might be
received and admitted, without prejudice to their former dignityes, if the
Catholic Bishops that should receive them, should think it convenient,
notwithstanding a Decree made to the contrary before, in another Synod held
beyond the seas: whereby it appears that notwithstanding the great need which
the Africa^ Church had of this decree (as they signified) yet they would not
ordain it without his knowledge and consent or rather, as it seems, they
expected his leave, and order to do it, and no meruail seeing that in other
Synods and namely in the next following in the time of his immediate successor
Innocentius P. Innocentius.
(of whom I am now to treat) the African Bishops craved confirmation of their
decrees from the Sea Apostolic; Ep. 90. inter ep. August.
vt statutis, say they, nostrae mediocritatis etiam Apostolicae Sedis
adhibeatur auctoritas etc. That the authority of the Sea Apostolic may also be
added to the statutes of our mediocrity, to conserve the salvation of many, and
to correct the peruersity of some.

71. Thus wrote they to Pope Innocentius, giving clearly to understand, not
only that the validity of their decrees depended upon his confirmation, but
also that the conservation of the faithful in the true faith and the
correction of perverse, and obstinate heretics did specially belong to his
care, and proceed from his authority. This will further appear by another
Epistle written to the same Pope Innocentius by them in another Synod held at
Mileuis, Ibid. ep. 92.
as also by his answer to them. Thus then they wrote: Quia te Dominus gratiae
suae praecipuo munere in Sede Apostolica collocauit etc. Because our Lord has
by his special gift of his grace placed thee in the Apostolical seat, and
ordained thee to be such a one in these our times that we should rather commit
the fault of negligence if we should conceal from thy Reverence those things
that are to be suggested for the Church, then that thou can either disdain
them, or contemn them; therefore we beseech thee, to use and apply thy
Pastoral diligence to the great dangers of the weaker members of Christ etc.
So they, whereby they showed sufficiently their opinion concerning as well the
worthynes of his person, as his Pastoral power and authority over all the
members of Christ; as it will more evidently appear by his answer, which was
this.

72. Diligenter and congrue Apostolico consulitis honori etc. Ibid. ep. 93.
You do diligently, and conveniently provide for the Apostolical honor, I
mean the honor of him, who besides other intrinsecall things, has the
solicitude, or care of all Churches (to declare what sentence is to be held in
doubtful matters) wherein truly you follow the rule that you know has been
kept with me always throughout the whole world etc. So he: and a little after,
he says further, that as often as there is question of matter of faith, all
Bishops ought to refer all that which is for the general good of the Church
to Peter, the author of their name, and honour^ giving to understand that all
Episcopal honor and dignity, and other Ecclesiastical authority proceeds
immediately from the visible head of the Church under Christ, that is to say, S.
Peter, and his successors; and that therefore the condemnation of heresies, and
determination of all doubts in faith ought to be expected and required
specially from them.

73. And to the end that M. Andrews may know that Pope Innocentius did not in
this urge his own Apostolical authority more then S. Augustine, and the other
African Bishops approved; I wish him to read an Epistle of S. Augustine, and
Alypius, where having said that relations were sent ex duobus Concilijs,
Cathaginensi, and Mileuitano ad Apostolicam sadem, August. ep. 106. ad Bonifac.
from the two Counsels of Carthage, and Mileuis to the Sea Apostolic, they
add afterward (concerning the answer of Pope Innocentius) ad omnia illa
rescripsit ^o modo, quo fas erat, atque oportebat Apostolicae sedis Antistitem:
he (to wit Innocentius) wrote back or answered to all things in such sort as
was convenient, and as the Bishop of the Apostolic Sea ought to do. So they;
approving as you see, not only the substance, and matter of his Epistle, but
also his Apostolical manner of writing, acknowledging it to be fit for a man
of his Apostolical dignity. So that it appears as well by the Epistle of the
African Bishops to Pope Innocentius, as also by his answer to them, and their
approbation thereof, Mark this consequence.
that the Bishops of Rome in those days had, and exercysed a supreme authority
in the confirmation of Synods, resolution of doubts, and condemnation of
heresies, and heretics.

The Pelagian heresy condemned by Zozsimus and Innocentius.
74. Whereof there occurred at that time a notable example in the condemnation
of the Pelagian heresy: for although the African Bishops did particulerly
condemn it in their provincial Synods (which could not prescrybe laws to the
whole Church, yet the general and universal condemnation thereof, throughout
the world proceeded from the authority of the Sea Apostolyke, and the several
sentences of the two Popes Innocentius, an Zosimus, which they signified in
their letters not only to the Bishops of Africa, but also to all Bishops
universally, in respect of the universal care, Aug. ep. 157.
and authority they had over the whole Church. And therefore S. Augustine
says, that the heretics, Pelagius and Celestius were, toto Christiano orb
da^nati, cond^ened throughout all the Christian world, by the vigila^cy of the
Episcopal Synods of Africa, etia^ a Venerabilibus Antistitibus Apostolicae
sedis Papa Innocentio, and Papa Zosimo, and by the venerable Bishops of the
Apostolic Sea, Pope Innocentius, and Pope Zosimus.

75. Thus says S. Augustine; which his great friend Possidius Bishop of Calama
(who wrote his life) confirms, Possid. in vita August. ca. 18.
and explicateth notably, signifying that the 2. Popes Innoce^tius and Zosimus
did (at the great instance of the Council of Africa) cut off the Pelagians,
from the members of the Church, and by letters directed to the Churches, as
well of Africa, as of the East, and West, judge them to be held as accursed,
and to be avoided of all Catholics, Et hoc tale, says he, de illis Ecclesiae
Dei Catholicae pronuntiatum iudicium, etiam pijssimus Imperator Honorius
audiens and sequens etc. and the most pious Emperor Honorius hearing, and
following this such a notable Judgment of the Catholic Church of God
pronounced against them, condemned them by his laws, 3. things to be noted in
the precedent testimony of Possidius.
and ordained that they should be held for heretics. So he; wherein three
things are specially to be noted. The first, that the Pelagian heresy was
condemned universally by the authority of the Sea Apostolic, to wit, by the
sentence of the Popes Innocentius and Zosimus, signified by their letters, not
only to the Churches Africa, but also to all other Churches; in which respect
S. Augustine also in his foresaid Epistle to Optatus, Aug. vbi supra.
aduertiseth him, that he sent him the copies of such writings, and letters of
the Sea Apostolic, as were come to his hands, concerning those matters,
addressed either particulerly to the Bishops of Africa, or universally to all
Bishops.

76. Another thing to be noted in the testimony Possidius, is, that he calls
the sentence of those two Popes Innocentius and Zosimus, Ecclesiae Dei
Catholicae iudicium the Judgment of the Catholic Church of God; which he
could not have done, but in respect of their supreme power, and authority to
condemn heresies, as heads of the whole Catholic Church. The third is, that
albeit the Emperor Honorius condemned Pelagians for heretics by his temporal
laws, yet he did it no otherwise but audiens, and sequens etc. hearing and
following the judgment of the Catholic Church, that is to say, of those two
Popes Innocentius and Zosimus; for of them he speaks expressly.

77. And now to proceed, if M. Andrews do yet desire any further proof of this
matter, Prosper in Chron.
let him read S. Prosper S. Augustines disciple, who says that a Synod of 217.
Bishops being held at Carthage, their Synodicall decrees were sent to Zosimus:
quibus probatis, per totum mundum haeresis Pelagiana condemnata etc. which
being approved, the Pelagian heresy was condemned thoughout the whole world.
And again in another place he says of Innocentius: Tunc Pelagianorum,
machinae fractae sunt etc. and then were the engines of the Pelagians broken,
when Innocentius of blessed memory stroke the heads of their wicked error with
his Apostolical sword. Idem contra collat. ca. 41.
So he, and a little after he affirms the like of Pope Zosimus who added,
says he, the force of his sentence to the decrees of the African Council, and
armed the right hands of Bishops with the sword of Peter, ad detruncationem
impiorum, for the excommunication of the wicked. So he; giving to understand,
that not only the force of the African Synods against the Pelagians, but also
the general condemnation of them throughout the world, proceeded from the
authority of the Roman Sea: whereupon it must needs follow, that the said
authority was universal, and that the Bishops of that Sea (and namely
Innocentius and Zosimus) were more then Caput Ecclesiae suae Romanae, heads of
their Church of Rome.

78. And albeit this might suffice concerning these two Popes; yet I cannot
omit the most famous, The famous appeal of S. John Chrysostom to Innocentius.
and sollemne appeal of S. Chrysostom to one of them (to wit to Innocentius)
to whom he sent 4. Bishops to complain of his unjust banishment procured by
Theophilus Bishop of Alexandria, and wrote also himself unto him thus:
Obsecro, vt scribat etc. I beseech you write, and decree by your authority that
these things which were so unjustly done (when I was absent, Chrysostom. ep. ad
Inno. To. 5.
and did not refuse to be judged) may be of no force (as indeed of their own
nature they are not) and that those which have done so unjustly, may be subject
to the penalty of the Ecclesiastical laws etc. Thus wrote S. Chrysostom with
much more to the same purpose which he would not have done, if he had thought
that the authority of Innocentius had been lymited within the particular Church
of Rome, or rather if he had not known that his authority was universal and
sufficient to determyne his cause, Palladius in vita Chrysostom.
which also was evident by the progress and issue of the matter; for not only
he as playntife appealed to Innocentius, but also Theophilus, as defendant sent
a Priest of his called Peter with letters to justify his cause; besides that
all the Bishops of the East, Zosom. li. 8. ca. 26.
and Greek Church (being in this controversy divided) sent messingers or
letters to Rome in favor of the one, or of the other, as witnesses Palladius
Bishop of Helenopolis, Georg. Alexand. in vita Chrysostom.
who was S. Christostomes disciple, and went also to Rome to prosecute his
cause, and further testifyeth that Pope Innocentius gave sentence for S.
Chrysostom, disanulling the act, and judgment of Theophilus.

79. And whereas Atticus was made Bishop of Constantinople after the expulsion
of S. Chrystostome, Idem ibid. Nicep. l. 13. ca. 34.
Innocentius suspended him from his Episcopal function, until the causes
should be fully heard, Glycas Annal. part. 4. Gennadius Patriar. Constant.
Exposit. pro Council. Florent. ca. 5. Sect. 7. Theodoreti histor. Eccle. li. 5.
c. 34.
and determined, ordayning that in the mean time Proclus Bishop of Cyzicum
should govern the Church of Constantinople. And albeit Innocentius forbear for
sometime to proceed against Theophilus by way of censure; yet after S.
Chrysostomes death (who dyed in banyshment within 3. years) he excommunicated
not only Theophilus, and Atticus for the excesses committed on their part, but
also Arcadius the Emperor, and Eudoxia the Empress for assisting them with
their Imperial authority, as Georgius Alexandrinus, Gennadius, Glicas, and
Nicephorus do testify. Finally although Theophilus remained obstinate so long
as he lived (which was not past 5. years after S. Chrysostomes death) yet he
dyed repentant, and Atticus after much suite and many Embassages sent (as
Theodoretus testifyeth) was reconcyled to the Roman Church. As also Arcadius
the Emperor upon his submission, and humble petition of pardon was absolved by
Pope Innocentius as appears by the letters of them both, which are set down
in Glycas. And thus passed this matter, Glycas part. 4. Annal.
which alone may suffice to prove the supreme, and universal authority of
Innocentius.

80. And as for Zosimus, Bonifacius, and Celestinus, who succeeded Innocentius
and were the 3. last Popes of the 8. that lived in S. Augustins time, I shall
not need to say much, seeing that I have already spoken sufficiently of them as
of Zosimus a little Supra nu. 74.
before, concerning the condemnation of the Pelagian heresy, besides a former
Supra nu. 52. and 53.
testimony of S. Augustine, touching an assembly of himself, and other African
Bishops at Cesaraea, by the invention or commaundment of Pope Zosimus. In like
manner I have Supra nu. ^8. and seq.
showed before that not only S. Augustine, but also the Primate of Numidia in
Africa acknowledged the primacy of the Popes Bonifacius, and Celestinus by
recommending to them the cause betwixt Antony Bishop of Fussula, and the people
of that Diocese, whereto nevertheless I think good to add concerning
Bonifacius, that it appears by his letters to the Bishops of 7. Provinces in
France, that To. 1. Council. ep. 2. Bonif.
the Clergy of the City of Valentia sent to him a bill of complaynt with the
testimony of the whole Province against Maximus an heretical Bishop of the
Manichaean sect, accusing him of many heinous crimes, and that thereupon
Bonifacius did delegate the hearing of the cause to the said Bishops, P.
Celestinus head of the general Counsel of Ephesus.
whereby it is evident that his power, and authority was not confyned within
the Church of Rome.

81. And now to conclude with Celestinus, who was the last of the 8. methinks
M. Andrews should not be ignorant how far his authority, and Jurisdiction
extended, seeing that, it cannot be denied that he was President and head of
the general Council of Ephesus, and that the famous S. Cyril Bishop of
Alexandria was but his substitute, and Legate therein, which is evident not
only by the testimony Euagr. lib. 1. c. 4. Prosper. in chron. Liberat. c. 5
Photin. de 7. Synod. and To. 2 ca. 17. Council. Ephesc. ibid. To. 1. ca. 14
of Historiographers but also by the letters of Celestinus to Council. Ephesians.
To. 1. cap. 16. and 17.
Cyrillus to whom he wrote thus: Adiuncta tibi nostrae sedis auctoritate ipse
qui vice nostra potestateque fungeris etc. Thou which hold our place and
power (the authority of our seat concurring with thee) shall with all euerity
pronounce this sentence against Nestorius, that if within 10. days after this
admonition, he do not detest and renounce his wicked doctrine etc. Thou shall
provide his Church (of a Pastor) and he shall understand that he is excluded
from our communion etc.

82. Thus wrote Celestinus to Cyril, who therefore in his Ibid. To. 1. cap. 14.
letters, to Nestorius signified unto him, that if he did not recant, and
reform his errors within the time limited, and prescrybed by Pope Celestinus,
he should be excommunicated, and deprived. And the whole Council also
pronouncing Ibid. To. 2. ca. 1^. Euag. lib. 1. ca. 4. Nicepho. l. 14. cap. 34.
sentence of condemnation against Nestorius, affirmed, that they were compelled
to use that severity not only by the Canons of the Church, but also by the
letters of Pope Celestinus: and To. 4. cap 17. Council. Ephesians.
in their Epistle to the said Pope they signified, that they reserved, and
remitted the cause of John the Patriarch of Antioch (who was a favorer of
Niceph. li. 14. ca. 34
Nestorius,) to his judgment and sentence. Besides that Nicephorus testifies
that the common fame was in his time, that certain privileges were granted
to S. Cyril, (which also his successors enjoyed) by reason of his Legacy, and
substitution to Pope Celestinus in that Council and amongst other things that
he had the title of Iudex vniuersi orbis, Judge of the whole world.

An evident argument that Celestinus was universal and supreme Pastor of the
Church.
83. Now then I report me to thee, good Reader, whether Celestinus was no more
then the head of his Church of Rome as M. Andrews makes him. For is it likely
that either S. Cyrill (who was Bishop of Alexandria, and consequently the first
and chief Patriarch of the East) would have stouped to be his substitute and
Legate, and to receive commissions and orders from him, or yet that the whole
Council, (being most of them also of the Greek and East Church) would have
acknowledged themselves to be compelled by his letters to condemn Nestorius,
yea and remitted the cause of the second Patriarch of the Greek Church to his
final determination, if they had not taken him for the universal and supreme
Pastor of the whole Church? As I showed also the like before in the second See
cap. 2. per. ^otum.
Chapter of this Adioynder, concerning the authority of Pope Leo in the great
Council of Chalcedon, which was held in the same age, not past 20. years
after this other of Ephesus. So that M. Andrews cannot by any means excuse
himself from a manifest lie in this, no more then in other two points before
mentioned.

M. Andrews facility in ^ing.
84. Whereby it appears evidently that he has made 3. notable lies as I may
say with one breath, that is to say within little more then 3. lines, Besyds an
egregious corruption of the Canon, of the African Synod (with his transmarinus
nemo) and a foul abuse as well of S. Augustine (in making him say, that which
he neither said, nor meant) as also of his Reader in seeking to persuade him,
that S. Augustine excommunicated all those that would appeal to Rome out of
Africa, yea and cured Peters-diseases in the 3. last Popes; for so he also
says, in quibus tamen eumdem morbum curauit, in whom, to wit ( Zosimus
Bonifacius, and Celestinus) Augustine cured the same diseases (that is to say
the diseases of Peter) meaning as I take it, either Peter's presumption of his
own strength or else his denial of Christ: which nevertheless I cannot see how
he can apply to them, and much less pretend that S. Augustine cured the same
diseases in them.

85. Therefore whereas his drift was no other in all this, as it seems but to
persuade thee (good Reader) that S. Augustine was at daggers drawing with these
3. Popes, thou have partly seen already by that which has been said
concerning two of them to wit Zosimus, and Celestinus, how much he has sought
to abuse thee therein, and the like will also evidently appear concerning Pope
Bonifacius, if thou consider with what affection, August. contra. duas ep.
Pelag. lib. 1^ cap. 1.
reverend respect, and submission S. Augustine dedicated unto him his 4. books
against two Epistles of the Pelagians writing to him thus:

86. Noueram te quidem fama celeberrima praedicante etc. I knew thee truly
before, S. Augustins dutiful respect unto Pope Banifacius.
by the most famous report of thy renoumne, and understood by many most
frequent, and true relations, how abundantly thou art replenished with Gods
grace (most blessed and venerable Pope Boniface) but after that my brother
Alipius, had seen thee, and been received by thee with all benignity and
sincerity etc. I had so much more notice of thy Holiness, by how much more
certain is our amity; for thou, who take no gust, or delight in high things
(though thou art in a higher degree then others) do not disdain to be a
friend to the mean and inferior sort. So he; and afterward having signified
that he had undertaken to write against 2. epistles of the Pelagians, he
concludes: Haec ergo quae duabus Epistolis etc. These things therefore which I
do answer in this disputation to two Epistles of the Pelagians, I have
determined to direct specially to thy Holiness, not as things needful to be
learned by you but to be examined, and amended if any thing do chance to
dislyke you. Thus wrote S. Augustine to Pope Bonifacius: being so far from
having any auersion or alienation from him, and much more from presumyng to
cure any diseases in him (that is to say to correct any errors in his person
or government) that he showed all dutiful love and reverend affection toward
him, giving notable testimony to his rare virtue, and sanctity, and not only
acknowledging the dignity of his seat, but also submitting himself and his
works to his censure, and Judgment, to be examined corrected, and amended by
him as he should see cause, whereby it appears that S. Augustine lived in
perfect union with Pope Bonifacius.

87. And in what terms he stood with Pope Celestinus (though we may gather it
sufficiently by his own letter See before nu. 38. and seq.
before mentioned concerning the Bishop of Fussula) yet it shall not be amiss
to understand it also by the testimony of Celestinus himself. It is therefore
to be understood that S. Augustine dying in the time of Pope Celestinus, and
his works (especially those against the Pelagians) being by their practice
much impugned and defamed in France S. Prosper who had been a disciple (as I
have said before) of S. Augustine, and was then Bishop of Aquitane, went
purposely to Rome together with Hilarlus Bishop of Arles, to complain thereof
and to procure the letters of Pope Celestinus in iustifycation of him, and his
works: Whereupon Celestinus wrote a general letter to all the Bishops of
France, as well in defense of S. Augustine, as in condemnation of the
Pelagians, and amongst other things says of S. Augustine thus: To. 1. Council.
ep. 1. Celest. S. Prosper contra Collator. cap. 42.
Augustinum sanctae record^tionis virum pro vita sua and meritis in nostra
semper communione habiumus etc. We have always held Augustine, of holy memory,
in our communion for his life, and merits: neither was he ever touched with so
much as any rumor of evil suspicion, whom we have known to have been so
learned, Vincent. lirinens. cap. vlt.
that he was held by my predecessors for one of the chief, or best masters.
So he.

88. Whereby it is evident that S. Augustine ever lived in the union and
obedience of the Roman Sea, for otherwise Pope Celestinus would not have given
this testimony of him especially if he had been so opposite to him, and his
predecessors as M. Andrews affirms, I mean if he had taken upon him not
only to correct, and reform them, and to excommunicate every one that should
appeal to them out of Africa, but also to deny and impugn their supreme, and
universal authority which all Christendom acknowledged at that time, as I
have evidently showed So that now I leave it to thee, good Reader, to consider
whether M. Andrews has not (as it pleased him to say of S. Peter) caput
morbidum, and verticem male sanum, being so possessed and oppressed with the
peccant, or rather pestilent heretical humor of lying, that it flows out of
his mouth in such abundance, as we see. And therefore whereas he pretends to
descend of the race of Physicians, and to be one of those Medicorum filij, who
make special profession to pry into the diseases of Popes, M. Andrews his
Father, a Father of lies.
I may truly say that whosoever was his Grand father (were he Physician, or
Apothecary) his father could be no other but the Father of lies, from whom he
has contracted this pestiferous, and devilish disease, which therefore being
hereditary is, as it may be feared, incurable: in which respect we may more
truly say of his head, then he said of ours, nec est sanum, nec vt videtur,
sanabile.

Mr. ANDREWS HIS ANSWERS TO THREE OTHER PLACES Alleged by the Cardinal out
of the Fathers, are examined and confuted: and diverse absurdities discovered
therein. AND Finally he is proved to be a Wrangler in the highest degree.
CHAP. V.
IN the two last Chapters I have examined, and (if I be not much deceived)
fully confuted M. Andrews his answers to 7. places of the Fathers, objected by
the Cardinal in his Apology, and by me in my Supplement. And whereas there are
3. other Authorityes of the Fathers objected together with the former by the
Cardinal, and pretended also to be answered by M. Andrews, which I have not
touched any where in my Supplement, I think good to say somewhat thereto, lest
if I should pass them with silence, it may seem to some that M. Andrews has
quit himself better in the answer of them, then of the rest; and that he has
been able, at the least, to say somewhat to the purpose in defense of his cause.

2. The First of the 3. places is alleged by the Cardinal out of Origin
thus: Orig. in cap. 6. ad Romans
Petro cum summa rerum de pascendis ouibus traderetur, and super ipsum etc.
When the chief or supreme charge of feeding Christ's sheep was given to Peter,
and the Church founded upon him, veluti super terram, A place of Origin is
discussed.
as upon the ground, the confession of no other virtue but only of Charity was
exacted of him. Thus far the Cardinal out of Origin to prove the primacy of
Peter. Andr cap. 2. pa^ 217.. ex Origene.
Whereto M. Andrews answers thus. Ex Orig^ne summam rerum etc. Out of Origin
the Cardinal obiecteth that the Chief charge of feeding Christ's sheep, was
given to Peter, Orig. in Matthew. 16. Tract. 1.
but the same Chief or supreme Charge was also given to others, as Origin does
else where plainly affirm, and if any thing were given there peculiarly to
Peter, the same was given him in respect of his peculiar fall; super ipsum
veluti super terram etc. The Church was founded upon him as upon the ground;
but it was also founded upon others, together with him. Thus says M. Andrews.

3. Wherein I wish two things to be noted. The one, that here he flies to his
common and stale shift, to wit, that the rest of the Apostles had as much
pre-eminence in all this as Peter: and that if he had any thing peculiar it was
in respect of his fall, all which I have fully confuted to his shame in the
first Chapter, See cap. 1. nu. 3.6.23. and 26.
where I have declared how he abused S. Augustine, S. Ambrose, and S. Cyril
concerning this point, and therefore I will not trouble my self and my Reader
with the Repetition thereof. The other is, that he seeks to fortify this idle
conceit of his by the interpretation of Origin himself who he says teaches
expressly else where that others had the chief charge of feeding Christ's flock
as well as Peter, for the which he quoteth his first homily upon the 16. of
Matthew, where nevertheless Origin has not one word touching the words, Pasce
oues meas, but expounds there that which occurred in the 16. of Matthew,
concerning Peter's Confession of Christ, Matthew. 16.
Thou art Christ the Son of the living God, and Christ's answer to him, Thou
art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my Church etc. and I will give thee
the keys of the Kingdom of heaven etc. wherein it is also to be observed,
that Origin in that Homily follows altogether an Allegorical sense, and
seeking to draw from thence some Moral doctrine (as preachers use to do)
applies the same not only to all the Apostles, as well as to Peter, but also
to all perfect Christians, teaching that whosoever does by the revelation of
God, and light of grace confess Christ, as Peter did, he shall have the same
beatitude which Peter had, and be a Rock as he was; and that as every true
Christian and just man does participate of Christ, and therefore may well be
called Christus, Iustitia and Sapientia, so also he may be called Petrus and
Petra, and to this purpose Origin adds further that the Church is built upon
such, and that hell gates shall not prevail against them, meaning such just
men and perfect Christians as are of the m^mber of the elect, expounding the
gates of hell to signify all kind of sins, as well as false doctrine.

4. In like manner he applies the giving of the keys, as well to every
faithful Christian, as either to Peter, or to the rest of the Apostles,
saying; Videamus quomodo dictum est Petro, and omni fideli qui Petrus est, Dabo
tibi claues etc. Let us see how it is said to Peter, and every faithful man
which is Peter, I will give thee the keys of the Kingdom of heaven. And then
he proceeds, showing that Christ promises the keys to every faithful man
in reward of his confession, vt ipse sibi aperiat portas Regni caeloru^ etc.
That he may open for himself the gates of the Kingdom of heaven. Which gates
also Origin expounds to be the virtues of Chaslitic, and perfect
Righteousness, by the which the gates of heaven are opened (as it were with
keys) and sic (says he) in singulis quibusque virtutibus, and so also in all
other virtues; and to this purpose is Origens discourse in that homily.

5. Now then who sees not here, that he leaves the litterall sense
altogether in this, and like a preacher, follows the Allegorical and Moral,
thereby to induce his audience to virtue, and withdraw them from vice and
sin? And will M. Andrews say, that therefore Origens opinion was, that Peter
had nothing promised peculiarly to himself more then to every perfect
Christan? By M. Andrews ^ad gloss every good man and woman shall have as much
authority as S. Peter.
So shall every just man and woman (for Orig^n speaks of all alyke) have as
much Ecclesiastical power and Jurisdiction as Peter had; for I am sure M.
Andrews will not deny, but that when Christ promised the keys to Peter, he
promised to give him Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction and power, howsoever the same
is to be understood, I mean whether as promised to himself alone for the
whole Church (as we understand it) or as promised also to the Apostles equally
with him (as M. Andrews, and his fellows would have it) and therefore, I say,
that taking this interpretation of Origin for the literal sense, every
faithful man or woman that is of the elect has as much power to bynd, loose,
excommunicate, and exercise any other Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, as Peter,
and the rest of the Apostles had: yea to be not only Pastors of Christ's flock,
but also chief Pastors and to have summa^ rerum de pascendis ouibus, the
chief charge of feeding Christ's sheep.

6. For whereas Origin says so of S. Peter, in the place now in question; M.
Andrews will have the same to be understood also according to this
Interpretation of Origin, which as you have heard, includes not only all the
Apostles, but also every other perfect Christian (if he be of the elect) and
excludes all those that are not such: so as amongst other consequents that
follow thereof, one may be^ that it is uncertain whether M. Andrews himself
be a Pastor, A great doubt whether M. Andrews be a Pastor or not, if he
understand Origin aright.
or no; for though he hold himself for a perfect Christian (which nevertheless
I hold to be very doubtful, or rather assure my self of the contrary) yet it
is very uncertain whether he be one of the elect, and if he be not of that
number, then according to this interpretation (if it be literal) he has no
pastoral Co^missio^. Besides, it would follow that every Priest should have as
much authority as his Bishop, and every Bishop as much as his Metropolitan, yea
and every predestinate man, or woman (that is a perfect Christian) should have
as much as any of them, or as they all: seeing that all they can have no more
then summa^ rerum de pascendis ouibus, the chief charge and care of feeding
Christ's flock^ which Origin says was given to Peter. M. Andrews by his
interpretation of Origin overthrows all subordination in the Church.
Lo then what good doctrine M. Andrews teaches here, by this Interpretation
of Origin (if he will have it to be litterall) overthrowing thereby all
subordination in the Church, and co^founding the Ecclesiastical with the
secular, the Laytie with the Clergy and the head with the members, I mean the
spiritual Pastors or sheapheardes of Christ's flock, with their sheep or
subjects, which truly he would not do if he were not as silly and single witted
as a sheep, or at least, if he were not more malicious then a sheep of
Christ's flock ought to be.

7. Therefore to conclude this point, seeing that this Interpretation of Origin
out of Origin serves him to no better purpose then the other did before out of
S. Augustine, S. Ambrose, and S. Cyril (which only served to bewray his malice
and folly, Chap. 1. vbi supra.
as I have showed amply in the first Chapter.) It is clear that Origens
testimony alleged by the Cardinal (concerning the chief Charge of feeding
Christ's sheep given to Peter) remains clear, Other plain places of Origin
to prove S. Peter's primacy.
and sound for the Catholics to be taken in the litterall sense as the
Cardinal alleged it, especially seeing it is most conform to Origens
doctrine in other places, as in his homilyes upon diverse Evangelists, Origin.
in diverse. Euangel. hom. 2.
where he calls. S. Peter Summum Apostolorum verticem, the chief or supreme
head of the Apostles; and therefore discoursing also afterward in the same
place of the particular privileges of grace given by our Savior to S. John
the Apostle, he prefers nevertheless S. Peter before him in dignity saying,
Nemo nos existimet Petro Ioannem prefer etc. Let no man think that I
prefer John before Peter. Who would so do? for, which of the Apostles was
higher (in dignity) then he, qui est and dicitur Vertex eorum? Who is called,
and is their head. So he. And I am sure M. Andrews can not imagine that Origin
deduced the supreme dignity of Peter from any other ground or reason, but
because he had, summam rerum de pascendis ouibus, the chief charge of feeding
Christ's sheep, and was the foundation of the Church, as Origin acknowledges
in the place alleged by the Cardinal, and diverse others: and this shall
suffice for him.

8. The second place which I am to debate with M. Andrews is taken by the
Cardinal out of S. Hylary in these words; Card. Apol. cap^ 8. page 125. S.
Hyl. in 16. cap. Matthew.
O in nuncupatione noui nominis felix Ecclesiae fundamentum etc. O happy
foundation of the Church in the nuncupation of a new name and a rock worthy of
the building thereof, A place of S. Hilary for S. Peter's authority defended.
that is to say of the Church. which (Rock) should dissolve or break the laws
of hell etc. Thus far the Cardinal out of S. Hilary, to prove that Peter was
the foundation, and consequently the head of the Church. Whereto M. Andrews
answers thus. Ex Hylario, felix Ecclesiae fundamentum Petrum, out of Hilary
the Cardinal objected that Peter was the happy foundation of the Church,
Andr. cap. 8. page 218.. ex Hylario.
Sed inter alia pariter fundamenta, but amongst and together with other
foundations. So he. Meaning that because all the Apostles are called in the
Scriptures foundations of the Church, therefore S. Peter was no otherwise the
foundation thereof then they. Whereto I need not to say any thing here, because
I have largely treated the same point in the third Chapter, showing how the
Apostles were called fou^dations of the Church, See chap. ^. nu^ 18.24.25. and
2^.
without derogation either to Christ, who is the first, and chief foundation,
or to Peter who is the second immediately grounded upon Christ, and therefore I
remit my Reader thereto.

9. And now to go forward with M. Andrews his answer, he adds the rest of
S. Hilaries words thus: Dignam aedificatione Christi Petram, a Rock worthy of
the building of Christ; which words of Hilary he glosseth thus; sed fidei
ratione etc. but by reason or means of faith (says Hilary himself) and not
of his person, that Peter may depend on the faith, and not the faith upon
Peter. M. Andrews his shifting gloss.
Thus says M. Andrews, seeking by the help of a lying gloss of his own to
make his Reader believe, that S. Hilary does so admit S. Peter's faith to be the
foundation of the Church, that he excludes his person; fidei ratione ait ipse
Hilarious, non personae, says M. Andrews, Peter was a Rock by the means of
his faith, says Hilary himself, and not of his person. So indeed says M.
Andrews, but so says not S. Hilary. And therefore M. Andrews thought best to
quote no place of S. Hilary neither in the text nor in the margent; and sure I
am that in the place which the Cardinal alleges, S. Hilary speaks
expressly of S. Peter's person, and not of his faith, except M. Andrews can
show us how faith was called by a new name, and so made the foundation of the
Church, as we can show him, how Simon was called Peter, that is to say a Rock,
to signify by that new name that he should be felix Ecclesiae fundamentu^ (as
S. Hilary says) the happy foundation of the Church, S. Peter's faith not
separated from his person in the sense and meaning of S. Hilary.
and receive the keys of heaven. In which respect S. Hilary adds also in the
same place, O Beatus caeli ianitor! O blessed porter of heaven! Nevertheless I
would not have M. Andrews to think that in affirming with S. Hilary that Peter
was the foundation of the Church, I do exclude his faith from his person, as
though S. Hilary should say or any Catholic man mean, that the Church was
built upon Peter's person and not upon his faith; but I do attribute the same so
to his person, that I acknowledge therein the presence, concurrence, and merit
of his faith, by the which he deserved to be made the foundation of the Church,
and the porter of heaven, as S. Hilary calls him.

10. And therefore albeit S. Hilary in another place calls the Rock of
Confession, the fou^datio^ of the Church, and says also that faith received
the keys of the heavenly Kingdom (which by all likelihood is the place that
M. Andrews means, though he does not quote it) yet in the same place he
adds concerning S. Peter's person, that supereminentem beatae fidei suae
confessione gloriam promeruit, S. Hilar^ li. 6. de Trinitate.
he deserved a supereminent glory by the confession of his blessed faith: and
a little after, hinc regni caelorum habet claues etc. hereby, or in respect
hereof (that is to say of his faith, or confession of Christ) he has the keys
of the Kingdom of heaven, and his earthly judgments are heavenly. Thus says
S. Hilary, showing evidently in what sense he says, that faith and the
confession of Christ was the foundation of the Church, and that it received the
keys, to wit, because by the Merit thereof S. Peter deserved to have the
supereminent dignity or glory to be the foundation of the Church, Ibidem.
and to have the keys; which he also signifies more plainly before in the
same Tract, saying of Peter's person, post Sacramenti confessione^ beatus Simon
aedificationi Eccl^siae subiace^s, and claues regni caelestis accipiens etc.
Blessed Simon after the confession of the mystery, lying under the building of
the Church (that is to say, being made the fou^datio^ of the church) and
receiuing^y^ keys of the heavenly Kingdom etc. So he. Where you see he
ascribes S. Peter's being the foundation of the Church, as also his having of
the keys, to his person, though to show the reason and cause thereof, he adds
post co^fessione^ Sacramenti, after the confession of the mystery.

11. So that S. Hilary saying in one place, that Peter was the foundation of
the Church, and in another affirming the same of his faith, or Confession, does
not in either of both understand his person without his faith, or yet his faith
without his person (I mean abstracting his faith from his person) but
considers both jointly, that is to say, his person by the merit of his faith.
One of M. Andrews his petty ^rauds.
And therefore whereas M. Andrews affirms, as you have heard, that S. Hilary
himself says, that Peter was the foundation of the Church fidei ratione, non
personae, by the means of his faith, and not of his person, he may put up non
personae in his pocket, for S. Hilary has no such word, neither that meaning,
which M. Andrews would have his Reader to gather thereof, that is to say, to
exclude S. Peter's person from the foundation of the Church. So as this may
pass for a petty fraud, and a pretty cosening trick amongst many other of more
importance, whereof you have seen diverse already, and shall see more hereafter.

12. There rests now to be examined only one of the 3. places before
mentioned, which is alleged by the Cardinal out of S. Maximus thus: Card.
cap. 8. p. 125.
Quanti igitur meriti apud Deum suum Petrus etc. Of how great merit do you
think that Peter was with his God, Maxim. ho. 3. de Apost. Pe^ro and Paulo.
that after the rowing of a little boat, the government of the whole Church was
given him. Thus far the Cardinal out of S. Maximus. To this M. Andrews says:
E Maximo (si tamen Maximus is Taurinensis etc. Andr. vbi supra page 219.. E.
Maximo.
The Cardinal obiecteth out of Maximus (if nevertheless this was Maximus of
Turin and not some other later then he, if also in the time of Maximus Sermons
were purposely made of the Apostles, as no doubt there were in the age after)
Petro totius Ecclesiae gubernacula tradita etc. the government of the whole
Church was given to Peter. But did ever any man think that the government of
any particular Church was given him, except you who gave him the government of
the Roman Church (as though the same were not part of the whole) after you have
given him the government of the whole? So he: very mystically as he is wont, yet
seeming to grant (for ought I see) that Peter had the government of the whole
Church, which is the same ^^at the Cardinal teaches, and seeks to prove by
this place.

13. But perhaps he will fly here to his old shift, to wit, that though Peter
had the government of the whole Church, yet he had it no otherwise then the rest
of the Apostles had. Concerning which point, I have treated so amply before,
that it were needles to repeat it here, especially seeing that he seeks no
such evasion in this place, but seems to grant as much as we demand; and
only carpeth at us for giving to Peter the government of the particular Church
of Rome, M. Andrews his fantastical conceit.
after we have given him the government of the whole. For so he says; which
truly is a fine conceit, and right worthy of M. Andrews enigmaticall and
fantastical brain, who loves to walk in mysts, and clouds, to the end it
may be uncertain what he affirms, or what he denies: as for example, he
grants here or at least seems to grant the doctrine of S. Maximus, which
is, that Christ gave the government of the whole Church to S. Peter; and yet
presently after he seems to call the same in question again, affirming, that
we have given him the government as well of the whole Church of God, as of the
particular Church of Rome, saying: Romanae vestrae traditis etc. postquam ei
totius gubernacula tradidistis: You give him the government of the particular
Church of Rome, after you have given him the government of the whole.

14. So that he suposeth here, that not Christ, but we have given him both the
one and the other, to wit the particular, after the general: whereby he
seems also to affirm that S. Peter was not Bishop of Rome otherwise then in
our conceit, and by our gift, adding withal a strange parenthesis (quasi ea
totius pars non esset) as though the same particu^^e Church of Rome were not a
part of the whole; as who would say that S. Peter could not be governor both of
the whole Church and of a particular Church; wherein he argues as wisely as if
he should say, that a Bishop of Ely could not be Governor of the particular
Church of Ely, and of the whole Diocese, or that a Bishop of Canterbury could
not be Governor of that Bishopric and Prymate of England, or that a general
of an Army could not govern a particular Company, and be General of the whole
Army.

M. Andrews dull head more to be confounded by blows then persuaded by
arguments.
15. But will M. Andrews, trow you, be so absurd to say in good earnest that S.
Peter was not governor of a particular Church, or that we only (meaning the
Catholics of this age) have made him so? Truly if he affirm this, and will
stand to it, he is not to be confuted by arguments, but confounded by blows,
as a mad man that had need to be beaten into his wits, having (as Aristotle
says of some) as much need of punishment, Arist. Topic. li. 1^ cap. 9.
as he should have of sense, that should deny the snow to be white, for I
think there was never any thing more clearly testified by all the Fathers of
the Church, Counsels, Historiographers Ecclesiastical and profane, undoubted
monuments of Antiquity, and all manner of Testimony then that S. Peter was
Bishop of Rome, especially seeing that the continual succession of Bishops in
the Roman Sea from him, even to the present Pope Paulus Quintus, does
demonstrate, and as I may say proclayme the evidence thereof. And therefore I
must needs imagine that M. Andrews has some other meaning then his words
import; but whatsoever it is, he shows by his obscure, doubtful and
impertinent manner of writing, See cap. 4 nu. 23.
that he has caput morbidum, and verticem male sanum, as you heard him say of
S. Peter in the last Chapter.

16. And this might suffice for answer to his gloss upon the place of S.
Maximus, S. Maximus of Turyn did write homilyes or Sermons of Saints.
but that I cannot omit to say something to the two doubts he makes, to wit,
whether this Maximus was he that was Bishop of Turin, and whether there were
Sermons made purposely of the Apostles in his time; both which doubts the
ancient Gennadius (who wrote in the same age) may well resolve, seeing that in
his book de viris illustribus, Genadius in Catal. Illustrium viror.
he writes that Maximus Bishop of Turin wrote certain Tracts in praise of the
Apostles (which are these very Homilies whence this testimony is taken) and
having mentioned diverse other Tracts and Homilies upon the Nativity of S. John
Baptist, S. Eusebius of Versels, and S. Cypri^n, also of the passion of Christ,
and the fast of Lent, of the Cross, Sepulcher, and Resurection of our Lord
(which are also to be seen in his works under the title of homylies, he
concludes: Scripsit etiam homilias multas etc. He (to wit Maximus) wrote also
many Homilyes of the Nativity of the Theophany (which we call the Epiphany) of
Easter, and of Pentecost etc. besides diverse others which I have read, and do
not remember. So he.

17. Wherein it is to be noted for the resolution of M. Andrews his doubts,
that S. Maximus who was Bishop of Turin, wrote homilyes in praise, not only of
the Apostles, but also of diverse other Saints, and upon diverse feasts; which M.
Andrews may believe because it is testified by one that might know it well, for
that he wrote about the year of our Lord 490. which was the same age wherein
S. Maximus lived, who died (as Gennadius also witnesses) in the year 420.
about ten years before the decease of S. Augustine, Gennadius vbi supra.
which I note by the way to put M. Andrews in mind of a notable escape and
oversight (not to call it a flatly) in his former answer to a place of S.
Augustine (whereof I treated in the last Chapter) where you may remember he
affirmed very confidently, See before chap. 4. nu. 21.
that, tempore Augustini non fiebant Sermones de tempore: M. Andrews has not
given any probable answer to any one of ten places objected by the Cardinal.
In S. Augustins time there were no sermons made de Tempore. So that you see he
is found to be minus habens, and taken tardy in every thing, and not able to
give any reasonable satisfaction, or answer to any one place of ten alleged
by the Cardinal in one Chapter.

18. And yet forsooth in the preamble to his answer of those places, he makes
so light of them as though he could blow them away all with a blast; for thus
he says: Vnum hoc peccant omnia etc. they have all this one fault, Andr. vbi
supra page 217.. Inspiciamus.
that they bring nothing which may not straight be granted, except perhaps
some little word, about the which I do not mean (...), to contend in words. So
he. But if this be true, how chances it that the poor man has been so puzzled
in the answer of these places that he has been feign so to trifle, wrangle,
cogg, and lie, as you have heard? Has some little word, trow you, that has
occurred now and then, and could not be granted, driven him to so hard an
exigent? But let us hear what he says may be granted, and what denied in
those places: Nam nec primatum (says he) negamus Petri etc. For we do not deny
the Primacy of Peter, nor the names which do signify it, but we demand the
thing or matter it self now in question, that is to say, his earthly Monarchy.
Thus says he, seeming out of his bountiful liberality, to grant that which
he seeks to overthrow, as much as in him lies, yea denying that in effect
which he grants in words, M. Andrews his (...).
and reducing all his dispute to a plain (...), that is to say, a wordwarre,
or a contention about words, which nevertheless he professes to avoid.

19. You see he grants the primacy of Peter, yet when it is urged against
him out of the Fathers in the places above mentioned, he labors to overthrow
the ground from whence they deduce it. For whereas they teach, that Peter had
the primacy because he was the foundation of the Church, and had a special
Commission given him to feed Christ's sheep, he goes about to prove that
Peter was no more the foundation of the Church, then the rest of the Apostles,
nor otherwise Pastor thereof then they: whereupon it must needs follow, that he
was not their primate, nor had any more government over the Church then they.
Wherein then consists his primacy which the Fathers teach, and deduce from
the power given him by the keys, and by his Pastoral commission, which do
import authority, power, Jurisdiction, and government?

20. Therefore M. Andrews denying S. Peter's preemine^ce in authority and
government, denies the primacy, that the Fathers teach, and reduces it only
to a bare name, without effect, and so does nothing else indeed but (...); yea
and if we well consider what he says we shall find that he grants not so
much as the very word or name of primacy, or at least if he do he co^tradicteth
himself; for what are, trow you, those voculae which he excepteth from his
grant, when he says, that there is nothing in these places of the Fathers,
which may not presently be granted, nisi voculam forte habent etc. except some
little word perhaps? M. Andrews troubled greatly with little words.
What little word I say is that which cannot be granted? Is it not Primatus,
Caput, and some such other words as signify Primacy? Yes truly; for no other
voculae, or voces in those places of the Fathers do so much molest him.
Nevertheless he has no sooner excepted them from his grant, but he grants
the^ presently, saying: Non negamus Primatum Petri etc. We do not deny the
primacy of Peter, nor those names which signify Primacy, which is a strange
kind of (...), for he wrangleth with himself, contradicting himself notably
within the space of two lines, first signifying that those words and names are
not to be granted, and presently after granting them, as no way prejudicial
to his doctrine.

21. And to the end we may understand that he grants us nothing but words
and names, he distinguishes the same from the thing it self which he means
to deny, and yet so handles the matter that he does still (...), reducing also
his denial to a mere quarrel of words devised by himself, and neither used
nor meant by us, either in words or sense: for he calls rem ipsam, M.
Andrews fights in the air and peruerteth the state of the Question.
the thing it self (which is signified by our primacy) terrestrem monarchiam,
an earthly Monarchy: and in another place he also terms it See cap. 1. nu.
20.
temporalem Primatum, a temporal Primacie; and this forsooth is that which he
denies here, and so denies no part of our doctrine, but a foolish co^ceipt
of his own; for although we hold and teach that the government of the Church
is a Monarchy, and that the power thereof does extend it self to temporal
things (in such sort and for such reasons as I have touched in the first nu.
20. and 21.
chapter of this Adioynder, and handled at large in my See Supplem. chap. 1.
nu. 61. and seq. vsque ad 69.
Suppleme^t) yet it neither is nor can be called temporal or earthly,
otherwise then as S. Hilary calls S. Peter's judicial sentences terrena
iudicia, when he says, terrena eius iudicia sunt caelestia, his earthly
Judgments (that is to say, S. Hilar. l. 6. de Trinit.
his sentences given on earth) are heavenly.

22. And so I say, that albeit the government of the Church may in this sense
be called earthly, to wit, because it is exercised upon earth, yet it is not
earthly or temporal, but spiritual and heavenly, both because it is a
spiritual and heavenly power, and also because it is guided and directed from
heaven by the spirit of God. And therefore whereas M. Andrews does call or
rather nickname the Popes Supremacy, a Temporal Primacy, and his Monarchy an
earthly Monarchy, because he punishes his spiritual subjects in their
temporal goods, or states, he may by the same reason say, that S. Peter and
S. Paul's power was not spiritual, but corporal and temporal, because the one
of them punished Ananias and Sapphira with corporal death, and the other
struck Elimas the Magician blind, Act. 5. Ibid. ca. 13.
delivered the incestuous Corinthian to Satan in interitum carnis, 1. Cor. 5.
to the destruction of the flesh, and finally extended his power to secular and
political matters, commanding Ibid. ca. 6.
the Corinthians to appoint temporal Judges amongst themselves rather then to
have recourse to the tribunalls and Judgments of Infidells: M. Andrews a
pecuniary Pastor and a wrangler in the highest degree.
yea M. Andrews must acknowledge himself to be but a mere temporal, yea a
pecuniary Pastor, because in his spiritual Courts he uses pecuniary mulcts,
and other temporal punishments, as I have showed before, in the first See
before chap. 1. nu. 21.
Chapter. By all this it appears that M. Andrews denying not the spiritual,
but (as he terms it) the earthly Monarchy, and temporal primacy of Peter,
denies nothing else but his own vain and idle manner of speech, expressing
only a foolish fancy of his, and a very Chymera that has no being in rerum
natura, and so he does still (...), and is therefore truly (...), that is to
say a wrangler, in the highest degree.

23. And to the end this may yet appear more manifestly, I will examine his
answers and objections touching another point in controversy betwixt him, and
us, whereby we shall also see how notably he wrangleth, cauilleth, iuggleth,
and tryfleth; and because the matter, and his manner of answering will require
some long discourse, I will make it the subject of the three next Chapters.

A FVRTHER MANIFESTATION OF MASTER ANDREWS HIS Tryfling, wrangling, and
fraudulent humor, by his Answers to other places of the Fathers, concerning
Prayer to Saints, which he deuydeth into three ranks, whereof the two first
are examined in this Chapter.
CHAP. VI.
WHEREAS the Cardinal undertakes in his Apology Card. Apol. cap. 1. page 12.
to treat of prayer to Saints (because the Apology for the Oath condemns the
use, M. Andrews his mere trifling cavil.
and practice of it in the Catholic Church) M. Andrews takes exception to
the Cardinal for changing the state of the question, Andr. cap. 1. p. 35..
Porro.
and says that he fights with his own shadow, because he promises to
treat de intercessione Sanctorum of the intercession of Saints, whereas that
which the King condemns (says M. Andrews) is the invocation of Saints:
wherein he also notes this difference, that the intercession of Saints is their
work, and the invocation of them is ours, and that the King denies not that
which the Cardinal proves, to wit, that the Saints do pray for us, but that
they are to be inuocated, or prayed unto, which (says M. Andrews) the
Cardinal proves not.

2. And he pleases himself so much with this devise, that he does often
inculcate the same, urging the Cardinal to prove that Saints may be inuocated,
yea producing a text of Scripture, to prove that none can be inuocated but God;
Andr. pa. 37.. Veru^.
for terret nos Apostolus, says he, vtcumque vos hominem habetis pro leui etc.
The Apostle does terrify us (how light soever you make of the man) when he
asks this question, Romans 10.
quomodo inuocabunt eum, in quem non crediderunt? how shall they invoke him
in whom they believe not? An ignorant collection.
for you perhaps have found a way how a man may invoke those in whom you
your selves say you do not believe, whereas he (to wit the Apostle) seemed then
to have found no way. Thus says M. Andrews: wherein it is to be noted, that
one special reason why he rejects our doctrine concerning prayer to Saints,
is, for that we do invoke them; because in his conceit, Invocation is so
proper to God alone, that none can be inuocated but he; and if he do not
conceive so, why does he insist so much upon the word invoke, yea, and seek
to terrify us with his terret no^s Apostolus, charging us to make light of him,
because we invoke them in whom we believe not, that is to say, those whom
we do not hold for God.

3. But a man may wonder how this great Doctor could so grossly err in a
matter so evident as this, seeing that the words of the Apostle immediately
going before, do manifestly show, that he speaks there of an invocation due
to God alone, as to our chief Lord; which kind of invocation is not
communicable to creatures; and therefore the Apostle having said, that God is
Dominus omnium etc. the Lord of all, and rich, or bountiful; Romans 10.
toward all that invoke him, he confirms it with the saying of the
Prophet, omnis qui inuocauerit nomen Domini saluus erit, Joel. 2.
every one that shall invoke the name of our Lord shall be saved, and then he
adds, The true meaning of S. Paul about the invocation of him in whom we
believe.
Quomodo inuocabunt eum in quem non crediderunt? How shall they invoke him,
in whom they have not believed? as who would say, how can they invoke him,
of whom the Prophet speaks, him that is Dominus omnium, the Lord of all,
except they believe in him, that is to say, except they believe him to be their
Lord, and Creator. Whereby he does not signify that none but God can be
inuocated in any sort, but that we cannot invoke God, as our Lord, and our
God, except we believe him so to be.

4. And this does not contradict the Invocation of Saints in another respect,
to wit (not as Gods) but as the servants of God, whom he glorifyeth, and
honoreth, and by whose intercession, and mediation he bestows graces, and
favors upon men: in which sense it may also be truly said, that we cannot
invoke them, or crave the help of their prayers, except we do in some sort
believe in them (I mean) so far forth as we invoke them, that is to, say
except we believe them to be Gods servants, and that we also have confidence in
them, as in those, who by Gods goodness may help us. So as a faith, and belief
in Saints, is also necessary for the invocation of them, though it is not the
faith that we have in God, as in our chief Lord, and Creator; and that we may
have faith in Saints, M. Andrews may learn in the Apostle himself, who
commends the charity, Ep. ad Philem.
and faith which Philemon had in Domino Jesus, and in omnes Sanctos, in our Lord
Jesus, and in all Saints; upon which words S. Hierome in his Commentary upon
that Epistle discourses amply, S. Hieron. To. 6. in ep. ad Philem.
proving that we may be said to have faith in Saints.

5. Therefore M. Andrews is to understand for the full answer of his
objection, that as there is an honor, and glory which is due to God only (as
the Apostle witnesses, 1. Tim. 1.
saying, soli Deo honor, and gloria, honor, and glory be to God alone) and
another due to creatures (whereof the same Apostle also says, Romans 2.
gloria, honor, and pax omni operanti bonum; glory, honor, and peace be to
every one that does good) so also there are two sorts of invocation, the one
used to God alone (whereof the Apostle speaks in the text alleged by M.
Andrews) and the other used not only to Angels, and Saints, Genesis 48.
but also to men, as we read in the holy Scriptures, where Jacob blessing the
children of Joseph says, (...).
inuocetur nomen meum super pueros hos, and nomina Patrum meorum: let my name,
and the names of my Fathers Abraham, and Isaac be inuocated upon those
children. Upon which words S. Augustine notes expressly that not only
exaudition, S. Aug. li. locution. in Genesis nu. 200.
but also invocation is sometimes applied to men, and not to God alone; besides
that, I will make it evident hereafter, that the ancient fathers do use
invocation, for prayer to Saints.

6. But if M. Andrews will not believe S. Augustine, and the other ancient
fathers, nor yet the holy Scripture, let him believe himself, who afterward
teaches clearly enough, that the word invocation may be applied to creatures,
for he says, that poscere a Sanctis auxilium, Andr. p. 45.. Locus autem.
proprie inuocare est, to crave help of Saints, is properly to invoke them,
so that according to this interpretation of his, we do properly invoke all
those of whom we crave help, M. Andrews co^tradicteth himself.
and succor, which we lawfully crave, not only of God, but also of those, who
by the ordinance of God, may, and do lawfully succor, and help us, as Angels,
Saints, and men do; whereupon it follows that we may lawfully demand their
help, and consequently invoke them according to M. Andrews his own
interpretation, whereby it appears that he has not only very idly labored
to fright us with his terrible text taken out of the Apostle, but also fondly
contradicted himself.

7. No less vain, and idle is the exception which he takes against the
Cardinal, Cardinal Bellarmine under the name of Intercession of Saints
comprizeth as well our prayers to them as their prayers for us.
for undertaking to prove the intercession of Saints, instead of the invocation
of Saints: for how can M. Andrews be ignorant that the Cardinal means to
prove the Catholic doctrine concerning prayer to Saints, or the invocation of
Saints, albeit he term it the intercession of Saints? For whereas there are
in this question two points specially controuersed, the one, whether we may
pray to Saints, and the other, whether they do pray for us, (which two have a
connection, and dependence one of another) it suffices that the Cardinal named
one of them, meaning under the title thereof to prove the Catholyke doctrine
concerning them both, as indeed he does by the places of the Fathers which he
alleges; proving by some of them that the Saints pray for us, succor, and
help us, and by others that we may pray to them, yea and that we do receive
help, and succor by them; whereby the Cardinal does sufficiently discharge
his promise, yea and proves that which M. Andrews exacteth of him, to wit,
the invocation of Saints, so that M. Andrews shows himself still to be
(...), a notable wrangler, contending about words, when nevertheless he
understands clearly the Cardinals sense, and meaning therein.

8. And now to show that the Cardinal evidently proves the invocation of
Saints, I will examine M. Andrews his answers to the places alleged by the
Cardinal out of the Fathers, whereby also his cauilling, wrangling and
fraudule^t humor shall evidently appear. He deuideth the Fathers (which the
Cardinal produces) into 3. ranks. Andr. pa. 39.. Patrum.
The first (says he) is of those, qui vere Patres, sed non vere citantur, are
truly Fathers, but not truly cyted. The second, of those, qui vere citantur,
sed fidei suspectae, which are truly cyted, but of no sound credit. And the
third, M. Andrews his triple division not worth three chipps.
of those, qui and very, and vere citantur, sed nihil ad rem, which are both
true Fathers, and truly cyted, but nothing to the purpose. Thus says M.
Andrews. In the first rank he places S. Basil, out of whose Oration upon the
Forty Martyrs the Cardinal alleges these words: Qui aliqua premitur
angustia etc. whosoever is pressed (or vexed) with any grief, S. Basil. ho. in
40. Martyrs.
let him have recourse to these, and he that is joyful, or merry, let him pray
to these: the one, that he may be delivered from his grief, and the other,
that he may be conserved in his mirth. Thus far the Cardinal alleges S.
Basil in that place.

9. Whereto M. Andrews gives two answers. M. Andrews wrangleth when he he
cannot answer.
In the first he says, that it is one thing to declare what is done, and
another to determine what ought to be done. In the other he takes exception to
the translation of the place out of the Greek, which later point I think good
to examine first, because the other will be afterward the more easily
discussed. Now then M. Andrews would make the world believe, that the Cardinal
had used great fraud, and corruption in cyting S. Basils words, and that he
has falsified the Greek text; whereas he knows well that the Cardinal
alleges truly the Latin translation, which also though it do not render the
Greek, word for word, yet gives the true sense, and meaning thereof. The
corruption which M. Andrews imputes to the Cardinal consists in these
words, hos oret, let him pray to these, which (says M. Andrews) is not so in
the Greek, either for the words, or sense. The words in the Greek he says,
are (...), that is to say, he runs to these, wherein he also notes, that
the manner of speech is different, as that there is not in the Greek any
precept, or commandment to pray, or run, but only a declaration of a fact, to
wit, that men did then use to have recourse, and run to the Martyrs: besides
that, he makes ( hos) these Martyrs, to signfy the place where their memories,
or monuments were.

10. And therefore he expounds, Andr. page 40.. Non vere.
ad hos currit, id est, says he, ad eorum memorias etc. that is to say, to
their memoryes, where he may pray unto God, who by miracles then done there
showed, that he did hear the prayers of his suppliants. So he, and then adds
further thus^ And that there should be no doubt hereof he (to wit) Basil adds
presently (...) etc. the devout woman makes her prayers in this place, and
therefore he speaks of the place: and then to take away all scruple he says
a little after, (...) (and not) (...), not let him pray to them, nor let our
prayers be made to them) but with them. Thus says M. Andrews confounding, as
you see, hos, with hic, the Martyrs with the place where they were honored,
and seeking to destroy ad hos, to these, by cum hijs with these, absurdly
impugning one truth by another, as though these could not all stand together;
whereas S. Basil touches all those three things severally, passing from one to
another.

11. And to the end that this may be evident, I crave thy patience, good
Reader, whiles I lay down unto thee the whole substance of S. Basils discourse
touching these 3 points. The substance of S. Basils discourse about praying
unto Saints.
First then he speaks of the Martyrs themselves, saying, hi sunt qui nostram
regione^ administrant etc. these are they which govern our Country, and like
Towers, or fortresses united together, do give us security against our
enemies: and then speaking not only of them, but also of diverse places where
they were honored, and served in their relics, he adds nec in vno loco se
clauserunt, sed in multis locis hospitio excepti, multorum, Patrias ornauerunt:
they have not shut themselves up in one place, but being received as guests in
many places, they have adorned the countries of many men. Afterward he
speaks both of the particular Temple, and Church in Caesarea dedicated to
those Martyrs (where it seems he made his Oration, or sermon) and also of the
Martyrs themselves. Beneficium, says he, fratres dilectissimi etc.; most
loving Brethren we have this benefit, and perpetual favor of Almighty God,
here is a ready help for Christians, to wit, a Church of Martyrs, an army of
the triumphant, a quyre of those that praise God. So he.

12. Then he continues his speech of the Martyrs, signifying that whereas they
were wont to use great diligence to find out some one intercessor for them,
Quadraginta, says he, sunt hi etc. These Martyrs are forty praying
altogether, for seeing God is where one or two are gathered in his name, who
can doubt that God is present where there are forty? He that is afflicted
which any grief, has refuge, or recourse to these, and he which is joyful,
or merry does run to these etc. Thus says S. Basil speaking sometimes, as
you see, of the Martyrs themselves, and sometimes of the place where their
relics were reserved, and they honored in their relics.

13. And therefore he passes also now from them again to speak of the place,
and to show withal the notable effects, and the temporal benefits which the
people might expect by their recourse to the Martyrs, saying: Hic, mulier pia
orans pro filijs auditur etc. Here, the devout woman praying for her children
is heard, and craves a safe return for her husband, when he is in his
journey, and health for him when he is sick. And then he concludes concerning
the Martyrs themselves, cum his ergo Martyribus nostrae fiant preces, therefore
let us pray with these Martyrs; in all which you see he exhorts the people
not only to have recourse to these Martyrs in their necessities, but also
finally to pray with them, because our prayers to Saints do little avail us,
except we also pray to God for our selves; and then are our prayers much more
potent, and acceptable to God, when they concur with the prayers of his
Saints, and servants, and are fortifyed, and strengthened by them.

M. Andrews very gross and foolish.
14. Now then, I remit it here to the judgment of any indifferent Reader,
whether M. Andrews has any reason in the world to confound hos, with hic, and
to destroy ad hos, cum his, seeing that every one of these has a clear, and
different sense according to the different nature, and property of the words.
Besides, that M. Andrews is totoo gross, and foolish in making ad hos, to
signify in hoc loco, seeing that presently after he himself makes cum his, to
signify, with these Martyrs. For if cum his, or cum illis, with these, or with
them, do signify the Martyrs themselves, what reason had he to make ad ^os, a
little before to signify the place, especially seeing that hi, is clearly
referred to the Martyrs themselves, throughout the whole context, as you have
evidently seen?

15. But will you hear him yet further confute his own gloss, M. Andrews
co^futeth himself.
and see him tript, as I may say, in his own play? You shall therefore
understand that the Cardinal having alleged that part of S. Basils discourse
which you have heard to prove prayers to Saints, adds those other words which
I have also by occasion laid down a little before, to wit, Hi sunt qui nostram
regionem administrant etc. these are they who gou^rne our Country, and like
towers, or fortresses give us security against the incursion of enemies etc.
which words the Cardinal cyteth to prove the veneration of holy relics;
Card. Apol. page 13.
and M. Andrews coming to treat of that matter, and to answer that place,
not past 3. lea^es after his answer to the former, flatly overthrows his
own exposition, Andr. p. 47.. Pari autem.
which you have heard, saying thus: locum Basilij a^^ert etc. The Cardinal
brings a place of Basil, whereof it shall suffice to admonish you in one
word. The Reader shall not find there any relics of Martyrs, but the Martyrs
themselves, hij sunt inquit etc. he says these are the words hij, cannot be
referred to relics; for the Gender does not suffer it, either in the Latin,
where it were to be said hae, or in the Greek, where it were to be said haec,
so that it cannot be referred to (...), which is of the neuter gender. So he.

16. If this then be true, why does he in the former place make hos, those, to
signify memorias Martyrum, the memoryes, or monuments of Martyrs? Does the
Gender, trow you, suffer it, either in the Latin, or in the Greek? Can he make
hij, or hos, which are masculine, agree with memorias of the feminine, or with
monumenta of the neuter Gender? or with (...), and (...) or (...) in the
Greek, whereof the first is feminine, and the other two neuters? Truly he must
either make a new Grammar to maintain his construction in the former place, or
else retract his exposition, and argument in the later, See Apol. Card. p. 13.
so that you see, how true it is, which the Latin Proverb says, oportet
mendacem esse memorem, it behooves a liar to have a good memory. Another
cavil of M. Andrews against Cardinal Bellarmine.


17. But if M. Andrews will say, that he may as well take hos Martyrs, for
memorias Martyrum in the former place, as Cardinal Bellarmine takes hij
Martyrs, for reliquias Martyrum in the later (for so indeed does M. Andrews
affirm of the Cardinal) I must tell him, Andr. p. 47.. P^r^^
that it is but an idle conceit of his own, that the Cardinal so takes hi
Martyrs in that place, or any where else, for although he cyteth those words of
S. Basil for the veneration of relics, yet the intercession of Saints is also
clearly proved thereby, and therefore the Cardinal does not confound the one
with the other, but proves the one by the other, to wit, the necessary use,
and veneration of holy relics, by the help, and protection which we receive
from Saints, to which purpose he alleges the place of S. Basil, showing
thereby that the forty Martyrs being honored in their relics throughout all
that Country did protect, and defend the same, veluti quaedam Turres like
certain Towers, and fortresses.

18. And therefore, as S. Basil says of them, and not of their relics, hij
sunt etc. these are they which govern our Country, so the Cardinal also
understands the words hij sunt, to signify the Martyrs themselves, and not
their relics, though he allege it, and that worthily, to prove that the
practice of the Catholic Church in the reverent reservation, and veneration of
relics, is not only lawful, but also very commendable, and profitable:
whereby it appears that M. Andrews cauilleth evidently and very idly, when he
makes the Cardinal to take hij Martyrs, for reliquias Martyrum, and much
more, when he argues so substantially, as you have heard, upon the difference
of the Genders, in the Greek, and Latin, seriously impugning his own vain
conceit, and using still that (...)^ and (...) wherewith he falsely charge
the Cardinal.

19. And now to say a word or two concerning the difference betwyxt the Latin,
The latin translation of S Basil defended.
and the Greek (by reason whereof M. Andrews charge the Cardinal to have
corrupted the Greek, text) I am sure M. Andrews is not ignorant (as I have
said before) that the Cardinal has laid down sincerely the words of the
Latin translation, who therefore could not justly be charged with falsity,
though the translatour had committed any error, as he has not for the sense,
albeit there is difference in the words. For although (...) does in deed,
signify currere to run, and not orare, to pray; yet for as much as the
ordinary means, and manner of running, or having recourse to Martyrs, both is,
and was in S. Basils time by prayer unto them, yea and that S. Basil does in
this oration sufficiently exhort, and persuade his auditors thereto, first
using an argument a fortiore (to wit, that seeing they were wont to take great
pains to find out some one intercessor for them, they had much more reason to
have recourse to these forty) and afterward signifying not only the custom
of the afflicted to recurre to them, but also the comfortable effects and helps
which they received thereby, to which purpose he says, hic pia mulier orans
profilijs auditur etc^ here the devout woman is heard praying for her children
etc. therefore I say all this being considered the Latin translatour (whose
text the Cardinal cyteth) doubted not to translate (...), hos oret, expressing
also the indicative mood in the Greek, by an imparatiue in the Latin, because
S. Basils discourse sufficiently includes an exhortation, and persuasion, as I
have signified before.

20. And because M. Andrews may perhaps desire some further proof that it was
the custom in S Basils time to pray to Martyrs, A plain place out of S. Basil
for the invocation of Martyrs.
yea to invoke them (for without that word there is no bargayne with M.
Andrews) let us hear what S. Basil himself says of another holy Martyr, to
wit S. Mammas, S. Basil. orat. in S. Mammantem.
upon whom he made also another oration, and says as follows: memores
estote Martyris, quotquot etc. Be ye myndfull of the Martyr, as many of you as
have enjoyed him in your sleep (he means by some vision, or apparition) as
many as have even in this place had his help, (...).
to pray for you, or whom soever nomine aduocatus, he being called upon by
name, has assisted in his actions, or works, as many as he has reduced to
the right way when they went astray, as many as have recovered their healths by
him, to whomesoeuer he has restored their children, reuyuing them when they
were dead; and finally as many of you, as have had your lives prolonged by him^
gather all these together, and contribute the same, as it were a common shot,
to the praise of the Martyr etc.

21. Thus says S. Basil, which I have the more largely laid down, to the end
thou may see good Reader, not only what benefits the devout Christians in S.
Basils time received by the intercession, and prayer of Martyrs, but also that
this holy Martyr of whom he treats did sometime appear to men by visions in
their sleep, and that men used to invoke him in their necessityes, and
thereby had his assistance, which is evident even in the Greek text, where we
read (...), that is to say, whomsoever he (to wit the Martyr) has assisted in
his works, being called upon by name: which words I hope M. Andrews cannot
deny to express a plain invocation of the Martyr, and the good effect (I
mean the help, and assistance) that followed thereof.

22. Besyds that it is also to be considered here, that S. Basil does speak
not only of assistance given by the holy Martyr in the place where his relics
were kept (as when he says, quotquot in hoc loco co^stituti etc. as many of
you as here in this place have had his help in your prayers) but also of great
favors done by him in other places, as namely to wandering men that had lost
their way etc. And therefore I would gladly know here of M. Andrews in what
manner these wandering men, or others that were absent from the monument, and
relics of the Martyr, M. Andrews very hardly posed.
obtained those favors mentioned by S. Basil, yea, and how they knew that the
Martyr had favored, and helped them, if they had not first inuocated him, and
prayed particulerly unto him; for M. Andrews cannot say in this case, as he
said in the former, that because God did show by miracles at the Monuments of
the Martyrs, that he heard men's prayers there, therefore men had and might have
recourse thither to pray to God for help, but not to the Martyr himself; this
deuyse I say cannot serve his turn.

23. For how did the wayfaring man (who was far from the Monument of the
Martyr, and had lost his way) know that he was brought into it again by the
help of the Martyr, but because he had reposed special confidence in him, yea,
and recommended himself particulerly to his prayers, and assistance? In which
respect S. Basil having used that general speech: Diverse miraculous effects of
the Invocation of Martyrs specifyed by S. Basil
quibuscumque ex nomine vocatus adfuit etc. to whomesoeuer the Martyr had given
assistance being called upon by name, does particularize the favors that many
had received by the invocation of him, saying that some had been reduced to
their right way, others restored to their health, others had recovered their
dead children, and others again obtained prolongation of life, all which, no
doubt, were things well known to S. Basils auditors, to have happened in that
manner to some or other amongst them, for otherwise he would not have affirmed
the same unto them so confidently as he did.

24. This then being so, it is evident by the testimony of S. Basil himself,
that the custom, and practice of faithful, and Catholyke people in his time,
was to invoke holy Martyrs, and Saints by name, and that God did approve the
same by many miracles: whereupon it follows, that the recourse which S. Basil
says was ordinary to the forty Martyrs, included the invocation of them
according to the common custom of that time, the Latin translation of S. Basil
defended
in which respect I also infer, that the translatour expounding (...), by
orare, did express S. Basils sense, and meaning, though not the nature of the
Greek word: and finally I conclude, that the place of S. Basil alleged by the
Cardinal proves directly not only the intercession of Saints for us, which M.
Andrews grants but also our intercession, and prayers to them,
notwithstanding the gloss of M. Andrews confounding the Martyrs with their
Monuments; which how impertinent, and frivolous it is, you have sufficiently
seen, as well by an argument of his own, as by the rest of this discourse.

Andr. p. 40.. Non vere
25. And now to say somewhat of his other answer which I mentioned in the
beginning, he says, Aliud est narrare quid fiat, aliud statuere quid faciendum
sit: it is one thing to declare what is done, Another answer of M. Andrews
refuted.
and another thing to declare what should be done, giving to understand that
albeit S. Basil in the place alleged by the Cardinal, declared that men used
in his time to pray to Saints, yet the same does not suffice to prove it to be
lawful, M. Andr. urging still to have some decrees of the Fathers concerning
prayers to Saints flies from the authority of the Fathers to Cou^cells.
except it be approved by some decree of S. Basil, and the other Fathers of
that time; to which purpose he does often inculcate the same, demanding still
some statute, or decree of the Fathers, as I shall have occasion to show
further hereafter. But here I would be glad to know, what kind of statute,
and decree he would have in this question, for if he exact some decree of the
Fathers assembled in a General, or Provincial Council, he flies, as I may
say, out of the lists, to another manner of trial then the Cardinal offers
in this place, and then he himself seems to accept. Besides that he must
expect such decrees from the To^es of the Cou^cells, where they are
particulerly related, and not from the works of the Fathers, who are not wont
to set them down, but upon particular occasions now and then occurring.

26. To which purpose it is also to be understood, that there were never any
Counsels assembled, or Synodicall statutes made concerning faith, Why
Councell^ are assembled.
but by reason of matters controuersed with public trouble, scandal, and
danger to the Church; as the 4. first General Counsels were called by reason
of the heresies of the Arians, M^cedonians, Nestorians, and Eutychians, which
at those days did exceedingly molest and scandalize all the East Church; Why
the Invocation of Saints was not confirmed by some Synodicall decree in the
primitive Church.
whereas the invocation of Saynts-being then publicly, and generally practiced
throughout the whole Church needed not to be confirmed by decrees of Synods,
especially seeing it was not expressly denied by any at that time. For albeit
an abominable Arian heretic called Eustathius did then impugn the publyke
honor done to Saints, by dedicating Churches to them, and celebrating their
feasts (for which cause a Provincial Council was held at Gangra, Council.
Gangren. in proamio and ca. 20.
where this his heresy, together with diverse others of his was condemned, and
all those anathematized who did contemn the Temples, and Monuments of Martyrs,
and the assemblyes, and sacred oblations which were made there:) yet because
this heretic did not directly impugn the invocation of Saints, the same was
not directly, and expressly confirmed, or mentioned in this Canon.

27. And although about this time also (I mean in the 4. age) Vigilantius
denied, S. Hieron. aduer. Vigilant.
that Saints pray for us (whereupon it may indeed be inferred that he
consequently held the Invocation of them to be superfluous) yet for as much as
he lived but only in a corner of France, The heresy of Vigilantius denying the
Saints pray for us, quikly repressed by S. Hierome.
and was presently confuted and repressed by S. Hierome, in such sort, that the
Church was no further troubled with his error, therefore there needed no
Counsels to be assembled, or Synodicall decrees to be made for the
condemnation thereof, and much less for the confirmation of prayer to Saints,
which he did not expressly deny. So as M. Andrews shows himself very
impertinent still to demand statutes, and decrees for the invocation of Saints
within the first 400. years, at what time it was (as I have said) so public,
and general throughout the whole Church, that it was needles to confirm it by
Canons, or decrees, as it will still further appear, the further we debate
this matter.

28. In the mean time to return to S. Basil, and to conclude concerning him,
The conclusion concerning the place of S. Basil.
I appeal to the judgment of any indifferent man, whether he could declare
either his own belief, or the faith of the Church touching this point, more
clearly then he has done here, showing the use, and custom of Catholic
people in his time, not only approved, and highly commended by him (as it is
evident by that which I have laid down before) but also confirmed, nu. 19. and
20.
and ratifyed by Almighty God with miraculous effects, and the grant of pious
petitions made by devout people to the holy Martyrs, and Saints, at their
Monuments, and else where. All which, I say, being witnessed by S. Basil, is
truly a far greater testimony for us, then if he should have only declared his
own opinion. So as a man may wonder with what face M. Andrews can admit the
authority of the Fathers, and yet reject their testimony of such facts as
these, whereby they show not only their own belief, but also the belief, and
practice of the Church in their days. And thus much concerning S. Basil.

29. The next place which M. Andrews undertakes to answer is taken out of
Eusebius, and cyted by the Cardinal thus: Apol. Card. p. 14^ Eusebius. de praep.
Euangel. lib. 13. c. 7.
Haec nos quotidie factitamus etc. These things we (Christians) use to do
daily, who honoring the true Souldiars of piety as the friends of God, do also
go to their tombs, and pray unto them, by whose intercession to Almighty God,
we do acknowledge, that we receive great help. M. Andrews his cavil against
the place cyted out of Eusebius.
Thus far the Cardinal cyteth the words of Eusebius, according to the Latin
translation, which he lays down sincerely; albeit M. Andrews charge him
with fraud in perverting the Greek text, because the words in the Greek are
somewhat otherwise, signifying that the custom of the Christians was to pray
at the tombs of the Martyrs, and makes no express mention of praying to
them: whereto I answer as to the former charge, that the Latin translatour,
whose words the Cardinal cyteth, follows the sense of Eus^bius, gathering
the same out of the circumstance of the place. For Eusebius showing there the
conformity of Plato's doctrine to our Christian Religion, lays down Plato's
words, wherein he says, that those which were virtuous, and valiant men, and
dyed for the defense of their Country, became after their death, Semidei, half
Gods, and delivered men from many evils, and were served, and worshipped as
Gods, and their monuments and tombs adored.

30. Whereupon Eusebius to show the like practice of Christians, says that it
was usual, and ordinary amongst Christians to go to the tombs of Martyrs,
and there to pray, and to honor their blessed souls (for so has the Greek)
which being considered, together with the doctrine of Plato before related,
concerning the honor, and worship done to the Semidei, and the conformity
thereof with Christian religion urged by Eusebius, as also that the common
custom of Christians was at that time to pray to Martyrs by name (as I have
showed a little before, See before nu. 20. and infra nu. ^^ 48.5^.57.60. and
seq. Item cap. 7. and 8. per. totum.
by the authority of S. Basil, and will show further after a while:) All this,
I say, being considered, the Translatour had reason to understand, that the
prayers which Eusebius says the Christians made at the tombs of Martyrs, were
directed to them, and not to God only, especially seeing that all the prayers,
honor, and service exhibited to Martyrs, either at their tombs, or else where,
redoundeth to the honor, and service of God, to whom the same are finally
directed, and addressed, and for whose sake principally, the holy Martyrs, and
Saints, are honored, and served. Therefore seeing the Latin translation which
the Cardinal cyteth is not only free from error in doctrine, but also
conform to the circumstances of the place, and to the practice of the Church
at that time, it may well be admitted, though it be not altogether litterall:
but howsoever it is, the Cardinal following, and alleging it, as it is
generally received amongst learned men, could not justly be charged with fraud,
though the same should be erroneous: whereas M. Andrews shows himself both
fraudulent and malicious, in charging the Cardinal to pervert the Greek text,
when he cyteth the Latin translation with all sincerity. And thus much for this
point.

31. Furthermore M. Andrews adds to the two former places another out of S.
Chrysostom, M. Andrews his exception against the testimony cited by Bellarmine
out of S. Chrysostom.
which the Cardinal cyteth thus: Saepius illos inuisamus, tumulos adoremus
etc. let us often visit these Martyrs (to wit S. Iuuentinus, and S. Maximus)
let us adore their tombs, and let us with great faith touch their relics, to
the end we may obtain some benediction thereby. Thus far the Cardinal out
of S. Chrysostom, to prove that the ancient Fathers of the first 400. years,
and namely S. Chrysostom approved the veneration of holy relics. Wherein M.
Andrews pretends to have found two frauds; Andr. vbi supra.. Sed neque.
the one, in the translation of the Greek, and the other in the allegation of
the Latin. Of the former he says thus: Nam and graece etc. For in the Greek
(...), is to touch the shryne; but to touch the shrine, I think, is not to
adore it. Our Savior did not adore the son of the widow of Naim, when he
touched the coffin wherein his body lay. So he.

32. Wherein I beseech thee good Reader, to note how substantially he answers
this place, saying nothing at all to the substance, and whole drift thereof,
but cauilling only about a word, M. Andrews says nothing to the whole
substance of the place, but cauilleth only about some words.
or two, as if all the wayght, and force of the place consisted therein,
whereas the place would directly pro^e all that which the Cardinal intends,
though we should grant that which M. Andrews affirms concerning the
difference betwixt the Greek, and the Latin. For seeing that S. Chrysostom
exhorts the people not only to visit the Martyrs by repayring to their
tombs, but also to touch, yea, and with faith to embrace their relics (for
so has the (...).
Greek) to the end to have thereby some benediction, does he not plainly
teach therein that holy relics are to be reverently kept, visited, and
worshipped?

33. For how can it be imagined that a man can come to visit holy relics, and
with faith touch, and embrace them to the end here declared (to wit, to
receive thereby some blessing from Almighty God) but that he does it with
devotion, and an exterior demonstration of the internal reverence that he
bears thereto, I mean with a reverent, and religious veneration thereof
expressed with his external acts, and religious behavior, which is nothing
else, but that reverence, and worship, which the Cardinal teaches to be due to
holy relics; and therefore seeing that this is S. Chrysostomes express
doctrine in this place, even according to the Greek text, and words laid
down, and urged by M. Andrews himself, how impertinent is his cavil touching
the difference betwixt the Greek, and the Latin? Does he not therein show
himself to be a mere tryfler, cauiller, and wrangler? Which may appear also
further by his confirmation thereof, M. Andrews a mere wrangler.
where he says that our Savior did not adore the son of the widow of Naim,
when he touched the coffin.

34. For to what purpose serves this, but to bewray his own perverse, and
wrangling humor? Will he argue thus: Christ touched not the coffin to adore
the widows son, Ergo, relics may not be touched with intention to worship
them? How absurd were this consequence? As well might he say, that because
Christ touched the coffin of the widows son with intent to stay it, M.
Andrews has found out a new Logik to infer quidlibet ex quolibe^
therefore whosoever touches the tomb of a Martyr, either has, or ought to
have the same intention; for the one may be inferred upon Christ's example as
truly, and directly as the other. B^^ perhaps M. Andrews has found out a new
Logic to infer quidlibet ex quolibet.

35. The second exception which he takes to the Cardinal for the citation of
this place, is for the difference betwixt the Latin text, and the Cardinals
allegation, who has tumulos adoremus, let us adore their tombs, whereas the
Latin translation (says M. Andrews) has tumulos adornemus, let us adorn, or
deck their tombs; and this he urges for a great fraud; from the which the
Cardinal may easily be freed. For albeit some impressions of S. Chrysostom
have tumulos adornemus, yet others (and namely those which the Cardinal
followed) have tumulos adoremus. And to the end M. Andrews may be satisfied in
this point, I remit him to three impressions of S. Chrysostoms works set forth
at Venice, two of them in diverse years, and all 3. of diverse stampes; the
first in the year 1574. apud Iuntas: the second in the same year apud
haeredes Melchioris Sessae; and the third in the year 1583. apud Dominicu^
Nicolinum. In all which he shall find tumulos adoremus, and not adornemus.

M. Andrews his trifling toy of tumulos tangere answered.
36. And now for as much as M. Andrews says very confidently, that the Greek
being (...) (which is in Latin capsulam tangere, to touch the shrine) he
belieueth, that to touch the shryne, is not to adore it, I will debate the
matter a little with him, and make no doubt to prove that (...) in Greek, and
tangere in Latin, as they are here taken, do signify in effect adorare, that
is to say to reverence, venerate, or worship, I mean not with divine honor,
but with such veneratio^ as is due to Saints, holy men, and holy things, for so
signifies adorare in this place, and so the Cardinal, and all other
Catholics take it, when they apply it to Saints, or holy relics, as I will
show amply hereafter in the 9. Chapter, where I shall have a good occasion to
justify the use of it in that sense against M. Andrews, See after chap. 9.
from nu. 10. to nu. 31.
who will needs have it to signify nothing else but to worship Andr. ca. 1. pa.
49.. Necesse.
with divine honor, contrary to the manifest, and frequent use of the word in
the holy Scriptures, as I will make it most evident when I shall come to treat
of that point.

37. In the mean time that which I wish to be observed concerning the Greek
word (...), is, that although it do properly signify tangere, to touch, yet it
includes many times an act of veneration, or worship, yea sometimes of prayer,
Plut. in Othone. vide Crispin. in Dictionario ex Budaeo.
and supplication, as when Plutark says (...), that is to say sup^licibus
manibus orabant (as Budaeus expounds it) they prayed with their hands held
up, as suppliants. Also we read in Homer, -- (...)
(...) --
Thetis autem sicut tetigit genua, sic inhaerebat aduoluta: where (...),
tetigit genua, expresses an act of veneration, and supplication; Homer Iliad.
^^
and therefore whereas Homer signifies in another place, the honor, and
reverence that Thetis did to Jupiter, saying, -- (...)
(...) --
accepit genua sinistra, Eustathius in his commentary upon Homer, says, that
(...) there does signify (...), tangere, as if he should have said (...),
Thetis touched the knees of Jupiter. Eurip. Hecub. act. 1.
The like we read also in Euripides, who expressing the reverence that Ulysses,
and Hecuba did one to another (touching each others knees, hand, and cheek)
uses the words (...), Arsen. Comment. in Eurip.
and (...): whereupon Arsenius in his Commentary says (...), that is to say,
suppliants did use to touch either the knees, or the hands, or the cheeks of
those to whom they were suitors. So as, you see, that in all this, (...), or
(...) includes, and expresses an act of veneration.

38. And upon this occasion, I cannot omit to speak of an ancient kind of
adoration with the hand, used amongst the Paynims; which was to stretch forth
their hand toward the Sun, or Moon, or what else soever they meant to adore,
as though they would touch it, and then to kiss their hand: of which kind of
adoration it seems Job spoke, when he said, that he had never kissed his hand
when he saw the Su^ne, and Moon, quae est, says he, iniquitas maxima, which
is the greatest iniquity that may be. And from hence, no doubt descended the
civil veneration, with the hand, whereof Martial speaks, when he says,
Martialis li. 8. epig. 65:
Roma salut auit voce manuque ducem,
Rome saluted her Captain both with voice, and hand. And the like we read in
Tacitus, Tacit. li. 10. anual.
who says of Nero, that being to sing, he bowed his knee, and coetum manu
veneratus est, Idem. li. 1. histor.
did reverence to the whole company with his hand. And of Otho, that,
protendens manum adorauit vulgum, he adored the people, stretching forth his
hand. Sueton. in Claudio.
And Suetonius seems to signify the like of Claudius the Emperor, when he
says, that he reverenced the Sen^^ours voce manuque with his voice, and hand.
And this, I say, was a kind of touching a far off, or a demonstration of a
desire, for reverence sake to touch those persons or things which were out of
reach.

39. But now to return to actual touching for reverence or devotion
(signified in Latin authors by the word tangere, Plin. li. 11. cap. 48.
as it was amongst the Greeks by (...), or (...)) Pliny witnesses that the
ancient Grecians did use attingere genua, vel mentum, to touch the knees or
chinne of those, to whom they made supplication: and Seruius refers the
same to the forhead, saying, venerantes Deum tangimus frontem. We read also in
Virgil, tangere aras, used for the taking of a solemn oath, by touching the
altar; and in another Poet, Ouidius.
Tange manu mensam, tangunt quo more precantes.
Touch the table with thy hand, as men are wont to do when they pray. Also the
Paynims were accustomed to touch the right hands of their Gods for reverence,
and devotion: whereupon Lucretius says: -- tum portas propter ahena
Lucret. li. ^. de not. rerum 1.
Signa manus dextras ostendunt attenuari,
Saepe salutantum tactu praeterque meantum.
The sense is, that the images of the Gods standing at the gates, had their
right hands worn with the frequent touching of passengers. And as you heard
before in Homer, that Thetis touched the knees of Jupiter, when she did him
reverence: Seneca i^ Medea.
so also Medea did the like to Creon in Seneca, which is expressed there with
the word attingere. Finally, from hence it is lykely the custom grew, which is
ordinary at this day, to offer to touch the knees, or the lower part of the
garment of great personages, to do them honor, and reverence.

40. What marvel is it then that the use was in times past (as still it is)
to touch holy things for reverence sake, or that S. Chrysostom earnestly
exhorted the people ther^to in the place whereof we now treat, which may also
be notably confirmed by the testimony of S. Gregory Nyssen in his Oration upon
S. Theodorus the Martyr, S. Greg. Nyssen orat. in S. Theod.
declaring what a wonderful comfort it was to be admitted (...), to touch the
Martyrs relics (as I shall have occasion to show more at large after a while:
S. Basil in Psalm. 115.
) and S. Basil also says to the same purpose, qui contingit ossa Martyrum etc.
he which touches the bones of Martyrs, receives a kind of sanctification, by
the grace that resideth in the body. S. Greg. Nazianz. orat. 1. in Julian.
So he: to whom I may add S. Gregory Nazianzen testifying, that the bodies of
Martyrs, and Saints, sieve manibus contrectentur etc. whether they be touched
with hands, or honored, are able to do as much as their holy souls.

41. And hereof there has always been manifest experience in the Church of
God, yea even in the old Testament, 4. Reg. 13.
where we read that a dead body was revived as soon as it touched the bones of
the Prophet Elizaeus. S. Aug. li. 22. de ciuit. Deica. 8.
And the like recounteth S. Augustine of Eucharius a Priest, a religious woman,
and a young maid, who being all 3. dead, were restored to life as soon as
their garments which had been laid upon the relics of S. Stephen were cast
upon them. Also he signifies that a blind woman recovered her sight by
applying to her eyes certain flowers which had but touched the said Martyrs
relics. S. Ambros. li. 7. ep. 54. ad Marcellin.
S. Ambrose also testifyeth the like concerning the relyques of S. Geruasius,
and S. Protasius, saying: Cognouistis, imo vidistis etc. you have known, yea
you have seen many dispossessed of Devils, and very many cured of their
diseases, as soon as they touched the clothes of the Saint. So he; who also
further declares that men used commonly to cast their garments super
Sanctissimas reliquias, upon their most holy relics to the end they might
become tactu ipso medicabilia, medicinable, or able to cure diseases even by
touching them. And finally he says, that men desired to touch though it were
but the very extreme parts of their relyques, and qui tetigerit, says he,
saluus ^rit, and he which touches them, shall be safe, or healed.

42. Now then all this being considered, with the circumstances of the place in
S. Chrysostom (to wit, that he not only exhorted the people to touch the
shryne of the Martyrs, but also to embrace their relics which faith, to the
end they might receive some benediction thereby) who sees not that he does
evidently include an act of veneration, and devotion, to be done to the tomb,
and relics of the Martyrs, by the reverend touching of them. Whereupon it
also follows, that he who translated (...), tumulum adorare, gives the true
sense of S. Chrysostom, and so neither he, nor the Cardinal following his
translation has committed any error. And therefore M. Andrews may do well to
rectify his belief (which was, as you have heard, that Capsulam tangere, is
not adorare) so as withal he learn to take adoration in the sense that here
it is meant, and is frequently used in the holy Scriptures (I mean for a
religious worship, See cap. 9. nu. 14. and 15.
or veneration, inferior to divine honor) which I hope to persuade him, or at
least the indifferent Reader in the 9. Chapter. Andr. pa^ 4. lin. 7.
Besides, that it may please him to free the Cardinal from the fraud, which he
imputes to him, for using adoremus, in steed of adornemus, seeing it is
evident by this which I have said, that adoremus expresses the sense of
tangamus, as it is used by S. Chrysostom in that place. And therefore whereas
M. Andrews concludes abesse voci litteram, Cardinali fidem, that there wants a
letter in the word, and fidelity in the Cardinal, he may now understand that
there is no other want here, but of wit in himself, or at least of a sincere
will to understand the place aright, according to the meaning of the author.
And this shall suffice for answer to his censure upon the Fathers of the first
rank.

43. Now let us see what he says to the second rank of Fathers which he
grants to be truly cyted, S. Ephr. Ser. de laud. SS. Mart Card. Apol. p. 15.
but not to be of sound credit. The first of these is S. Ephrem, out of whom
the Cardinal alleges these words: Precamur be atissimi Martyrs etc. we
beseech you most blessed Martyrs, Andr. ca. 1. p. 41.. Proximi.
that you will vouchsafe to pray unto our Lord for us wretched sinners, that
the grace of Christ may come unto us. To this M. Andrews answers diverse
ways; M. Andrews his crypticall cavil against the testimony alleged out of
S. Ephrem.
first he takes exception against the translation, both because the author
thereof was one of ours (who fidelity and credit he says has been long since
cracked) and also because the original (which is in Greek) was, says he,
lately taken out of a grot, and therefore is fidei crypticae, of obscure
credit. So it pleases him to make himself merry with the word Crypta, for
that Vossius the Translatour signifies in his Epistle to the reader, in the
beginning of the first Tome, that he had a special help for his translation,
by two very ancient manuscripts, or written copyes of S. Ephrems works, which
are to be seen in Crypta ferrata (a famous monastery near to Rome called,
commonly in Italian Grotta ferrata) of which manuscripts the one was written in
the year of our Lord 531.

44. But what cause had M. Andrews to jest at this? Sure I am, that in the
judgment of any indifferent man, it may serve for no small justification of
the translatour, that he fortifyeth his translation with the authority of such
an ancient manuscript, written above eleven hundredth years ago, and yet
extant to seen so near to Rome, where his Tomes were printed, especially
seeing that there is such continual recourse, and confluence thither from Rome
(by reason of the celebrity of that Monastery) that he might well think he
should quickly be discovered for an impudent, and notable liar, in case he
should faygne the same. And therefore for his further justification in this
point, he also directs his Reader to the very Class where the said
manuscripts are, to be found in the Library of Grotta ferrata, to wit, under
the tytles of these Greek letters o, and TT. Besyds, that he declares also
further that he conferred the same copyes with diverse other which he saw, and
are yet to be seen in the Vatican at Rome, and in the library of Cardinal
Sforza.

45. So that these particularityes being considered, no man can with any
reason, or without extreme malice imagine any fraudulent meaning in the
translatour, seeing he remitteth his translation to the examination of so many
learned men, as Rome continually affoardeth, who might with all facility
convince him of fraud, if he had used any: and therefore M. Andrews shows
more malice, then wit, in this exception, as also in that he rejects the
translation, because the author thereof was a Catholyke. For albeit he say that
Catholykes have lost their credit in matters of that kind, yet I hope the
discreet Reader (who has already seen by many examples how little credit M.
Andrews deserves) will not easily believe him without some further proof then
his bare word. And this it seems he himself fears, and therefore seeks
another shift in these words: Andr. vbi supr.
Long aliter Tomo primo germanus Ep^rem etc. The true Ephrem in his first Tome
(where he pray^th, and does not make orations) says far otherwise, calling
upon God alone in every prayer, not so much as naming any Saint, M. Andrews his
c^ggery.
yea there he s^eketh to God in this manner: Ad te, ad praeter te nemiuem
orationem facio, to thee, to none but thee I make my prayer. So he; not quoting
any particular Treatise, or chapter where the words which he cyteth are to be
found; which by all lykelyhood he omiteth of purpose, the better to cloak a
piece of coggery, which he may be worthily suspected to have used in this point.

46. For whereas he mentions the first tome of a true Ephrem, thou shall
understand, good Reader, that there are no other works of S. Ephrem extant in
Latin, but only the three Tomes above mentioned set forth by Vossius, except a
little pamphlet containing a few sermons translated by a monk of Camaldula,
which cannot deserve the name of a Tome: besides that, there is not any such
prayer therein as he mentions, for ought I can find. And put the case he
could there show the same words which he cyteth, yet they may be so understood,
that they will make nothing for his purpose. Psalm. 50.
For even as David when he had committed homicide, and sinned not only against
God, In what sense it is said that we pray to God alone.
but also against his neighbor, said nevertheless to almighty God, Tibi soli
peccaui, I have sinned against thee alone, because all sin against man, does
finally redound to God: even so, for as much as all our prayer is finally
directed to God the author, and giver of all grace, and goodness, we may well
say, that we pray to none but to him; albeit we use therein the interuention,
and assistance of Angels, Saints, or men, by whom we also pray to God, when we
crave, or procure their prayers to him for us.

47. And in this sense, no doubt that manner of prayer is to be understood, if
any such be in S. Ephrem, or in any other ancient Father: for otherwise it
should contradict the custom of the Apostle, who used to crave the prayers of
the Romans, To. 15.
Ephesians, Ephesians. 6.
Thessalonians and others to whom he wrote, These. 3.
Col. 4.
as also all good Christians are wont to reco^mend themselves to the prayers
one of another, Heb. 13.
and are warranted so to do by the holy Scripture: so as I shall not need to
say any more concerning his true Ephrem, until he give me further news by
whom he was translated, and published, how many tomes there are of him, and in
what part of his first tome those words which he cyteth are to be found. And
whereas he concludes his censure upon this place, with another deuyse,
affirming that S. Ephrem might perhaps play the Orator, and invoke Martyrs
by a figure called Prosopopaeia (whereupon, says he, you may perhaps ground an
example of Rhetoric, but no rule of Divinity) I will differ the answer
thereof for a while, because he handles the same point more amply afterward
upon another occasion.

48. In the mean time I will proceed to the examination of his censure upon a
place of S. Chrysostom which the Cardinal cyteth thus: S. Chrysostom. Hom. 66. ad
Pop. Antioch. Ca^d. Apol. p. 14.
Nam and ipse qui purpuram indutus est etc. For he also which is clad with
purple comes to embrace these tombs, and all pride laid aside, to pray to
the Saints, that they may pray to God for him. To this he answers in
substance, Andr. pa. 41. lamdudum.
that the homily from whence it is taken (to wit the 66. ad populum
Antiochenum) is not S. Chrysostomes by the opinion not only of Erasmus, but
also of our Garetius, yea and that the Cardinal himself knows that S.
Chrysostom did not make 26. Homilyes ad populum Antiochenum, and much less
66. But here I must advertise him, that as the Cardinal knows that S.
Chrysostom made not 66. Homilyes ad populum Antiochenum, so he also knows
very well that all those homilyes are taken out of other undoubted works of S.
Chrysostom, and namely that very place which the Cardinal alleges, is to be
seen word for word in S. Chrysostomes Homilyes upon the Epistle to the
Corinth. where the words cyted by the Cardinal in Latin are in Greek thus: S.
Chryso. Ho 26. in 2 ep. ad Cor^
(...).

49. This I have thought good for the satisfaction of those that understand the
Greek to lay down out of the Greek text, in the 26. homily of S. Chrysostom
upon the second Epistle of S. Paul to the Corinthians, where there follows in
like manner further testimony for the Invocation of Saints, which is also to be
seen in the 66. homily ad Populum Antiochenum, albeit the Cardinal thought it
needles, as it seems, to allege the same, because the former seemed to him
sufficient; A further testimony of S^ Chrysostom touching the inuo^cation of
Saints.
nevertheless I think it not amiss upon this occasion to add a few words,
which follow in the Greek text, thus: (...): that is to say, and which has
(or wears) the diadem prays to the tent-maker, and the fisher, as to his
patrons, yea though they be dead. Thus says S. Chrysostom in the same place
immediately after the words alleged by the Cardinal, as it may be seen not
only in the 66. homily ad populum Antiochenu^, but also in the homilyes upon
the Epistle to the Corinthians, which are acknowledged by all men to be S.
Chrysostomes works. So that there is no doubt, but that the words alleged by
the Cardinal are S. Chrysostomes, and do correspond to the Greek text word
for word, in which respect the testimony cannot be avoided, and shifted of by
M. Andrews, as either corrupt, or counterfeit.

50. And this as it seems, he knew well enough, and therefore devised another
shift, seeming to admit that S. Chrysostom does say so, Andr. vbi supra.
and yet denying that it makes for us. For, non quid fecerit, says he, tum
aliquis, sed quid ex Patrum statuto fecerit etc The King demands not what
some man did then, This is nothing else but to cast shadows before the light,
to obscure, and not to seek out the truth.
but what he did according to the decree of the Fathers, and what at that time
the Fathers decreed concerning this point? Where an act, or deed only is
declared, and no decree related, is a voluntary act, as of a matter of free
devotion, and not as of a thing necessary to salvation, which nevertheless the
Cardinal undertook to prove. Thus far M. Andrews, turning, and wynding, as
you see, to find some starting hole if it were possible, though he be caught so
fast that he cannot escape away. For, whereas he flies to his former shift of
demanding some decree of the Fathers, and rejecting their testimony of facts,
he notably discovers the weakness of his cause.

51. For, Supra. nu. 26. and 27.
as I signified before (upon the occasion of the self same answer which he
made to a place of S. Basil) there was not any sufficient occasion, why the
Fathers of the Greek Church should make any Synodicall decree at that time
concerning prayer to Saints, Supra. nu. 19. and 20.
seeing that there was no question of it among them, but a general custom,
and practice thereof every where, as I partly showed by the testimony of S.
Basil, and the same may be clearly euinced even by this place of S.
Chrysostom, especially if we consider what follows immediately the words
alleged by the Cardinal, and me. For S. Chrysostom having said (as you have
heard) that he which was clad with purple (meaning the Emperor) stood praying
to the Saints at their tombs, and that he which wears the di^deme does pray
to the tentmaker, and the fisher, as his Patrons, and protectours, adds;
Therefore dare thou be so bold to say, that their Lord, The custom of prayer
to Saints universal in S Chrysostomes time.
or Master is dead, whose servants, even when they are dead, are the
prot^ctors of the Kings of the world? And this is not only seen at Rome, but
also at Constantinople, for even here the Son of Constantine the Great,
thought his father to be much honored, if his body were laid before the Gates
of the Fisher. Thus says S. Chrysostom, with much more to the same purpose,
which I omit.

52. For by this it appears sufficiently, first, that the custom, and
practice of prayer to Saints was universal, I mean both in the Latin, and in
the Greek Church in the time of S. Chrysostom, which he signifies expressly
by naming the two principal Cittyes, and Imperial Seats, to wit Rome, and
Constantinople, where the same was in ure. Secondly it appears that it was
not practiced only by some obscure person (as M. Andrews seems to insinuate,
when he says that the question is not quid aliquis tum fecerit, what some man
did then) but that it was the custom of most worthy, M. Andrews impugning the
custom of prayer to Saints impugneth an argument of Christ's divinity.
and remarkable persons, to wit, the most Christian and Catholyke Emperors
themselves. Thirdly it is evident by this place, that S. Chrysostom hyghly
approved this custom and believed it to be most necessary, and conform to the
Christian and Catholyke verity, seeing he does notably urge, and exaggerate the
same, for the instruction, and edificatio^ of the people, to show unto them,
not only the great dignity, and glory of Gods servants, and Saints, but also
the Omnipotent power, and divinity of our Savior Christ.

53. Whereupon it also follows, that M. Andrews, and others who deny this
article of Catholic religion, do deny a notable argument of Christ's Divinity.
And therefore whereas he contemns such a fact as this of most Christian and
worthy Emperors, so testified, M. Andrews tryfleth notably in urging the
Cardinal to prove that prayer to Saints is of necessity to salvation.
approved and urged by S. Chrysostom, as you have heard, to prove that Christ
is God, it is clear that he condemns the practice, and belief of the
Catholyke Church of that age, yea (and if by the decrees of the Fathers which
he demands, he means their express, and clear doctrine delivered in their
works) he condemns also the decree of S. Chrysostom touching the same. And
whereas he adds for the conclusion of this point, that this fact related by
S. Chrysostom, was but an act of voluntary devotion, and not of a thing
necessary to salvation (which he says the Cardinal undertook to prove) he
tryfleth notably; for neither does the Cardinal undertake to prove any such
thing, neither is it material for the question in hand, whether it be of
necessity to salvation, or no.

54. The Cardinal undertook only to prove that the doctrine of the Protestans
rejecting prayer to Saints, is not the faith of the old primitive Church, which
he promises to prove by the testimony of the Fathers of the first 400. or 500.
years, as it appears expressly by his own words. Soquitur, says he, vt
ostendamus fidem etc. It follows that we show the faith (which the King
defends) not to be the faith of the old, and primitive Church etc. Apol. Card.
p. 11.. Sequitu^
And again a little after, having signified that his Majesty in his preface,
admits the 3. Creeds, the 4. first General Counsels, and the uniform
doctrine of the Fathers of the first 400. (or as it is in the English copy 500.
years) he declares that amongst other points of Catholic religion his
Majesty condemns Prayer to Saints, and the veneration of Relics, as
superstitious. Whereupon the Cardinal says: Accipiam Intercessionem Sanctorum
etc. I will take in hand the intercession of Saints, with the veneration of
relics, which if I can show to be approved by an vnanime consent of the
Fathers of the first 400. or 500. years, Ibid p. ^2.. Accipiam.
I shall withal prove that the King of Englands faith is not the faith of the
old, and primitive Church, but the deuyses and heresies of late innouatours.
Thus says the Cardinal, without touching any way the question, whether prayer
to Saints be necessary to salvation, which as I have said little imports for
the decision of the controversy, whether the primitive Church held it to be
lawful or no.

55. For there is no doubt but that many things are, and may be lawful, yea
very commendable, and behoouefull to salvation, though they are not of such
necessity, but that a man may in some cases be saved without them; as for
example, the Evangelical Counsayles, and many works of supererogation (as
alms, fasting, and such like, which consist in acts of voluntary devotion) are
convenient and notable helps, though not absolutely necessary to every man's
salvation. And therefore albeit his Majesty seems not to bynd himself
further to admit the uniform consent of the Fathers, then in matters necessary
to salvation; yet for as much as the question concerning Prayer to Saints,
which the Cardinal undertook to handle, is only whether the primitive Church
held it to be superstitious (as his Majesty affirms it to be) the Cardinal
needed not to debate and discuss, How the belief of prayer to Saints is of
necessity to salvation.
whether it be of necessity to salvation; and therefore he forebare to speak
thereof, as needles, and impertinent to the question in hand: nevertheless this
occasion being now offered, I cannot omit to say, that if M. Andrwees do speak
here (not of the act, or practice of praying to Saints, but) of the belief of
the doctrine, demanding, whether it be of necessity to salvation to believe
that prayer to Saints is lawful, I must needs tell him that it is so
necessary, that if he, or any man else do obstinatly deny, and impugn it, he is
an heretic, and consequently cannot be saved, and the reason is because he
impugneth the belief, and practice of the universal Catholic Church, which
our Savior has commanded us to hear, and obey, under pain to be held as
Ethnicks, Matthew. 18.
and Publicans.

56. Besides that, considering the inestimable benefits that we may receive
both spiritually, and temporally by prayers to Saints, Folly to neglect and
omit prayer to Saints, impiety to contemn^ it, heresy to condemn it.
whereof the whole Church has had sufficient, and publyke experience in all
ages (as it is most evident by the testimonies of these fathers, for the times
when they lived) it cannot be denied, but that to omit the practice of it, were
extreme folly, and to contemn it were impiety. So as M. Andrews may now choose
whether he will believe, and practice this doctrine with the whole Catholyke
Church, or else show himself a fool in neglecting it, impyous in contemning
it, or an heretyke in condemning and impugning it. And thus much for his
censure upon the place of S. Chrysostom.

57. The next place which he censureth, is of Saint Maximus Bishop of Turin,
Card. Apol. p. 17^ S. Max. in ser. de laud. S. Agnet.
alleged by the Cardinal thus: S. Maximus in sermon etc. S. Maximus in his
sermon made in the praise of S. Agnes says: O sple^dida virgo etc. O worthy
Virgin etc. we beseech thee, with as fervent prayers, as we may, that thou
vouchsafe to remember us. Andr. p^ 42.. Maxmi.
To this M. Andrews answers that the homilyes of Maximus, and almost all the
rest which go under the title of Sermones de tempore, and are of Saints, are
not very much to be esteemed: that this very homily which the Cardinal cyteth
as of Maximus, was a long time held to be of Ambrose, and that now we have made
it to be the homily of Maximus: that we are wont to attribute these homilyes
sometimes to one, and sometimes to another, as it pleases us to make tytles:
and finally, that nec fides certa, vbi author incertus, there is no sure credit
to be given to a work, whereof the author is uncertain. So he. But how much
this his censure is to be esteemed you may partly guess by his like censure
upon an homily of S. Augustine de tempore, See chap. 4. nu. 22.23. and 24. See
chap. 5. nu. 16. and 17.
whereof I treated amply in the 4. Chapter, and touched also again in the last
Chapter by occasion of an homily of S. Maximus made in the praise of the
Apostles, which I proved to be his, as also that he w^ote diverse other
homilyes, as well de tempore, as of particular Saints, whereto I remit thee,
good Reader, S. Ambro. de Virgin, and li. 4. ep^ 33.
to avoid a needles repetition thereof.

58. And whereas M. Andrews says here, that this homily in the praise of S.
Agnes was a long time held for an homily of S. Ambrose, he might have done well
to have told us where he finds the same. True it is, that S. Ambrose in his
book de Virginibus writes a notable encomium, or praise of S. Agnes, and in
his Epistles he wrote an elegant discourse of her life, martyrdom, and
miracles; but that he was ever thought to be author of this homily, it is but a
conceit, or invention of M. Andrews for ought I have yet seen: and put the
case, that that there has been some doubt or question whether of them was the
author of it, will he conclude, as here he does, that therefore there is no
credit to be given unto it? If he will justify that consequence, he must
reject, diverse parts of the holy Scripture, which nevertheless I hope he will
acknowledge to be of sound credit; as in the old Testament the book of the
Vide Bellar. de verbo Dei cap. 20.
Judges, Ruth, and Job, of which the author is either wholly unknown, or
uncertain: The writers of diverse parts of holy Scripture uncertain.
and to omit other in the new Testament, there is even at this day amongst the
sectaryes, as there was also in the primitive Church, great doubt who was the
author of the Epistle to the Hebrews Eusebius. li. 3. hist. c. 3. S. Hier. de
viris. Illust.
some ascrybing it (as S. Hierome testifyeth) to S. Clement who was after Pope,
some to S. Barnabas, and others to S. Luke, and some, as Sixtus Sixth. Senens.
l. 7. Biblioth. Sanct.
Senensis witnesses, to Tertullian: besides that Luth. in prolo. ep. ad Hebr.
Luther, the Mag. cent. 1. li. 2. c. 4. col. 55.
Magdeburgenses, Kem. in exam. ^. s^ss. Council. Trident.
Kemnitius, in Confess. VVittemb. cap. de sacra. Scriptura.
and Brentius, with diverse other Ghospellers, do deny it to be S. Paul's, or
any of the Apostles, or yet Canonical Scripture. And albeit Caluinus inst. ca.
10. ^^. etc. 16.. 25.
Calvin and diverse of his followers admit it for Scripture, yet they doubt
greatly who was the author of it.

59. So as if M. Andrews will stand to his own inference he must needs
conclude, that the Epistle to the Hebrews is of no sound credit, which I think
he will be loath to say, seeing that all the English Clergy does at this
present acknowledge it for Canonical Scripture. Besides, that although it
should be true which he says (to wit that it has been doubted whether S.
Ambrose, or S. Maximus were author of that homily) yet that can be no
sufficient reason to reject the doctrine of it, but rather an argument to
fortify, and approve it, as both very sound, and very acient, seeing that it
has been always ascrybed to one of those two ancient, learned, and holy
Fathers: and therefore to conclude, you see that M. Andrews has said nothing
to the purpose against this testimony produced by the Cardinal out of S.
Maximus.

60. There follows another out of S. Gregory Nazianzen his oration, S. Greg.
Naz. in laud. S. Cypri. Card. Apol. p. 14 A cavil against a place cited out of
S. Greg. Nazianzen. Andr. v^i supra.
in the praise of S. Cyprian, to whom he prays thus: Tu e supernis nos
respice, and populum hunc sanctum dirige: Behold us from above, and direct this
holy people. And again in the same Oration, the same Father testifyeth that a
holy Virgin called Iustina did pray unto the Virgin Mary, to deliver her from
danger. To these two points M. Andrews answers severally: to the first he
says that the oration is not liquidae fide^, of clear credit; and his reason
is because it is uncertain who that Cyprian was of whom the oration was made,
as whether he was Cyprian Bishop of Carthage, or another Cyprian of Antioch:
and then he concludes: Ita fluctuat res tota, ita perplexa omnia: So
uncertain is the whole matter, so perplexe, or doubtful are all things in
that oration. So he. Wherein you see how substantially he argues, inferring
that the matter, and substance of the oration is uncertain, because it is
doubtful of which Cyprian the oration was made, whereas nevertheless he cannot
with any reason deny but that the oration is S. Gregory Nazianzens: whereupon
it must needs follow that albeit Nazianzen should be deceived, ^. Hieron.
comment. in cap. 23. Matthew.
and err in the history, or the persons of whom he speaks, yet the
substance as well of the story, as of the doctrine contained in that oration,
was true in his conceit, and therefore may serve for an assured testimony of
his belief, and of the practice of the Church in his time (which is the only
point now in question) and therefore seeing that he not only prayed to a Saint
himself, but also signified that a holy Virgin did the like; it is clear,
that both he himself, and also the faithful people in those days, held it to
be lawful, and practiced it as occasion required.

61. And whereas M. Andrews adds concerning the latter point (to wit, the
prayer of the maid) that it was but a fact of a maid, and then asks whether
the fact of a maid is a statute of the Church? and whether a rule of faith is
to be grounded upon a mayds act? I have sufficiently answered him already
touching the statutes, See before. nu. ^^.19 ^7 I^em nu^ 5^.
and decrees of the Church concerning this point and now tell him again, that
there was neither at that time, any need of statutes for prayer to Saints,
which then was every where in practice; neither i^ i^ now in question what the
Church decreed then touching the same, but what was then generally practiced
and believed, which cannot be better, and more clearly proved by any
testimonies of the Fathers, then by such as witness, not only their own
facts, but also the practice of other Christians, either in their days, or else
in former times, as this was which S. Gregory affirms of that holy maid.

62. But will you now hear how well M. Andrews concludes all this matter?
Andr. vbi supra.
forsooth he makes an objection against himself, saying in a different letter
(as if the objection were the Cardinals) sed factum non reprehenditur, A
notable collusion. of M. Andrews.
but this fact of the maid is not reprehended by S. Gregory Nazianzen: and then
he adds answering to his own objection: Immo, idem illud etc. yea, but
Epiphanius sharply reprehended the self same, in the same age, in the
Collyridian heretykes, when it was done by many of the same sex. Thus says M.
Andrews, playing his part kindly, as well in his objection as in his answer.
For in his objection (wherein he would seem to speak for the Cardinal, or
rather to lay down his words) he dissembleth altogether what the Cardinal
says to urge, and fortify that example of the maid, (...).
and therefore forbeareth purposely, as it may be thought, to set it down in
his margent with the rest of the Cardinals text^ who after the words of S.
Gregory before related (to wit Virginem Mariam rogauit etc. S. Gregory
Nazianzen highly approves prayer to our Blessed Lady.
She besought the Virgin Mary to succor a Virgin in danger) adds immediately,
ac paulo post refert eam etc. and a little after (Nazianzen) declares that her
prayer was heard. Vicit, inquit, virgo, vincitur demon. The Virgin (says he)
overcame, and the Devil is overcome. Thus does the Cardinal urge this example,
which as you see, is of much more force, then to say only (as M. Andrews says)
that S. Gregory did not reprehend the fact.

63. For albeit his silence in not reprehending it may serve for an argument
that he did not mislyke it, yet the other clearly proves that not only he,
but also God himself did notably approve it, seeing he says that she obtained
the effect of her prayer, and overcame the Devil: whereto I also add, that when
that holy Father begins to recount the history of the maid, S. Greg.
Nazian. vbi supra
he says thus: Audite Virgins, ac simul exultate etc. Harken o ye Virgins,
and rejoice also, yea all ye that esteem chastity in matrimony, and love
Virgins, give ear, for to both sorts this my narratio may serve for an
ornament. So he. Whereby it appears plainly that he meant to recount that
which he would wish to be approved and imitated by others: whereupon it
follows that by this example he exhorted, and encouraged all those whose
chastity should be endangered. to crave the help of the blessed Virgin, as that
holy maid did, who thereby (together with her other devotions of fasting, and
prayer to almighty God, which S. Gregory relates) overcame the Devil and
escaped the danger of his tentation. And could this holy Father more evidently
declare what his faith and belief was, concerning prayer to Saints, then not
only to relate this fact of a holy Virgin without reprehension of it, but also
to signify the happy event, and success thereof, yea, and to incyte others to
the approbation, S. Epiph^. shamefully abused by M Andrews.
and imitation of it?

64. But now says M. Andrews, although Nazianzen did not reprehend it^ yet
Epiphanius did sharply reprove idem illud, even the self same fact in the same
age in other women. If this be true, M. Andrews does indeed say somewhat to the
purpose (at least to prove that the Fathers of that age did not with vnanim
consent allow prayers to Saints;) but if it be false, and that he flatly
belyeth S. Epiphanius, The heresy of the Collyrid^an^.
what shall we think of the man's conscience, and cause. The truth is, S.
Epiphanius sharply reprehendeth certain women who used at a certain time of
the year to commit Idolatry to the Virgin Mary, S. Epipha. haer. 79. de
Collyri^ dianis.
adoring her with divine honor, offering unto her certain cakes in sacrifice,
as though she had been a God, or a Goddess, and they her Priests: whereupon he
discourses amply, proving first out of the old Testament, that nusquam mulier
sacrificauit, aut Sacerdotio functa est, women have never sacrifyced anywhere,
or executed Priestly function. And then he comes to the new Testament, where
he shows also the same, and adds further, that if women could ever have been
admitted to Sacrifyce, the Virgin Mary her self should have done it rather,
then any other, nevertheless she never did: and finally he concludes, that the
body of the blessed Virgin Mary was reuera sanctum, sed non Deus, truly holy,
but not God,

65. By all which it appears, that these women, which Epiphanius
reprehendeth, did not only take upon them the Priestly function, but also
committed flat Idolatry, adoring the Virgin Mary with divine honor, offering
sacrifice unto her, which is a worship due to God alone. Now then could a man
believe that M. Andrews, M. Andrews care^lesse of hi^ reputation
or any man else that has care of his reputation would be so shameless, to
say, that this is idem illud, that very self same thing which Nazianzen says
that holy Virgin did, who only craved help of the Virgin Mary? Is there no
difference betwixt praying, and sacrifysing? betwixt Idolatry, and religious
veneration due to Gods Saints, M^ Andrews seeking to discredit a place of
Nazianzen has discredited himself.
and servants? Or betwixt the usurpation of Priestly function (whereof no woman
is capable) and the oblation of private prayers, which is as free for women, as
men? Does every one, or any one that prays to Saints or Angels, craving their
help, and assistance (as that holy Virgin did) does he, I say, adore them as
Gods, commit Idolatry, offer Sacrifice, usurp the function of a Priest, as
those women did, whom Epiphanius reprehended? Truly if M. Andrews can justify
this, he may boldly say, and write what he list. So as now you see that whereas
he undertook to prove that this testimony of S. Gregory Nazianzen is not
liquidae fidei, of clear credit, he has obscured, or rather clearly lost his
own credit, by an evident, and intolerable abuse of S. Epiphanius, without
giving the least blemish, or taynt in the world to the credit of the place that
he impugneth: by the which it appears evidently, that the Invocation of
Saints was usual in the time of S. Gregory Nazianzen, seeing that he himself
did both invoke Saints, and also testify and approve the practice of it in
others, as you have heard: and this shall suffice for him.

Apol. Card. pa. ^5. Cyril. Hieros. catech. 5.
66. After this M. Andrews concludes his censure upon the Fathers of the second
rank, with a place of S. Cyril alleged by the Cardinal thus: Cum hoc
sacrif^cium offerimus etc. When we offer this sacrifice (he means the holy.
Eucharist) we make mention of them that have dyed before us: first of
Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, and Martyrs, that Almighty God may by their
prayers receive ours. Thus far the Cardinal alleges S. Cyril to prove that
Saynt^ do pray for us; which albeit M. Andrews does not deny, yet diverse other
Sectaryes do^ In which respect the Cardinal cyted this place no less then the
former, and the rather, because the Invocation of Saints follows of their
prayer for us; for if they pray for us, we may lawful crave their prayers, as
I will show more amply hereafter: so that I shall not need to stand long upon
this place; only I will say, that whereas by occasion of this he affirms,
that S. Augustine does teach expressly, that Saints are not to be inuocated at
the altar, though they are named there, I shall have better opportunity to
speak fully of that point in the next Chapter; and in the mean time I will
examine his answer to the Fathers of the third rank, whom he grants to be
true Fathers, and truly cyted, but nihil ad rem, nothing to the purpose. And
this shall be the subject of the next Chapter, because so many things occur to
be debated, that they cannot be discussed in a few words.

THE ANSWERS OF Mr. ANDREVVS TO THE FATHERS OF THE THIRD RANK, are examined,
and found to be either impertinent, fraudulent, or most injurious to them;
namely to S^ Ambrose, whom he egregiously abuses. ALSO It is evidently
showed, that the Invocation of Saints was generally practiced and approved, as
well by the ancient Fathers, as by all other faithful Christians, in the
Primitive Church.
CHAP. VII.
TO the third rank of Fathers M. Andrews reduces those whom the Cardinal
affirms to have expressly inuocated Saints. S Greg. Nissen orat in S.
Theodor. Card. Apol. p. 13.
As for example, S. Gregory Nyssen Brother to S. Basil praying to Saint
Theodorus the Marter, says thus: Intercede ac deprecare etc. Pray, and make
intercession for us to our common King, and Lord, to obtain us grace etc. And
a little after: If there be need of greater prayer, or to call upon the other
Martyrs thy brethren, assemble the whole company, and pray together with them
all, admonish Peter, stir up Paul, and John the Deuyne, and beloved Disciple
of Christ. Thus says this ancient Father. Andr. p. 42.. Venio and seq.


2. Whereto, as also to all other places of like quality, and namely to three
alleged by the Cardinal out of S. Gregory Nazianzen, S. Hierome, and S.
Maximus, M. Andrews answers in substance, Ambros. in Luc. 10. cap. 12. Eusebius.
in vita Constant. Nazian. orat. in pascha.
that they are but figurative, and Rhetorical speeches, after the manner of
Orators, who in panegyricall and funeral Orations do commonly use the figures
prosopopaeia and Apostrophe, whereby they speak not only to dead men, as
though they were living, but also to senseless things, as Ambrose does to the
water of Baptism, Eusebius to Piety, M. Andrews would make the ancient Fathers
better Orators the^ Christian^
Nazianzen to the Feast of Easter. And for the confirmation of this, he adds
that the Fathers themselves, when they spoke to Saints in that manner do not
suffer themselves to be otherwise understood, seeing they confess diverse times
that they know not whether those to whom they speak, do hear them, or no;
for so, says he, does Nazianzen in an Apostrophe to the soul of Constantius
the Emperor, and in the funeral Oration of his sister Gorgonia; as also
Gregory Nissen in his Oration upon Theodorus the Martyr; and Hierome in his
Epitaph upon Nepotianus. Whereupon he concludes, that when the Fathers do
invoke Saints by name in their panegyricall, and funeral Orations, Homilyes,
or Sermons, they do it not as Christians, and Deuines, but as Orators and
Rhetoritians; to wit, as the pagan Orator did, when he said, Marce Druse te
appello, I call upon thee Marcus Drusus: or as the Poet said, Audis haec
Amp^iar^e sub terram abdite? do thou hear these things, O Amphiaraus, being
hid under the earth?

3. And to this effect he makes a larger discourse then he is commonly wont to
do, employing therein all the art he has, because he sees it to be very
needful to dazell the eyes of the Reader with the splendor of a Rhetorical
answer: but truly he had need of more Rhetorik then ever had Cicero, or
Demosthenes to persuade a learned, and discreet Reader, that the Fathers do
invoke Saints rather as Orators, then as Christians, rather in show then in
deed, and by Rhetorical figures, rather then with religious devotion. And
therefore whereas the confirmation, and proof of this his conceit, consists
specially in that he says the Fathers themselves do seem now and then to
doubt, whether those whom they invoke in that manner do hear them, I must
admonish him of four things, for the full answer of his objection.

4. First that he make a difference betwixt the souls of dead men in general,
M. Andrews ad^uertised of 4. things.
and of such as are known Saints, and honored by Almighty God with publyke
miracles: for albeit the Fathers in the funeral Matthew. 5.
yea though they were good men are not received into glory until they have as
our Savior speaks, paid the last farthing of the debts co^tracted in this
life) yet they made no such doubt concerning the Saints whose feasts were
publikly celebrated in the Church, as were the feasts of S. Theodorus the
Martyr, S. Cyprian, and S. Agnes, of whom, the first was in^ocated by S.
Gregory Nissen, the second by S. Gregory Nazianzen, and the third by S. Maximus
in their festival days, celebrated with great solemnity, as it appears in
the Orations, and Homilyes of the said Fathers cyted by the Cardinal.

5. Secondly, he is to understand that such conditional S. Gregory Nazianzen
in his Apostrophe to the soul of Constantius the Emperor to wit, Conditional
speeches do not always suppose a doubt in the speaker.
si quis tibi istorum sensus sit, if thou have any feeling, or understanding of
these things) and again to his sister Gorgonia ( si fanctae animae haec talia
prefe^tiscant, if holy souls do understand things of this quality) these, I
say, and such like do not always signify a doubt in him that uses them, but
rather sometimes an affirmatio^, or assurance of that which he may seem to
doubt of, being used rather by the way of obsecratio^, the^ otherwise. As for
example, if a man should say to some great favorite of a Prince, If you have
any credit with your Master, procure me this favor. Or if one dear friend
should say to another, If you love me, do this for me; these ma^ners of speech
do signify nothing else in effect, but because it is certain, that you have so
great credit with your master, that you may obtain of him what you will
procure me this grace at his hands: or because I am sure you love me, therefore
let it appear in doing this for me; Ep. (...) hilem^
as the Apostle S. Paul used the like speech to Philemo^, when he requested him
to receive again Onesimus his slave who was run away from him: Si me, says he
^otium habes etc. If thou take me for thy fellow, receive ^im as my self, as
if he should have said, because I am well assured that thou take me for thy
(...) Christ, ^herfore receive him as my self; and that the Apostles meaning
was no other then this, it is evident by that which follows, when he says;
Confidens in obedientia tuae etc. trusting in thy obedince, Ibid.
I have written unto thee, knowing that thou will do above that which I say.
Therefore M. Andrews must not make such a general rule of such condicionall
speeches as he does, but rather understand, that when the Fathers do use any
such concerning glorified souls, and known Saints, they use them no otherwise
then as affirmations, or rather earnest obsecrations, M. Andrews makes the
ancient Fathers very unchristian and wicked Orators.
as if they should say, because I am sure thou know what is done here on
earth, therefore help, and assist those which recommend themselves unto thy
prayers.

6. Thirdly, M. Andrews well to consider how absurdly he makes the Fathers (I
will not say rather Orators then Christians, as he himself terms them, but)
very unchristian, and most wicked Orators, if it be true which he, and his
fellows teach concerning the Invocation of Saints. Melanch. in antith. Verae
doctri. and Pontif. Magdeb. cent. 1. l. 2. c. 4. colum. 340. Brent in Apol.
Confess. VVittemb. Beza. in Respons. ad Nicolaum Seluec. Andr. cap. 8. p. 150.
liu. 45.
For who knows not, that all the sectaryes of this time do hold the same to
be injurious to Christ (yea and diverse of them affirm it to be blasphemous,
and Idolatricall; for so teach Melanchthon, the Magdeburgenses, Brentius,
Bezae, and diverse others of them) and M. Andrews himself says, that when we
invoke Saints, we give them the place of Christ, and make other mediators
besides him, wherein he signifies evidently, that we do injury to Christ. And
if this be true, what a wicked, and impious Rhetorik was this of the fathers
not only to invoke Saints themselves, but also to induce others unto it by
their example?

7. For although there is no doubt, but that in their writings, and specially
in their panegyricall and funeral Oratio^s they used all ornaments of
Rhetorike fit for the subjects whereof they treated (in matters wherein there
was no longer of scandal, or error) yet it were absurd to think that they
would use them in such sort that their audience might be scandalized, and
drawn into error thereby, or that they would themselves, so much as in show
and appearance, violate the least point of Christian doctrine, or seem to do
injury to Christ; or finally that they sought rather to be eloquent then
religious: and therefore M. Andrews must either acknowledge the Invocation of
Saints to be lawful, or else confess that he has a most profane, and
irreligious conceit of the ancient Fathers, in affirming, as he does, that
they used the same, not as Deuynes, but as Rhetoritians, and not as Christians,
but as Orators.

8. Lastly to put this matter out of all doubt, and to discover the impertinent
vanity of M. Andrews in S. Greg. Nyssen. orat. in Theodor. Mart.
and him, I mean the same place of S. Gregory Nissen, which I have laid down
before, taken out of his oration made in the solemnity of the feast of S.
Theodorus the Martyr, wherein S. Gregory having first touched the great
celebrity of the feast by the confluence of all sorts of people, far and
near, moves them to consider thereby how God rewards the just man, not only
in earth and thereby also incyteth them further to aspyre to the like rewards,
by the imitation of the virtues of those whom God so honors; and to this
end he discourses amply of the great honor that was every where exhibited to
the relics of martyrs, and particulerly of that holy Martyr in that place,
and feast, elegantly declaring the magnificence of the Church where his feast
was celebrated adorned with excellent workmanship of all sorts^ and namely
with pictures, Pictures of Martyrs used in Churches, and highly approved by S.
Gregory Nyssen.
lively expressing the particularityes of his Martyrdom, wherein, by the way,
we may note the use of the pictures of Saints in Churches in those days, yea
and that they were held to be very profitable for the instruction of the
people, seeing that S. Gregory Nissen says also upon this occasion: The great
devotion of Chrians in the reuereut touching of holy relics, approved by S
Gregory Nyssen.
Solet enim pictura tacens in pariete loqui, maximeque prodesse: for the
picture which is sylent upon the wall is wont to speak, and to profit
exceedingly. So he^ giving to understand, that the sight of the picture, or
painted history did greatly edify the people, and styre them up to the
imitation of the Saints virtues, and holy life. But to proceed.

9. After this the same Father relates the fervent devotion of the people,
greatly desiring to approach to the tomb of the Martyr; Credens, says he,
contrectationem eius esse sanctificationem, and benedictionem, believing that
the very touching of it would be a sanctification and benediction; yea seeking
to get but some of the dust about the tomb, esteeming the same as a thing of
great price; and if they could have the good fortune to touch the relics
themselves, he appealeth to their own experience and knowledge, The Invocation
of holy Martyrs expressly mentioned and allowed by S Gregory Nyssen.
how prosperous, and happy they would think themselves, and how they would
embrace the said relics, kiss them, and apply them to their eyes, ears, and
all the instruments of their senses^ Deinde says he, deuotionis and affectonis
lachrimas Martyri etc. And then pouring forth tears of devotion and affection
to the Martyr, as though he were there whole, and alive, they exhibit their
humble petition unto him, as to the servant of God, and as one that being
inuocated (for so signifies the Greek (...).
word) receives what gifts soever he will. Thus says this ancient, and holy
Father, and then concludes: ex hijs omnibus, o popule pie, discite etc. O
pious, or godly people learn by all this, that the death of Gods Saints, is
honorable, and precious in his sight.

10. All this I have thought good to lay down at large, first to confirm all
that which has hitherto been treated concerning the custom of the Church at
that time, not only in the veneration of holy relics, but also in the
express Invocation of Saynts^ secondly that this holy Father making all this
discourse in the solemnity of that Martyrs feast, to stir up the people as
well to devotion toward God, and the Martyr, as to the imitation of the
Martyrs virtues (for so he himself professes) did highly approve all that
which he has here related, and consequently when afterward in the conclusion
of the Oration he himself inuocated the Martyr, he did it of pure devotion and
not of vain ostentation of his eloquence, not as a flanting Rhetorician, or
Orator, but as a religious Divine, and devout Christan, a pious Pastor, and
teacher of his flock, to whom he preached, for whom he prayed, S. Greg.
Nyssen. vbi supra.
and whom he sought to move by his own example, to concur with him in the
Invocation of the Martyr.

11. Wherein also M. Andrews may if it please him note the word Invocation used
by this Father for prayer to the Martyr, (...)
of whom he says, that the people prayed unto him, and called upon him as the
Mynister of God, and as one that received (or obtained of God) what gifts he
would (...) that is say, being inuocated; for I think M. Andrews will not
deny that (...) in Greek does properly signify inuocare in Latin, and in
English to invoke. And therefore because he is so curious to run to the
Greek in all occasions to examine our cytations of the Greek Fathers, I remit
him here to the Greek; for that I have been in this no less (if not more)
curious then he, M Andrews remitted to the Greek text, whereto he ordinarily
appealeth.
having searched the old manuscripts of the Vatican, where I have seen two
written copyes of S. Gregory Nyssen, both of them very ancient, and in them
both have found the Greek words, as here I have laid them down in the
margent, with all the rest, very conform to the Latin translation; and
therefore I hope he can take no just exceptions thereto.

12. And how then do you think he will seek to elude this evident testimony
of this ancient Father? Marry (forsooth) because he finds, A shifting evasion
of M. Andrews refuted.
that he says to the Martyr, vbicumque tamdem fueris, wheresoever thou art, he
infers thereupon, that the Father calls upon him doubtfully, and that
fluctuant hic omnia, fides nulla de hijs, securum nihil; all things are here
uncertain, no faith or belief is to be had of these things, Andr. page 44.
lin. 12.
nothing at all secure. So he. And shall then all this serious discourse of
this holy Father, directed especially to the glory of God, (...).
and the hono^r of his Martyr, in the solemnity of his feast, in a public
assembly of the people, and for their instruction and edification (wherein he
testified, and highly commended their devotion to the Martyr, the honor they
did unto him, yea to his very relics, and their express Invocation, of him,
with tears of devotion, and affection, for so says the Greek:) shall all
this, I say, be uncertain, void of faith, and belief, void of security,
only because M. Andrews has found therein, vbicumque fueris? Can any man
imagine that S. Gregory Nyssen would publicly belly the people, even to their
faces, or yet approve their devotion to the Martyr, and their invocation of
him, if he did not believe it to be acceptable to God, and no way repugnant to
the Catholic faith?

13. And again on the other side, if all that he said was true and highly
approved by him (as it is evident it was) can we desire a more clear testimony
of the belief of this holy Father, and the Church in his time concerning the
invocation of Saints? And what then if he should have doubted where the soul
of the Martyr was (acknowledging nevertheless that wheresoever he were, he was
highly in Gods favor) would it follow thereon, that all his former discourse
was either false, or impertinent? Or that he doubted whether the Martyr could
hear, M. Andrews his doubt retorted upon him self.
or help them that did invoke him? Nay might not M. Andrews rather gather
directly thereof, that S. Gregory Nissen, and the people believed that the
Martyr heard their prayers, saw their devotion, and understood their actions,
yea could, and would help them wheresoever he were, seeing that they craved his
help, not knowing where he was? Of this truly there can be no doubt.

14. But for M. Andrews his better satisfaction in this point, Joan. 14.
I must needs desire him to call to mind what our Savior himself teaches
concerning the many mansions in his Fathers house, What S. Gregory Nyssen meant
when he said to S. Theodore Wheresoever thou art.
signifying thereby that as there be many mansions, so also there are different
degrees of glory which God imparteth to his Saints; whereby M. Andrews may also
understand (if it please him) that S. Gregory Nissen alluding thereto, had
reason to speak doubtfully of the mansion, or place where the Martyr was, and
degree of glory, wherewith God had blessed him, because no mortal man can know
it without special revelation, neither yet is it known to us in what sort the
glorified souls are employed in the service, Nyssen. vbi supra.
and praise of God in those heavenly mansions; in which respect the Father
spoke also doubtfully thereof, beseeching the Martyr that wheresoever he was,
or howsoever he was employed in Gods service, he would vouchsafe (as an
invisible friend) to come to visit the assembly of those that honored him, and
to praise and thank God, together with them, even for the rewards that God had
bestowed upon him, for shedding his blood in the confession of his faith.

15. This then being so, I leave it to thee, good Reader, M. Andrews a
wrangler in the highest degree.
to judge whether M. Andrews be not a true (...), and a Wrangler in the highest
degree, seeing that he not only dissembleth the whole drift, and scope of this
ancient Father, and all the substance of his discourse; but also impugneth the
same with some of the Fathers own words, or his manner of speech, ill
understood, and wrested from the Fathers meaning^ besides that, it also
appears, what a frivolous and vain evasion he has sought here to avoid the
force of diverse pregnant, and vnswerable places alleged by the Cardinal, I
mean not only this of S. Gregory Nissen, but also the others before mentioned,
to wit, of S. Gregory Nazianzen, S. Hierome, and S. Maximus, inuocating
expressly S. Cyprian, the holy widow Paula, and S. Agnes: all which, as also
all other places to the same purpose he labors to frustrate (as you have
heard) with a devise of an Apostrophe, and a proso^opaeia; whereas no man can
doubt, but that those Fathers did therein exercise acts of pure devotion (as
you see S. Gregory Nyssen did) according to the belief, and practice of the
whole Church at that time; which is evident by the testimonies that you have
heard already, and will be much more manifest by those that yet rest to be
examined. And this shall suffice for this point.

16. The next place that he takes in hand to answer, is one of S. Ambrose in
these words: Ambros^ l. de viduis. Card. in Apol. p. 15.
Obsecrandi sunt Angeli etc. The Angels which are given us for Guardians, and
defenders are to be prayed unto; and the Martyrs in like manner, whose
protection we seem to challenge, by having their bodies in pledge, they may
pray for our sins, S. Ambrose shamefully calumniated by M. Andrews.
who with their own blood have washed away their own sins, if they had any.
(...) says S. Ambrose. Whereto M. Andrews answers, that the Cardinal might
very well have forborne to produce this place, and not have cyted it so
greedily, as he has done, but that, he little cares (says he) as it seems,
that the blood of Christ should be held for superfluous, Andr. p. 45.. Pot^rat.
rather then he would not pray to Saints; for, superfluus certe sanguis Christi
etc. truly the blood of Christ is superfluous, if Martyrs can wash away their
sins with their own blood. So he.

17. Whereupon he also infers, that the Reader may preceiue hereby, that
Ambrose wrote this when he was but a Nouice in Chistian religion, and that it
is no marvel, if he said, that Martyrs are to be prayed unto, seeing he
teacheth^ that they have washed their sins with their own blood. Wherein
appears the modesty of M. Andrews, and his good spirit, who rather then he
will acknowledge his own error (which is evidently convinced by this place)
charge this holy Father with the most execrable, and blasphemous doctrine
that can be imagined, as to teach that the blood of Christ is superfluous;
which any Christian heart would abbore to hear, and much more to hold, and
teach; seeing that it must needs follow thereupon, that all Christian religion,
and belief is in vain being all grounded upon the merits of Christ's Passion,
and his precious blood shed for us.

S. Ambrose cleared from M. Andrews his slanderous imputation by the uniform
doctrine of holy Scriptures and Fathers.
18. And truly if S. Ambrose may be charged with this blasphemous opinion, for
the cause which M. Andrews alleges, then all the Fathers of Gods Church yea
the Apostles themselves may in like manner be charged therewith. For all of
them say as much in effect, as S. Ambrose does, which also may by some perverse
and heretical ^rayne be wrested to the same perverse sense, albeit to those
who do consider the grounds of their doctrine, and belief, the contrary is
evident. For who knows not (if malice do not blynd-fold, and wholly pervert
his understanding) that when in the holy Scriptures, and Fathers, any merit,
sufficiency, or cooperatio^ to salvation is attributed to a man, or to his
faith, works, or any endeavor of his, the same is understood to proceed
principally from the merits of Christ's Passion, which is the cause, ground, and
foundation of all grace, goodness, and merit in man; and therefore is always
supposed, and necessarily understood in all such manner of speech, as this of
S. Ambrose, though it be not expressed.

Nazian. orat. 1. in. Julian.
19. As when we read in S. Gregory Nazianzen that certain Christian souldiars
having committed Idolatry, exhorted one another, vt Christo satisfacerent
sanguine suo, to satisfy Christ with their blood: and in S. Cyprian: Cypr. li.
4. ep. 2.
omnia peccata passione purgare, to purge all sins by passion, or suffering.
And again in another place, Idem li. 1^ ep. 3.
redimere peccata etc. to redeem sins with just sorrow, and satisfaction;
and to wassh the wounds (of sin) with tears. li. 3. ep. 14.
Also in the same Father, Deo precibus, and operibus satisfaccre, to satisfy
God with prayers, and works: in ser. de opere and eleemos.
and, sordes eleemosynis abluere, to wash away the filth (of sin) with alms.
And in Origin, Poenitendo, flendo, satisfaciendo delere quod admissum est, to
abolish, Origin. bo. 6. in exodus
or blot out that which has been committed, with repentance, weeping, and
satisfaction. Also in Tertullian, Tertul. li. 2. de poeniten. ca. 7. Ibid. ca.
6.
that the sinner has cui satisfaciat, to whom he may give satisfaction, and
that God does offer us, impunitatem poenitentiae compensatione redimendam,
impunity, or remission of punishment to be redeemed with the recompense of
penance.

20. We read also in Irenaeus, that our goods, or substance being given to the
poor, Iren. li. 4. c. 26. in sine.
solutionem faciunt praeteritae cupiditatis, do cause solution (or remission)
of our former covetousness. Also in S. Augustine, that for daily, and light
sins, quotidiana oration fidelium satisfacit, the daily prayer of the
faithful does satisfy. S. Aug. in enchiridio ca. 71. S. Hylar. in psalm. 118.
in. fine.
And in S. Hilary, that David facti veteris crimen lacrymis abluit, David washed
away the fault of his old deed with tears. In S. Chrysostom, that S. Peter
adeo abluit negationem etc. did so wash away his denial of Christ (with his
tears, or repentance) that he was made the chief Apostle. And again in the
same Oration; S. Chrysostom. orat. 5. aduers. Iud.
Vna anima quam lucrati fuerimus etc. One soul which we have gained, may
abolish the wayght of innumerable sins, animaeque redimend^ fieri precium in
illo die, and become a price to redeem our soul in the day of judgment. S.
Greg. li. 6. in 2. Reg. 15^ ca. 2.
Finally, to omit innumerable other places of the rest of the Fathers, S.
Gregory the great teaches, that peccata delenda sunt austeritate poenitentiae,
sins are to be blotted out with the austerity of pe^nance, and, the possunt
satisfactione purgari, they may be purged with satisfaction. Thus say these
holy Fathers.

21. And now will M. Andrews charge them all to teach, that the blood of Christ
is superfluous, because they speak of men's satisfaction for sin (by washing
the same with tears, and by purging, and redeeming them with alms, pe^nance,
and Martyrdom) without mention of Christ's satisfaction for us? May he not take
the like exception also to diverse speeches in the holy Scripture as peccatu^
tuum eleemosynis redime; Dan. 4.
redeem thy sin with alms, Prou. 16.
misericordia, and veritate redimitur iniquitas, iniquity is redeemed with
mercy, and verity^ spesalui facti sumus, Romans 8.
we are saved by hope; baptisma vos saluos facit, baptism saves you; saluos
nos fecit per lauachrum regenerationis, Tit. 3.
he has saved us by the water of regeneration; Philip. 2.
operamini salutem, work your salvation, and the like in diverse other places:
may he not, I say, cavil as well against these speeches, as against the other
in S. Ambrose? Yes truly.

The reason why baptism, penance, good works, Martyrdom, and such like, are
said to save us, without derogatio^ to the Passion of Christ.
22. For the reason is all one in both, it being evident, that the merit of
Christ's precious blood, and death is presupposed, and necessarily understood as
well in the one, as in the other: and as Baptism, and Hope are special means
to apply unto us the merits of Christ's passion (in which respect they are said
in the Scripture to save us;) so also tears of repentance, penance, alms,
good works, and Martyrdom (whereof S. Ambrose speaks) are special means to
apply unto us the satisfaction of Christ; and in that respect the Fathers say,
that they satisfy for us, wash away, blot out, and purge our sins, to wit, as
secondary causes that have their operation by the virtue, and force of the
first cause (which is the merits of our Saviors passion:) and therefore if a
man should say, that a Physician had saved his life, he could not with reason
be thought to derogate any thing either from the operation of the medicine, or
from the providence, or power of God, who gave force to the medicine, and good
success to the Physician; as neither he that should say the medicine saved his
life, could be thought to do injury either to God, or to the Physician.

23. For whereas many causes do commonly concur to one effect, M. Andrews
showed to b^ either very ignorant, or exceeding malicious.
every cause may well be said to work the effect, without denial of the
concurrence of other causes, and especially of the first cause, by virtue
whereof all the rest have their opperation. So that M. Andrews shows himself
either very ignorant, or totoo malicious, in saying, that S. Ambrose makes the
blood of Christ superfluous, because he says, that the Martyrs wash away their
sins with their own blood, as though he denied the virtue of Christ's passion
by ascribing remission of sin to Martyrdom, which is an inferior, and
secondary cause thereof, as being an immediate means to apply the force and
fruit of Christ's passion unto us; and therefore whereas he says, it is no
marvel that S. Ambrose who so said, did not also stick to say, that we may
pray to Saints; it is indeed no marvel at all, seeing that his speech is in
both most conform to reason, Scriptures, Fathers, and to the doctrine of the
whole Church. But truly the wonder is, that any modest Christian, and
especially one that pretends to be a Prelate in Gods Church, should be so
temerarious, and audacious, as to lay so foul an imputation as he does here,
upon one of the most holy, and famous Fathers of Gods Church, for speaking only
in such sort, as all other Fathers speak, yea the Scriptures themselves, as I
have already showed.

24. Yea but S. Ambrose changed his mind (says M. Andrews) in the later point
(to wit concerning prayer to Saints) for Ambrosio, Andr. p. 45. Poterat.
says he, alibi alia men's prouecto iam, melius edocto: Ambrose was elsewhere of
another mind, when he waxed elder, and was better learned. So he; and how does
he prove this? Marry for sooth by two manifest testimonies of his, as he says,
for thus he goes forward, cuius nota sententia ad Deum suffragatore non est
opus, S. Ambros. in cap. 1. ad Romans
certe nec obsecratore, whose known opinion, or sentence is, there is no need
of a suffragator, or helper to God, nor yet of a beseecher, and illa: Idem
oration. de obitu Theodos.
tu solus Domine inuocandus es; and that other, thou only, O Lord art to be
inuocated. Thus says he, alleging, as you see, two places out of S. Ambrose,
and cyting for the former his Commentary upon the Epistle to the Romans, and
for the latter, his funeral Oration upon Theodosius the Emperor. But in the
former you may note partly his evil hap, and partly his folly; M. Andrews
unfortunate, foolish, and fraudule^t, and first touching his evil fortune.
in the latter his fraud, and falsehood. His evil hap is manifest in the former,
because, to show that S. Ambrose recalled his doctrine which he had delivered
in an undoubted work of his, M. Andrews brings a testimony calling it notam
sententiam, a known sentence, or opinion of S. Ambrose, albeit he take it out
of a work, which in the opinion of diverse learned men was not written by S.
Ambrose; and so perhaps M. Andrews himself would tell us, Coment. in ca. 3.
ep. ^. ad Tim.
if we should object against him out of that Commentary that Pope Damasus was
head, or governor of the whole Church, because we read there, cuius
(Ecclesiae) hodie rector est Damasus, of which (Church) Damasus is governor at
this day.

25. Nevertheless I say not this because I mean to reject the authority of that
Commentary, See chap. 1. nu. 7.
having alleged it my self before against M. Andrews, as S. Ambrose his
work, which I have done partly because it is commonly cyted under his name,
being amongst his other works, and no other Author of it known; and partly
because M. Andrews himself approves it so highly, as you see in this place,
and therefore I made account that howsoever others may take exception to it,
and to my allegation of it, yet he can take none, but must needs admit it;
wherein also I wish this difference to be noted betwixt his allegation thereof,
and mine, that I did not wholly rely upon the authority of it, but fortifyed it
with a most pregnant place taken out of a known, and assured work of S.
Ambrose for the satisfaction of such as might doubt of the former; Ibidem.
whereas he being driven to such an exigent as you have seen (that is to say,
Posseuin. in Appar. Maldonat. in cap. 17. Matt. Bellar. de amiss. gra. lib. 4.
c. 9.. Sed facilis.
flatly to deny S. Ambrose his clear doctrine) and undertaking to show that he
recalled it afterward, professes to produce an undoubted and known testimony
of S. Ambrose, cyting nevertheless a work which diverse learned men, as I have
said, do hold to be none of his, as it may be seen in Posseuinus, Maldonatus,
Cardinal Bellarmine, and others; which, I say, I cannot but ascribe to some
evil fortune that haunteth M. Andrews, and forces him to ground all his
buildings upon such weak, and unsure foundations, that there is no true
solidity in anything he says, or produces out of others.

26. And put the case there were no doubt at all to be made of the Author of
that Commentary, M Andrews his folly in alleging a place against prayer to
Saints, which does nothing concern it.
but that he was undoubtedly S. Ambrose, yet M. Andrews shows himself not
only unfortunate, but also most foolish, and ridiculous, in that the place
which he alleges out of it, against prayer to Saints, does not concern it at
all, nor impugn any thing else, but Idolatry to the Sun, Moon, Planets, and
Stars, which S. Paul reproved in the Pagans in his Epistle to the Romans, by
the occasion whereof the Author of the Co^mentary says that those Idolatrous
Paynims of whom the Apostle speaks were wont to excuse their Idolatry, Romans
1.
by saying, that by the inferior Gods, men did come to the highest and chief
God, Ambros. in cap. 1. ad Romans
as by Counts, or Earls to the King: and then he adds, Numquid it a demens
est aliquis etc. Is any man so mad, or so unmindful of his own good, that he
gives the Kings honor to the Count? For if any be found that do but only
treat of such a matter, they are worthily condemned as Traitors, and yet
these (Pagans) do not think themselves guilty of treason, when they give the
honor of the name of God to his creature, and forsaking their Lord, do adore
their fellow-seruants, as though any thing more can be reserved to God. For men
do therefore go to the King by his Tribunes, or Counts, because the King is but
a man, and knows not whom he may trust with the Common wealth: Ad Deum autem
(quem vtique nihil latet, omnia enim merita nouit) promerendum, suffragatore
non est opus, sed mente deuota; but to deserve the favor of God (from whom
nothing is hid, and who knows all men's merits) there is no need of a
suffragator, or helper, but of a devout mind. Thus says that Author in that
place, be he S. Ambrose, or who else soever.

27. Wherein it is to be observed, What the authors scope and drift was in the
place alleged by M. Andrews.
that his whole scope, and drift is to confute the Idolatrous Pagans, who did
not so much use the help, and mediation of creatures to come to God (which no
man can deny to be lawful, so that it be done in due manner) as they gave to
creatures both the name of God and the honor due to him, calling them Gods,
and adoring them with divine honor, that is to say, with sacrifice which is a
worship due to God alone; and this they did because they were of opinion that
the chief God did not otherwise know men's minds, or actions, nor could
otherwise govern the world, but by the inferior Gods, as kings cannot
otherwise govern their realms, but by their officers, in which respect the
author shows the difference betwixt God, and earthly Kings, opposing to their
ignorance Gods knowledge of all men's hearts, and secret thoughts, and thereupon
concludes that, Ad Deum promerendum suffragatore opus non est, there is no
need of a suffragator to deserve the favor of God, sed mente deuota, but of a
devout mind: giving to understand, that God, to whom all men's mynds and hearts
are manifest, knows and sees the devotion and merits of every man, though no
man intimate, or relate the same unto him.

28. Whereupon it follows, that there is no such absolute necessity to come
to God by the means of others, as the Paynims imagined, seeing that any man
may (according to the doctrine of this Author) come to him immediately by the
devotion of his own mind, yea and by his merits, which, by the way, I wish M.
Andrews to observe in this place, where the author signifies that there is no
need of a suffragator ad Deum promerendu^, to merit or deserve Gods favor,
because God knows omnia merita, M. Andrews clippeth the Fathers authorities
that they may not speak against him
all merits; which words (I mean promerendum, and omnia merita) M. Andrews
thought good to leave out of the text, which he alleges, albeit the Authors
meaning, and the true sense of the place cannot be well understood without
them, especially promerendum, which is essential to the text; for the Author
says, ad Deum promerendum suffragatore non est opus. So as you see, how M.
Andrews iugleth in the citation of this place, not only dissembling the
circumstances, and drift of the Author, but also nipping a word out of the
short sentence which he cyteth.

29. But notwithstanding all his iugling, it is evident (the whole place being
considered) that it makes nothing against our Prayer to Saints, seeing that we
do not make the Saints Gods, as the Paynims made the Sun, and Moon, to whom
they sacrificed, neither do we hold, as the Paynims did, that a man cannot come
immediately to God by prayer, and devotion, which we commonly use to do,
directing our prayers, The mediation as well of Christ himself, as of Saints
and men for us, is overthrown by the place alleged by M. Andrews if he
understand it aright.
as well mental as vocal, to God himself, although we do also many times
crave the help, and assistance, as well of men, as of Saints, as a thing
(though not of absolute necessity to salvation) yet very convenient,
behoouefull, and profitable thereto, which is no way contradicted by this place.

30. For no man can with any reason imagine that the author of that Commentary
denied it to be lawful, profitable, or needful to have a suffragatour, or
mediator to pray for us, for so should he have impugned a most known truth,
which M. Andrews neither will, nor can deny (I mean the mediation not only of
Saints for us, and of one man for another (both which M. Andrews grants) but
also of the humanity of Christ for us all) for if we have no need of either
suffragatour, or mediator to God, but only of a devout mind, because he
knows our hearts, and thoughts; it follows that when we do devoutly serve
God our selves, we need not the prayer either of other men, or of Saints, or
yet of Christ himself and therefore let M. Andrews consider, whether he will
admit this inference, which must needs be good, if he will infer any thing
upon this place against prayer to Saints.

31. So as you see, he has very impertinently alleged this testimony, to
prove that S. Ambrose changed his mind concerning Prayer to Saints, for neither
is the Commentary, The trick of heretics to seek to overthrow plain places by
obscure.
which he cyteth, an undoubted work of S. Ambrose (and consequently the
sentence which he alleges out of it, is not nota sententia, a known sentence
of that holy Father, as he terms it:) neither is it any thing to the purpose
though it be his, besides that we may note here an ordinary trick of an
heretyke, which is, to seek to overthrow most evident and plain places, by
others that are more obscure, and doubtful, or subject to diverse
interpretations, for so does he here, opposing this obscure, and difficult
place, to a testimony which is so clear, that he is forced to reject S.
Ambrose, and make him no better then a blasphemous heretic for his doctrine
therein, and yet you see also, that the place which he cyteth, being understood
secundum subiectam materiam, and according to the circumstances thereof, makes
nothing at all for him, or against us, and this shall suffice for the former of
the two places, and his evil fortune and folly in the allegation thereof.

32. In the other sentence which he alleges to prove, that S. Ambrose changed
his mind touching prayer to Saints, he shows more fraud then folly^ The words
are; Another place of S. Ambr. very fraudulently cited by M. Andrews and
ridiculously applied to his purpose.
Tu solus Domine inuocandus es. Thou only, o Lord, art to be inuocated;
whereupon he would infer, that no Saint may be inuocated, that is to say
prayed unto; but to omit that which I have sufficiently treated before,
concerning the word invocation (whereon he so much relyeth) I desire thee good
Reader, to note how he would cozen, and abuse thee in the allegation of this
place. Thou shall therefore understand, that S. Ambrose in his funeral oration
upon the death of the Emperor Theodosius, having declared his great virtues,
See Chap. 6 nu. 2. and 3.
uses indeed those words which M. Andrews cyteth, but whether to the same
purpose that they are alleged, thou thy self shall be judge. Thus then he
says: S. Ambr. de obitu Theod.
Conteror cord etc. I am much afflicted in heart, because a man is taken from
us, whose like is hardly to be found; sed tu solus Domine inuocandus es, tu
rogandus vt eum in filijs repraesentes; but thou alone, o Lord, art to be
inuocated, thou to be prayed, that thou may represent him in his Children.
Thus says S. Ambrose.

33. And now will M. Andrews infer upon this, that S. Ambrose teaches here,
that we may not pray to Saints? did he not see trow you (if he saw the place in
the author, M. Andr. applies that to all things in general which S. Ambrose
speaks of a particular matter.
and not in some corrupt note-booke, either of his own, or his fellows) that
S. Ambrose speaks here of prayer for a particular purpose, to wit, to
obtain the grace of God for the Emperors Children, to make them like their
Father? and this S. Ambrose said with great reason was to be craved of God
alone; for he alone, and none but he, can give grace, and therefore he is only
to be inuocated as the giver of it, albeit the prayers both of Saints, and men,
may be craved to help to obtain it of him; and I think M. Andrews will not
deny, Only God is to be inuocated, and prayed unto, as the giver of grace,
though the prayers of Saints and men may be craved to obtain it of him.
but that S. Ambrose might very lawfully have desired the people to pray to God
to represent Theodosius in his Children, that is to say, to give them grace
that they might be like their father in virtue, and piety. So as it appears
that solus inuocandus is no otherwise used in this place of S. Ambrose, then as
rogandus is, which presently follows; and that both of them are to be
referred to that which ensues, to wit, vt eum in filijs repraesentes^ and
finally that this place does not exclude the craving of prayers either of man,
or of Saints to obtain grace of God, though it signify, that God only can give
grace and consequently is only to be inuocated to that end.

34. And therefore I leave it to thy judgment, The weakness of M Andrews his
cause is further discovered, by another shift and cozenage of his
good Reader, how sincere M. Andrews is in cyting the Fathers, whom he
nippeth, and mangleth in this manner, to make them speak after his fasshion,
and what a good cause he has in hand, seeing he is forced to maintain it with
such fraud and falsehood, which may yet further appear by the conclusion of
his answer to the place objected by the Cardinal out of S. Ambrose, wherein
truly he shows himself no less fraudulent, Andr. p. 45.. Poterat.
and impertinent, then before. Thus then he says. Etiam scriptus illi de
oratione liber etc. He (to wit Ambrose) also wrote a book concerning prayer,
wherein (albeit there was fit place or occasion to treat of this matter, A
book forged and fathered upon S. Ambrose which he never wrote.
yet) there is no mention at all of Saints. So he^ which truly I must needs
account for a fraud, and abuse of his reader, until he tell me where this
book, which he mentions, is to be found; for I have searched for it
diligently, as well in the Tome of S. Ambrose, as also in others that have
written particulerly of his works, and yet I can find no such book, nor
mention thereof any where.

35. True it is that he treats of prayer in many parts of his works, not in
any particular treatise bearing that title, but obiter by the way upon
occasions offered either in the exposition of the Scriptures of the old and new
Testament, or in his other treatises; as for example, in his books de
Sacramentis, he writes of the manner, and place of prayer, of the order to be
observed therein, of the beginning, midst, and end of it, of the difference of
postulation, S. Ambros. lib 1 de sacram. cap. 3.4. and 5. Idem lib. 5. cap. 4.
obsecration, and thanksgiving, yea he expounds the whole Pater noster. And
as it is true, that in these places there is no mention either of the prayers
of Saints for us, or of our prayers to them: so also it is no less true, that
there are many other things apperteyning to prayer, which are not so much as
touched there, as (to speak of a thing of like nature and quality to the
other) there is not any insinuation of our mutual prayers one for another,
albeit there are diverse places which may be supposed very fit, and convenient
for that purpose; neither is there any mention there of prayer for our enemies,
although S. Ambrose may seem to have had very just occasion to speak thereof,
when treating of prayer, he expounds this petition of the Pater Noster,
Dimite nobis debita nostra etc. Forgive us our trespasses, as we for give them
that trespass against us.

36. And now shall we say, that S. Ambrose held it to be either unlawful, M.
Andrews hardly urged by his own argument.
or needles to pray for our enemies? or to crave the prayers of our brethren,
because he faith nothing of those points in these places? or shall his silence
here prejudice his clear doctrine else where, and be taken for a recantation
of it, as M. Andrews would have it to be supposed in this other case? What then
will he say of a point which he himself allows concerning the intercession
of Saints, to wit, not only that they pray for us, but also that we may pray to
God to hear and help us by their intercession, which he grants to be
lawful, albeit there would be no mention of it in that book of S. Ambrose de
Oratione which he cyteth, Andr. p. 45. Poterat.
if there were any such, for he himself confesses, that there is no mention
therein at all of Saints; will he therefore allow us to infer hereupon, that
S. Ambrose did not believe eythere that Saints do pray for us, or that we may
pray to God to be helped by their intercession? So should this supposed book
whereto he appealeth, condemn him no less in this point, then us in the other.

37. And if I would be so absurd to argue as he does, I might as probably say,
that S. Ambrose approves prayer to Saints, M. Andrews hi^ absurd argument ab
authoritat^ negatiua, retorted against himself.
because he does not condemn it in his exposition of the Pater Noster, where
the place seemed to inuit him to teach, that all prayer ought to be directed
to God only, if he had been of that opinion, and had not allowed prayer to
Saints, as to intercessours to God for us: thus I say, I might argue with as
much probability, as M. Andrews does, but that I am not ignorant (as neither
he, me thinks, should be) that such an argument ab authoritate negatiua
(howsoever it may sometimes serve for a light or bare conjecture) yet can never
pass for a proof amongst learned men, especially to such purpose as he urges
it here, to wit to overthrow an authors express doctrine in one place, by his
silence thereof in another; for who knows not that all authors have certain
principal intentions in their works and treatises, whereto specially tends
all their discourse; and that they are not any way bound to handle other
by-questions further then they think convenient? wherein also every one has
his reasons (though unknown to others) why he handles one point, more then
some other, which may perhaps seem no less pertinent to his subject then that
which he handles; neither is he to be controlled or blamed for the same, if he
perform as much as he either promises or specially intends. And therefore
although S. Ambrose had written such a book concerning prayer, as M. Andrews
forgeth, yet his silence therein touching prayer to Saints, could not prejudice
his express doctrine thereof in his other works.

38. Well then to conclude concerning this point, I hope, good Reader, thou
have noted diverse things worthy to be considered; as first that M. Andrews
has not only rejected S. Ambrose his express testimony concerning the
invocation of Saints, but also charged him with a most blasphemous doctrine,
How many ways M. Andrews has abused S. Ambrose.
which never any man else I dare say (except perhaps some other Sectary of this
age) ever so much as suspected, or imagined in that holy Father. Secondly
promising to prove by a known sentence of S. Ambrose, that he changed his mind
afterward in that point, he alleges a work, which in the opinion of diverse
learned men was not written by S. Ambrose; besides that the place which he
produces is nothing at all to the purpose, for the which he alleges it.
Thirdly laying down the true words of another place in a true work of S.
Ambrose, he has fraudulently dissembled and concealed that which immediately
follows, and not only discovers, but also overthrows his false
construction thereof; and lastly he has coined a new work of S. Ambrose,
never heard of by any, but by himself, whereby also he could gain nothing if
there were any such. So as now I report me to thee, good Reader, whether he
has not quit himself well in the answer of the Cardinals objection out of
S. Ambrose. Let us then pass to another. M. Andrews answer to a place of
Ruffinus examined. and confuted.


39. The next place which he labors to answer is taken out of the history
of Ruffinus, who says of Theodosius the Emperor thus. Circuibat omnia
orationum loca etc. he went about to all places of prayer, and lay prostrate in
hearcloth, and craved help for himself, by the faithful intercession of
Saints. So he; declaring what means Theodosius used to obtain the admirable
victory which almighty God afterward gave him against Eugenius the Tyrant.
Ruffin. lib. 2. Hist. c. 33. Card. Apol. p. 10.
To this M. Andrews answers thus: Theodosius ibi sanctorum inuocator non est
etc. Andr. p. 4.5.. Locus.
Theodosius is not there an inuocatour of Saints, for it is one thing to crave
help of Saints, which is properly to invoke them, and another to crave help
of God by the intercession of Saints, So he, giving to understand that
Theodosius did not pray to Saints, but to God, to hear him by the intercession
of Saints, which he signifies afterward more plainly, saying. Rogare autem
Deum etc. To beseech God to favor us at the request of Saints, is not to pray
to them, Page 48. lin. 14.
or to invoke them but God; hoc autem nec praeterea quid fecit ibi
Theodosius, this, and nothing else did Theodosius there. Thus says M. Andrews,
who, as you see grants that Theodosius prayed at the tombs of Martyrs, yea
that he craved help of almighty God by the intercession of Saints, but not that
he prayed to the Saints themselves.

40. Nevertheless he may easily be co^uinced herein, if we consider what has
been already proved by the testimonies of those holy Fathers which have hitherto
been produced; by the which it is evident that the common custom of Christians
was at that time to pray to Saints, and Martyrs, at their tombs, and
monuments; and amongst the rest S. Chrysostom testifyeth expressly (as you
have heard) that the very Emperors themselves (of whom one was Theodosius)
used to come to the monuments of Martyrs, Supra chap. 6.
and there to pray to them, S. Chrysostom. ho. 20. in ep. ad Corin.
to the end that they might pray to God for them, and therefore I remit it to
the judgment of any indifferent man, whether it be credible that Theodosius
being to crave Gods favor, and assistance against the Tyrant Eugenius at the
tombs of Martyrs, and by their intercession, did not also particulerly pray to
them, as not only all Christians at that time, but also he, and other Emperors
were wont to do in their necessityes; is it likely that he would do it at other
times, and not then when he had most need?

41. This is so improbable that M. Andrews had need to bring some more pregnant
reasons to prove it then he does, especially seeing it was commonly reported,
as Zozomen witnesses, that Theodosius going to encounter Eugenius, Zozomen.
lib. 7. cap. 24.
passed by a Church which he had buylt in the honor of S. John Baptist, and
that (...), that is to say, he inuocated the Baptist to be his Assistant in the
battle? The Emperor Theodosius inuocated Saints, and namely S. John Baptist.
whereby it evidently appears, that Theodosius was held at that time to be an
inuocatour of Saints, and namely of S. John Baptist, and that the same was
generally approved in him, seeing it was reported amongst the people, and
related by Sozomen, as one special means which he used to obtain the famous
victory, that God gave him presently after against his enemy; and therefore
there is no doubt, but that when he craved help against the same enemy by the
intercession of Martyrs at their tombs (as Ruffinus testifyeth in the place
alleged by the Cardinal) he inuocated the Martyrs themselves; for I think no
reason can be given why he should pray particulerly to S. John Baptist, and not
also to those Martyrs, seeing that the self same occasion, and opportunity of
time, place, and necessity urged him to both alyke^

42. But perhaps you will imagine that some potent reasons moved M. Andrews to
think that Theodosius did not invoke the Martyrs, yea that it was not
lawful for him to do it. Andr. p. 45.. Locus.
But truly his reason is no other, but because, we neither are sure that the
Saints hear us, nor have any precept in Scripture to pray to them. Vtcumque,
This is to give checkmates to all the ancient Fathers at once, and was there
not one of all these great Clerks that understood the Scripture as well as this
Mynister^
says he, illi pro nobis intercedant etc. Howsoever the Saints pray for us,
yet except we may be sure that they hear us, yea and though the same were
manifest, yet except we have some commandment of God for it, they are not to be
inuocated by us, albeit they pray for us of their own accord. So he; opposing
this his frivolous conceit against the sacred authority, as well of the public
custom, and practice of the primitue Church, as of the belief of the ancient
Fathers, testifying, and approving the same; which might suffice to persuade
any reasonable man, both that Saints do hear us, and also that they may be
inuocated. For would the whole Church of God, even then when it was notably
furnished with learned, and holy pastors (which our adversaries cannot deny)
have practiced, or yet permitted the invocation of Saints, if either it were
unlawful, or else that the Saints do not hear us? ^. Tim. 3.
So should the spouse of Christ, Matthew. 28.
and the pillar of truth (whereto our Savior promised his own continual
assistance) so should she, I say have erred most perniciously, if it were not
lawful to pray to Saints; and foolishly, if they did not hear us; and
therefore if there were no other argument or proof thereof, but the practice
of the whole Church, as well in those days as ever since, yet the same might
suffice to convince M. Andrews, and his fellows in this point.

It is proved by manifest experience that Saints do hear our prayers, and help
us.
43. But what will he say to the undoubted experience that men have had in all
times, and ages, and yet have of the admirable, and most miraculous effects of
petitions made to Saints? do not the same most evidently prove both that the
Saints do hear us, and that God himself approves the use, and custom of
praying to them? I have showed this experience already in the age whereof we
now speak, by the testimonies of Saint Basil, See Chap. 6.
and Saint Gregory Nazianzen, witnessing the notable effects of prayers to the
40^ Martyrs, Saint Mammas, and the blessed Virgin Mary, whereto I might add
diverse others of the same age, and all other ages ensuing until this day; but
to avoid prolixity (and because I hold it needeles to multiply witnesses, in a
matter so manifest as this) I will content my self with only one evident
testimony of Theodoret, who lived in the same age that diverse of those other
fathers did, whom the Cardinal alleges; for he was Bishop of Sirus in S.
Augustines time before the third General Council, of Ephesus, though he was
younger then any of the rest, and lived many years after them, to wit until
the 4. General Counsel where he was present^ So as two of the 4. first
General Cou^cells were held in his days, and whiles he was Bishop.

44. This ancient Father writing against the Gentiles of his time, and proving
by many evident arguments that Christ is God, urges notably the great honor
generally exhibited in those days to Martyrs, in the sumptuous, and
magnificent Churches that were then dedicated unto them, Theodor^ de Graec.
affect. curan. lib. 8.
whereof he says thus: Neque vero ad haec per annum semel, aut bis etc. We do
not use to come to these only once, or twyce, or five times in the year, but
we do often celebrate festival days in them; we do often every day sing
hymns, and praises to the Lord of those Martyrs; and men that are in health do
pray to be conserved in it, and those that are sick do crave health; also
barren women and men do desire to have children, and those that are already
Fathers do seek to have their Children conserved: also trauaylers (...).
do crave the Martyrs to be their companions in their way, and guydes of their
journey; and those that are safely returned, give thanks, confessing the
benefit received, (...),
not coming to them, as to Gods, but praying to them as to divine men, and
beseeching them to be intercessors for them; and that they do obtain those
things which they piously, and faithfully crave, it is testified by the gifts,
that are offered by such as have made vows, which are manifest tokens that
they have obtained their desired health; for some do hang up figures (or
representations) of eyes, some of feet, some of hands, all made of silver, or
gould; and their Lord does gratfully accept what gift soever is given, and
disdayneth none, though never so small and mean, measuring them according to
the ability of the giver. Therefore those gifts being set forth to the public
view of all men, are most evident signs, and testimonies, that those which
give them are freed from their diseases, and have recovered their health. These
I say do show what is the virtue or power of the Martyrs, and the power, and
virtue of the Martyrs does declare, that he whom they have worshipped and
served, is true God. Thus says Theodoret.

The ancient custom of the primitive Church to hang up votiue representations
of hands, feet eyes, and such like in Churches, to testify the recovery of
bodily health by the intercession of Saints.
45. And can any man desire more clear, and manifest testimony, either that the
general custom of the Church was to pray to Saints in his time, or that God
approved it with miraculous effects? Yea, and that the same was held for a
special argument to prove that Christ was God? Wherein also it is to be
observed, that the use was in that age (above eleven hundred years ago) to
hang up votiue Images and representations of hands, feet, eyes, and such like,
to testify the miraculous recovery of bodily health by the intercession of
Saints, which therefore is no modern custom of these later ages (as our
adversaries falsely affirm it to be) but an ancient practice of the primitive
Church. Whereupon it also follows not only that prayer to Saints is most
lawful, and honorable to almighty God, and profitable to men, but also that
Saints hear the prayers that are made unto them, seeing that they obtain the
grant thereof, and give succor to their suppliants. What account then is to be
made of the cauilling, and trifling doubt that M. Andrews makes, whether they
hear us, or no? Especially seeing he groundeth the same upon no better reason,
then partly because some of the ancient Fathers were of opinion that the Saints
shall not have the perfect vision of God, before the day of Judgment (and
consequently that they do not see in him what is done on earth) and partly also
for that S. Augustine teaches, Andr. p. 40. lin. 5.
that the dead are not present at the affairs of men. Whereupon he concludes;
Quod sinec ipsi intersint (vt Augustinus) etc. if the Saints are neither
present here themselves, A very simple discourse of M. Andrews.
as Augustine affirms, neither yet do see any thing in the glass (he means
the Essence of God) as almost all the other Fathers affirm, they cannot know
our desires; for how should they know them, seeing that they neither can see
things in the glass, nor yet in themselves. So he; arguing more simply then I
could have imagined of so great a Doctor, if I had not seen it.

46. For put the case that all this which he says, How Saints may understand
and know our prayers and actions.
were infallibly true (I mean that the Saints neither have as yet the full
vision of God, neither are at any time present here amongst men) is there no
otherway for them to know our actions, or understand our petitio^s? how did
Elizaeus the Prophet know that his servant Giezi took gifts of Naman Syrus,
when nevertheless he neither had the vision of God, 4. Reg. c. 5.
nor yet was present with Giezi when he received the gifts? And how do Prophets
understand things to come, or done in remote places? Will M. Andrews say, that
they have no knowledge thereof, because they neither see God, nor are present
at the actions, nor in the places whereof they speak? This I think he will be
ashamed to say; and therefore he must needs confess that his inference is very
vain, and idle, when he argues that the Saints do not understand our prayers,
because they do not see God, nor are present with us. And this he might have
learned of S. Augustine, even in that place which he cyteth, to prove that the
dead are not present at our affairs.

47. For even there (I mean in his book de cura pro mortuis) he declares, S.
Aug. l. de cura pro mort. c. 12.
that albeit the dead do not naturally know what passes in earth, neither are
ordinarily conversant with us, yet they may know our actions, Ibid. ca. 15. See
Chap. 9. nu. 42.43. and 44. S. Aug. lib. 2. de Ciuit. Dei cap. 9.
as well by the relation of Angels, as by divine revelation, yea, and that they
may be present with us, and help us per diuinam potentiam, by divine power, as
shall further appear in the ninth Chapter, where I shall have somewhat more to
say to M. Andrews concerning his gross, and shameful abuse both of the
Cardinal, Lact. li. 7. cap. 21.
and S. Augustine touching this place. Therefore whereas he also alleges S.
Augustine, Lactantius, and S. Bernard to prove that the souls of the just are
reserved in certain receptacles, Bern. ser. 3. de omnib. Sanct.
and secret places, where they have not the perfect vision of God until the
day of judgment, I shall not need to say any thing thereto, as well because it
would avail him nothing, as you see, though S. Augustine and all the rest of
the Fathers had been of that opinion, seeing that even there (I mean in those
receptacles) the Saints might know our prayers by Ang^es, or by divine
revelation, according to S. Augustines doctrine, as also because it is evident,
that not only S. Augustine, but also all the Fathers both Greek and Latin
(except 3. to wit, Tertullian, Lactantius, and Victorinus) do teach, that the
Saints do already enjoy the vision of God, though not in that perfection, and
consummation of their beatitude, which they shall have after the resurection,
and glorification of the bodies, as M. Andrews may see, if it please him in the
controversy of Cardinal Bellarmine, who alleges to this purpose 36. Fathers
of the Greek, Bellar. de Sanct Fea^it lib. 1. c. 4. and 5. Ibid. cap. 1.
and Latin Church, and answers particulerly those very places, which M.
Andrews quoteth in his margent, and all other places and authorityes, which are
commonly objected against our Catholyke doctrine in this point. So as, in fine
M. Andrews proves nothing at all against us by this objection.

48. And whereas he says also by the way that the Saints ought not to be
inuocated, albeit they could hear us, because there is no precept of it, I
forbear to give any full satisfaction to that scruple in this place, because
he does not here yield any reason, or produce any authority to prove, that
nothing is to be done wihout an express precept, though in another place he
alleges a text of Scripture to that end, whereof I shall have further
occasion to speak after a while, and therefore I remit the full answer
thereof until then, and only in the mean time I will say to him with S.
Augustine, S. Aug. To. 2. ^p. 86.
that in his rebus de quibus nihil certi statuit Scriptura etc. In these things
whereof there is no certain precept, or determination in Scripture, the
custom of Gods people, or the ordinances of our forefathers are to be held for
a law.

49. So he; Idem. ep. 118.
who also in another place speaking of certain traditions of the Church,
says: Si quid horum tota p^r orbem frequentat Ecclesia etc. if the whole
Church throughout the world do frequent, The force and validity of
Ecclesiastical customs.
or use any of these things, it is a most insolent madness to dispute whether it
be to be done, or no. Thus says S. Augustine, co^cluding M. Andrews to be a
most insolent mad man, who calls in question a general custom of the
Church: S. Hiero. contra Lucifer. c^. 4^
to which purpose S. Hierome also says to the Luciferians, that albeit there
were no authority of Scripture for the matter in question betwyxt them, yet,
totius orbis in hanc partem consensus instar praecepti obtineret, the consent
of the whole world in this behalf were as much as a precept. And the like
says Tertullian; Hanc si nulla, says he, Tertul. de corona. mil. cap. 3.
Scriptura determinauit etc. if no Scripture has determined this, yet truly
custom, which without doubt, has flowed from tradition, has corroborated,
and strengthened it.

50. To these Fathers I might add many more to the same purpose, if it were
needful, but these may suffice for the present, to show that M. Andrews does
very idly exact a precept for prayer to Saints, when it is evident by the
testimony of all the Fathers before cyted, that the same was generally
practiced in the Church in their time, no less then it is at this present:
whereupon I also conclude concerning the fact of Theodosius the Emperor, See
supra nu. 41. Sozom. bist. lib. 7. cap. 24. S. Chryso. ho. 26. in ep. ad
Corinth.
that it cannot be with reason denied, but that when he lay prostrate before
the tombs of the Martyrs, craving help against Eugenius the Tyrant by their
intercession, he prayed also to them, and not only to God, especially
considering the testimonies produced by me before out of Sozomen concerning his
particular invocation of S. John Baptist upon the same occasion, and out of S.
Chrysostom, testifying the Emperors custom in those days to pray to the
Martyrs at their monuments; wherein also, it may well be presumed, that S.
Chrysostom had a special relation even to that fact of Theodosius whereof we
now treat, because the same was then very famous when he wrote his co^mentary
upon S. Paul's Epistles, whence this testimony is taken; for he wrote the same,
while he was Bishop, as it may appear by the time of his election, and of a
vision of S. Paul who was seen to assist him whiles he interpreted those
Epistles, See Baron. an. ^97. in fine. and in ^nno 407.
being then Bishop, which was but a few years after the overthrow of Eugenius,
and the death of Theodosius. Thus much for the testimony of Ruffinus.

51. Next after this follows a place of S. Paulinus, S. Paulinus ep. 12. ad
Sever. Card. Apol^ p. ^7 Andr. p. 4^. Postquam.
inuocating S. Clarus in these words: Haec peccatorum etc. Receive these
prayers of sinners, who do beseech thee to be mindful of Paulinus, and
Therasia. And now because Paulinus wrote in verse, M. Andrews will have it to
be understood that he did but play, or dally like a Poet. The testimony of S.
Paulin for the invocation of Saints defended against M. Andrews.
But to this I answer, that if S. Paulinus was a Poet, he was a Christian, yea
a holy Poet, and therefore would not use any Poetical license to the
derogation of the Christian faith, or Religion, or that might any way seem
injurious to Christ (as M. Andrews, and his fellows do account the invocation
of Saints to be:) besides that, it is manifest that he did no otherwise in
verse, then the other Fathers before mentioned did in prose, See before nu. 6.
and was warranted, as you have seen by the custom, and practice of the whole
Church at that time: S. Aug. ser. 17. d^ verb. Apostol. pa. 18.
so that this is as vain an evasion, and as improbable as any of the former.

52. Finally he concludes his censure with S. Augustine, whom the Cardinal
alleges thus: Habet Ecclesiastica disciplina etc. M. Andrews his answer to a
place of S. Augustine examined and confuted.
The Ecclesiastical discipline has that which the faithful know, who make
mention of Martyrs at the Altar of God, not to pray for them there, as for
others that are dead, for it is an injury to pray for a Martyr, to whose
prayers we ought to be recommended: Thus says S. Augustine. To this M.
Andrews answers, that the Cardinal shall never be able to make Augustine on
his side, Andr. p. 46.. At. A most vain and ridiculous brag of M. Andrews.
or not to be for the Protestants, and that whatsoever is cyted ex aliquo
riuulo Augustini, out of some little book of Augustine; the same is dried up
with one only sentence, as with the sun: and this sentence, he says, is in
opere suo palmari, in his principal work de Ciuitate Dei. Well then let us
see the splendor of this radiant sentence, and try what heat or force it has
to dry up the other testimonies cyted out of S. Augustine for prayer to Saints.

S Aug. de ciuit. Dei l. 22^ ca. 10.
53. The words which M. Andrews alleges out of S. Augustine are these: Ad
quod Sacrificium Martyrs etc. At which Sacrifyce ( S. Augustine means the
Sacrifice of the Mass) the Martyrs are named in their place, and order, as the
men of God (who have overcome the world in the confession of him) but yet they
are not inuocated by the Priest which sacrifices. Thus far M. Andrews cyteth
S. Augutine, and then adds: Non inuocantur Martyrs etc. Augustine has these
very words, the Martyrs are not inuocated by the Priest; and why less by the
Priest, then by the people? And that which is not lawful in Sacrifice, why is
it lawful out of Sacrifice? And that which is not to be done at Mass, A
childish discourse of M. Andrews co^tayning three foolish demands.
why may it be done at Mattins? And is there any force in the Sacrifice or
Altar to make that unlawful, which is otherwise lawful? Thus M. Andrews
discourses to prove that S. Augustine is not ours, but wholly his in this
controversy.

54. Thereof let us see how well he has performed it, and for as much as he
insisteth most upon the word inuocantur, because S. Augustine says, Touching
the invocation which S. Augustine says is due to God alone
that the Martyrs are not inuocated by the Priest, it is specially to be
considered in what sense S. Augustine uses that word in this place; for seeing
that it is applied sometimes to God alone, and sometimes to creatures (as I
have showed before, as well out of the holy Scripture, as by the testimony of
S. Augustine himself) it is evident, Chap. 6. nu. 2. and seq.
that if it be used here in the former sense only (I mean for an invocation of
God including a divine honor) it does no way constradict the invocation of
Saints in our sense, signifying only a request of their help by their prayers,
which, as I have showed, M. Andrews himself acknowledges to be the proper
signification of inuocare. Ibid.
It is therefore to be understood that S. Augustine in this place uses it only
for an invocation by Sacrifice, which is so proper to God alone, that it cannot
be applied to Saints, or any pure creature.

55. This will be most manifest, The true sense of S. Augustin^ declared.
if we consider the circumstances of the text, and the drift of S. Augustine,
who meaning to show that the honor which we Christians do to Martyrs,
redoundeth specially to God, signifies, that albeit God does work great
miracles by them, yet we do not hold them for Gods, neither buyld temples to
them as to Gods, nor erect Altars to Sacrifice to them; sed vni Deo, and
Martyrum, and nostro Sacrificium immolamus, but we offer Sacrifice to one God,
who is as well the God of the Martyrs, as ours; at which Sacrifice (says he)
they are named as the servants of God, non tamen a Sacerdote qui sacrificat
inuocantur, yet they are not inuocated by the Priest which sacrifices; and
then to show evidently that he includes the oblation of Sacrifice in the
invocation whereof he speaks, he adds presently: Deo quippe non ipsis
sacrificat etc. for he sacrifices to God, and not to them, though he
sacrifices in the honor of them, The invocation whereof S. Augustine speaks
is proper^ to Priestly function, and not to be used but in Sacrifice.
because he is Gods Priest, and not theirs. Thus says S. Augustine, immediately
after the word inuocantur.

56. Whereby he gives to understand that the invocation whereof he speaks is
proper to Priestly function, and therefore to be exhibited by the Priest to God
only (whole Priest he is) and not to the Martyrs; as who would say, because the
Priest is Gods Priest, and ought to sacrifice to God alone, therefore he only
names the Martyrs in his Sacrifice, and does not invoke them, that is to
say, he does not invoke them with Sacrifice, which is proper to the office,
or function of a Priest, S. Augustine does no way impugn the invocation of
Saints in the place alleged by M. Andrews.
for otherwise (I mean if S. Augustine did not take invocation in this place
for a Priestly, or Sacrificall action) his reason why the Priest does not
invoke the Martyrs (to wit, because he is the Priest of God, and sacrifices
to him alone) were to no purpose; which no doubt M. Andrews saw well enough,
and therefore he ended his citation at inuoca^tur, without adding that which
immediately follows, and shows what S. Augustine means there by invocation.

57. Now then what wonder it is that S. Augustine says, that Martyrs are not
to be inuocated in this manner, that is to say, with Sacrifice which is offered
to God alone? Does any man doubt of it? Or does it any way impugn the
invocation of Saints by prayer? how idle then are M. Andrews his questions, to
wit, why the Priest may not invoke Martyrs, as well as the people may? and
why not at Mass, as well as at Mattins? and whether there be any force in the
Sacrifice or Altar, M. Andrews does seem to confound the Priest with the
people Mass with Mattins, and the Altar with every other place.
to make that unlawful which otherwise is lawful? whereby he seems to
confound the Priest with the people, Mass with Mattins, and the Altar with
every other place, supposing that whatsoever is prohibited to the Priest, is
also forbidden to the people, and what cannot be done at Mass, is not to be
done at Mattins: and finally that whatsoever is unlawful at the Altar, is
lawful no where else, which is most absurd, seeing that many things are
lawful, or unlawful according to the different state, and quality of persons,
matters, time, and place.

58. For who knows not that to invoke God with Sacrifice, is the proper
function of the Priest, and not of the people, and that the same is done at
Mass, and not at Mattins, and no where else but at the Altar, yea and that the
Priest may highly offend God in his Sacrifice, that is to say at Mass, or at
the Altar, when the people offend no way at all: and therefore to satisfy M.
Andrews his three demands according to S. Augustines meaning in this place, he
is to understand that the Priest may invoke God with Sacrifice, Three foolish
demands of M. Andrews answered, according to S Augustins meaning.
and the people cannot, that the same is to be done at Mass, and not at
Mattins, and that such invocation is not lawfully done any where, but at the
Altar, and that it is so due to God alone, that it can never be applied to
Saints, either by people, or Priest, at Mattins, or Mass, at the Altar, or yet
elsewhere; and so shall he understand that the place which he alleges makes
nothing against prayer to Saints, and that his vain demands have served to no
other purpose but to show his ignorance and folly.

59. This will yet further appear by his conclusion, wherein he takes upon
him to expound the other place of S. Augustine, which you have heard cyted by
the Cardinal, to wit, Iniuria est etc. It is injury to pray for a Martyr, to
whose prayers we ought to be recommended: whereto M. Andrews having opposed, M.
Andrews his extrauagant and foolish gloss, upon S Augustins place objected by
the Cardinal.
and vaynely urged this other place in such sort, as you have heard, answers
in conclusion thus: Quare apud illum etc. Wherefore, that we should be
recomended to the prayers of Martyrs, is not to invoke them; but to wish to
be recommended to the intercession of Christ the head, and of all his mystical
body, and we do call upon Christ, that he may hear us, and not upon the Saints
that they may hear us, but this we crave of God, that they may be heard for us
of him, and with him. Thus does M. Andrews gloss that text.

60. So as to be recommended to the prayer of a Martyr, is to wish to be
recommended to the intercession of Christ, and of all his mistycall body; as if
a man should say, that for a man to be recommended to the prayers of M.
Andrews, is not to crave the help of his prayers in particular, but to wish
that the Kings Majesty (being head of the English Church) and all English
Protestants, may pray for him. For truly he may say the one as well as the
other, especially seeing that he gives no reason at all of this his
extrauagant interpretation, but relyeth wholly upon his own perverse, and false
understanding of the other place of S. Augustine, which he will needs suppose
to exclude all invocation of Saints, though, as you have seen, it does not
concern the same any way at all.

61. But to put the matter out of doubt what S. Augustine meant in this place,
when he said, that we ought to be recommended to the prayer of the Martyr, we
are to consider what his express doctrine is else where concerning the same
point, namely in his Treatise de cura pro mortuis, of the care to be had of the
dead, which albeit M. Andrews will not (as I think) allow for opus palmare, S.
Augustines principal work (because he has already given that title to the
books de Ciuitate Dei) yet it cannot be denied to be S. Augustines, S.
Augustines express doctrine concerning the invocation of Saints.
who does himself acknowledge it for such in his Retractions. This learned
holy Father treating of the good that the dead may receive by the care of their
friends to bury their bodies near to the monuments of Saints, says thus:

62. Sed cum talia viuorum solatia requi^unt^r etc. But when such comforts of
the living are sought, S. Aug. in lib. de cura pro. mort. cap. 4.
whereby they may show their pious mind or affection toward their friends, I
do not see what help the dead may receive thereby, but only this, that whiles
the living do remember where the bodies of their friends are laid, e^sd^m
illos ta^quam paironis susc^ptos, apud Dominum adiuuandos commendent, they may
by prayer recommend them to the same Saints, as to their patrons, who have
received them into their protection to be helped with Almighty God, which truly
they might also do, although they could not bury them in such places. So he.
And a little after he says further to the same purpose: Cum it aque recolit
animus etc. Therefore when the mind of a man remembers where his friends body
is buried, and some place also which is venerable by the name of some Martyr
occurreth to his remembrance, eidem Martyri animam dilectam commendat
recordantis, and precantis affectus; the affection of him that remembers it
and prays, does recommend the soul of his friend, to the same Martyr. Thus
says S. Augustine, teaching expressly not only prayer to Saints, but also
prayer for the dead (which I wish M. Andrews to note by the way) as also that
the prayer whereof S. Augustine speaks here, cannot be said to be made
generally to Christ, and to all his mystical body (according to M. Andrews his
former gloss) but particulerly eisdem Sanctis tamquam patronis, to the same
Saints, as to their patrons, and eidem Martyri, to the same Martyr, by whose
tomb the bodies of the dead are buried.

63. But perhaps M. Andrews will say that this is taken ex aliquo riuulo
Augustini, out of some little brook of Augustine, and not ex opere suo palmari,
out of his principal work de Ciuitate Dei. Well then, let us see whether we
can find any thing there to this purpose. I doubt not but that M. Andrews (who
highly esteems that most excellent work, and therefore seems to have read
it diligently) will easily call to mind what a number of notable, A notable
miracle recounted by S. Augustine.
and manifest miracles S. Augustine relates there, as known to himself to
have been done at the memoryes of S. Steven and diverse other Martyrs, and that
amongst the rest he recounteth one which happened to an honest poor old man of
Hippo, S. Aug. de ciuit. Dei lib. 22. c. 8.
called Florentius, who having lost his cloak, and not having money wherewith
to buy another, went to the monument of the Twenty Martyrs (which was there
very famous) and clara voce, says he, vt vestiretur orauit, prayed with a loud
voice, that he might have wherewith to cloth himself.

64. Whereupon certain scoffing young men, for (so S. Augustine calls them)
being by chance present, and having heard him, followed him at his departure,
and mocked him, quasi a Martyribus quinquagenos folles, vnde vestimentum
emeret, petiuisset, as though he had demanded of the Martyrs fifty pieces of
money (called folles) wherewith he might buy him clothes. But he not regarding
them went toward the sea side, and there saw a great fish panting upon the
shore, which, with their help (who had followed him thither) he took, and sold
for three hundred folles to a Christian Cook called C^rt^sus (declaring unto
him all that had happened) who opening the fish, found in his belly a ring of
gold, and being moved partly with commiseration, and partly with scruple, gave
it also to the poor man, saying unto him, Ecce quomodo viginti Martyrs te
vestierunt: Behold how the 20. Martyrs have clothed thee. Thus much relates S.
Augustine concerning this matter.

65. Whereby it evidently appears, An inference upon the miracle related by
S. Augustine.
first, that this poor man prayed not only at the monument of those Martyrs,
but also to the Martyrs themselves, craving of them relief of his necessity;
for there upon the young men, who heard his prayer, took occasion to charge him
to have craved 50. folles of the Martyrs, which they would not have done if
they had not heard him pray unto the Martyrs; and thereto also alluded the
Cook, who having heard the story related, and understood thereby, to whom,
and for what he had prayed, said unto him, Behold how the Martyrs have clothed
thee, as who would say, the Martyrs of whom thou crauedst to be clothed, have
heard thy prayer, and given thee wherewith to cloth thee.

66. Secondly it appears that it was the custom at that time to invoke
Saints particulerly, and that God approved it by this miraculous effect. And if
M. Andrews do say, that if it had been usual, these young men who heard him,
would not have mocked him for doing it, he is to understand, that they did not
mock him for calling upon the Martyrs, but because his request seemed to them
extrauagant, quasi qui a Martyribus quinquagenos folles petiuisset, as though
he had demanded 50. folles to buy him clothes. Besides that, Saint Augustine so
much condemned them for deryding him, that he calls them adolescentes
irrisores, scoffing young men, yea and God so disposed for their confusion, that
they themselves were witnesses of the miraculous event, and helped him to take
the fish which he sold for 300. folles, besides the ring that was found in his
belly.

97. Thirdly it is clear, that S. Augustine highly approved the invocation of
the 20. Martyrs, seeing that he recou^teth this together with many other
miracles, to prove the truth of the Christian faith, saying in the end for the
conclusion of the whole: Cui nisi huic fidei attesta^tur ista miracula etc. To
what other faith do these miracles give testimony^ but to this, whereby Christ
is preached to have ascended into heaven with his flesh? for these Martyrs,
were Martyrs (that is to say witnesses) of this faith etc. For in this faith
they dyed, who can obtain these things of God, for whose name they were
slain. So he.

68. Now then, that which I wish thee, good Reader, to note in all this
discourse, The conclusion of this Chapter, touching the vanity of M. Andrews
and the conformity of S. Augustine with the other Fathers alleged by the
Cardinal for prayer to Saints.
is, how well M. Andrews has performed his vaunt, which was that he would with
one only sentence, as with the sun, dry up, whatsoever could be objected out
of any little brook of Augustine, when nevertheless his hot sunny sentence has
proved no warmer, nor brighter then the moon in the wayne, and change, which
has neither heat nor light, for so you see it has fallen out with the place
cyted by him out of S. Augustine, which proves nothing at all for his purpose,
whereas the other testimonies alleged partly by the Cardinal, and partly by
me, are (as you have also seen) most evident, and pregnant, to prove the
invocation of Saints, which M. Andrews has hitherto impugned.

69. If then we consider the conformity of S. Augustine in this point withal
the other Fathers, whose places have been before produced to wit S. Basil,
Eusebius, S. Chrysostom, S. Ephrem, S. Maximus, S. Gregory Nazianzen, S.
Gregory Nyssen, S. Ambrose, S. Hierome, Ruffinus, S. Paulinus, and Theodoret, I
doubt not but that their consent, and uniform testimony may suffice in the
opinion of any reasonable man, to show that the universal custom, practice,
and faith of the Church in their age, was the same that now is concerning the
Invocation of Saints, notwithstanding all the wrangling, trifling, shifts,
euasions, collusions, and frauds, which you see M. Andrews has used to obscure
the evident, and manifest verity thereof: so as I might here very well end
this matter, were it not that M. Andrews in the preamble to his censure upon
the places of the Fathers, makes some objections, not hitherto answered by me,
which by all likelihood not only he, but also those that have read him, will
expect should be some way satisfied, and therefore I mean to examine the
validity thereof, with what breuity I conveniently may.

CERTAIN OBJECTIONS OF M. ANDREWS AGAINST PRAYERS TO SAINTS ARE ANSWERED: AND
by the way, an Imposture of the pretended Bishops and Clergy of the Province of
Canterbury in a Synodicall Canon of theirs is discovered. AND Finally, M.
Andrews is proved to have notably wrangled, iuggled, and tryfled throughout
this whole Controversy.
CHAP. VIII.
AMONGST diverse frivolous objections there is one especially, which, as it
seems, he makes his Achilles, and holds for invincible, and therefore he
tryumpheth not a little, before he produces it, Andr. p. 39.. Neque.
saying, that he will not object to the Cardinal some acclamation, or vow
proceeding from some man's impetuous or violet affection, M. Andrews confidence
in the Canon of the Counsel of Laodicea.
but a Canon, and a statute of a Council held at Laodicea about the same time,
and published by the uniform consent of the Fathers, quod leges, says he, bis
a Thedoret relatum etc. which ( Statute) thou shall read twice related by
Theodoret in his Commentary upon the 2. and 3. Chapter to the Colossenses. They
do there forbid in express words, ne quis precetur Angelos, that no man pray
to Angels (and the reason touching Saints is all one) because some men did then
give counsel, and thought it necessary to procure the favor of God by
Angels. Thus says M. Andrews, using no less fraud then he is wont, as well
touching Theodoret, as the Canon of the Council of Laodicea.

2. And first for Theodoret, Theodoret notably abused by M Andrews.
he abuses him notably, alleging some part of his words, and leaving out that
which would clearly explicate the whole matter, and Theodorets meaning, who
interpreting the place of S. Paul to the Colossenses ( Nemo vos seducat, volens
in humilitate and religione Angelorum, Coloss. 2.
let no man seduce you, willing in the humility, and religion of Angels)
declares that certain heretykes in Phrygia and Pisidia defending the use of
the old law, Theodoret. in c. ^. ep ad Coloss^n.
induced men to the worship of Angels; and after a while lays down the
reason, which they used to that end, saying; Illi ergo consulebant etc.
therefore they counseled this under pretense of humility, saying that men
cannot see, nor comprehend Almighty God, nor come unto him, and that they must
procure to themselves Gods favor by Angels. Thus says Theodoret, whereof you
see M. Andrews lays down only the last words, to wit, putabant oportere
sibi diuinam beneuolentiam conciliare etc. They thought they must procure to
themselves the divine favor by Angels; whereas the words immediately going
before, which he leaves out, gave the reason of this their error, signifying
that they thought it necessary to procure Gods favor by Angels, because men
could not come to him otherwise, which is far from the conceit of any
Catholyke, or Christian man, seeing that this opinion denies that we may come
to God by Christ, and makes Angels the only mediators betwyxt God and us,
which is in effect to deny, and destroy the Christian faith.

3. And therefore no marvel if Saint Paul, the Council of Laodicea, and
Theodoret forbad such prayer to Angels; but the truth is that the Canon which
Theodoret mentions forbids only to commit Idolatry to Angels, and not
simply to pray to them, as I will make it manifest, when I shall have first
declared how M. Andrews has abused the Council of Laodicea. M. Andrews
abuses the Counsel of Laodicea.
Therefore having said that the Canon of that Council is twyce related by
Theodoret in his Comment upon the second, and third to the Colossenses, he
adds; Prohibent ibi disertis verbis, ne quis precetur Angelos; the Fathers of
that Council do there forbid in express words, Andr. p. 39.. Neque.
that no man pray to Angels. So he. Whereby the Reader must needs imagine not
only that the Cano^ of the Council was fully laid down by Theodoret, but also
that the same was to no other effect, The Counsel of Laodicea forbids
Idolatry to Angels and not prayer ^o them.
but only to ordain that no man should pray to Angels; whereas Theodoret does
not allege any one word of the Canon, but touches only the effect of it in
some sort and in very general terms, for the Canon it self makes no
mention at all of prayer, but forbids only an Idolatrous worship of Angels;
which also Theodoret shows to be his own meaning, though he speak only of
prayer to Angels, as it is evident both by the circumstances of the place laid
down by me before, and left out by M. Andrews, and also more plainly
afterward when he speaks of the said Council, and Canon the second time, in
one of the two places which M. Andrews himself quoteth, to wit, upon the third
Chapter to the Colossenses, where he says thus.

4. Quod enim illi Angelos iubebant adorare etc. For because those Phrygians
commanded men to adore Angels, he (to wit S. Paul) commanded the contrary,
Theodor^t. in 3. Coloss.
that they should adorn both their words, and deeds with the remembrance of
Christ our Lord. Theodoret his meaning clearly explicated by his own words.
Utter forth (says the Apostle) your thanks giving to God the Father by him,
and not by Angels. And the Synod of Laodicea following this law, and seeking to
remedy the old disease, decreed, that men should not pray to Angels, and leave
our Lord Jesus Christ. Thus says Theodoret: whereby he shows that those
Phrygian Idolatours made a plain oppositio^ of Angels to Christ, teaching and
co^ma^ding an adoration of Angels instead of Christ, and therefore he says
that the Apostle commanded the contrary to them, to wit, that we should praise
God by Christ, and not by Angels; whereby it appears that their contrary
doctrine was to praise God by Angels, and not by Christ; which he also
confirms saying, Theodoret forbids such prayer to Angels as excludes the
mediation of Christ.
that the Council of Laodicea made the like Decree against the same error,
ordayning that none should pray to Angels, and leave Christ. So as by all this
it is manifest, that according to Theodoret, the adoration, and prayer to
Angels forbidden by S. Paul, and the Council, was such as excluded the
mediation of Christ for us, and made the Angels our only mediators whereof
nevertheless you do not see so much as any insinuation, or ynkling in M.
Andrews, whereby it is evident, that he has abused both the Council, and
Theodoret, and his Reader most of all.

5. This will appear more clearly by the express words of the Canon whereof
Theodoret speaks, which are these: Quod non oporteat Christianos relicta Dei
Ecclesia obire etc. Council. Laodic. cap. 35.
That Christians ought not to forsake the Church of God, and to go away, and
to make Congregations of abominable Idolatry to Angels, which is forbidden, and
therefore whosoever shallbe found, The meaning of the Canon of the Counsel of
Laodicea.
huic occultae Idololatriae vacans, exercising this hidden, or secret Idolatry,
be he accursed, for that he has forsaken our Lord Jesus Christ, and gone to
Idols. Thus says the Canon, showing evidently, that the adoration, and prayer
to Angels, which Theodoret says was forbidden by the Canon, What kind of
Idolatry was done to Angels by the Phrygians
was some abominable Idolatry committed to Angels in certain secret
Congregations, which those Phrygians made in corners, forsaking the Church of
God, and Christ himself. And this I say is evident by the Canon; for no man I
think can be so simple to imagine that all this could be said, or meant of
prayer to Angels, in such sort as we Catholykes use the same, that is to crave
the assistance of their prayers to Christ for us, or to God by the merits, and
mediation of Christ.

6. For if this were the abominable Idolatry whereof the Council speaks,
then should the Apostle have been an abominable Idolatour, when he desired the
Romans, Corinthians, Thessalonians, and others to pray for him: Romans 15.
and so should we in like manner when we desire one another prayers, 1. Cor. 1.
for no sufficient, These. 3.
Colos. 4.
or probable reason can be given why it should be Idolatry to pray to Angels,
Iosue. 5.
and no Idolatry to crave the prayers of men, Dan. 10.
especially seeing that we read in express Scripture, Judith. 13.
that Jacob blessing the children of Act. 12.
Joseph, Matthew. 18.
did invoke an Angel, saying; Angelus qui cruit me etc. the Angel which has
delivered me from all 1. Cor. 11.
evils, S. Dionys. Areop. eccles. Hier. c. 9. S. Justin. Mart. quaest. 30.
Clemens Alexand. li. 5. strom. Origin ho. 8. in Genesis and alibipassim. S. Basil.
ho. in Psalm. 33. S. Chrysostom. ho. 3. ad c. 1. ad Colos. Theodor. ad cap. 10.
Daniel. and in Genes. quaes. 3. S. Hilar. ad Psalm. 129. and Ca. 18. in Mat. S.
Hi^ron. ad ca. 66. Esai. S. Ambros. l. de viduis. S. Aug. in Soliloquij^ cap.
27.
bless these children. And Iosue fell down prostrate before an Angel, and
called him Dominum suum, his Lord. Besides that the Apostle, yea our Savior
himself testifyeth, not only the continual presence of Angels amongst us, but
also the assistance, and help that we receive by them: in so much that the
ancient Fathers (and amongst the rest Theodoret himself) do thereupon teach
expressly that we have every one of us from our nativity a proper Angel, who
protecteth, and defends us, and prays to God for us.

7. Whereupon it must needs follow that seeing the Angels do not only know our
actions much better then men, and hear our prayers no less then they, but
also do continually assist us as well with their prayers, as otherwise; it
follows, I say, that we may lawfully crave their assistance, yea much more
then of men, for that they being ordained by God to help us, are no less
willing, and far more potent, and able to do it then men are; and therefore
truly I may well conclude, that neither the Council of Laodicea, nor yet
Theodoret could be so absurd as M. Andrews would make them, to think it
Idolatry to pray to Angels, when they know it to be lawful to pray to men. And
this I say the rather of Theodoret, because he teaching expressly (as I
signified before) that Angels have the protection of men, does declare withal,
that men are subject imperio Angelorum, Theodor. in G^nes. quaest. ^^
to the government, and command of Angels, and that they pray for us, whereby
he teaches consequently that men owe unto them, not only love, and gratitude
as to their Guardians, and Protectors, but also the duty of reverence, and
supplication, as to their superiors, commanders, governors, and intercessours
for them.

M. Andrews must reform his understanding of Theodoret.
8. So as M. Andrews may see that he has just cause to reform his
understanding of that place of Theodoret, and acknowledge that it is not
likely, that Theodoret would thereby contradict his own doctrine elsewhere, but
rather that he, I mean M. Andrews, has notably abused both the Council and
Theodoret; the Council, in concealing, and dissembling the whole substance of
the Canon, which he could not but know; and Theodoret in leaving out that which
was most necessary for the explication of his meaning in both those places
which he cyteth; and finally that he has also abused them both, in making them
to impugn, and forbid all prayer to Angels, though as intercessours to Christ
for us: whereas they only forbid Idolatry to Angels, with prayer to them, as to
the only mediators betwixt God and us, whereby Christ's mediation for us is
wholly excluded, to the utter subversion, and overthrow of our Christian faith.

The place of S. Paul forbidding the religion of Angels explicated.
9. And to the end that all this may be yet more clear, we are to consider that
religio Angelorum, the religion, or superstitious worship of Angels, which S.
Paul reprehended in the Epistle to the Colossenses, that Theodoret expounds,
was no other but some such Magical, or Idolatrous worship exhibited to Angels
as the disciples of Simon Magus used (whereof Tertul. de praesor. cap. 23. in
fin^.
Tertullian says: Simonianae magiae disciplina Angelis seruiens etc. the
discipline of Simons magic serving Angels, was also held to be Idolatry) or
some such other as might spring from the blasphemous heresy of Irae^^^^ lib.
1. c. 25. Tertul. de praescrip. cap. 4^. S. Epipha^ haer. 28.
Cerinthus, who so much abused Christ, and exalted Angels, that he held Christ
to be but pure man, and the son of Joseph, and that Angels made the world,
and gave the law to the Jews, yea that an Angel was the God of the Jews; or
finally of some such other heretykes, as either attributed divinity to Angels,
or made them mediators for man in such sort, as those Phrygian heretykes did,
S. Chryso. in 2. ad (...)
of whom Theodoret speaks, which was to exclude the mediation of Christ, as
it appears evidently by that which the Apostle adds saying: and non tenens
Caput ex quo etc. and not holding the head whereof the whole body is by joints,
and bands compacted etc. signifying that he spoke of such as forsook the head,
to wit Christ, and made Angels the chief mediators of their reconciliation to
God.

10. Therefore S. Chrysostom says upon that place of S. Paul: Sunt nonnulli
etc. there are some which do say that we must not come to God the Father, and
be reconciled to him by Christ, but by Angels: and so does also Oecumenius, and
Theophilactus expound the same place. And the author of the Commentary upon S.
Paul's Epistles amongst the works of S. Ambrose, Oecum. Theoph. in hunc locum.
says that the Apostle taxed there such as adored the stars quas, says he
Angelos vocat, he calls Angels; and finally to omit others, S. Hierome, S.
Hieron. q. 10. ad Algasia^ Haymo in ep. ad Colos. cap. 2.
and Haymo, do understand that the Apostle speaks of such as used to offer
Sacrifice to Angels; whereupon also the Council of Laodicea might have just
occasion to make their decree against some such abominable Idolatry done
secretly to Angels in their days.

11. So as it is evident by all this, that neither the Apostle in his Epistle
to (the Col^ss^nses^ The conclusion (...) M. Andrews his objection out of
Theodoret.
no^ The^doret, in his Commentary upon the same) nor then Galnon of the
Laodicean Council mentioned by Theodoret, and objected by M. Andrews, do any
way impugn the custom of the Catholyke Church in praying to Angels; as
mediators to Christ for ^s. And to conclude concerning Theodoret is whereas M.
Andrews would by, this place make the world belieu^ that he did not approve
prayer to Saynts^ See before chap. 7. (...) 44.
I remit thee, good Reader, to that most perspicuous, and preg^ant^ testimony,
which I have before produced (...) of (...) to prove the public practiced and
custom of the whole Church to pray to Saints in his time, together with the
admirable effects, and miraculous benefits^ that devout people received
thereby, and his own evident and clear approbation thereof, seeing that he
urges it, to the confusion of the Paynims infer^ing thereupon a manifess
argument of Christ's divinity besides, that in his historia religiosa (wherein
writing the lives of diverse religious persons) he craves in the end of every
particular Saints life, Another objection of M. An^drews answered touching the
question whether Saints do hear us, and how they see or know our actions.
Gods favor and divine assistance by his intercession^ and in the conclusion
(...).
of the last he desires them all (whose lives he had written) to pray for him.
So that I hope, this may suffice in answer of M. Andrews his objection taken
out of him.

12. I have before touched another objection of M. Andrews grounded upon an
absurd conceit of his, that it is uncertain, whether Saints do hear us, and
how they see, or know our actions: and albeit that which I said (...) before
chap. 7. nu. 42.4^. and seq.
there, touching the common, and universal experience that the Church has had
in all ages of the help, and assistance of Saints to such as invoke them,
might suffice for his confutatio^ in this point, yet because he urges the same
diverse times, and especially in his preamble to his censure upon the Fathers, I
will and here somewhat more to show his absurd manner of arguing in this
matter. Thus then he says; An^r. page 34. Vt hoc tamen.
Vt hoc detur etc. although this should be granted (that Saints do pray for us)
yet it is not ^^^fest how they he are us praying here on earth; and those your
positions touching the glass of the divine essence; and the shyning therein of
all things that are done on earth, are more subtle, then solid, and not clear
enough to your selves, and altogether unheard of amongst the Fathers, and no
man does willingly call upon those of whom he is not certain by what means
they hear him, and pro^^de andeant necne etc. and therefore unsure whether
they hear him, or no. So he.

13. Wherein you see he argues in effect no otherwise then thus, that because
we know not certaynely how the Saints do hear us, therefore we are not sure,
that they hear us at all; which truly is a strange inference for albeit we be
not sure how, and in what manner they hear us, yet we may be sure that they
hear us, seeing that the certaynty of any effect does no^ depend upon the
knowledge either of the cause, Many effects evident though their causes be
secret and unknown, and first of natural effects.
or of the manner, or means how it is wrought, as it is evident by infinite
effects which we certaynely know and see, though we neither know the assured
cause thereof, nor in what manner they are performed. As for example^ it is
certain that the sea ^bbeth, and flows, that ^e^e^s have their accesses, and
crises^ (...) stone draws (...), and looks always toward the North^ and
yet nevertheless we neither cer^aynly (...) these ^ffects proceed, nor how they
are effected, and who can assuredly tell, how the sound of a voice is framed,
and how the eye sees (whether by intromission, or extramission, as the
Philosophers speak) when nevertheless the effects are evident.

The same is to be granted much more in supernatural things.
14. And this being so in natural and earthly matters subject to our senses,
what shall we think of heavenly things, or of matters belonging to religion,
and faith, which do far more exceed man's weak capacity? must we either know
how they are wrought, or else deny the effects? Let M. Andrews tell me how
Angels, and Saints in heaven do pray to God for us, which he grants they do,
or how they understand one another; or yet how the humanity of Christ hears
our prayers, and knows our actions, I mean, whether he sees them in his
divinity, or knows them by revelation? and if he dare not determine the
matter, let him according to his own inference doubt whether Christ hears
our prayers, or not: yea let him not willingly pray unto him, seeing he Pa.
37.. Vt hoc.
says that no man does willingly call upon those of whom he is uncertain by
what means they hear him: and if he will take upon him to determine it, let
him tell me why the glorified souls of Saints which see God, may not hear our
prayers, and know our actions in the same manner?

15. But to omit infinite other instances which might be given, let us hear
what S. Augustine says, even in a matter pertaining to this question whereof
we now treat. For albeit he makes great doubt how Almighty God did work those
stupendous miracles (which as he testifies upon his own knowledge were done
at the memoryes, S. Aug. de ciuit. li 22. cap. 8.
and relyques of S. Steven, and other Martyrs) yet he made so little doubt of
the effect, that he urged the same notably against the Paynims to prove the
verity of the Christian faith, saying: Si^e Deus per seipsum miro modo etc.
whether God does work these things by himself, in that marvelous manner,
Idem Ibid. c. ^.
whereby he works temporal things, being himself eternal; or whether he
does the self same things by his ministers, or whether he does some of them by
the souls of the Martyrs, as he does by men whiles they are yet here in body,
or all by Angels whom he commands inuisibly, immutably, and without a body
(in such sort that those things which are said to be done by the Martyrs, be
done only by their prayers, and impetration, and not also by their operation)
or whether some things are done by these means, and some by others, which
cannot by any means be comprehended by mortal men, ei profecto haec
attestantur fidei etc. all these truly do give testimony to that faith, wherein
the resurrection of the flesh is preached.

16. Thus discourses this holy Father, acknowledging as you see, the
imbecility of man's understanding to comprehend the manner how Almighty God did
work these supernatural effects, although he doubted not of the effects of
themselves, M. Andrews co^uinced by that which he grants elsewhere.
and yet forsooth M. Andrews must either know how Saints do hear us, or else he
will deny that they hear us, notwithstanding the known, and common experience
that the Church of God has always had thereof; to which purpose also it may
be observed that he confe^seth himself And^. p. 40.. Non ver^^
elsewhere, that God was wont miraculously to relieve those that prayed at the
tombs of Martyrs; and yet I am sure he knows not how the same was wrought (I
mean whether God did it by himself, or by the (...) of the Martyrs, (...) by
the ministry of Angels, (...) and sometimes by (...) why then does he deny
here, that Saynt^ hear us, because he is not sure how they hear us? So as
thou see good Reader what a wise inference he has made with his proinde,
when he says; proinde a^diant necn^ and. therefore a man is not sure whether
the Saints hear him, Andr. p. 37.. Vt hoc.
because he is vndertayne, qu^ natione audiant compellant^^^, by what ^eanes,
or in what manner, they hear him when he calls upon them.

17. Therefore whereas he says, that our doctrine concerning the glass of the
divine Essence, and the sight of all things therein is more subtle then solid,
and not ceare enough to our sel^es, Upon what grounds the doctrine that Saints
do hear our prayers, is founded.
it would (...) import though it (...), seeing that we do not thereon ground
our doctrine that Saints hear, or know ou^ prayers, (...) the custom, and
practice of the whole Church of God which prays to Saints, (...) therefore
believe that they hear us; and partly upon evident experience of the benefits
that by Gods merciful providence, and ordinance men do receive by them and
partly also upon the conformity thereof to the holy Scripture, which teaches
not only that the Angel^ in heaven do rejoice at the repentance of sinners
(which they could not do if they did not knee^ Luc. 1^.
it) but also that the souls of the just being glorified (...) aequales
Angelis, Luc. 20.
equal to Angels, and consequently have the like knowledge that they have;
besides that it is evident in the holy Scriptures, that the Prophets of God did
see the hearts and thoughts of men, ^. Reg. 9.
and know things far distant from them Samuel told unto Saul all that he had
in his heart; ^. Reg. 5.
and Eliz^^s being absent, saw hi^ servant G^^zi take gifts of (...) the
Syrian^ and discovered also all that which the King of Syria treated in his
cabinet. Ibid. cap. ^. Act. 7.
Also S. Steven being on earth did see our Savior Jesus Christ on the right
hand of his Father in heaven; and therefore it, were absurd to imagine that the
glorified Saints in heaven could not see, or know what is done on earth,
especially such things as concern themselves, and the honor that is done unto
them for Gods greater glory, and the prayers that are directed to them for the
relief of Gods servants. Lastly S. John in the Apocalypse signifies that the
Saints in heaven do offer up the prayers of holy men on earth, Apoc. ^^
which they could not do, if they did not understand and know men's prayers.

18. Furthermore this doctrine is also grounded upon the clear testimony of
the Fathers who teach it expressly. S. Atha. q. 11.
As S. Athanasius who says, that the souls of Saints, The Fathers plainly
testify that the Saints do know all our actions in earth.
and post mortem, and in die Iudicij cognoscent omnia, shall know all things
both after their death, and in the day of judgment: and, nullus est (says S.
Basil) ex hijs, qui non singula vbique consideret, there is none of these (he
speaks of Angels, and the souls of the just) who does not consider every
thing every where besides, that he calls the 40. Martyrs communes humani
generis custodes, the common guardians, or keepers of humane kind. S. Basil d^
vera Virginitate paulo ante medium.
S. Ambrose also says, that Martyrs are prae^ules, and spectatores actuum
nostroru^, the gouernour^, and beholders of our actions.

19. In like manner S. Hierom^ teaches, S. Ambros. de viduis Apoc. 14.

S. Hieron. aduers. Vigila^ ^^


that it is written of the souls of the just in the holy Scripture si quuntur
agnum quocumque ierit, they follow the Lamb wheresoever he goeth^ and then he
adds, Si agnu^ vbique etc. If the Lamb ^e every were, therefore it is to be
believed that those also who are with the Lamb are every where; and seeing
that Devils go all the world over, and by reason of their exceeding great
celerity are every where present, shall Martyrs after they have shed their
blood for Christ, be shut up, as it were in a coffer, that they cannot get out?
So he. Theodoret also gives to Martyrs, the title of Duces, Principes,
propugnatores, and custodes hominum etc. the Captayns, the Princes, Theodoret
de Graec. ^ffect. cu^^. lib. 8.
the defenders, and guardians of men, by whom (says he) those mischiefs, and
miseryes which Devils do inflict upon us, are auerted from us. S. Chrysostom
calls S. Peter, ^. Chrysostom. ho. ^^. in. ep. ad Corinth.
and S. Paul and Patrons, and Protectors of the Emperors. Whereupon it must
needs follow, that those blessed Apostles, and other Saints, did understand the
actions, and necessityes of those whom they protected, and defended.

S. Aug. li. ^^. de ciuit. (...) cap. ^^.
20. Moreover S. Augustine discoursing how the Saints shall see God in heaven
after the resurrection, and whether they shall see him with their corporal
eyes, teaches by the way, that they shall then see all things with the eyes of
the spirit, etiam vnde sunt corpore absentes, even whence they are absent in
body; and this he proves amply by the example of Elizaeus, who being absent
from his servant Giezi, saw him take gifts of Naaman, ^. Reg. ^.
and therefore said unto him, Nonne cor meum in praesenti erat etc. was not my
heart present with thee, when the man came from his Chariot to meet thee, and
thou tookest the money? Whereupon S. Augustine says; Cord suo ergo se dixit
hoc vidisse Propheta etc. therefore the Prophet said that he saw this with his
heart, being no doubt admirably helped by Almighty God: but how much more shall
all men then abound in this gift, when God shall be omnia in omnibus, all in all?
Thus discourses this learned Father to prove that the Saints after their
resurrection videbunt omnia, shall see all things with their spiritual eye,
etiam vnde sunt corpore absentes, even whence they are absent in body.

21. And this must needs be understood in like manner of glorified souls
before the resurrection, for that the glorification of their bodies (although
it shall increase their Joy, and glory, yet) shall not increase their vision of
God, or knowledge, which they have now as perfect, as they shall have after
their resurrection. Finally to omit many other Fathers which might be alleged,
S. Gregory says, S. Greg. li. 12. Moral. cap. 14.
that it is not to be believed, that quae intus claritatem Dei vident etc. the
souls which see into the light, or brightness of God, are ignorant of any thing
that is abroad; Idem. li. 4. Dial. ca. 33.
and again in another place, quia in illa aeterna haereditate etc. for as much
as in that eternal inheritance all men do see God with a common clarity, or
brightness, what is there which they cannot know, who know him that knows all
things? Thus says S. Gregory, teaching, as you see, that the Saints in heaven
know all things in earth, and yielding the self same reason thereof which you
have heard M. Andrews say was inaudita Patribus, never heard of amongst the
Fathers, to wit, that because they see, and know God, therefore they see, and
know all things in him, in whom omnia constant, says the Apostle, all things
do consist.

22. So as howsoever the ancient Fathers may have differed in opinion
concerning the manner how the Saints know things done on earth, A good
deduction upon M. Andrews his own grant.
M. Andrews may see that they agree touching the effect: which also is so
conform to reason, that he cannot with reason deny it, especially seeing he
himself grants that the Saints do pray for us of their charity, and love
toward us. For if they love us so, that as S. Cyprian. li. de mortalit. Item.
ep. 57.
S. Cyprian says, de nostra salute sunt solliciti, they are careful for our
salvation, and as M. Andrews Andr. page 37.. Omnia. Item. p. 46. lin. 9.
confesses they do indeed pray for us, it must needs be granted that this
their love, and care does include a desire to know our necessityes whereupon it
also follows that they do know them for if their desire should not be
satisfied, they should not be so happy and blessed, as the perfection of their
beatitude does require: besides, that seeing Almighty God does glorify them not
only in heaven with the vision of his Deity, but also in earth with many
miracles done at their monuments (as M. Andrews himself confesses in his
answer to a place of S. Basil) it were absurd to think that they do not know
as well the particular favors that God does to men for their fakes, Andr. p.
4.. Non Vere.
as also the honor and glory that redoundeth thereof both to God, and them,
without which knowledge their beatitude, as I have said, should not be complete.

23. Now then seeing that our doctrine, that Saints do hear, A brief
recapitulation of the reasons whereupon is grounded the doctrine that Saints
hear our prayers.
or understand our prayers, is grounded upon such sure foundations, as here I
have declared, to wit, the continual custom, and practice of the Church to
pray to them; the manifest experience of benefits received by them; the
conformity thereof to the holy Scriptures, with the uniform and express
testimonies of the Fathers, and lastly upon reason it self; how little reason
has M. Andrews to deny it upon no better reason, then because it is uncertain
in what manner they hear us? especially seeing I have also evidently proved
that the uncertainty of the manner, See before nu. 13 and 14.
means, or cause of any thing, can nothing derogate from the certaynty of the
effect, so as he must either bring some more solid arguments against prayer to
Saints, or else he shall but discover both his own imbecility, and the
weakness if his cause.

24. And therefore he had reason to seek some better reason, Another silly
shift of M. Andrews.
which he does, seeming to put the case that it were true, yea most manifest
that Saints do hear our prayers, yet, ne sic quidem (says he) audemus vota
nostra ad illos precesque dirigere, we dare not for all that direct our vows,
Andr cap. 1 p. 37.. Verum.
and prayers unto them; and hereof he yields this reason, cum praeceptum ^a
de re nullum acceperimus, praeceptum autem acceperimus in Lege disertis verbis:
Deuteronomy. 12.
Quod tibi praecepero hoc tantum facies. We dare not (says he) pray unto them,
because we have received no precept concerning that point, M. Andrews is so
scrupulous that he dare do nothing without ^ precept or example in Scripture.
but have received a precept in the law, in express words; What I shall
command thee, that only thou shall do: So he; and then concludes; id tantum
audemus facere etc. We dare do that only whereof we have a precept. Bring you
a praecept, and we will straight invoke them with you. Thus argues he.

25. And has he not, trow you, very well proved now, that nothing may be
practiced in Gods Church without an express written precept? His impertinent
allegation of Scripture.
Who would think that a Doctor of divinity should have so little understanding
of the holy Scriptures, as to infer this conclusion upon the place that he
alleges, which concerns only the Sacrifyces that God required, and
commanded to be offered unto him in the Mosaycall law, as it is evident by the
very circumstances of the place, in the 12. Chapter of Deuteronomy, from whence
that precept is taken. For when Almighty God had admonished the people to
beware that they did not imitate the nations whose lands they should possess,
in their abominable Sacrifyces, saying: for all the abominations, that our
Lord does abhor, have they done to their Gods, Deuteronomy. 12.
offering their sons, and daughters, An explication of the place of
Deuteronomy alleged by M. Andrews.
and burning them with fire, after this I say, follows immediately, what I
command thee, that only do to our Lord, neither add any thing, nor diminish.
Thus said Almighty God; as who would say, whereas the gentills whose lands thou
shall possess, did worship their Gods with most abominable Sacrifyces, and
ceremonies, sacrificing their own children by fire, do not thou imitate them
therein, but offer thou to me in Sacrifice, only that which I do command thee,
to wit those things which are ordained, and prescrybed in the law to that end,

26. And this no doubt is the clear sense, and meaning of those words, for if
they shall be understood, as M. Andrews takes them, to exclude the practice of
all things whatsoever that were not expressly commanded in the letter of the
law, Hest. 9 Judith ca. vlt. 1. Machab. 4.
then the solmne feasts ordained afterward by Mardochaeus, Judith, and the
Machabees had been unlawful, which nevertheless are approved in the Scripture,
and the last of the 3. to wit the feast of the Dedication instituted by the
Machabees, Joan. 10.
was honored by our Savior himself with his presence. But let us put the case
that this commandment of Almighty God was general touching the service and
worship of God in the old law, M. Andrews hardly pressed by his own argument.
will M. Andrews infer thereupon, that the same is to be extended to the new
law? As well may he say, that we are bound to observe the whole law, and so
prove himself a Jew, and euacuate the law of Christ, as Saint Paul argues
against Gal. 5.
those that mayntained the use of Circu^cisio^ together with the faith of
Christ.

27. Nevertheless I say not this to exclude all manner of arguments, How
arguments may be deduced from the Law of Moses.
or inferences drawn from the old law to the new (that the same remain within
the limits of probability, as from the figure, to the verity, which admits
many limitations, and exceptions) but to exclude the obligation of all precepts
either ceremonial, See chap. 1. nu. 14.15. and 16.
or Judicial, which do not in any sort bynd us now, as I have showed in the
first Chapter of this Adioynder. And therefore whereas M. Andrews says here,
cum praeceptum acceperimus in lege disertis verbis etc. seeing we have received
a precept in the law in express words etc. M. Andrews his argument proves
himself to be a Jew.
I say to him that seeing this precept did undoubtedly belong to the ceremonial
law, and concerned only the manner of worship to be done to God by Sacrifice,
he shows himself a flat Jew, in saying that we Christians have received this
precept in the law.

28. Furthermore he is to understand, that albeit we should grant that nothing
can be practiced, or taught in the new law without some precept, or doctrine
thereof delivered by our Savior Christ unto his Church, yet he could gain
nothing thereby, except he could also prove that all our Saviors precepts, and
doctrine are expressly set down in Scripture, which neither he nor any of his
fellows have been able yet to prove, or ever shall be, it being evident that our
Savior neither commanded any thing at all to be written, but to be preached,
and taught, saying, praedicate euangelium etc. preach the gospel to every
Creature, and again docete omnes gentes etc. teach all Nations, Matthew. 28.
baptizing them etc. neither did the Apostles either write any thing of diverse
years after Christ Ascension, or when they wrote, deliver all Christ's
doctrine, and their own by writing, ^. These. 2.
but very many things by tradition, in which respect the Apostle himself
says, tenete traditiones quas accepistis, sieve per sermonem, sieve per.
Epistolam nostram, hold the traditions which you have received either by word,
or by our Epistle, by which words of the Apostle the ancient Fathers namely
Hom. in 2. These. 2.
S. Chrysostom Haer. 61
S. Epiphanius Lib. de Spiritu Sanct. cap. 29.
S. Basil, S. John Lib. 4. de fide ca. 17
Damascen, in 2. These. 2.
Oecumenius Theophilactus, and the 8. General Act. Vlt. can. 1.
Council do prove the necessary use of unwritten traditions in the Church, and
amongst the rest S. Chrysostom says: hinc patet etc. hereby it is m^nifest,
that the Apostles did not deliver all things by Epistle, but many things
without writing; eadem fide digna sunt tam illa, quam ista: as well those
things as these, are worthy of the same credit.

S. Augustines golden rule.
29. For this cause S. Augustine gives this general rule, that whatsoever the
whole Church retayneth, whereof the beginning cannot be deduced either from the
Scriptures, or General Counsels, or some later institution, the same was
undoubtedly delivered by the Apostles, and this he urges S. Aug. de Baptis.
contra Donat. l. 2. ca. 7. and li. 4. c. 6. and Ibid cap. 24. and li. 5. ca. 23.
very often as a most assured ground, and principle against the Donatists; and
for the same reason not only he, but also all other Fathers teach, that the
general custom of the Church, is an infallible, and evident proof of the
truth in any controversy, in so much that he affirms it to be insolentissimae
insaniae, a point of most insolent madness to dispute, or doubt of it, as I have
declared in the last Chapter, which I wish M. Andrews well to observe, as also
the other testimonies of the ancient Fathers produced there concerning this
point. Idem ep. 118. See chap. 7. nu. 49.


30. Now then, hereupon I conclude two things, the one, that M. Andrews, who as
he says dare do nothing without a written precept, may lay away his scruple,
in matters that are generally practiced by the Church, the other, that seeing
it is evident by these testimonies of so many holy and learned Fathers, as have
been here alleged, that the whole Church in their days practiced prayer to
Saints, as a thing most beneficial to men, and honorable to God; and that they
acknowledged the evident and miraculous benefits that grew to men thereby, yea
urged the same against the very Gentills, and Paynims, as invincible arguments
of the divinity of Christ, and of the verity of Christian religion: and seeing
also that this practice, custom, and belief was then general, when Christian
religion most flourished (I mean in the time of the 4. first general
Counsels) and when the Church abounded most with famous Doctors, Pastors, and
Fathers, it must needs be granted, that the doctrine of prayer to Saints, is
an irrefragable verity, and that according to S. Augustines censure, it is no
less then insolent madness in M. Andrews to call it in question, M. Andrews
according to S. Augustins censure is an insolent mad man.
and much more to impugn it with such frivolous reasons as he does, and
especially with a ceremonial precept of the Mosaycall law, as if he were a
Jew, and not a Christian, seeing that he acknowledges himself to have
received a precept thereby disertis verbis, in express words, which I think
no good Christian will say of any precept, Andr. p. 38.. Atque.
belonging to the ceremonial, or Judicial law.

31. But M. Andrews goes yet further, and exacteth at least some example of it
in the Scripture, S. Aug li de unit. Eccl. ca. 22. vel. 19. in some ed^tions.
if there be no precept: whereto S. Augustine answers sufficiently, when he
says to a Donatist (who made the like demand about the rebaptization of such
as were baptized by heretykes) that seeing there is no example or express
mention of it in Scripture, and that Christ has clearly and expressly
recommended unto us the authority of his universal Church dispersed thoughout
the world, the testimony and custom of that Church is to be admitted and
embraced, and whosoever rejects or resists the same, Idem. contra. Crescon.
lib. 1. cap. 33.
does most perniciously resist our Savior himself against his own salvation.
Thus says S. Augustine in substance, though much more amply; who also speaking
elsewhere of the same point, gives this notable, and general rule, that for as
much as the holy Scripture does undoubtedly recommend unto us the authority of
the Church etiam in hac re a nobis tenetur Scripturarum veritas etc. the veri^y
of Scripture is retained by us in this point, when we do that which has
already pleased the whole Church. So he. And so say I to M. Andrews in this our
case; to wit that seeing it is evident by the testimony of all antiquity, that
the invocation of Saints was generally admitted, and practiced by the Primitive
Church, and from thence has descended to our time, there needs no example of
it in Scripture, because the authority of the Church, which the Scriptures do
expressly recommend unto us suffices to warrant the same. M. Andrews and his
fellows do admit diverse traditions without any ex^presse precept, or example
thereof in Scripture.


32. And truly it may seem strange that M. Andrews, or any of his fellows of
the English Clergy do deny this, seeing that they do admit diverse traditions
whereof there is neither precept, nor example in the Scripture; as the baptism
of infants, who do not actually believe, for although the same be very
consonant to Scripture (as also is prayer to Saints, and all other things which
are practiced in the Catholic Church) yet the use, and practice thereof is
grounded upon tradition and not upon the Scriptures, Origin lib. 5. in cap. 6.
ad Romans
as Origin testifyeth, saying: Ecclesia ab Apostolis traditione^ accepit etc.
The Church received a tradition from the Apostles, to give baptism to little
children. So he. And S. Augustine also to the same purpose says more plainly
thus; S. Aug. de Genesis ad lit. li. 10. c. 23.
Consuetudo m^tris Ecclesiae in baptizandis paruulis etc. the custom of our
Mother the Church in baptizing infants, is not to be contemned, or reputed as
superfluous, neither were it to be believed at all, if it were not an
Apostolical tradition. So he, who also acknowledges the same in another
place, Idem lib. 4. de Baptis. con^ra Donatist. cap. 24.
and says further, that if any man do demand divine authority for it
(quamquam quod vniuersa tenet Ecclesia etc. albeit that which the universal
Church holds, and has not been ordained by Counsels, but has always been
retained, is most rightly believed to have been delivered by no other, but by
Apostolical authority) nevertheless we may truly conjecture by Circumcision in
the old law, what force the Sacrament of Baptism has in Infants. Thus says
S. Augustine, who to answer those, that do demand divine authority, for the
custom of the Church in baptizing Infants, does not prove, or confirm it by
any precept, or example out of Scripture, but only by a probable conjecture
drawn from the figure of it in the old law, relying principally upon the
tradition of the Church.

33. But what need I seek any other testimony for this matter, seeing that
Tho. Rogers in the 39. articles agreed upon by the pretended Bishops, and
Clergy of England, and analyzed into propositions, glossed, and set forth by
him, with their publyke approbation, does acknowledge that the baptism of young
children, is in any wise to be retained in the Church, as most agreeable with
the institution of Christ, See the faith, doctrine etc. printed an. Do. 1607.
by John Legate in Cambridg page 1^5. art. 27.. The Baptism. and p. 168..
Although^
although (says he) we be not commanded by express terms to baptize them. So
he; whereupon it directly follows, that M. Andrews has ouerlashed greatly in
saying, id tantum audemus facere de quo praeceptum habemus, we dare do that
only whereof we have a precept. Also what precept, or example have M. Andrews
and his fellows in Scripture for the use of Godfathers, and Godmothers, and of
the sign of the cross in Baptism, allowed as well by their practice, as by
the late Queens Injunctions, yea and by the Ecclesiastical Canons of the
Bishops, See constitutions Ecclesiast. printed at London by Barker an. 1604,
can. 30.
and Clergy of the Province of Canterbury, made in their Synod held at London
with his Maiestyes license, in the year 1603. and published the year
following by his Maiestyes authority, under the great Seal of England, in
which Canons they do not only approve the use of the sign of the cross in
Baptism, but also profess to follow therein the primitive, and Apostolical
Churches, and the true rules of doctrine concerning things indifferent, which
are consonant to the word of God, and the judgment of all the ancient Fathers,
so that by their own confession, they retain the use of it without either
precept or example in holy Scripture.

34. And now, because I have had this occasion to speak of this constitution,
A notable trumpery of the pretended Bishops in their Ecclesiastical
Constitutions.
I can not omit to advertise thee, good Reader, of a notable piece of trumpery,
and cosenage, used by that grave Synod, in this very Canon whereof we now
speak; wherein giving the reason why they retain the use of the sign of the
cross in Baptism, they say they do it, because the same has been ever
accompanied (among them) with sufficient cautions, and exceptions against all
popish superstition, and error, and forsooth, Ibidem.
that the world may understand from what popish error they have freed the
same, they signify, that the Church of England since the abolishing of Popery,
has ever held, and taught, that the sign of the cross used in Baptism is no
part of the substance of that Sacrament, and that the infant Baptized is by
virtue of Baptism (before it be signed with the sign of the cross) received
into the congregation of Christ's flock, as a perfect member thereof, and not by
any power ascribed to the sign of the cross etc. whereupon they conclude,
that the use of the sign of the cross in Baptism, being thus purged from all
popish superstition, and error, and reduced in the Church of England to the
primary institution of it etc. it is to be reverently retained, and used. Thus
teach they in their foresaid Synod.

35. But now we must demand of them where they have ever read in any Catholyke
Author, that the sign of the cross, D. Tho. 3. par. q 66. Greg. de Valent.
disput. 4. q. 1. Nauar. in Manu. cap. 22. nu. 6. Bellar. de Sacra: Baptis. lib.
1. cap. 25.
as it is used in the administration of baptism, is any part of the substance
of the Sacrament: sure I am that all our schoolmen, and Canonists and others
that have occasion to treat thereof, do expressly teach the contrary: neither
did ever any learned Catholyke hold, or suppose it to be any part, either of
the form or of the matter of Baptism, (which are the essential parts
thereof) but only an ancient and holy ceremony; and this is evident even by the
practice of the Catholyke Church, approving the baptism not only of the
midwyfe (in cases of necessity) but also of any heretic, if he have the
intention to do that which the Catholyke Church does, and uses the true form,
with convenient matter, without the sign of the cross, or any other ceremony
in the world; and albeit the Church uses to suply the said ceremonies
afterward, in such as wanted the same, yet it makes no doubt at all, Nauar.
in Manual cap. 22 nu 6.
but that they are baptized before, and in state of salvation, if they dye
before the said ceremonies be supplied, whereby it is manifest that the
Catholykes do not take the sign of the cross to be of the substance, or
essence of the sacrament.

The pretended Bi^shops convinced of fraud by his Maiestyes testimony.
36. But of this I shall not need to produce any further proof, seeing that
those pretended Bishops, which were present at this Congregation, and made this
Canon, have given sufficient testimony of the truth in this point, to no meaner
a person, then to his Majesty himself, as he did publicly testify in the
Conference at Hampton Court wherein the question concerning the use of the
sign of the cross in Baptism, being debated betwixt them and the Puritans,
his Majesty said, that he understood by the Bishops, yea and found it himself
to be true, that the Papists themselves did never ascribe any power, or
spiritual grace to the sign of the cross in Baptism, See the Su^me of the
Conference page ^7.. Thirdly. printed an. 1604.
whereupon it follows that they do not, nor ever did account to be any
essential part of the Sacrament, for if they did, they should ascribe unto it
a spiritual grace, and power, as they do to the essence of the Sacrament,
which they all do uniformly teach to give grace ex opere operato, and therefore
seeing that according to his Maiestyes testimony (as well upon his own
knowledge, Conference of Hampton Court contrary to the Constitutions and the
same Bishops to them selves.
as by the relation of the Bishops to him) the Catholykes did never ascribe any
power, or spiritual grace to the sign of the Cross in Baptism, it is
evident that the Bishops in their Synod belyed them egregiously (charging them
to hold it to be a part of the substance of the Sacrament) yea and notably
deluded the people in seeking to persuade them, that the Catholykes had
corrupted the use thereof, and that the English Clergy has now reduced it to
the primary institution.

37. The miserable state of England where such Pastors have the charge of
souls.
Who then could imagine that so many Ecclesiastical men, honorable for their
rank, and dignity in the common wel^h, by profession Deuines, by title
Prelates, and spiritual Pastors of the people, could also uniformly agree to
cozen the world in this manner, and instead of feeding their flock with wholesome
doctrine, to infect and poison them with such manifest lies as this, convinced
even by their own testimony to his Majesty himself, the very same year that
they devised it; as it appears by the printed copyes of their Ecclesiastical
constitutions, and of the conference at Hampton Court, published in the year
1604. and therefore I leave it to thee, good Reader, to consider in what a
miserable state our poor country is, where such men as these (who as it
seems have no care either of their own conscience, or reputation) have
nevertheless the care, and charge of other men's souls.

38. M. Andrews transgresses either the Synodical Canon of the English Clergy
or his own rule
But to return to M. Andrews (who perhaps was one of that conuenticle, though
not as a Bishop, yet as one of the Clergy of the Province of Canterbury) I
would gladly know of him whether he, and his Clergy in the Diocese of Ely, do
use the sign of the Cross in the administration of Baptism, or not; and if
they do not, let him tell us how they observe this Synodicall Canon made by his
fellows, and authorized by his Majesty: and if they do observe it, let him
show us some precept, or example of it in Scripture, seeing he resolutly
affirms in the name of the whole English Church, See supra nu. ^4. Andr. p.
37.. Veru^^
as it seems, that they dare do that only whereof they have a precept.
Therefore I say, let him either show us some precept for it in Scripture, or
else confess that he, and his fellows dare do more then is commanded therein.

39. Finally, if they may lawfully follow the primitive, and Apostolical
Churches, and the judgment of all the ancient fathers, in matters though not
commanded in Scripture, Prayer to Saints no less conform to the practice of
the primitive Church, then the use of the sign of the Cross in Baptism.
yet consonant thereto (as they profess to do in the foresaid Canon) then they
must also grant, that it is in like manner lawful for Catholykes, to do the
like for prayer to Saints, seeing that the same is conform to the practice of
the primitive Church, and to the belief of the ancient fathers, and
consequently to the holy Scriptures, for otherwise neither would so many
learned, ancient and holy fathers have approved it, neither yet the Church
(whose authority, as S. Augustine says, the Scripture recommendeth unto us)
would have practiced it; I mean that visible Catholyke Church, S. Aug. li. de
unit. Eccl. c. 1^. and contra Crescon. lib. 1. c. 31.
whereof S. Augustine did so constantly defend, and maintain the authority,
against the heretykes in his time, that he pronounced them (as you have heard
before) to be most insolent mad men, if they did but only doubt of any general
custom thereof. Idem. ep. 118.


40. Whereupon I conclude, that prayer to Saints being generally approved, and
practiced by the Church in S. Augustines time, it must needs follow according
to his rule, that the use, and practice thereof, is not only most lawful, and
consonant to Scripture, but also reverently to be retained, and used by M.
Andrews, and his fellows, even according to their own profession in their
Synodicall constitution, seeing, as I have signified before, they profess
reverently to retain the sign of the Cross in Baptism (though not commanded
in Scripture) because the same was used in the primitive Church, and is
consonant to Scripture, and to the Judgment of all the ancient Fathers.

41. And if he say, M. Andrews still hardly pressed with his own rule and
inference upon the text of Deuteronomy.
that they profess in their Canon to follow the rules of doctrine, concerning
things that are (at least) indifferent, and that prayer to Saints is neither
absolutely good, nor yet indifferent, but altogether unlawful, and
consequently not to be used, he is to understand first, that according to his
own rule, and inference upon the text of Deuteronomy, he neither does, nor can
admit any thing, that is not commanded in Scripture, be it never so good. For
he says id tantum audemus facere etc. we dare do that only whereof we have a
precept, and to that purpose he alleges also the text of Deuteronomy, hoc
tantum facies quod tibi praecipio, thou shall do this only which I do command
thee, where you see the word tantum as well in his assertion, as in the text of
Scripture, excludes all things whatsoever that are not commanded, whereupon it
follows that the use of the sign of the Cross in baptism is as well
prohibited, as prayer to Saints, if he understand that text of Deuteronomy
aright, Prayer to Saints ought rather to be admitted, then the sign of the
Cross in Baptism according to the Synodicall Canon of the English Clergy.
and make a good inference thereon,

42. Secondly it is not sufficient, that he and his fellows do hold the
invocation of Saints to be unlawful, but they must also prove it so to be, or
else they must grant the practice of it to be lawful (as of a thing at least
indifferent) upon the same reason that they admit the ^igne of the Cross in
baptism, yea with far greater reason, seeing that, as I have already proved,
prayer to Saints is not only good, and lawful, but also most profitable, and
beneficial to men, whereas the Cross in baptism (according to the doctrine
of the foresaid Canon) has no virtue, or power in it at all, but is only an
outward Ceremony, and honorable badge of a Christian. So as M. Andrews cannot
approve the use thereof, and exclude the practice of prayer to Saints, except
he will be so absurd to admit things indifferent, and reject a thing absolutely
good, and very necessary for every Christian man; for so I say, he must needs
confess the invocation of Saints to be, M. Andrews either idly demands a
precept in Scripture for prayer to Saints, or else he must grant it to be as
lawful as the sign of the Cross in Baptism.
except he can overthrow the testimonies of all the ancient Fathers, yea and
the experience that the Church has always had of the soueraygne benefits that
men reap thereby.

43. Thirdly, whereas he demands a precept in Scripture for prayer to Saints,
he seems to grant it to be either good of it self, or at least indifferent;
for if it were absolutely bad, it were in vain, and absurd to demand a precept
of it, for that it could never be commanded, so as either his demand in that
behalf is very idle, and absurd, or else he must acknowledge it at least to be
indifferent, and consequently, that it is no less lawful to use it without a
precept, then the sign of the Cross in Baptism.

1. Tim. 2.
1. Joan. 2.
44. Lastly, seeing that he uses the sign of the Cross without a precept,
because it is consonant to Scripture (for so says the Canon) and rejects
prayer to Saints for want of a precept, What places and how fit to the purpose
the Protestants allege out of the Scriptures against praying to Saints.
it is reason that he show us, either some prohibitio^ of prayer to Saints in
Scripture, or at least how it is repugnant to Scripture: which he shall never
be able to do, as it appears suffciently by those texts of Scripture, that he
and his fellows are wont to allege against it; as for example, they object,
that Christ is the only mediator betwixt God, and man, that he is our advocate
with his Father, and that he commands all men that labor, Matthew. 11.
and are laden to come to him, promising to refresh them, and such like places
as signify unto us the bounty, and mercy of our Savior Christ, and his
facility, and readiness to hear, and help us; all which places being
understood as our adversaries take them, do no less overthrow our mutual
prayers one for another, then our prayers to Saints, whereby they may
understand their absurdity.

45. For if Christ be our only mediator, The absurdity of our adversaries
arguments against the invocation of Saints.
and advocate in such sort as they take it, to wit, that we may not crave the
prayers of Saints without injury to Christ, because he is our only mediator,
how then does the Scripture teach us to crave one another prayers? is i^ less
injury to Christ to crave the prayers of sinners, the^ of Angels, and Saints,
who are free from sin, and most acceptable to God? And again, if it be
lawful to come to God by the mediation, and prayers of men, can it be
unlawful to come to him by the intercession of Angels, and Saints? But that
thou may, good Reader, see how substantially M. Andrews argues against
prayer to Saints out of these places of Scripture, Andr. cap. 8. page 179. lin.
29.
thou shall hear an eloquent discourse of his; thus then he says.

46. Cum, Venite ad me, dixerit etc. seeing that Christ said come to me, come
all and I will refresh you (that is to say, by my self, and not by mynisters)
why do we not go to himself directly without an interpreter, A very seely and
simple discourse of M. Andrews against praying to Saints.
and sue to him, but do go out of the way to Saints, and sue to them that they
may vouchsafe to be suitors for us? Do we treat with any of the holy Spirits
more safely, or sweetly then with our Jesus? have they more easy access, or
better commodity to speak to God? or is any elder amongst the Jews, more
grateful to Christ then the faithful Centurian? do the Saints better know our
needs, or are they more compassionate, or more merciful or yet more
affectionat toward us then he, whereby we may have more confidence in them,
then in him? ought we to make more account of any favor of theirs, then of
Christ's promise ( I will refresh you) or of his precept, come to me? But when
you do so invoke Saints, you give them the place of Christ, for if you come
to them, you have in Christ's place those that may refresh you instead of him;
you have mediators to God who may pray for your sins, such (mediators) as
Paul, and John did not make themselves, and if they had, the faithful
Christians would not have suffered it, S. Aug co^^^ra ep. Parmen lib. 2. cap. 8.
if Augustine in his books against Parmenian do understand the matter aright.

47. Thus far M. Andrews; which I have laid down the more amply to the end
it may appear how seriously he tryfleth in this important matter, M. Andrews
serious in tryfling.
which thou will evidently see, good Reader, if thou do but note well his
discourse, and what follows thereof (if his construction of those places of
Scripture, which he alleges be true) for as well might he argue thus
(following his own grounds and changing only the word Saints into men) Cum,
His argument and whole discourse re^torted upon himself impug^ning our mutual
prayers one for another.
Venite ad me dixerit etc. seeing that Christ said Come to me, and I will
refresh you (by my self, and not by my Ministers) why do we not go to him
directly without any interpreter, but sue to men, that they may be suitors for
us? Do we confer more safely, or sweetly with any man then with our Jesus?
have we more easy access or better opportunity to speak to any man then to
him? do men know our necessityes better then he, or are they more
compassionate, merciful, or more affectionate toward us then he, whereby we
may have more confidence in them, then in him? ought we not much more to
esteem Christ's promise (to wit, I will refresh you) and his precept Come unto
me, then any favor of men? But you, when you crave the prayers of men, do give
them the place of Christ; for if you come to them, you have in Christ's place
those which may refresh you instead of him, you have mediators to God, which
may pray for your sins, such (mediators) as Paul, and John did not make
themselves etc.

48. Lo then how substantially he has argued against prayer to Saints, M.
Andrews his arguments do as directly-ouerthrow that which he himself
approves, a^ that which he impugneth.
seeing that his arguments (if they have any force at all) do as directly
overthrow that which he himself approves, as that which he impugneth, I mean
as well our mutual prayer one for another (which I am sure he will not
disallow) as either the prayers of Saints for us, or our intercession to them;
and is it possible, that so great a Clarke, and subtle Logician as he, did not
see this? or that he is ignorant in what sense the Scripture teaches that our
Savior is our only mediator, and aduocat? seeing that the Apostle having
said, that, there is one mediator of God and men Jesus Christ, adds
immediately, qui dedit redemptionem semetipsum pro omnibus, who gave himself a
redemption for all, How it i^ to be understood that Christ is our only
mediator and aduocat.
as who would say, he is the only mediator, because he only being both God, and
man, is that eternal Priest, and Redeemer who by the Sacrifice of himself
upon the Cross, has reconcyled us to God, and paid our ransom having
himself no need of redemption in which sense also he is our singular aduocat,
and patron.

49. And therefore John having said that we have 1. Tim. ^^
an advocate with the Father, 1. Joan. 2.
Jesus Christ, adds presently, and ipse est propitiatio etc. and he is the
propitiation for our sins, and not only for ours, but also for the sins of
the whole world, giving to understand that he is our advocate and prays for
us in a very peculiar, and singular manner, for that he by himself alone, and
by his own merits procures all grace, and mercy to mankind in the sight of
his Father, accedens per semetipsum ad Deum, Hebr. 7.
coming (says the Apostle) to God by himself, whereas all other Aduocats, or
Patrons (be they Angels, Saints, or men) do no otherwise obtain grace, or
mercy but by him, and by his merits, in which respect the Church ends her
prayers to Saints with per Christum Dominum nostrum, by Christ our Lord; and in
this sense, I say, our Savior Christ is truly called our only mediator, not
only by the way of redemption, but also by the way of prayer which does no way
exclude other mediators to him for us, or to God the Father by his merits,
which M. Andrews himself confesses sufficiently, seeing he grants that the
Saints in heaven do pray for us all with Christ their head, and does not deny,
but that we may crave the prayers one of another: whereupon it follows that
Christ is not our only mediator by the way of prayer, in such sort as he and
his fellows do understand it.

50. And whereas he seeks to confirm his false inference with the testimony
of S. Augustine against Parmenian the Donatist, The meaning of S. Augustine
perverted by M. Andrews, is truly explicated.
saying, that if Paul, and John had made themselves mediators, the faithful
Christians would not have suffered it, he peruerteth wholly the sense of S.
Augustine, as he is wont, alleging only a little scrap of his discourse, and
dissembling all that which does fully explicate his meaning. And that this may
appear thou shall understand, good Reader, that for as much as the Donatists
taught that the grace of the Sacraments depended of the goodness of the
minister, yea and did most wickedly, and proudly affirm of themselves, S. Aug.
li. 2. co^tra ep. Parmemanica. 8^
neminem esse inter collegas suos, vel seipsos, cum aliqua macula and vitio,
that there was none amongst their colleagues, or companions, or amongst
themselves spotted with any blot, or vice; and that Parmenian also said of a
Bishop of theirs, that he was a mediator betwixt God and the people (meaning
an immaculate, and unspotted mediator) S. Augustine inueigheth bitterly
against this their execrable presumption, and pride, and says, that neither S.
John, nor S. Paul, nor the rest of the Apostles durst ever presume to make
themselves mediators in this sense; and therefore he says that they
acknowledged themselves to be sinners, and that S. John did not say, 1. Joan. 2.
si quis peccauerit mediatorem me babetis etc. if any man sin, you have me
for a mediator, but, aduocatu^ habemus etc. we have an advocate Jesus Christ;
whereby S. John confessed himself to be a sinner and to have need of the
propitiation, and mediatio^ of Christ.

51. And S. Paul in like manner commended himself (says S. Augustine) to the
prayers of the faithful, and did not make himself a mediator betwixt God, and
the people: so as S. Augustine shows evidently hereby, that he does not
exclude the mediation of Saints, or of one man for another by way of
intercession to Christ, but only in such sort, as the same should impugn
Christ's mediation for all men; which he also signifies more expressly in the
same place, saying, Homines omnes Christiani etc. all Christian men do
recommend themselves one to another prayers, but he for whom no man prays,
but he for all, is the only and true mediator. Thus says S. Augustine; How S.
Augustine denies that men may be mediators one for another.
who affirming that Christians crave the prayers one of another, grants
consequently that they may also be mediators, that is to say intercessors one
for another, and therefore does not deny that Saints, or men may be mediators
for men in any other sense then such as the proud Donatists understood the
same, who did so justify themselves that they did euacuate, and take away the
necessity of Christ's mediation for them, or for such as they recommended to
God, esteeming themselves to be so pure, and immaculate, that God did hear
them in respect of their own purity.

52. Wherein also it is to be observed that albeit S. Augustine in all this
discourse speaks only of men whiles they live in this world (and not of
Saints, or Angels) teaching that no man living (in respect of his frailty, and
subjection to sin) can be a mediator, or advocate in the same sense that
Christ is (to wit, in such sort that he needs no other mediator, Neither men
nor Saints, or Angels do obteyn any thing of God but by the mediation and
meri^s of Jesus Christ.
or advocate to pray for him, but that he prays for all other) nevertheless
the same may also be understood of Angels, and Saints; for although they pray
for all men, and no man for them, yet for as much as they obtain nothing of
God but by Christ's mediation, and merits, they cannot be said to be such
mediators, or advocates as need no other mediation, or help to obtain their
suits, which is only said truly of Christ, who therefore is (as S. Augustine
says) the true, and only mediator pro quo nemo interpellat, sed ipse pro
omnibus, for whom no man prays, but he for all.

53. This then being the clear sense, and meaning of S. Augustine, I remit it
to thy judgment good Reader, whether this contradicts any way our Catholyke
doctrine, or makes any thing at al for M. Andrews his purpose; may he not
then be ashamed to say, as he does, that when we crave the prayers to Saints,
we give them the place of Christ, and that when we come to them we seek to be
refreshed by them instead of Christ? when nevertheless he does not deny but that
we may crave the prayers of men and consequently come to Christ by them, or
rather together with them, and with their assistance; for no man I think that
requests either men, or Saints to pray for him, does so wholly confide in their
prayers, that he omitteth to pray to Christ, M. Andrews prodigal of his
rhetorik.
and therefore he comes also himself immediately to Christ, as he that has a
suite to a Prince, and does not only procure to be recommended to him by his
fauorits, but also presents his own petition unto him, does come himself
immediately to the Prince, though he be accompanied, or seconded by others,
whereby it appears what a deal of Rhetorik M. Andrews has cast away, to
prove that he which prays to Saints does not come to Christ.

54. And if he will yet say further (as some of his fellows are wont to do,
that the case is not like of Saints, and men, because there are examples in the
Scripture of craving the prayers of men, but not of Saints, he shall show
himself to be no less ignorant then absurb, because the same can be no
confirmation of his former arguments taken out of Scripture, An absurd shift
and evasion of our adversaries urged against the^.
but an evident confutation of them, seeing that it appears thereby, that
Christ is not the only mediator, or advocate in the sense that they take it;
for if he were then could we not crave the prayers of any but of Christ; and
therefore for as much as the Scripture (which cannot be contrary to it self,
allows and exhorts us to crave one another prayers, Iac. 5.
it is evident that it does not teach, The Scripture should co^tradict it
self, if Christ were our only mediator in the sense that our adversaries do
take it.
or mean that Christ is our only mediator, or advocate, in such sort as that
no other may pray for us but he, or we crave the prayers of no other but of
him, or that we do injury to him, when we come to him by the mediation, means,
and assistance of others, for so should the Scripture co^tradict it self,
which it cannot do.

55. Moreover by seeking this shift, they leave wholly their former argument,
and fly to another, grounded upon as false a foundation as the former, to wit,
that nothing is to be believed, or practiced in the Church whereof there is no
commandment, or example in Scripture, which you have heard Supra ^u. 25.26. and
seq.
already confuted, as well by the authority of Scripture, and Fathers, as also
by our adversaries own Supra nu. 33. and seq.
doctrine, approving the practice of things not commanded any where in
Scripture, as the baptism of infants, the use of the sign of the Cross, and
Godfathers, and Godmothers in baptism; whereto I may add the tradition of
keeping Sunday holy day in S. Hieron. aduers. Vigilant. S. Aug. ep. 119. and
lib. 22. de ciuit. cap. 30. S. Greg. lib. 11. ep. 3. How prayer to Saints is
conform to Scripture and deduced from it.
memory of the Resurrection of our Savior, with abstinence from servile works.
Also the observation of Easter, Pentecost, and such feasts, and diverse other
things consisting in matters of practice

56. If then they approve and practice these things, although they be not
commanded or ordained in Scripture, what reason have they to reject prayer to
Saints, because there is no commandment, or example of it in Scripture, when
nevertheless it is most conform thereto and deduced from it, as I have partly
showed See chap. 7. nu. 48. and supra hoc cap nu. 31.
already, by an inafallible rule of S. Augustine (seeing it is approved by that
Church which the Scripture commands us to Luc. 10^ Matthew. 18.
hear, believe, and obey) besides that it being evident in Scripture, that
Charity, which moves, and obliges men to pray one for another in this life,
1. Cor. 1^.
nunquam excidit (as the Apostle teaches) never decays, but is more perfect
in the next life, it follows not only that the Saints do pray for us (which
M. Andrews grants) but also that we may crave their prayers, If our brethren
on earth may pray for us and we by warrant of the Scriptures commend our selves
to their prayers, why may we not do the like unto Saints?
for it were most absurd to think that we may not request them to do that,
which is most correspondent to their Charity, and they will most willingly
perform.

57. Furthermore seeing that the Scripture does teach us to crave the prayers
and help of our brethren living, there can be no reason imagined, why we should
not also do the same when they are glorified in heaven, but either because they
do not hear, or understand our prayers, or because they are not willing, or
not able to help us, but that they hear us, I have sufficiently proved
already, and have also answered M. Andrews his cauils concerning the same; and
he neither denies, nor seems to doubt either that they are willing to
succor us, See suprad nu. 12. ad nu. 24.
(considering the perfection of their Charity) or yet that they are able to do
it, seeing he grants they do pray for us; and if he should deny it, or that
their prayers may avail us (as Vigilantius and his followers did in times
past, Vide coccium To. 1. lib 5. art. 4. de Sanctis.
and Zuinglius with other sectaries have done in these our days) he might
easily be convinced by the holy Scriptures, which witness that God grants
the petitions of his servants even when they are here subject to sin, See
supra nu. 22.
and misery, and has mercy on sinners for the merits of the just, as well
dead, as living; and therefore the Prophet prayed: ne auferas misericordiam
tuam etc. do not take away thy mercy from us O Lord, Dan. 3.
for thy beloved Abraham, and thy servant Isaac, and thy holy Israel. And we
read in the book of Kings that for David's sake God did mitigate his wrath
toward Solomon, ^. Reg. 11.
and saved also the Kingdom of Judah from destruction in the reygne of Ioram,
2. Paral. 21.
and Ezechias. 4. Reg 19.


58. In like manner God pardoned Jobs friends for his sake, Job. 42.
and directed them unto him to crave his prayers for them. Also for the prayers
of Moses he had mercy on the people; Exodus 32.
and the like we read in the new testament. Whereupon S. Hierome said to
Vigilantius thus: S. Hieron. aduers. Vigilantium.
Si Apostoli and Martyrs etc. If the Apostles, and Martyrs being here in
body could pray for others, whiles they ought to be careful for themselves,
how much more may they do it after their crounes, victoryes, and tryumphs; one
Moses obtained of God pardon for six hundred thousand armed men, and Steven
the follower of his Lord, Exodus 32.
and first Martyr in Christ, craved pardon for his persecutours, and shall they
now be able to do less when they are with Christ? Act. 7.
Paul the Apostle says that 276. men's lives were given him in the ship, Ibid.
ca. 27.
and therefore now when he is dissolved, and with Christ, will he hold his
peace, and shall he not be able so much as to open his mouth for those which
have believed by his preaching throughout the world? and shall Vigilantius a
living dog be better then a dead lion? Thus argues S. Hierome by an argument a
fortiori, grounded on the Scripture to show the extreme absurdity of
Vigilantius the heretic, who denied that the Saints in heaven do pray for us,
and are able to help us.

59. And this ability of Saints to help men, is to be ascribed not only to the
effect of their prayers, but also to their power, Apoc. 1^.
authority, and dignity; seeing that Christ who is the King of Kings, Matthew. 28.
and Lord of Lords, and has all power in heaven and earth given him by his
Father, Saints able to help, us by the participation of Christ's power.
does in the Apocalips promise to his Saints a communication, and participation
of his own Kingdom, dominion, and power over men; qui vicerit, says he, dabo
sedere mecum etc. he that shall overcome, I will give unto him to sit with me
in my throne, as I also have overcome, and sitten with my father in his throne;
dabo ei potestatem super gentes etc. Apoc. 3.
I will give him power over nations, Ibid. 2.
and he shall rule them etc. and according to this promise of our Savior, the
Saints also said to him in the Apocalips; Ibid. 1. and 5.
Redimisti nos Deo in sanguine tuo etc. thou have redeemed us to God in thy
blood, and have made us to our God a Kingdom, and Priests, and we shall reygne
upon the earth; and this may be confirmed out of the book of wisdom, Sap. 3^
which says, that the just (when they shall be glorified) iudicabunt Nationes,
and dominabuntur populis etc. shall judge Nations, and shall have dominion over
people; and in like manner the Psalmist says (speaking of the glory of Gods
Saints) exultabunt Sancti in gloria etc. the Saints shall exult, Psalm. 14^.
and rejoice in glory etc. they shall have two edged swoords in their hands to
take revenge upon nations, and to chastise people, to tie their Kings in
fetters, and their noble men in iron manicles etc. Thus says the royal
Prophet.

60. And albeit this shall be specially, Matthew. 19.
and most manifestly fulfilled at the day of Judgment, Luc. ^2.
when the Saints of God shall assist our Savior in the Judgment, Saints
protectors of men, Cittyes and Cou^tryes.
and condemnation of the wicked, yet it cannot be denied but that also in the
mean time it is verifyed in the power and dominion that God imparteth to his
Saints, giving them the protection of Cittyes, Countries, and men, as it
appears evidently by innumerable examples which might be alleged of
Kingdoms and Cytties defended, Gods servants relieved, and his enemies
destroyed by them; See before nu. 18. and 19.
for which cause the ancient Fathers do worthily call them the keepers of human
kind, governors of our actions, the Capteyns, Princes, propugnators, patrons,
and protectors of men (as I have more particulerly declared before in this
Chapter) and therefore also all Christian Countries, and Cittyes are accustomed
to have some Saint, The 1. part of the Treatise of Policy and religion chap.
15. nu. 12.13.14.15.16.17.18. and 27. Item 2 par. chap. 24. nu. 31.
or other for their particular patron, by whose help they have often received
relief in their necessityes, and victory against their enemies; whereof diverse
notable examples testified by very grave authors may be seen in a treatise of
Policy and Religion published a few years a go, whereto I remit my Reader for
breuityes sake and will now infer upon these premises that seeing the
glorified Saints of God, do not only understand and know our prayers, but also
are most willing and able to help us, and, as S. John testifyeth in the
Apocalips do offer up our prayers to God, Apoc. 5.
yea and as M. Andrews himself grants do pray for us; and finally seeing
that experience See sup. nu. ^2.
also teaches that they do diverse ways assist and relieve us (which I have
evidently proved by the testimony of the ancient Fathers) it were most absurd
to think that the holy Scriptures should allow us to crave the prayers and
help of men, and disallow prayers to Saints and therefore I conclude that for
as much as prayer to Saints is most consonant both to Scripture and reason, and
most profitable, and beneficial to men, and was admitted, and practiced by all
the primitue Church, and ratified, and approved by the uniform consent of the
ancient Fathers (as I have showed sufficiently before) it cannot be rejected by
M. Andrews, and his fellows, though there should be no commandment nor example
of it in Scripture, seeing they profess to admit without a precept, such
things as are indifferent, when they are conform to the holy Scriptures, the
practice of the primitive Church, and judgment of all the ancient Fathers.

61. But what starting hole, Two foolish exceptions taken by M. Andrews to the
Cardinals allegation of the ancient Fathers.
trow you, will M. Andrews find here, or what exceptions will he take to this
my conclusion? mary forsooth, he will cavil, at least, about the authority of
the Fathers alleged by the Cardinal; against whom he takes two main
exceptions, the one concerning the age, and time when they lived, and the other
touching their uniform consent; of the former he says that they were all of
them after 300. years, to wit, in the 4. age, whereas in quadringentis annis,
says he, rex expectat, the King expects the resolution of the Fathers of
400. years; Andr. page 35.. de qua dringentis.
as who would say that the Cardinal has proved nothing to the purpose (at
least to his Majesty's intention) because he has not alleged any of the
Fathers of the first 3. hundred years; M. Andrews wrongeth his Majesty.
wherein no doubt he does his Majesty great wrong, Fathering his own foolish,
and absurd conceit upon his Majesty, whose great wisdom being considered, it
cannot be imagined, that in admitting the Fathers of the first 500. years (for
so he does in the English Apology) his meaning was to reject their uniform
consent in any one of those centuries especially seeing that his Majesty
professes in the same place to reverence the ancient Fathers more then ever
the Jesuits did; which truly he should not do if his meaning were such as M.
Andrews makes it here.

62. For I am well assured that the Jesuits never took any exception against
all the Fathers of any one age from Christ's time to this, The uniform consent
of the Fathers of the 4. or 5. age must needs be taken for an evident testimony
of the truth.
and much less to those of the 4. and 5. age, who were of such eminent
learning; and sanctity, that their uniform consent concerning any question of
religion, must needs be held for an evident testimony of the truth, seeing that
God of his infinite mercy, did then propagate his Church, and faith over the
world, and establish the same under Christian Emperors (to wit Constantin the
Great, and his successors (by means whereof the Church was every where
provided, and furnished with notable Pastors, who being freed from the former
persecutions, had opportunity to write those ample volumes, and worthy
monuments, which by Gods great providence they left to their posterity, for the
confirmation of the Christian Catholyke faith; whereas in the former ages (I
mean the first 3. Centenaryes) the persecution was so great under the pagan
Emperors that neither the Christian faith could so much extend it self, as it
did in the 4. and 5. age. Neither could there be so many able men to write,
neither those that were, could have such opportunity to do it, as the others
had in the peace, and tranquillity of the Church.

Some one Father of the 4. and 5. age has written more then all the Fathers of
the 3. precedent ages.
63. And this is evident by the works of the one, and the other seeing that in
the first 300. years, there were not past 7. or 8. Fathers at most, that
wrote, (at least whose books we now have) and of those also the most wrote
very little, in so much that the works of some one of the Fathers of the 4.
and 5. age do in volume, and quantity exceed all the works (that are now
extant) of all the Fathers of the 3. former ages; and therefore it cannot be
expected, that they should treat, or touch all matters which are now in
controversy, especially such as were not then any way called in question.
Besides that in the 4. and 5. age were held the 4. first General Counsels,
which not only his Majesty, It is not possible that all the Doctors and Pastors
of the Church can err in any thing at any time and why.
but also M. Andrews himself admits. In which respect the Fathers of that
time must needs be taken for assured, and uncontrollable witnesses of the
truth, for those Counsels (which were no other but assemblyes of the Fathers
then living) could not be of such undoubted authority, as they are, if the
Fathers of those ages had uniformly taught, or believed any erroneous
doctrine; for if they were all deceived in one point, they might also be
deceived and err in the rest, and so should the whole Church (whereof they were
the Pastors and Doctors) be drawn into error by them, Matthew. 28. Ibid. 16.
which is not possible, seeing that Christ has not only promised his own
assistance to his Church for ever, Ephesians. 4.
and that hell gates shall not prevail against it, but also has placed in it
Pastors, Pastors and Doctors ordained by Christ in his Church to preserve it
from error, unto the worlds end.
and Doctors (says the Apostle) to the consummation of the Saints, unto the
work of the ministry, until we meet all in the unity of faith; vt iam non
simus paruuli fluctuantes etc. to the end we now be not wavering Children, and
carried away with every blast of doctrine; so says the Apostle.

64. Whereby it is evident that God of his singular providence has given
Doctors, and Pastors to the Church, yea and ordained that they shall remain
there unto the worlds end, to preserve the same from error; whereupon it
follows, that all the Doctors, and Pastors of the Church, If all the Doctors
of the Church, could err at any time, the remedy were not effectual which God
has ordained to preserve his Church from error by them.
cannot err at any time, for if they could, then were not the remedy
effectual, and certain which God has ordained in his Church to preserve it
from error by them; and therefore if they have all erred in the 4. age, or any
other, then has the providence, ordinance, yea and the promise of God failed,
which is impossible (as I have amply proved in my supplement) so as I conclude
that the exception which M. Andrews takes against the Fathers alleged by the
Cardinal, for being all of that 4. age, is most vain, and frivolous, seeing
that the consent of the Doctors of any one age is sufficient to determine any
matter in controversy.

65. And much more may we content our selves with the uniform testimony, and
consent of those of the 4. and 5. age in the time of the 4. first general
Counsels, See sup. chap. 4. nu. 36.37.38.
when the Church most flourished, and as I have signified before, was best
furnished with learned, and holy Pastors, and Doctors of whom the Cardinal
has cyted no less then twelve, to wit S. Basil, S. Gregory Nyssen, S.
Ephraem, S. Gregory Nazianzen. Eusebius. S. Chrysostom, If these Fathers
cannot be heard or credited what other Fathers will he desire?
S. Ambrose, S. Augustine, S. Hierome, S. Cyril, S. Paulinus and S. Maximus;
besyds the history of Ruffinus, to whom I have also added Theodoret, not
inferior in learning to the rest; all which were pillars, lights, and notable
ornaments of the latin, and Greek Church in the 4. and 5. age; and all of
these being 14. in number, alleged by the Cardinal and me, 12. have given (as
you have heard) uniform and clear testimony to the doctrine, and custom of
Prayer to Saints, either inuocating Saints themselves, or approving the public
use and practice of it in others; and albeit the other two (to wit S. Ciril and
Eusebius) do not so expressly speak of the invocation of Saints, as the other
fathers do, yet the same is also sufficiently gathered out of their
testimonies, as I have showed before in the 6. Chapter; See chap. ^. nu. 28.
and 66.
whereupon I conclude, that this doctrine of prayer to Saints, be^ing approved
and practiced by so many learned Fathers of the 4. and 5. age, it must needs be
admitted for an infallible truth.

66. Andr. page 6.. Tum.
Yea but says M. Andrews there is no uniform co^se^t of Fathers in this
point; for, alij, says he, non pauci sunt etc. there are not a few others, who
have right of suffrage, or voice, herein; omitted by the Cardinal. So he;
wherein I doubt not, good Reader, but thou see how absurdly he cauilleth, and
tryfleth, for may not the verdict of a whole Jury of Fathers alleged by the
Cardinal, The uniform consent of a few Fathers not contradicted by the rest,
must needs be taken for a genrall consent of the Church i^ their time.
and not contradicted by any suffice to show a general, and uniform consent
of the Church in their time? and will not M. Andrews acknowledge an uniform
consent in the Fathers, without a particular testimony of every one of them?
does he suppose that every one of them has written of all points of religion?
and if they have not (whereof there is no doubt) shall the silence of some
prejudice the clear testimony of others? so shall we prove little or nothing at
all by the Fathers, for there are but very few points of religi^on, whereof
every one of them has had occasion to write.

67. But will M. Andrews, and his fellows be content that we exact the like of
them when they allege the Fathers; See supra nu. 33.
as for example, the Bishops in their Canon before mentioned, concerning the
use of the sign of the Cross in Baptism, M. Andrwes confuted by an example
of his own fellows.
do affirm that they follow therein the judgment of all the Fathers of the
primitive Church, but can they show, trow you, that every Father of the
primitive Church, yea or the greatest part of them do particulerly speak of
that ceremony? sure I am they cannot show it; for albeit diverse very ancient
and holy Fathers do treat thereof and highly approve it, yet many others are
utterly silent concerning the same; nevertheless for as much as those that
approve it, are not contradicted by any of the rest, their testimony may well
be taken for the uniform consent of all, or truly otherwise my Lord Bishops
will not be able to justify their assertion, and prove that they follow the
judgment of all the Fathers in that point. Therefore this exception of M.
Andrews is very ridiculous except he can show that those Fathers whom the
Cardinal omitted, have contradicted the testimonies of the other; but this you
see, he has not been able to do, though he has done his best endeavor
thereto, with shame enough to himself, and his cause.

S Augustine against Julian the Pelagian contented himself with the
testimo^nyes of six Fathers.
68. S. Augustine writing against Julian the Pelagian about original sin, and
the baptism of Infants, thought the testimony of 6. Fathers sufficient to
convince him, though five of them were of the same time, and age wherein he
himself lived; for whereas the Pelagian falsely pretended that S. Chrysostom
made for him, S. Augustine answered: Absit vt Ioannes Constantinopolitanus etc.
God forbid that John Bishop of Constantinople should resist so many, and worthy
Bishops his fellows, especially Innocentius Bishop of Rome, S. Aug. lib. 1.
contra Julian. cap. 2.
Cyprian of Carthage, Basil of Cappadocia, Gregory of Nazianzen, Hilary of
France, and Ambrose of Milan. So he. Therefore how much more may we rely upon
the authority of as many more Fathers, whereof there were 4. even of those
whom S. Augustine named, and he himself also one of the number, and all of
them flourished above 1100. years ago, and have not been gaynsayd, or impugned
by any? May we not, I say, boldly admit their testimonies for a proof of the
uniform consent of the Church in their time? The Scripture teaches, and
common practice approves that 2. or 3. substantial witnesses may suffice to
prove any matter in question, Deuteronomy. 17.
and therefore much more may these 12. most learned, and holy Fathers suffice
to show, what was the practice, and belief of the Church in their days,
especially seeing that diverse of them speak of public matters of fact, which
passed in their own time, and knowledge, in which respect they cannot be
thought to feign; and lie, except we shall take them to be void both of
conscience, and common honesty.

69. But M. Andrews adds further, that it appears even in Cardinal
Bellarmine himself that the Fathers were not all of one mind concerning prayer
to Saints, Andr. vbi supra.
and for proof thereof he remitteth his Reader to the Cardinals
controuersyes, Another vayn evasion of M. Andrews answered.
and particulerly to the tract de beatitudine Sanctorum, the first book, and
20. Chapter; which truly I have read diligently, and cannot find any thing at
all to that purpose, except perhaps he mean that the Cardinal signifies
there the different opinions of the Fathers concerning the manner how Saints do
understand, Bellar. de beatit. Sanct. lib. 1. cap. 20.
or hear our prayers; whereupon it seems M. Andrews infers that they
differed also in opinion concerning the whole controversy, Cardinal Bellarmine
abused by M. Andrews.
when nevertheless it appears evidently there, that they made no doubt whether
prayer to Saints be lawful, neither yet whether they know our actions, but
only in what manner they know them, and how they hear, or understand our
prayers; touching which point, and the absurd inference that M Andrews makes
thereof (denying the certaynty of the effect, by the uncertainty of the cause,
or manner of it) I have so amply discoursed See supra nu. 12.13.14.15. and 16.
before, that I shall not need to say any more thereof in this place.

70. But that which I wish to be noted here is, that in the same Chapter which
he quoteth, all the arguments of Luther, Calvin, the Magdeburgenses, and the
rest, and amongst others even those which he obiecteth against prayer to
Saints, are fully answered, and yet he insisteth still upon the same, without
any reply in the world to the Cardinals answers, as though these his old stale
objections were new inventions, and had never been answered before; whereas
reason would, M Andrews presumed to err not of ignorance but of malice.
that seeing he saw the answers thereto (as by this his quotation it is
manifest he did) he should have said somewhat to confute them. And if he say
that he did not hold them worthy of a reply, he should have showed the same, at
least in some one or 2. of them: and so no doubt he would have done, if he had
been able, whereby it appears that he erreth not of ignorance, but of mere
malice, and impugneth a known truth against his own conscience, and knowledge.

71. Well then I will conclude concerning the 12. Fathers alleged by the
Cardinal, S. Aug. aduers. Julian Pela. lib. 2. in Epilogo.
and me, with the words of S. Augustine, defending the authority, and faith of
11. Fathers alleged by him against Julian the Pelagi^n, who desired to have
Judges of his cause. His igitur eloquijs, says S. Augustine, Saint Augustins
words to a Pelagian heretic fitly applied to M. Andrews.
and tanta auctoritate Sanctorum etc. therefore with these testimonies, and so
great authority of holy men, either thou will through Gods mercy be cured
(which how much I desire, he sees, whom I beseech to work it) or if (which
God forbid) thou still remain in thy great folly (for so it is, though it
seem wisdom to thee) thou will not seek Judges, to the end to purge thy
self, and try thy cause, but to accuse the worthy, and famous Doctors of
Catholyke verity, Irenaeus, Cyprian, Reticius, Olympius, Hilary, Gregory,
Ambrose, Basil, John, Innocent, and Hierome, with the rest of their fellows
yea the universal Church of Christ, wherein they have flourished with exceeding
great glory in our Lord, whiles they faithfully ministered the food of God to
his divine family, and therefore I will see that in respect of this thy
miserable madness (from which God deliver thee) thy books are to be answered
in such sort that the faith of these Fathers is to be defended against thee, no
less then the Gospel it self against the professed enemies of Christ. Thus
says S. Augustine to Julian, and the same say I to M. Andrews, with like hearty
desire of this good, leaving the application of the whole partly to the
consideration of the discreet Reader, and partly to himself according to the
light, and feeling he may have thereof in his own conscience.

72. It rests now that I say somewhat briefly to certain trifling
objections which he makes against the invocation of Saints out of Origin, S.
Cyril, and S. Athanasius, Certain trifeling objections of M. Andrews out of
Origin, S. Cyril, and S. Athanasius.
urging the Cardinal to show somewhat out of them to prove it to be lawful,
and particulerly out of Origin against Celsus, and S. Cyril against Julian the
Apostata, and out of Athanasius against the Arians, because he supposes that
those Fathers should in those their treatises have taught that the invocation
of Saints is lawful, if they had been of that opinion; and he adds that the
two former do flatly deny that Christians do honor Martyrs pari cultu, with
equal honor to that which the Paynims gave to their Heroes: wherein truly he
has great reason; and I will also add thereto that not only Origin, and S.
Cyril, but also S. Nazianz. oration. 1. in Julian.
Gregory Nazianzen, S. S. Aug. de ciuita. Dei lib. 22. cap. 10.
Augustine, and Theodoret de Graecor. affect. curat. cap. 8.
Theodoret, and diverse other Fathers deny the same, as well as they, but what
is that to the invocation of Saints, or yet to the honor that the Church does
to them in their feasts (which perhaps M. Andrews covertly impugneth by this
objection, though he speak expressly of nothing else but of the invocation of
Saints) does he not know that the Heroes were not only accounted Gods, but also
honored as Gods with Sacrifice, which honor the Fathers do vterly deny to be
given by Christians to Martyrs, and Saints, though they highly approve the
honor that is done unto them in the Church, as to the beloved servants of God.

73. And now will M. Andrews infer hereupon that Saints may not be
inuocated? me thinks he should not be simple; and if he say that those Fathers
should at least upon the same occasion have taught that the invocation of
Saints is lawful, if they had held it so to be (for so indeed he seems to
infer) I have See chap. 7. nu. 35.36. and 37.
already answered him sufficiently concerning this absurd manner of arguing, ab
auctoritate negatiua, and therefore will only say unto him here, that I may
with much more reason infer the contrary upon the same ground, M Andrews his
argument retorted upon himself.
to wit that because those Fathers did not upon that occasion teach the
invocation of Saints to be unlawful, therefore they approved it; for rejecting
the unlawful honor that the Paynims said was done to Martyrs, they had
sufficient occasion to reject also the invocation of them, if they had held it
to be unlawful. So as, you see, he gayneth nothing by this objection out of
Origin, and S^ Cyril, but rather hurts his cause, and bewrays his own
folly.

74. But now in his other objection out of Athanasius he shows both folly,
and fraud. For whereas he urges the Cardinal to bring some testimony for the
invocation of Saints out of the Orations of S. Athanasius against the Arians,
M. Andrews frames a very fraudulent objection out of S. Athanasiu^.
he pretends to find there, that the same is wholly excluded, and rejected,
vbi, says he, Christum ideo conuincit esse Deum, quod inuocetur; praeter Deum
enim a Christianis neminem inuocari, where Athanasius does therefore convince
that Christ is God, because he is inuocated, for that Christians do invoke
none but God. So he; quoting for the same the second oration of S. Athanasius
against the Arians; Athana. orat^ ^^.
where truly I find no such thing; true it is that in the 3. Oration he proves
substantially, and amply that Christ is God because he is adored, speaking
plainly of that kind of adoration which is called Cultus latriae, and is due to
God alone, as it is evident by the places of Scripture which he alleges to
prove it; but of invocation there is not one word, for ought I find, and though
there were, yet it were as little to the purpose, for that invocation is also
diversely taken, as adoration is, and is applied sometimes to God alone (in
which sense it cannot be applied to creatures) and sometimes to Angels, Saints,
or men, as I have showed evidently before in the 6. Chapter by examples of holy
Scripture, See before Chap. 6. nu. 2.3.4. and 5.
and the testimony of S. Augustine.

75. Whereby it appears, that he is not only idle, and impertinent in this
objection, M. Andrews idle impertinent and fraudule^t.
but also fraudulent; changing the word adoration into invocation, if he did
mistake the second oration of S. Athanasius for the third, and not of purpose
falsify, and belly him in both; which I remit to God and his conscience to judge
of; and will now with this conclude this Chapter, and matter, not doubting^
good Reader, but thou have noted throughout the whole, that he has neither
sufficiently answered any one place of the Fathers alleged by the Cardinal,
or any argument of his, neither yet has objected any thing himself to any
purpose, but has either notably tryfled, and paltred in his answers, and
objections, or egregiously perverted, corupted, or falsified such Fathers, and
authors as he has had occasion to allege.

M. Andrews a true (...) and a wrangler, iuggler and tryfler in the highest
degree.
76. So as, I hope, I have now performed that which I undertook in these 3.
Chapters, which was to defend the Cardinal, and to prove M. Andrews to be a
true (...), that is, an egregious wrangler, iangler, iuggler, and tryfler in
the highest degree; and by the same occasion I have also fully debated with him
an important point of Catholic religion concerning the invocation of Saints,
which I have evidently proved to be most consonant to holy Scripture, practiced
by the primitive Church, approved by the uniform consent of the ancient
Fathers, most acceptable to God, honorable to him, and his Saints, and finally
very behouefull, and beneficial to man. Whereby it may appear that M.
Andrews, and his fellows, who so eagerly impugn it, are no other then the
instruments, and proctors of the Devil, who out of his extreme malice, and
envy to Angels, Saints, and all mankind, seeks by all the means he may, to
deprive the Angels, and Saints of their honor, M. Andrews the Devils Proctor.
and man of the inestimable benefits that he may reap, both spiritually, and
temporally by their intercession; to which purpose he has retained, and feyed
M. Andrews, as it seems by his diligent, and eloquent pleading the cause, and
will, I fear me, one day pay him his fee in other money then he will be willing
to receive, except he open his eyes in time to see his danger, which I beseech
God of his infinite mercy to give him grace to do.

THE CONCLUSION OF THIS ADIOYNDER, DIVIDED INTO TWO CHAPTERS. IN THIS, are
detected diverse frauds and shifts common to M. Andrews with M. Barlow; as to
change the state of the question, to dissemble that which most imports in the
Cardinals text and arguments; to abuse, wrest, belly and falsefy not only the
Cardinal, but also the ancient Fathers, Counsels, and holy Scriptures: and
finally to face out matters impude^tly for lack of proofs.
CHAP. IX.
THERE remain, good Reader, diverse other things in M. Andrews to be examined
which I have touched in my Supplement: The author forced to draw to an end.
but being now called on by my printer to furnish his press, I am forced not
only to send away that which I have already written, but also to interrupt my
designement in the prosecution of the rest; and therefore for as much, as I am
now to draw to an end, I think good for the conclusion of the whole, to lay
before thee sundry sorts of shifts, cosenages, corruptions, and frauds which
he has used throughout his whole work; and to the end I may perform it with
more breuity, and better method, I will follow the same course that I held with
M. Barlow, That is, draw them to certain ^eades and give thee some few
examples of every one, which being added to those that have already occurred in
this Adioynder, may suffice, I hope, to show ^hee with what kind of stuff he
has patched up his Latin volume, what a miserable cause he and his fellows
have to defend, seeing it drives them to such shameful shifts as thou have
partly seen already, and shall further see by that which ensues.

2. The first point which I reproved in M. Barlow was his common custom to
change the state of the question, Changing the state of the question
exemplified in the question of the Popes Primacy.
and so to answer nothing to the purpose, which is no less frequent and
ordinary in M. Andrews: as for example, whereas the true state of the
controversy betwixt us and them concerning the primacy of the Pope, is, Whether
he be supreme head of the Church in all spiritual and Ecclesiastical causes,
and may in some cases extend his power to temporal things, that is to say,
Whether being the supreme spiritual Pastor, he may for the publik benefit of
the Church and the good of souls punish his disobedient children (namely
temporal Princes) in their temporal See supl. chap. 1. nu. 59. and seq.
states (which I have showed in my Supplement to be a necessary consequent of
his supreme spiritual power) M. Andrews will needs make us hold and teach
that the Popes primacy is a temporal primacy, in which respect he Andr. cap.
1. page 17. linca. 4.
calls our doctrine and belief touching that point, illustrem fidei
articulum de Primatu Petri temporali, The notable Article of Faith concerning
the temporal Primacy of Peter: and as you heard Chap. 5. nu. 21.
before distinguishing the name of Peter's primacy (which he grants) from the
thing signified by that name (which he denies) he terms it Cap. 8. page
217.. Inspiciam and cap. 1. page 14.. 1.
terrestrem Monarchiam, an earthly Monarchy, and therefore he urges the
Cardinal to prove this temporal primacy, and earthly Monarchy, and so
impugneth no opinion of ours, nor any thing else but his own fond fiction, as I
have showed Chap. 5. nu. 21. and 22.
before, and more amply in the Sea chap. 1. nu. 20. and 2^.
first Chapter of this Adioynder, and therefore I shall not need to stand any
longer upon this point here, but will pass to another.

3. Amongst other questions much controuersed concerning good works, Another
example of the state of the question changed touching works of supererogation.
one is, whether there be any works of supererogation, which the Catholyks
understand to be such as being lawful and good of their own nature, are not
commanded by any precept (as for example, the Evangelical Counsels) in which
sense Cardinal Bellarmine, and all other Catholics do use the word
supererogation, as signifying a work done supra praeceptum, that is to say,
more then the precept commands. But M. Andrews impugneth it in another sense
and so changes the state of the question. Andr. cap. 8. page 169.. In
supererogationis.
For he will needs have works of Supererogation to be such good works only as
are done after or besides the full accomplishment of the Commandment (so that
before a man can do a work of supererogation, he must fulfill and fully
observe all the precepts) whereupon he also infers, that no man can do any
such works, no not the Apostles themselves, because they could not fulfill the
Commandments, having always occasion to to say, Dimitte nobis debita nostra,
forgive us Lord our offenses.

4. Wherein M. Andrews expressly impugneth not so much the Cardinal and
other. Catholics, as S. Augustine, and other ancient Fathers, from whom they
take both the term and the sense thereof. For whereas our Savior says in the
Gospel, that the good Samaritan brought the wounded man into the Inn, Luc.
10.
and leaving two pence with the Host told him, quodcumque supererogaueris
reddam tibi, whatsoever thou shall lay out more I will render it unto thee, S.
Augustine alluding to the same place, and words of our Savior, teaches
evidently, that those things which are lawful, id est, S. Aug. lib. ^. de
adulter coniug. ad Pollent. cap. 14.
says he, nullo praecepto Domini prohibentur, that is to say, which are not
forbidden by any precept of our Lord, and are done, non praescripto legis, sed
confi^io charitatis, not by the prescript or commandment of the law, but by the
counsel of Charity, haec sunt, says he, quae amplius exogantur saucio etc.
These are those works which are laid out more for the wounded man, who through
the compassion of the Samaritan was brought to the Inn to be cured, and
therefore they are said not to be commanded by our Lord, although they are
advised to be offered, to the end, that they may be understood to be so much
more gratfull, by how much more they are signified not to be due. So he.

5. Also in another place he puts the matter out of all doubt exemplyfying
the same thus: Stbularius ergo est Apostolus. Idem lib. 2. quaest. Euang. cap.
1^^
Quod autem supererogat etc. Therefore the host is the Apostle, And that which
he lays out more, is either that counsel whereof he says, De Virginibus
praeceptum Domini non habeo, consilium autem do: Concerning virgins I have no
precept of our Lord, but I give counsel. Or else it is, that he wrought with
his own hands, least in the beginning of the Gospel he should be a burden to
some of the weaker sort, when nevertheless it was lawful for him to be fed or
maintained by the Gospel. Thus says S. Augustine, clearly confuting M.
Andrews his idle discourse; for to omit that he teaches the use of the word
supererogation (which therefore was not devised of late time and much less by
the Catholics of these days) first he shows that it signifies such works,
as being lawful them selves are not commanded by any precept, in which only
sense Cardinal Bellarmine, and all other Catholyks use it.

6. Secondly he exemplifieth the same not only in the counsel of Virginity
(which is therefore a work of Supererogatio^) but also in S. Paul's own
practice of mayntayning himself by the labor of his hands, when he might have
lived by the Gospel; whereupon it follows clearly that M. Andrews argues
very impertinently in saying, that the Apostles themselves could do no works
of Supererogation, because they had daily occasion to say, Dimitte nobis debita
nostra. For I am sure M. Andrews will not deny that S. Paul was an Apostle, and
yet S. Augustine affirms, as you see, that he not only taught works of
Supererogatio^ (namely Virginity, and continent single life) but also practiced
and performed them himself, doing such good works as he was not bound to do
by any precept. Besides that, it appears also hereby that a man may do a
work of Supererogation, though he have occasion daily to say Dimitte nobis
debita nostra. Which therefore was an idle exception of M. Andrews against such
works, even in the Apostles themselves. Lastly we see by these testymonyes of
S. Augustine, and the example of S. Paul, that a work of supererogation is no
other but such a good work as is not commanded by precept, and therefore it is
evident that M. Andrews taking it in another sense changes the state of the
question.

A third example of the state of the question changed. Car. Apol. pa. 107.
7. Moreover, whereas the Apology for the Oath accounts the Adoration of the
Bl. Sacrament of the Eucharist to be a new inue^tio^, and the Cardinal
answering the same declares the sense and meaning of the Catholics concerning
that point, saying, that they teach the Adoration of Christ our Lord present in
the Sacrament etc. M. Andrews replieth thus: In adoratione Sacramenti ad limen
ipsum turpiter impingit etc. In the Adoration of the Sacrament the Cardinal
stumbleth shamefully, Andr. cap. 8. page 195.. In adora.
even at the first entrance. Of the Sacrament, says he, that is to say of
Christ our Lord in the Sacrament^ Apage vero! Quis ei hoc dederit? Fie fie, who
would grant him this? The Sacrament, that is to say, Lib. 4. cap. 34. de
consecrat. 2. Hoc ergo.
Christ in the Sacrament, but rather Christ himself (who is the thing
contained in the Sacrament) is to be adored wheresoever he is, i^, with, or
without the Sacrament. The King houldeth that Christ is truly in the Eucharist,
and truly to be adored, that is to say, the thing of the Sacrament, but not the
Sacrament, I mean the earthly part, as Irenaeus calls it, and the visible
according to Augustine. So he.

8. Wherein I omit for the present to note what he grants concerning our
Catholyk doctrine (whereof I shall have occasion to speak more particulerly
Chap. 10. nu. 4.
hereafter) and I only wish to be observed, how manifestly and wittingly (no
doubt) he changes the state of the question, notwithstanding the Cardinals
own explication thereof, who signifies, that for as much as Christ is truly,
and really present in the Sacrament, therefore Christ himself is adored
therein, and not the bare Sacrament: though the Cardinal, I say, does declare
this, yet M. Andrews will needs presuppose that we hold and teach that the
bare Sacrament or forms of bread and wine are to be adored, for else why does
he make distinction of the Sacrament, and the thing of the Sacrament, granting
the adoration of the one, and not of the other, but denying the later, as our
opinion, as though we affirming that the Sacrament of the Eucharist is to be
adored, should mean it only of the exterior forms? As well might he say,
that he which teaches that Christ is to be adored, means it of his humanity,
and not of his divinity; for who knows not that the Sacrament of the
Eucharist conteyneth not only the Sacrament (that is to say the exterior
forms of bread, and wine) but also the thing of the Sacrament, which is our
Savior Christ, as the person of Christ conteyneth as well his Divinity, as his
humanity. And therefore he that adoreth his person does adore his Divinity
united with his humanity, and not his humanity alone.

9. For otherwise he that should adore Christ Cultu latriae, S. Ambros. lib. 3
de spiritu S. cap. 12.
should commit Idolatry. And as well S. Ambrose (when he says, Carnem Christi
in mysterijs odoramus, We adore the flesh of Christ in the mysteries) as also
S. Augustine (saying, S. Aug. in Psa^m. 98.
Nemo illam carnem manducat nisi prius adorauerit, No man eats that flesh but
he adoreth it first) should teach Idolatry, if they should be understood to
speak of the flesh of Christ alone separated from his Divinity. In which
repect M. Andrews himself approves that manner of speech in those two
Fathers, yea, and afterward explicateth the same himself very well out of S.
Augustine, saying, the humanity it self of Christ (as S. Augustine disputes)
is not to be adored by it self, Andr. vbi supra page 201.
but united with the Divinity, as the Kings purple, or Royal robe, when he is
vested or clad with it, and not when it lies by it self alone. Thus says M.
Andrews: and the like exposition might he have made of adoring the Blessed
Sacrament of the Eucharist, if his perverse, wrangling, and cauiling humor
would have permitted him to acknowledge what is our Catholic doctrine in this
point, which he could not but know in his conscience, for that I am sure he
never read, nor heard tell of any Catholic, who taught or thought that the bare
Sacrament in the Eucharist I mean the exterior form, is to be adored without
Christ's presence, or in respect of it self. And this may suffice for this
point.

A fourth example of the state of the question changed, concerning the
veneration of holy relics.
10. I may add the like concerning another point, wherein M. Andrews charge
the Cardinal to change the state of the question, I mean touching the
reverence and honor that is and always has been done in the Catholic Church
to the holy relics of Saints. For whereas the Apology for the Oath condemns
it for a new and false, yea an abominable doctrine, and the Cardinal in his
answer thereto, so amply and evidently proves it out of the Ancient Fathers
that it cannot be denied, M. Andrews has no other refuge but to take hold of
the word Adoration used by the Apology, Card. Apolog. cap. 1. page
12.13.14.15.16.17. and 18.
understanding it for worship due to God alone, and exacting of the Cardinal
some proof that such adoration is due to relics, as though Catholics were of
that opinon; whereas nether the Cardinal, nor any other Catholic does apply
that word to relics in that sense, but use it for reverence and veneration
due to holy men, or holy things, as the Cardinal himself signifies in plain
and express words. So that if the said Apology do impugn the adoration of
Relics, in the other sense (meaning the exhibition of divine honor
thereunto) it does not any way impugn our doctrine, A strange peruersity
but changes the state of the question, as well as M. Andrews, though so
absurdly as he who does not only understand the Adoration of Relics to
signify a divine honor done unto them, but also will needs prove no adoration
of creatures is lawful.

11. To which purpose he alleges the example of the Angel in the Apocalypse,
Apocal. 1^. and 22.
who when Saint John the Evangelist would have adored him twice, forbad him to
do it at both times, saying, Vide ne feceris, Deum adora, Andr. vbi supra. page
49.. neces^se ^abe^.
See that thou do it not, adore God. Whereupon he infers, that seeing S.
John could not be ignorant (especially the second time) that the Angel was not
God, and yet would have adored him, it follows that he (I mean S. John) did
not intend to adore him with adoration due to God alone, but with such (says
M. Andrews) as the Cardinal supposes may be used to Angels, holy men, or
sacred things, and yet nevertheless the Angel would not permit it, Andr.
ibidem page 5^.
and therefore in M. Andrews his opinion no such adoration is lawful, for, Nec
est, says he, Angelorum ratio alia, alia Sanctorum etc. For in this there is
no difference betwixt the adoration of Angels, and of Saints of holy men^
neither is there more respect to be had to relics the^ to those whose
relics they are. So he. Not admitting, as you ^ee, any adoration of Angels
or Saints, though it be not meant thereby to exhibit divine honor unto them,
but only to do an act of veneratio^, reverence or religious worship; and why?
Many forsooth because the Angel would not suffer S. John the Apostle to adore
him in that manner.

12. Wherein two things are to be noted, the one, what a poor conceit M.
Andrews has of S. John whom he makes to be so ignorant that he knew not
whether such adoration were lawful or no, M. Andrews has a poor conceit of
S. John the Evangelist
until the Angel did instruct him, and forbad him to use it. The other that
he reasons as substantially as if he should say, that if a holy man should of
modesty and humility. refuse some extraordinary honor offered unto him by some
other holy person, and bid him not to do it to him, but to God, he must needs
mean that no such kind of reverence, or honor may be done to men; for such no
doubt was the case betwixt S. John and the Angel, Why the Angel in the
Apocalips did forbid S. John to adore him
either of them showing their humility, and the respect they bare the one to
the other, S. John reuerencing the Angel as a Celestial creature to whom he
held himself much inferior, and the Angel bearing much respect, and
reverence to S. John as to the most worthy and beloved Apostle of Christ, who
was Lord and master to them both, and therefore acknowledging himself to be
no other but conseruum, S. Greg. ho. ^. in Euang ^^ ad. A^sel. Richar. Ruper.
in 19. Apoc.
as he said, a fellow servant of S. John, he would not permit him to do him
that honor, but bad him do it to God; besides that, S. Gregory the great, Beda,
Anselmus, Richardus de S. Victore, and Rupertus do give also another reason
thereof to wit, that the Angel bare respect even to humane nature, in regard
of the humanity of our Savior. Hinc est, says S. Gregory, quod Lot, and Iosue
Angelos ipsis non prohibentibus etc. S. Greg vbi supra.
For this cause Lot and Iosue adored Angels, and were not forbidden by them,
but (...) in the Apocalips meaning to adore an Angel, was by him forbidden to
do it. So he, signifying how much the Angels respected humane nature after the
Incarnation of our Savior more then before.

13. But for the further satisfaction and instruction of the unlearned reader
in this point, Three sorts of adoration mentioned in the Scriptures
he is to understand that there are three kinds of adoration specified in the
holy Scripture. The first is that which is due to God alone, and is called by
Deuines Adoratio Latriae, that is to say, an adoration, or exterior worship
exhibited adoration is so due proper unto God alone, that it is Idolatry to
exhibit the same unto any Creature. Of this kind the Scripture speaks when it
says Matthew 4.
Dominum Deum tuum adorabis, and illi soli seruies. Thou shall adore thy Lord
God, and serve him alone. Also, Non Exodus 20.
adorabis ea neque coals: Thou shall not adore, nor worship them, that is to
say Idols. Non ^bid. 23.
adorabis Deos eorum; Thou shall not adore their Gods. Genesis 47
Adorauit Irael Dominum, Israel adored our Lord. Iudic. 7.
Gedeon adorauit and reuersus est. Gedeon adored and returned. Joan. 4.
Very adoratores adorabunt patrem in spiritu, and veritate. The true Adorers,
or worshipers, shall adore my Father in spirit and truth. And the like
occurreth in infinite other places as well of the new as the old testament.

14^ The second kind of adoration, though it be Genes. 18.
Abraham, Genesis 19^
Lo^, and Number. 22.
Balaam, who adored Angels prostrate upon the ground. And of Iosue 5.
Iosue who fell down prostrate before an Angel, and adorans ait, quid Dominus
meus etc. And adoring said, why does my Lord speak unto his servant? And so
far was the Angel from reprehending him, that he made him do more reueren^e,
commanding him to put of his shoes because the place was holy wherein he
stood; which place (no doubt) was no other way holy, but for the presence of
the Angell^ Also ^. Reg. 2^.
Saul adored the soul of Samuel. And though Abdias was in temporal dignity a
greater man, and more worthy then Elias the Prophet, yet he fell upon his face
before 3. Reg. 28.4. Reg. ^.
Elias, acknowledging thereby the spiritual excellency and sanctity of Gods
Prophet, and therein did an act of Religion^ As also the Children of the
Prophets did the like to Elizaeus, when they perceived by his miraculous
passage of the River, that God had given him the spirit of Elias, adorauerunt
eum, says the Scripture, proni interram. They adored him flat upon the ground.
In like manner Dan. 2.
Nabuchodonozor adored Daniel, and Hebr. 11. in Psalm ^8 See Bellar. de beat^e.
Sanct. li. 1. cap. 1^.
Jacob the top of Joseph's r^d. Finally the Psalmist says of the Arc (for so
it is to be understood according to the letter) adorate scabellum pedum eius,
Adore the Footstool of his Feet.

15. The third kind of Adoration, is no act of Religion, but merely civil
testifying a reverend respect of one man to another, for some civil, and
temporal excellency; such was the adoration, which Genesis 23.
Abraham used to the Children of Heth, Genesis 33.
Jacob to his brother Es^u, the Ib^d. 42
Children of Israel to their brother Joseph, Ruth. 2.
Ruth to Booz^ Judith. 2
Judith to Holofernes, 1. Reg 25
Abigail and 2. Reg. 9
Miphiboseth to David, besides very many Genesis 7 49.50. 2. Reg. 24. 2. R^g.
14.16.18. and 14. 3. Reg. 1. ver. 6.23.31 47. and 53. It^m ^ap. 2. and alibi
passim.
other which I omit for breuityes sake. In which as also in the two former
kinds of adoration, it is to be observed that as well the exterior Acts of
submission, and reverence as the word adoration are common to all three kinds,
and diuersifyed or distinguished only by the intention and will of him that
performs the same, and therefore we see that the same manner of prostra^ion
which Genesis 1^.
Abraham used to Almighty God for divine honor, was used as well by Ibid. 18.
himself as^ Ibid. 19.
others to Angels for a Religious veneration, and to Genesis 23.3^. and 42.
men of dignity for a civil worship and submission, and the same termed every
where adoration.

16. Hereby then it is evident, that according to the use and phrase of the
holy Scripture, Adoration is understood diversely according to the circumstances.
the word Adoration is to be understood diversely as it is diversely applied
either to God alone, or to Angels, holy men, and holy things, or else to men
of dignity and the same is also observed in the hebrew word Sachah which
signifies Adorare, and is diversely understood of each of these three kinds of
Adoration, according to the different application thereof^ in so much that it
cannot otherwise be distinguished but by the circumstances. So as it is no
marvel, that as well the ancient Fathers as the Catholics of these days,
following the custom of the holy Scriptures do use the word Adoration in the
same different manner and s^nse, that the Scripture does. But it may be
wondered that M. Andrews being so great a Doctor, and R^bin, as he is taken to
be, can either be so ignorant as not to know this, or so perverse and malicious
(if he know it) as to contend and strive to prove that there can be no lawful
Adoration but of God alone.

17. And therefore for as much as he has sought to make good his Assertion,
not only by the example of the Angel in the Apocalypse before mentioned, but
also by two or three testimonies of the Fathers (yea gybing, bragging, and
triumphing, in such sort as if he had utterly foiled the Cardinal) I cannot
omit to say somewhat thereto, Card. Apol vbi supra. S. Hierom. Epist. ad Marcel.
vt commigret Bethl^^m.
seeing I have had this occasion to speak thereof. The Cardinal to prove the
Adoration of Relics in the Catholyke sense, alleges amongst many other
places, one out of S. Hierome to Marcella, where he signified that if she would
come to Bethleem, she might besides many other acts of devotion (which he there
recounteth) adorare cineres etc. Andr. vbi supra page 49.. Non probat.
Adore the ashes of S. John Baptist, He^isaeus, and Abdias. Whereto M. Andrews
answers that S. Hierome does not use adorare there properly, but
figuratively: and thereof he yields two reasons, the one because in the same
place he says also, that she might puluerem lingere, lick the dust, Quare vt
hoc, ita and illud non proprie, sed figurate. Wherefore as this, so also that
is not spoken properly, but figuratively. Thus reasons M. Andrews, and by the
way adds out of his scoffing humor: At nec vos puluerilingi estis; But
neither you your selves are dust-lickers, meaning as I take it, that we must
either be dust-lickers, or else take adorare figuratively in that place.

A jest of M. Andrews spoiled.
18. But truly he has spoiled his jest by mistaking the phrase, whereupon he
groundeth it, for puluerem lingere, is not in all that Epistle, for ought I can
find, though I have read it over of purpose; but some lines before there is
indeed, Crucis lignum lambere, to like the wood of the Cross, and therefore if
he will make himself as merry with us, and with this phrase, as he does with
that other, he must say we are not Crucilambi, Crosse-lickers, or rather to
express the whole and make a merry word indeed he must say Cruci-ligni-lambi,
Crosse-wood-lickers; but howsoever it pleases him to be merry, I must tell
him seriously, that I will not so easily grant him, that Crucis lignum lambere,
was spoken there figuratively, for that it may well be that the devotion of the
faithful people was such a^ that time, that in kissing of the Cross they used
also to like the wood thereof. But put the case S. Hierome spoke therein
figuratively, does it therefore follow that adorare cin^res (which comes
after some lines) is also a figurative speech? as well may he say that every
word^ yea the whole context of that Epistle is figurative, seeing that there
are throughout the whole many elegant Metaphors, Allegories, and figurative
speeches.

19. But what figure trow you is it that he means? Andr. pa. 50. (...).
forsooth no other will serve the turn but Catachresis, for so he says in the
end, Cardinalis iam adoratio per Catachresin forte, proprie autem non est
adoratio. This Adoration (which the Cardinal says is due to holy things) may
perhaps be so called by the figure Catachresis, Qui^t. ^^flic. bra^. lib 9.
cap. 6. Isidor^ and Etymol.
but is not properly adoration. Thus says he most absurdly, for so should it
be used for lack of a proper word, if the Gra^marians, and Rhetoricians do
judge of Catachresis aright, which signifying Ab^sio, does import the abuse of
a Methaphore, when there wants a proper word: as Quintilian and others teach.

20. But will M. Andrews say, that there is such want of proper words for the
Veneration of Angels, Saints, and men, that the penners and translatours of
the holy Scriptures were forced in all those places mentioned before, to abuse
a word that is proper to God? Might not honorare and venerari have served to
express their meaning, if adorare were only to be understood of divine honor?
Besides that, I must needs say that the matter goes very hard with Abraham,
Lot, Iosue, Balaam, the Children of the Prophets, and all those others before
mentioned (who are said in the Scriptures to have adored Angels and men) their
case, I say, is hard^ if there be no way to save them from Idolatry, but by an
absurd Catachresis never dreamed of by any but by M. Andrews^ For I think no
man would be so absurd to imagine a Catachresis, where there is no want of
proper words, The word adoration used for the worship of Angels and men in
holy Sc^ipture above 40. times.
especially so often as adoration is used for the worship of Angels and men,
not only in the Fathers but also in the holy Scriptures. Where I ^are undertake
to show it in that sense above 40. times (for I have taken pains to search it)
which I hope may suffice to teach M^ Andrews that it does not signify divine
honor only, and that the ancient Fathers^ and we, who use it sometimes in other
sense, have sufficient warrant for it from the Scripture it self, and finally
that there is no other Catachresis (I mean no other abuse) in all this matter,
but in M. Andrews his corrupt Conscience, M. Andrews his corrupt conscience.
who makes no scruple to abuse and delude his Reader with such shifts and
devises, to bolster out his bad cause. Thus much for his first reason.

21. His second reason why adorare is taken figuratively in that place of S.
Hierome is this^ Vbi vero says he, Andr. vbi supra.
proprie ei loquendum erat etc. For when S. Hierome was to speak properly, to
wit, to Vigilantius his adversary (who pressed him strictly, and would not
suffer him to speak at large (then he denies it earnestly, saying, Nos autem,
non dico, Martyrum reliquias etc. We do not worship and adore (I do not say)
the Relics of Martyrs, but neither the Sun nor the Moon, nor the Angels,
nor the Cherubim, nor the Seraphim. Thus says M. Andrews out of S. Hierome,
ending his citation there; because that which follows would mar all his
market, as you shall see after a while, and in the mean time he concludes
thus, What I pray you will the Cardinal say here, seeing that the old Fathers
of the Church do cry out we do not adore the relics of Martyrs? M. Andrews
tryumpheth when he has lost the victory.
here the Cardinal is held so fast that he cannot slip away. Thus triumphs
M. Andrews before the victory, or rather having lost the victory, being
himself a Captive, and having no other remedy left him, but to brag and face
out the matter.

22. For thou shall understand good Reader, that S. Hierome here speaks (as
the Logicians say) ad hominem, that is to say according to the sense and
meaning of his adversary Vigilantius (one of M. Andrews his worthy
progenitors) who impugning the adoration of relics in the same sense that M.
Andrews does, Vigilantius M. Andrews his progenitor.
held it for no other then Idolatry, as S. Hierome testifies in the same
Epistle to Riparius, which M. Andrews alleges. Ais, says S. Hierome, S.
Hier. ad Riparium.
Vigilantius etc. you say, that Vigilantius (as we may say M. Andews) opens
again his stinking mouth, and casts forth a most filthy savor against the
Relics of holy Martyrs, and calls us, who reverence them, and worship the
bones of the dead, Cinerarios, and Idololatras, worshipers of Ashes, and
Idolators. Idem li. aduers. Vigilantium.
So he. And in his tract against Vigilantius himself, he sets down
Vigilantius his own words thus, Quid n^cesse est etc. What need have thou not
only to honor with so great honor, but also to adore that (I know not what)
which thou worshipest, carrying it in a little vessel from place to place, and
why do thou kiss and adore dust lapt in a linen cloth? And again a little
after, We see you, according to the custom of the Gentiles etc. every where
kiss and adore I know not what little dust carried in a little vssell, and lapt
in a precious linen cloth. Thus wrote Vigilantius.

23. Whereby you see how he charged the Catholics of those days with flat
Idolatry, for worshipping, or adoring the Relics of Saints, taking adoration
for worship due to God alone, in which respect he calls the Catholics
Idolators. And therefore S. Hierome answering him in the same sense, says that
which M. Andrews alleges, S. Hierom explicated by himself.
to wit, non adoramus reliquias Martyrum etc. We do not adore the relics of
Martyrs (that is to say, we do not give divine honor to the relics of
Martyrs, committing Idolatry as Vigilantius charge us: Idem ibidem.
) But, honoramus (says he presently afterward) reliquias Martyrum, vt eum
cuius sunt Martyris adoremus etc. We honor the Relics of Martyrs, that we may
adore (or yield divine honor to) him whose Martyrs they are. The honor done
to Gods servants for his sake, redoundeth to God.
Honoramus serous etc. We honor the servants, to the end that their honor may
redound to the honor of their Lord, who said, he which receives you,
receives me. Thus says S. Hierome; which M. Andrews thought good to
dissemble, as if he had not seem it, for that it fully explicateth the state
of the question betwixt S. Hierome and Vigilantius (as also betwixt M. Andrews
and us) and clears all the matter. For who sees not here that albeit S.
Hierome denies the adoration of Relics in the sense that Vigilantius obicted
it, as we also do (to wit as signifying a divine honor) yet he approves and
teaches it in the sense of Catholics, that is, as adoration signifies a
veneration and worship done to Saints, for the honor of God who is honored and
glorified thereby.

24. To which purpose two things are to be noted in this matter, the one, that
whereas Vigilantius charge the Catholics to adore and kiss every where the
R^liques of Martyrs, he showed sufficiently, that the custom of the faithful
was at that time to do corporal reverence thereto, not only by kissing them,
but also by inclyning or bowing down the body, which the word adoration
signifies, and S. Hierome denies not, though he denies the inference of
Idolatry, that Vigilantius made thereon.

25. The other is, that as Vigilantius did not herein reprove the particular
custom of some particular men, but the practice of the whole Church at that
time; so also S. Hierome did not impugn him only with private reasons and
arguments of his own, but also with public examples, as of the public
translation of the holy Relics of S. Andrew, S. Luke, and S. Timothy to
Constantinople by Constantin the Emperor, S. Hiero^. vbi supr^^
apud quas, says he, Daemones rugiunt etc. at which relics Devils do rore,
and the inhabitors and prossessors of Vigilantius do confess that they feel
their presence. So he. And then produces also another example that had passed
not long before of a most solemn translation of the Relics of Samuel the
Prophet from Iudaea to Chalcedon in Thracia, which were sumptuously and
triumphantly carried by Bishops in a goulden vessel, and met, received, and
accompanied by the people of all the Churches by the way (in so much that there
were, says S. Hierome, continual swarms of people even from Palestina to
Chalcedon, sounding forth the praise of Christ with one voice all a long as
they went: Mark ^hi^ reason of S. Hierome.
) whereupon he asks Vigilantius, whether he took Arcadius the Emperor (who
caused this to be done) and all the Bishops which carried these relics, and
all the multitude of people which accompanied them, for sacrilegious persons
and fools, and finally concludes, deryding his folly, Videlicet, says he,
adorabant Samuelem, non Christum, cuius Samuel and Leuita and Propheta fuit.
Belike they adored Samuel, and not Christ, whose Leuite and Prophet Samuel was.
This says S. Hierome, showing the absurdity of Vigilantius, who did think
that Christ was not adored in all this, but only Samuel. Whereas all the
reverence, honor, and adoration used by those Bishops, and people to the
Relics of Samuel, was indeed done to Christ, because (as S. Hierome said
before) seruorum honos redundat ad Dominum: The honor of the servants
redoundeth to their Lord.

26. So that S. Hierome does not deny, that holy relics may be adored in any
other sense, then as M. Andrews (following his progenitor Vigilantius) will
needs understand the word adoration, that is, for a divine Cult, and worship,
in which sense neither S. Hierome nor the Catholics in his time, nor we now do
use, or take it, when it is applied to holy things, but only for a devout and
religious veneration, as S. Hierome himself does also use it, not only in the
place before cited by the Cardinal (touching the adoration of the ashes of S.
John, and other Prophets) but also when he said of himself, S. Hierom. lib. 2.
Apol aduersus Ruffin.
Praesepe Domini and incunabula adoraui. I adored the manger, and cradle of
Christ: and again expounding that verse of the Psalm, adorate scabellum pedum
eius, adore the Foot-stole of his Feet, he takes the Footstool to be the
Cross, Idem in Psalm. 98.
giving thereby to understand that the Cross is to be adored. And therefore I
leave it to thee, good Reader, to judge what a vain vaunt it was of M. Andrews
to say upon the former place of S. Hierome, Tenetur hic Cardinalis vt elabi non
possit: hecre the Cardinal is taken, and held so fast, that he cannot slip
away. Whereas you see, that the whole place and the circumstances, being laid
down with the state of the question betwixt Vigilantius and S. Hierome (all
which he craftily concealed) he is caught himself like a mouse in a trappe in
such sort that he shall never be able to get out with his credit.

27. A place of S. Augustine and S. Ambrose examined.
But yet there remains a word or two more to be said of this matter to a
place of S. Augustine, and S. Ambrose, which he also obiecteth to the same
purpose. For whereas those two Fathers interpreting the words of the psalm,
adorate scabellum pedum eius, Adore ye the Footstool of his Feet, do
expound the footstool to be the body of our Savior in the Blessed Sacrament
of the Eucharist, S. Aug. in Psalm. 98. S Ambros. lib. 3. despir^ Sancto. c. 12.
teaching that the same is there to be adored, M. Andrews says, that if
adorare might be taken properly to adore holy things, they would never have
troubled themselves so much to find out how the Footstool of God might be
adored: neither would they have determined that it could not be adored but in
the body of Christ: Bellar. de Sanctor. Beatit. lib. 2. cap. 13.
Whereto I answer, first^ that they do not expound the same literally, but
mystically; for scabellum Dei, the Footstool of God, in that place, is
literally to be understood of the Arc of the Testament, as the Cardinal has
proved by many notable reaso^^ and authority^ in his Co^trouersys, whereto I
remit M. Andrews, because I will not detayne my reader too long upon this point.

28. Secondly I say, that albeit they understood adoration in that place for
divine honor, yet they do not deny but that it is, and well may be taken in
other places, S. Aug. de ciuitate Dei li. 10. cap. 1.
for a religious worship, done to holy men; for S. Augustine himself teaches
expressly in his book de Ciuitate Dei, that there is no one word in Latin
that so properly signifies divine honor, or worship, but it is, and may be
applied to creatures, except Latria, which is borrowed of the Greeks, and
applied either always, says S. Augustine, or almost always, to the service
of God, rather by custom and use, then by the nature of the word, properly
signifying seruitus, service. For which cause having in his questions upon
Genesis demanded, how Abraham could lawfully adore the Children of Heth, seeing
the Scripture says, Matthew. 4.
Dominum Deum tuum adorabis, and illi soli seruies. Thou shall adore thy Lord
God, and serve him alone, he answers that it is not said there, Deum solum
adorabis, Thou shall adore God alone, but, illi soli seruies thou shall serve
him alone, and notes also, that for the word seruies in Latin, the Greek
has (...), from whence is derived Latria. So that it is evident by S.
Augustine himself, that neither adorare, nor any other Latin word does
properly signify to worship God only, and that adoratio when it is not taken
for cultus Latriae (as he takes it in the exposition of Adorate scabellum
etc.) may be applied to creatures; and therefore he himsefe not only
understands adoration for civil worship in the foresaid example of Abraham,
Idem ser. 25 de Sanctis.
but also uses it else where for religious worship due to holy men, saying of
S. Peter, Bea^issimum Petrum piscatorom etc. The multitude of faithful people
does now adore the most Blessed Peter the Fisher^ genibus prouolutis, upon
their knees.

S. Ambros. de obitu Theodosij.
29. S. Ambrose also made no doubt to apply it to the veneration, and worship of
holy things, who speaking of the Nail of Christ's Cross (which Queen Helen
caused to be set in the Diadem of the Emperor Constantin her son) said, that
she did wisely therein, vt Crux Christi adoretur in regibus, that the Cross of
Christ may be adored in Kings; and to show that he spoke of religious worship,
and adoration, and not of civil honor due to kings, he adds immediately, non
insolentia ista, sed pietas est, cum defertur sacrae redemptioni, This is not
insolency, but piety, when (...) it is referred to our holy Redemption: wherein
I wish it ^o be noted by the way, that M. Andrews may learn hereby how
impertinently he answers else where to this place alleged by Cardinal
Bellarmine; for whereas the Cardinal (to prove the religious adoration of
relics, and images) obiecteth out of S. Ambrose this very place (to wit that
Queen Helen did well, and wisely cause the Cross to be set upon the head of
Kings, to the end that the Cross of Christ may be adored in Kings) M. Andrews
answers, Andr. cap. 8. p. 198.. Ambrosio.
that if the Cross be adored in Kings, no^ aliter adoratur etc. it is not
otherwise adored then the Kings thems^lues: is autem ciuilis honos est, non
religiosus, but this is a civil, and not religious honor. So he: but you see
here that the adoration whereof S. Ambrose speaks, is not due, or given to
the Kings themselves, but referred to our redemption, that is to say, to the
Passion of Christ, and therefore it is not civil, but religious adoration,
which also appears more evidently by that which follows a little after in S.
Ambrose, declaring what manner of reverence was exhibited to the holy Nail of
the Cross; for having said, Ecce clauus in honor est etc. behold the Nail is
honored etc. and that, inuisibili potestate daemones torquet, S. Ambros vbi
supra.
it does torment devils by an invisible power, he adds after a whyle^ ferro
pedum eius reges inclinantur; reges adorant, and Photinians diuinitatem eius
negant? Kings do bow down to the iron of his feet (that is to say to the
nail wherewith Christ's feet were fastened to the Cross) Kings do adore, and
do the Photinian heretics deny his divinity? thus says S. Ambrose, making,
as you see, the adoration of the instruments of our Saviors Passion, to be an
argument of his divinity, and showing withal what manner of reverence Kings
themselves used to the holy Nail, to wit, a corporal reverence, and
submission, inclyning and bowing down their bodies unto it, which is properly
Adoration.

30. Whereby the Reader may also see the absurdity of another evasion which M.
Andrews seeks in the same place, Andr. vbi supra. Ambros. de obitu Theod.
saying: vbi de religiosa adoratione sermo illi etc. where he (to wit Ambrose)
speaks of religious adoration, he says, that Helen having found the Cross
adored the King (that is to say Christ) and not the wood, whereof he also
declares the cause, to wit, because this is the error of the gentiles, and the
vanity of wicked men. So he; who in these very words of S. Ambrose, which he
obiecteth, may see, and acknowledge, if it please him, what all Catholics do
teach together with S. Ambrose concerning the adoration of the Cross, and
other instruments of Christ's Passion, Images, and holy relics, to wit, that
the wood, substance, and matter it self is not adored, but that which is
thereby represented: as in like case, when M. Andrews stands bare in the
Chamber of Presence before the Kings chayr, and Cloth of Estate, he does nor
reverence the matter, or substance of the Cloth and Chair, but the Majesty of
the Prince which the same does represent, and yet nevertheless he cannot deny,
but that he reuerenceth, and honors the Kings Chair, though not for it
self, but to show, and express his duty toward his Prince; and in like
manner, albeit S. Ambrose affirms with great reason, that Queen Helen did
not adore the wood of the Cross, but Christ (because to adore the wood alone,
without relation to Christ, had been a wicked, and Gentilicall vanity, and
error) yet he says afterward, as you have heard, not only that the Cross is
adored, but also that ferro pedum eius reges inclinantur, Kings do bow down to
the Iron of Christ's feet, meaning the holy Nail, as I have declared before;
and therefore M. Andrews must needs grant, that though S. Ambrose do reject
(as all Catholics also do) the adoration of the bare wood and Iron of the
Cross, and Nail in respect of themselves, yet he admits, and approves the
adoration of them, with relation to our Saviors Passion, cum defertur (as he
speaks) sacrae Redemptioni, when the honor is referred to our holy
Redemption.

31. This then being so, Three things gathered out of the premises.
3. things follow upon the premises. The first, that S. Augustine and S.
Ambrose affirming that the Footstool of God could not be adored, if it were
not understood of the Blessed body of our Savior in the Eucharist, do speak
only of adoratio that is to say the adoration which is due to God alone, and
therefore they allege the words of our Savior, Dominum Deum tuum adorabis,
and illi soli seruies: thou shall adore thy God and serve him alone. Matthew. 1^
In which words adoration is precisely to be understood of divine honor, and
yet so, that S. Augustine (as you have heard) gathers thereby, that there is
also an inferior adoration which may be exhibited to creatures, and therefore
he notes that our Savior said not, Deum solum The second consequent is, that
M. Andrews has wholly failed of his purpose, which was to prove that adoration
of Relics must needs be understood to signify a divine and godly honor done
to Relics, whereof I have clearly proved the contrary, notwithstanding his
objections, which I have showed to be partly frivolous, and partly the true
progeny of the heretic Vigilantius, whose humor and condition he expresses
ad v^uum, not only in calumniating us, and our doctrine concerning the
adoration of holy Relics, but also in changing the state of the question, as
Vigilantius did, and therefore I may well and justly say of him as S. Hierome
said of the other, O praecidendam linguam a medicis! immo insanum curandum
caput, vt qui loqui nescit, discat aliquando reticere! And this shall suffice
for this point, I mean his custom to change the state of the question, which
is so ordinary in him, that I could give many other instances thereof, but that
I must p^sse to other shifts and frauds of his, not having time to stand long
upon any one kind, and therefore I mean also to be briefer in the rest.

Supl. cap. 8. nn. 75. M. Andres dissimulation of that which most imports in
the obiection^ of his adversaries.
32. The second point of cosenage which I discovered in M. Barlow, was that he
used to dissemble and omit many times the most important part of his
adversaries objections, and answers, which kind of fraudulent dealing is no
less ordinary in M. Andrews, though nevertheless in his Preface to the Reader
he promises to set down in his Margent the Cardinals own words and text,
and albeit he confesses that other whiles he contracteth, or abridgeth the
same when place and paper wants, and that sometimes he leaves out and
cutteth off some words, quae abesse poterant, which might well be spared,
Andr. ad Lecto. in fine^. Deduco. autem.
yet he assures his Reader, that he will allwaies set down those words
wherein the whole force of the Cardinals meaning and intent consists, in
such sort, Vt nihil pereat de argumenti pondere, that there shall vant nothing
of the weight of his argument. Thus promises he, but how well he performs it
we shall easily perceive by those two or three examples following. For though I
might lay down many more, yet I am forced to keep my self within certain
limits to avoid prolixity.

33. The Cardinal to prove that the Article of the Creed concerning the
remission of sins, is not admitted and received in England as it ought to be,
says thus: Veram peccatorum remissionem credere non potest etc. he cannot
believe that there is true remission of sins, Card. in Apol. cap. 7. page 84.
lin. 19.
who belieueth, as the new Sectaries do, that sins do always remain in
man, though he be justified, albeit they be not imputed. For the Apostle did
not say in the Creed, I believe that sins are not imputed, The argument of
Cardinal Bellarmine.
but, I believe the Remission of sins, that is to say, true and full
remission; otherwise the offense of the first man Adam which did truly and
properly infect all his offspring, should be of greater force then the grace of
the second man, that is to say Christ, which could not truly and properly purge
or make clean those that are borne again in him. Thus says the Cardinal:
who you see groundeth the force of his reason partly upon the express words of
the Creed, and partly upon a comparison of the offense of Adam, and the grace
of Christ, showing that if sins be not truly remitted, the grace, and merits
of Christ shall not be so powerful to cleanse us from sin, Romans 3^
as the fall of Adam was to infect us therewith, which cannot be said without
extreme injury to our Savior.

34. And this is not the Cardinals own argument but taken from the Apostle
himself, and therefore being most important, it deserved to be set down and
answered by M. Andrews, who nevertheless does not either alleadg it in his
margent with the rest of the Cardinals text, Andr. ca. 7. p. 162.. S^d neque.
or so much as mention it in his answer, but makes the Cardinal say only
this, Neque veram remissionem peccatorum etc. Neither can he believe the true
remission of sins, which belieueth, as the new Sectaries do, that sins do
allwaies remain in man, though he be justified, albeit they be not imputed.
Thus far does M. Andrews allege the Cardinals text, leaving out his
arguments wherein consists the proof of his assertion, and instead of
answering the same, he urges an ordinary and stale objection out of the
Psalmist, Psalm. 31.
and the Apostle to the Romans, Romans 4.
to prove that sins are not forgiven, but only discovered, and not imputed.

35. But this has been answered a hundredth times so fully, that he may be
ashamed to urge the same still and not to take so much as knowledge of the
answer, M. Andrews brings in stale arguments and dissembleth their answers.
though nevertheless Cardinal Bellarmine gave him sufficient occasion to do it
even in this place, remitting his Reader to his Controversies, as indeed he had
great reason to do, for that he has there substantially and clearly proved
the Catholic doctrine in this point, and confuted all the adversaries
arguments, and particulerly answered those objections which M. Andrews brings
here concerning the covering of sin and not imputing it; which phrases and
manner of speech the Cardinal teaches to signify a full remission of sin,
and this he proves not only by solid arguments deduced out of the holy
Scripture, but also by the interpretation of the ancient Fathers, as of S. S.
Justin. Dial. cum Triph. propefinem.
Justin the Martyr (who lived within 150. years after Christ) Orig. li. 4. in
ep. ad Romans
Origin, S. S. Hier. comment in. Psalm. 31.
Hierome, S. S. Aug. concio. 2. in psalm. 31.
Augustine, and S. S. Greg. in psalm. 2. poenitent.
Gregory the Great; all which expounding the same place of the Psalmist, and
the very words which M. Andrews obiecteth, do teach that sins are said there
to be covered and not imputed, when they are fully remitted. I forbear to set
down the words of those Fathers for breuities ^ake, Bellar. de Iustif. li. 2.
ca. ^.
remitting my Reader either to Cardinal Bellarmine (who cyteth them more at
large) or rather to the Authors themselves, whose doctrine in this point is so
clear, that it may satisfy any reasonable man.

36. And albeit I have determined not to enter into any new debate of matters
in Controversy with M. Andrews in this my Conclusion, but only to admonish him
of his frauds, yet I cannot omit upon this occasion to desire thee, good
Reader, to observe in this matter a notable absurdity in him and his fellows,
in that they fl^ here to a common shift of theirs, which is, to find out some
few obscure texts of Scripture to interpret thereby a great number of plain
and evident places, which might be exemplif^ed in many Controuersyes betwixt
the^, and us, and in this is most manifest. For is there any thing in the holy
Scriptures either more plain or frequent, then the mention of true remission,
and abolition of sin? which is expressed there so many ways, and by such
different manner of speeches, that nothing can be added to make it more clear;
as when the Prophet says: Esaias ca 1.
If your sins shall be like scarlet, they shall be made as white as snow. ca.
33.
The Iniquity of the people shall be taken away. ca. 44.
I am he who do wype or blott out thy sins for my own sake. ca. 48.
I have abolished thy iniquity like a cloud, and thy sins as a mist. And in
another Ezech. ca. 37.
Prophet: I will power out a clean water upon you, and you shall be cleansed
from all your filth. And again in Mich. c. 7
another, he will cast all your sins into the bottom of the sea. And in the
prou. 15.
Proverbs, sins are purged by mercy and ^aith. Also in the psalm. 102.
Psalmist, he has made our iniquity to be as far from us, as the East is
from the west; and again, Psalm. 9.
his sin shall be sought, and shall not be found. Whereto may be added the
prayers of the Psalmist, that it might please God to psalm. 50
blot, or wype out his iniquity, to make him clean, and to Ibid.
wash him more, and more, that so he might be whyter then snow.

37. Also in the new testament, the like manner of speeches are most frequent,
as that our Savior Apoc. 1.
washed our sins in his blood, Haebr. 9.
shall cleanse our consciences from dead works, Ibid. c. 1.
make a purgation of sins, Act. 15.
purify out hearts, John. 1.
take away the sins of the world, Coloss. 2.
cancel our obligation of debt, Ephesians. 2.
kill our enmities in himself, Haeb. 9.
exhaust or consume sin, and finally make us holy, Coloss. 1.
immaculate, and irreprehensible coram ipso, before him, or in his sight. In
all which you see the holy Ghost teaches such a full and perfect remission,
and utter abolition of sin (to our exceeding comfort) that if a man should
study and devise words and phrases to signify, and persuade the same, it were
not possible to do it more effectually. And yet all these places being so
evident as you see, must be understood forsooth (say our adversaries) of
covering or hiding sin, What the Psalmist meant by not imputation of sin.
or not imputing it, because the Scripture somtymes uses such manner of
speeches, though reason would, that the more rare and obscure phrases should be
expounded by the more frequent and clear, especially in this place of the
Psalm alleged by M. Andrews, which the Psalmist himself does sufficiently
explicate, who having said: Blessed is the man to whom God has not imputed
sin, adds immediately, Nec est in Spiritu eius dolus; Nor any deceit is in
his spirit, or soul: whereby he signifies plainly, that man's sins are then
covered, and not imputed, when his soul is clear, or free from sin.

38. And now to return to the Cardinals argument dissembled and omitted by M.
Andrews, The abounda^ce of Christ his grace, works a true and inherent
Justification in us.
the same does notably confirm all this, for that it inuincibly proves a
real, and inherent Justification in us, consisting in a true remission of
sin, and a true sanctification grounded upon the plenitude, and fullnes of
Christ's merits, and the abundance of grace which we receive thereby according
to the express Doctrine of the Apostle, saying, Si enim vniusdelicto mors
regnauit per vnu^ etc. If by one man's fault, Romans 5.
death has reigned by one, much more those which receive abundance of grace,
and of the gift, and of the Justice, shall reign in life by one Jesus Christ.
In which words it is to be noted that the Apostle speaking of Justification
does plainly exclude, and reject the imputation of Justice, making express
mention of a righteousness, which we receive abundantly with grace, and a gift
given us by Almighty God; which abundance of Grace and Justice, being given
us, and received by us, must needs be really in us, and make us truly just.
And this is much more evident by that which follows, Sicut enim, says the
Apostle, Ibidem.
per inobedientiam vnius hominis etc. for even as by the disobedience of one
man, many sinners were made, so by the obedience of one man, many just shall be
made.

39. Thus says the Apostle, who, as you see, compares, or rather opposes
Christ to Adam, and our Justification given us by Christ, to the death of the
soul, or damnation purchased for us by Adam, concluding that we are made as
truly just by Christ, as we were truly sinners by Adam, which he also
enforces and urges in the same place, Romans 5.
saying: Si enim vnius delicto multi mortui sunt etc. For if by one man's fault
many have died, much more the grace of God, and the gift in the grace of one
man Jesus Christ, has abounded unto more me^, whereby the Apostle signifies
not, that more are justified by Christ, then have died, or been condemned by
Adam (which in the Greek is manifest, where instead of plures, more men, we
read (...), many men) but that Christ's grace was more abundant, and of greater
force to justify us, then Adams sin was to make us sinners, and to condemn
us, which he confirms also afterward saying: Vbi abundauit delictum
superabundauit gratia: Where the fault abounded, grace has been much more
abundant.

40. Whereupon the Cardinal infers with the Blessed Apostle, that seeing
the sin of Adam was of force to make us truly sinners, the merits and grace
of Christ are of far greater force to purge, and cleanse us from our sins,
and to make us truly just; for otherwise we must needs say, that our help is
not equivalent to our harm, nor our remedy to our diseases, nor our rising to
our fall, nor our gain to our loss, nor consequently^ Christ to Adam, M.
Andrews does foully break his promise.
which were impiety to think, and blasphemy to say. This then being the effect
and substance of the Cardinals argument, and the same so important, as you see,
I leave it to the Judgment of any indifferent man, whether M. Andrews has
performed his promise in his Preface, which was (as you have heard) that albeit
he should be forced sometimes for want of place and paper to abridge and
contract the Cardinals text, yet he would leave out nothing that should be of
moment, vt nihil ei pereat de argumenti pondere, so that nothing should be lost
of the weight of his argument? Did he want here, trow you, place and paper? or
rather sincerity to set down that which he had neither will, not skill to
answer? truly so it must be supposed, until he yield some more probable
reason thereof. In the mean time let us (...) some more of his iugling in this
kind. Card. cap^ 7. page 90. and. 91.


41. The Cardinal alleges part of the Epistle of the Emperor Theodosius the
younger to the 3. General Counsel of Ephesus, M. Andrews hi^ crafly co^ueyance
concerning the epistle of Theodosius the Emperor.
to show what is the office of Kings in General Counsels, and to whom it
specially belongs to judge and determine of Ecclesiastical causes; to which
end the Cardinal lays down, above a dozen lines of the said Epistle, all
which M. Andrews thought good to leave out, least the same might discover the
weakness of his answer. For whereas the principal point which the Cardinal
sought to prove thereby, was that Kings could have no voice, or suffrage in
the definition of Ecclesiastical matters, M. Andrews answers, that
Theodosius in that Epistle signifies what the Count Ca^didianus was to do in
the Council, and not what he himself might do therein: which answer would
have appeared to have been most frivolous, if so much of the Epistle had been
set down, as the Cardinal alleges, and especially these words, Nefas est
etc. It is v^lawfull that he which is not of the number of the most holy
Bishops, Andr. c. 7. page 169.. Etiam tertium.
should meddle which Ecclesiastical business, and Consultations, which words
being general (extending themselves to all men that are not Bishops) excluded
no less the Emperor himself, then the Count Candidianus from dealing in
Ecclesiastical causes. So that this remains as well unsatisfied as vncited:
belyke he was scanted of place and paper no less in this point, then in the
former.

42. Also in the same Chapter the Cardinal (to prove the Apparition of Saints,
and consequently the help that we have by their meri^s, M. Andrews wants
paper in his text and margent to set down S. Augustins words.
and prayers) alleges the words of S. Augustine concerning the apparition
of S. Felix in the siege of Nola, but M. ^^drewes did not think good, or
perhaps had no room to lay down the words either in the margent or in his
text, but only names Augustine in his margent, and answers in his text, that
Augustinus nihil praeter auditum habet etc. A^gustine has nothing in this
matter but by hearsay. Whereas the Cardinal alleges out of S. Augustine
these words, Card. apol. c. 8. page 95. Neque And. c. 7. page 178.. Instit. S.
Aug de cura pro mortuis c. 16.
Audiuimus non incertis rumor^bus, sed certis testibus etc. We have heard not
by uncertain rumors, but by assured witnesses, that the Confessor Felix has
appeared, not only by the effects of benefits, but also to the very sights of
men. So he. Where you see S. Augustine gives another manner of assurance of
this apparition then M. Andrews acknowledges in his answer, who makes the
matter to seem very uncertain, as depending upon a bare hearsay; whereas S.
Augustine excludes all uncertainty of Rumors, and fortifieth his relation with
the testimonies of assured witnesses.

43. And whereas M. Andrews adds, that S. Augustine was so uncertain of this
matter of apparitions, that he durst not de^ine, whether they were made by the
Saints themselves, or by Angels in their lykenes, he says true, though I know
not what he can infer thereon for his purpose, seeing that S. Augustine
makes no question of the verity of apparitions (and much less of the benefit
and help which devout people received thereby) but only of the manner how the
same was performed, and therefore he says in the beginning of that discourse,
Ista quaestio etc. This question surpasses the force of my understanding how
Martyrs do help those, qoud per eos certum est adi^uari, who it is certain
are helped by them. So he. And then proceeds with the question, whether the
Martyrs are themselves present in so diverse places, and so far asunder at one
time, or whether Almigh^^ God do satisfy the devotion of the people by the
ministry of Angels, through the merits of the Martyrs, or else whether it be
done both ways; this he says he dare not define, confessing and teaching
evidently as much as we require in this matter, to wit, that devout people are
certainly helped by the Martyrs. Neither is it to be wondered, that S. Augustine
would not take upon him to determine how the same was wrought, saying that even
in ordinary and natural things, the effects are evident and certain, and
yet the causes are many times either uncertain, or else wholly unknown, which is
to be granted much more in supernatural and miraculous events, See Chap. 8.
n. 12.13.14.15.16.
as I have showed evidently in the last Chapter, where I have confuted such
another ridiculous argument of his against Prayer to Saints.

44. And albeit he had resolved that the Saints themselves do not appear or
assist at their tombs, but Angels in their shape and lykenes, yet it could not
be said but that apparition is theirs, being made by Gods express ordinance
for their merits, in their name and lykenes, and for the benefit of those that
expect and crave their help; especially seeing it is usually said in the holy
Scriptures, that God spoke and appeared to Genes. 18.
Abraham, and Moses Exodus 3.
, when nevertheless it was done by the ministry of Angels, and not in any
shape that could represent him; and therefore S. Augustin^ had great reason to
say, that S. Felix appeared, and that the Martyrs per diuinam potentiam viuorum
rebus intersunt, are by the divine power present at the doings or affairs of
men: although afterward he moves a question concerning the manner of it, and
does not deny, but that it may be done by the ministry of Angels. Hereby then
it appears, that this place of S. Augustine so clearly proves the
Apparition of Saints, and that men are helped by theirs prayers and merits,
that M. Andrews had no other way to shift it off handsomely, but to omit the
words of S. Augustine as of small moment, and testifying only a slight matter
of hearsay. I might add diverse others of this kind, but I omit them for
breuities sake, and the rather for that they are commonly mixed with other kind
of frauds, whereof I shall have occasion to speak herafter; and therefore I
will now proceed to others of more importance, namely his egregious abuse of
authors, partly in wresting and perverting their sense, and partly in the
corrupt and fraudulent citation of the^, in which kind you have already seen
M. Barlows talent, whereby you shall be able to judge whether of them excels
therein.

45. First then I will begin with his abuse of the Cardinal, who to show that
the Protestants in England do not entirely hold the Creed of Athanasius, M.
Andrews his abusing and corrupting of Authors. Bell. Apol. cap. 7.. Venio ad
tertiu^.
proposes the Article concerning the day of Judgment, when every one (says
Athanasius) is to render account (de factis proprijs) of his own acts: and
those which have done well, shall go to life everlasting; and those which have
done evil, shall go to eternal fire. Whereupon the Cardinnll says thus, In
quibus verbis confitemur etc. In which words (of Athanasius) we confess, that
there shall be a last Judgment, wherein the just Judge will render to every
one according to the quality of his deeds, to some the crown of Justice, and
to others eternal punishment, and shame. For if life everlasting should be
given to the faithful not for the merits of works, but in respect of faith
and of Christ's righteousness mercifully imputed unto them, there should be no
need of Judgment nor of examination of deeds: neither were it needful that
there should come a just Judge, but a merciful Father, neither that we should
render any reason of our deeds, but show Christ's Justice imputed unto us, and
apprehended by faith; therefore the King cannot believe this Article, if he
believe with Calvin and the Protestants, that all the works of just men are
sins; Calu. l. 3. Inst. c. 14.
for these are Caluins words: no work can pass from holy men, which does not
deserve the just reward of shame.

46. And what account shall just men be able to make of their own deeds unto
Christ the Judge, if all their works are vicious, and deserve the just reward
of reproach? and if just men shall not be able to give account of their deeds,
truly the unjust shall be much less able to do it; to what purpose then shall
we all stand before the Tribunal of Christ to render account of our own
actions? But perhapps they will say, that all the works of the Just are
unclean, and filthy, but their filth shall be covered by the mercy of God,
and the works reputed as clean to the faithful, for Christ. But if this were
true, then should there be no need (as I have said before) of the justice of a
Judge, but of the mercy of a Father, and liberality of a Prince, therefore to
what purpose does the Article of the Creed say that Christ shall come to judge
the quick and the dead, and that all men shall render account of their own
deeds, and why does the Apostle say, reposita est mihi corona iustitiae etc.
The Crown of Justice is laid up for me, 1. Pet. 1.
which the just Judge will give me in that day? And why does his fellow
Apostle Peter say in like sort, and si patrem inuocatis etc. And if you
invoke, or call upon the Father, Matthew. 16.
him which judges without acception of persons, according to the work of
every man: converse ye with fear in the time of your soiourning or dwelling
here? And finally why does our Lord, who will come to judge, fortell that he
will come with his Angels to render to every one according to his works?

47. All this says the Cardinal concerning this matter, which I have laid
down thus largely to the end you may see as well his sound discourse grounded
upon express scripture, as the malice of M. Andrews perverting and wresting
the same to another sense then ever the Cardinal meant, and there fore
craftily leaves out of the Cardinals text, all that which touches Caluins
doctrine, concerning the impuritie and uncleanness of the best works; which
point the Cardinal especially impugneth, urging, that if Caluins doctrine were
true in that behalf, then were the Justice of God in the judgment and
examination of works needles, and only his mercy and liberality requisite,
whereby the Cardinal excludes not Gods mercy from his Judgments (as you
shall hear even now M. Andrews charge him) but infers 3. Card. Bellarmines
infere^ces.
things upon the Article of the Creed against Caluins doctrine. Calvin
teaches them to be. by the merits of good works. And the third follows
directly of the former, to wit, that the only mercy and liberality of God is
not to have place in his last Judgment (as it should have if Caluins doctrine
were true) but also his Iustice^ And therefore upon this it follows directly
(as the Cardinal argues very well) that whosoever belieueth Caluins doctrine
in this behalf, does not believe the Article of the Creed concerning Gods
Judgment, and retribution of works.

48. But now let us se, how M. Andrews understands, and glosseth the
Cardinals text; and to the end thou may, good Reader, hear him in his right
vain how he b^stirreth himself, and flourishes when he has once changed
the state of the question and brought it to his purpose, I will imparte unto
thee a good part of his discourse, and set down also as much of the Cardinals
text in the margent, as M. Andrews does, Andr. c. 7. page 163.. Symbolum.
Symboli 3. articulum de ratione redd^nda de proprijs factis Rex credere non
poterit. Consit^mu^ iudicium nouissimum in quo iudex pro qualitate factorum
reddet alijs coronam Iustitiae, alijs supplicium sempiternum. Nam si non pro
meritis operum sed in gratiam fidei and Iustitiae misericorditer imputatae vita
aeterna daretur, non esset opus iudicio^ neque discussione factorum, neque
oporteret Iudicem iustum, sed Patrem misericorde^ aduenire^ neque rationem de
factis proprijs reddere, sed Christi Iustitiam nobis i^putatam ostendere
deberemus. page 87.
to the end thou may the better judge of the whole matter. Thus then he
says: Symbolum quoque tertium ab Athanasio conscriptum recipimus integre etc.
We receive also wholly the third Creed, written by Athanasius. There was no need
to make mention of the last judgment out of that, seeing it is expressed both
by the Apostolical, and also in the Nycen Creed. It is said there that we are
to yield account of our deeds, but not such an account as it seems here the
Cardinal will make, who I think will not appear in the last Iudggement with
this his Theology, nor say there, behold the merits of my works; behold the
quality of my deeds, for the which I require that life everlasting be given
me. I do not desire here a merciful Father, but I will have a just judge,
away with the grace of Faith, or of the righteousness of Christ mercifully
imputed unto me. I will have my deeds examined, for works have proceeded from
me which do not deserve reproach, as being such as are without fault, and have
nothing that needs to be covered with mercy: for if it were so, I should have
no need of the Justice of a Judge, but of the mercy of a Father, or of the
liberality of a Prince, whereof I have no need. It is marvel that the
Cardinal did not add, for I am not as all other men, as also these innouatours
are, who have need of thy mercy, to the end that their evil deeds be not
ymputed unto the^, and reputed as good deeds for the righteousness of Christ.
But if this were so, the^ would Constantine say to the Cardinal, set up a
ladder, and clime up to heaven alon, as he said once to Acetius the Nouatia^
heretic.

49. Nevertheless a man may well maruaille and demand, whether the Cardinal
in good earnest be so affected, Sozomen. l. 1.22. At fi ita ^sset, non iustitia
iudicis, sed misericordia Patris velliberalitat^ Principis opus ^sset. page 87.
and so think of himself as here he seems to do, to wit, that he shall have
no need of the mercy of a Father, nor of the liberality of a Prince, that he
fears not the Justice of the Judge, that he challenges to himself life
everlasting, for the quality of his deeds, and merits of his works; that he
renounceth the Grace, Faith, and Righteousness of Christ; that he will appear
in Judgment without these, and there make ostentation of his works, as being
full, pure, and perfect, without all kind of filth, or vice. Thus far M.
Andrews.

50. And do thou not (good Reader) see how he descanteth here upon a false
burden of his own, amplifying and exaggerating his own malicious conceit,
and misconstruction of the Cardinals words, as though the same were his true
sense and meaning? do thou not see, I say, how he pleases himself in
dilating and amplifying his slanderous fiction, glorying and triumphing in his
own malice? In so much that I may well say unto him with the psalmist, Psalm.
51.
Quid gloriaris in malitia, qui potens es in iniquitate? For I appeal to any
indifferent man whether any such thing, as here maliciously he infers, can
be justly gathered on the Cardinals words, who (as I have said before)
meaning to confute Caluins pernicious doctrine (which draws men to a most
dangerous presumption of Gods mercy and neglect of his justice, yea and to a
careless contempt of all good works, teaching all to be sinful and damnable,
and no other means of salvation but by only faith, and the imputation of
Christ's Justice;) the Cardinal, I say, impugning this as well by express
Scripture, as by the Article of the Creed, does urge the Justice of our just
Judge, as well in the reward of virtue, and good works, as in the punishment
of vice and sin, not excluding his mercy from his Justice (which can never be
separated) but inculcating the consideration of his exact Judgment in the
examination, punishment, and reward of men's deeds, good and bad, according to
their merits, which directly overthrows Caluins doctrine of justification by
only faith, and of the impurity of good works.

51. And therefore for as much as M. Andrews knew very well that he could not
so easily delude his Reader with the flourish of his false gloss, if he should
lay down the doctrine, and words of Calvin (which the Cardinal alleges and
confuteth) he resolved to leave them quite out with a great part also of the
Cardinals text concerning the same. Perhaps he would have his Reader to
imagine that he lackt place and paper but if you consider the length of his
discourse (which he continues for almost three whole pages) you will easily
see that he wants neither paper nor room in his margent to set down all the
Cardinals text, if he had thought it would have been for his purpose.

52. But truly, that which seems to me most strange in his extrauagant
discourse, is, how he could imagine that the Cardinal takes upon him to be
judge of his own actions, whose arguments tend to prove, that God only is to
examine and judge all men's works, and not that every man, or yet any man shall
be able to judge and determine of the quality of his own deeds; for so should
man be his own Judge, and the iugdement of God be no less superfluous and
needles, then it should be if Caluins doctrine (which the Cardinal impugneth)
were true. Besides, that the Cardinal neither says, nor so much as
insinuates, that we shall have no need in judgment of the mercy of a Father,
or the liberality of a Prince, and much less that he renounceth the mercy,
grace, faith, and the Righteousness of Christ (as M. Andrews does calumniate and
belie him.) For the Cardinal knows and acknowledges, as all Catholics do,
that without the mercy, grace, faith, and Righteousness of Christ, there can be
noe justification (I mean not the Righteous^es of Christ imputed to us, but
that which he of his infinite mercy, and bounty, gives us and makes ours, non
qua iustus est Deus, Aug. tract. ^6^ in Joan.
says S. Augustine, sed quam dat homini Deus etc. not that Justice by the
which God is just, but that which he gives to man, that man may be just by God)
and therefore that which the Cardinal says, is only this, that, si ita esset,
if it were so as Calvin teaches, that is to say, if the just man's best works
were sinful, and impure, and yet covered and reputed as clean by the mercy of
God, and for the Righteousness of Christ imputed unto us, then the justice of a
Judge to examine, and judge our works were needles, and to no purpose, seeing in
that case the only mercy of God covering our sins, and imputing Christ's
Righteousenes unto us, would suffice to save us without the examination and
just judgment of works: which consequence is indeed so clear, that M. Andrews
had noe other shift to avoid it, but to pervert the Cardinals whole sense, and
meaning, and so to argue against his own fiction, and make a plain
Schi^ma^hia as you have seen him often do before.

53. Furthermore it may be wondered greatly how he could so far forget
himself as to make the Cardinal so confident and presumptuous of his own
merit, as to brag and boast even to God himself of the quality of his deeds,
seeing that he (I mean M. Andrews) knows full well (and accounts it for no
small error in the Cardinal, and all Catholykes) that they impugn Luther and
Caluins doctrine concerning the certainety and assurance of Salvation, and
hold that no man without a special revelation from almighty God can know, and
much less determine, vtrum odio vel amore dignus sit. Whether he be worthy of
love or hatred, Eccles. 9.
that is to say, whether he be in the state of grace, or have true merits, and
be truly justified. And therefore the good Catholic, though his merits be never
so great in the sight of God, yea and his conscience never so clear (whereby
his hope also of reward may be great) yet assuring himself that he has no
goodness of himself, but that all his good merits are Gods gifts, are special
fruits of Gods grace, neither is vainly proud thereof, but rather more humble
and thankful for the same; neither yet presumes to be his own judge, whether
he have any good merits or no, but leaves the judgment thereof to God, with due
reverence and fear, knowing that he searches the hearts and reins, yea and
that, as the Prophet says, Psalm. 7.
scrutabitur Jerusalem cum lucernis, he will search Jerusalem (that is to say
even the Consciences of the just) with Candles. Sophon. cap. 1.
And that therefore it is necessary for every man according to the advice of
the Apostle, Bellar. de Iustific. lib. 5. ca. 7.. Sit iam altera.
operari salutem cum metu, and tremore, to work his salvation with fear and
trembling. In which respect the Cardinal treating in his controversies of the
merits of works, and having proved that a man may have some confidence in good
works and merits ( modo superbia cauetur, Ibid.. Sit tertia propositio.
says he, so that pride be avoided) concludes that, propter incertitudinem
propriae iustitiae etc. For the uncertainty of a man's own Justice and the
danger of vain glory, S. Chrysos. Ho. 38. ad Pop. Antioch and ho. 3. in Matthew.
it is most safe, and secure for every man to repose his whole confidence, and
trust in the only mercy and benignity of almighty God. Whereof he yealdeth
also this reason out of S. Chrysostom, that God who sees, and knows his
good merits, will undoubtedly reward him, the rather for his humility.

54. Thus then you see that M. Andrews has imployd all his Rhetoric, no
less maliciously then vainly in framing such a formal prosopopaeia, as he has
done, of the Cardinals Justification of himself, and ostentation of his
merits, which is so far, not only from the Cardinals humility and
sanctity, but also from his doctrine every where, and his sense and meaning in
this place, that I may well conclude, that M. Andrews has notoriously abused,
wronged, and belyed him, charging him with false and absurd doctrine which he
never thought and much less taught, wresting his words, and sense to other
purpose, then ever he meant, or could ymagine, which is the point that I have
undertaken to show at this time; and therefore I omit to prosecute the
Confutation of the rest of his idle discourse, wherein after some further gybes
at the Cardinal, M. Andrews is copious in proving that which no man does deny.
yea at all Cardinals and Jesuits for their presumption in their own
(Innocence) he labors to prove that there shall be place for mercy in Gods
Judgment, which I think no man will be so absurd to deny; and then he
alleges certain places of S. Gregory and S. Bernard to prove that our best
works are impure, which places (as also all the rest that his fellows are
wont to cite for that purpose) are fully answered in Cardinal Bellarmins
Controversies, Bellar. d^ Iustif. lib. 4. cap. 21.
whereto I remit him for that point. But in the end after all his rauing, it
seems he is somewhat come to himself, acknowledging (as it were in lucid^
interuallo) that account is to be given for deeds, M. Andrews lucidum
interuallum.
as well at the hour of death as in the last judgment, and that good works
shall be rewarded by the force of Gods promise, yea and that a man may claim
that as due, and say to almighty God with due humility, read quod promisi^ti;
Give me that which thou have promised, touching which graunts of his, I shall
have very just occasion See Cap. 10. nu. 6.7. and seq.
hereafter to say somewhat more unto him, as also about merits and the eternal
retribution of works. And therefore this shall suffice for the present
concerning this point.

55. But what marvel is it if he makes no scruple to abuse the Cardinal and
to pervert his sense and meaning, M. Andrews abuses the Fathers.
seeing that he uses the same style with the holy and ancient Fathers, to
which purpose I doubt not but you may remember that in the first Chapter of
this Adioynder I showed evidently how he abused, belyed, and falsified S.
Ambrose, S. Augustine, and S. Cyrill; as that he corrupted See before Chap. 1.
nu. 6.
S. Ambrose his text, adding certain words thereto, and belyed S. Ibid. number.
25.
Augustine, and S. Cyril, affirming them to teach that S. Peter lost his
Apostleship by his fall. Whereas S. Augustine has nothing at all to that
purpose in the place cyted by M. Andrews, and teaches the quite contrary else
where. And though S. Cyril has somewhat concerning that matter, yet it is
far otherwise then M. Andrews suggesteth, as is evident by the place it self
which I have laid down at large in the first nu. 26.27.
Chapter, and therefore I forbear to treat further thereof in this place.

56. Also you may remember his notable fraud in the corrupt allegation of a
Canon of the Council of Chalcedon, concerning the equality of dignity, power
and authority, which he says, was given thereby to the Bishop of
Constantinople with the Bishop of Rome^ whereas the contrary appears by the
express words of the same Canon, by the which it is clear, that only the
precede^ce was not granted to the Bishop of Constantinople before the Bishops
of Alexandria and Antioch; and therefore he craftily concealed and left vncited
such words of the Canon as would have discovered his fraud, besides other
tricks and shifts which he used in other points concerning the same matter, See
Chapt. 2. nu. 6.8.9.64.65. and 66.
as I declared amply in the 2. Chapter.

57. I doubt not also, but that you remember his egregious abuse of S.
Augustine and of an Affrican Synod concerning appeals from Africa to Rome with
3. notable Cap. 4. nu. 34. and sequent.
lies within little more then 3. lynes^ and of S. See Cap. 6. nu. 64.
Epiphanius flatly belyed touching prayer to our Blessed Lady. Also of S. Cap.
7. nu. 16.17. and sup.
Ambrose not only shamefully calumniated, but also very fraudulently alleged.
And lastly, his notable abuse, and deceiptfull allegation of Cap. 8. nu. 1.2.3.
and seq. vsque ad nu. 10. Suplem. ^. 2. nu. 71.
Theod^ret concerning prayer to Angels; all which I have amply and clearly
discovered in the 4.6.7. and 8. Chapters. Whereto I will now add some other
examples of his fraudule^t dealing in this kind; and first touching a point
which I had occasion to touch in my Suplement, to wit, the authority of
general Counsels.

58. Therefore whereas the Apology for the Oath seems only to admit and
approve the 4. first general Counsels, the Cardinal demands, why those
only should be admitted and received, And cap. 7. p. 160.. Verum.
and not also the 5.6.7.8. and the rest? Whereto M. Andrews answers thus^
Cur qu^tuor ta^tum prima C^n^ilia veneratur Rex^ Quaere id a Gregorio etc. Why
does the King reverence only the four first Counsels? S. Gregory abused by M.
Andrew^
Ask that of Gregory, who allbeit he was after the fifth, yet he bare this
honor only to the 4. first. He spoke magnificently of the first four, de
quinto silijt, he was silent, or said nothing of the fifth; and the reason which
moved him not to give like honor to the fifth as to the other, moved also the
King not to bear the like respect to the rest of the Counsels which followed
the fifth. So he. Wherein you see he affirms that S. Gregory spoke
magnificently, or very honorably of the 4. first Counsels, and de quinto
siluit, said nothing of the fifth, though the same had been held before his time.

59. But how truly he says this, it shall appear by Saint Gregory's own
words, who writing to John Bishop of Constantinople, and having said of the 4.
first Counsels that he did embrace them tota deuotione. vt quatuor Euangelia,
with all devotion as the 4. Ghospels (because, says he, the building of the
holy faith is raised upon them as upon a four squared stone etc.) he adds
concerning the fi^^t, Open your eyes Sir Lancelot and see whether S. Gregory
said nothing of the fifth general Council.
quintum quoque pariter veneror etc. I reverence also together with them the
fifth Council, wherein the Epistle of Iba is rejected, as full of error, and
Theodorus separating the person of our mediator in two substances, is
convinced to have fallen into perfidious impiety. Also the writings of
Theodoret, reproving the faith of Cyril, are refuted there, for their
temerarious madness, and therefore all the persons which the said venerable
Councels reject, I do also reject, and those which they admit, and reverence, I
do embrace: for seeing they were ordained by an universal consent, whosoever
presumes to loose that which they bind, or to bind that which they loose,
does destroy himself and not them. Quisquis ergo aliud sapit, Anathema sit
etc. Therefore whosoever thinks, or understands otherwise, let him be
accursed, and whosoever holds the faith of the foresaid Synods, peace be to
him from God the Father by Jesus Christ his Son. Thus says S. Gregory, as
well of the 5. Synod, as of the other four.

60. And now, good Reader, I remit it to thy judgment whether it be truth
which M. Andrews says, to wit, that S. Gregory, Siluit de quinto, said nothing
to the fifth Council, yea and whether he admitted, and honored only the four
first Counsels, does he not say, quintum quoque pariter ven^ror. I do also
together with the other reverence the fifth Council? and does he not
acknowledge the infallible verity thereof as well as of the other, holding him
for accursed who does reject anything determined by any of the five, whether it
concern matter of faith, or the Comdemnation of any man's person? and what
other reason does he alledg, but because they were all five held by general
consent, giving evidently to understand that a general Council lawfully
assembled, represents the whole Church of God, and is infallibly guided by
the holy Ghost.

61. And whereas he seems to speak more magnificiently (as M. Andrews
terms it) of the four former then of the fifth (saying that he reuerenceth
them with all devotion as the 4. Ghospells) the reason thereof is evident, to
wit, because the most important points of our Christian faith (concerning the
Blessed Trinity, the Godhead of the holy Ghost, and the Divinity, Humanity,
Nature and Person of our Savior Christ) were resolved, and decreed therein,
whereas in the 5. there was not any new matter of faith determined, but only
certain persons and their writings condemned, which had caused a great
controversy, and schism in the Church at that time; nevertheless we see, S.
Greg. l. 3. Ep. 37.
that albeit S. Gregory does not say in express words, that he reuerenceth
the 5. Council, as the 4. Ghospells (as he said of the other four) yet he
says as much in effect, seeing that he professes to hold all those for
accursed who do reject or contradict it. So that M. Andrews has shamefully
abused and belied S. Gregory herein, and must seek some other Patron to
justify and defend him for admitting only the 4. first general Counsels: but
let us see some more of his frauds in this kind.

62. Upon occasion of certain places of the Fathers alleged by the Cardinal,
to show the Custom of praying to Saints in the primative Church, M. Andrews
goes about to prove that Saints do not know what we do here on earth, Andr.
cap. 1. page 46.
either by seeing the same in God, or by being themselves present amongst us,
and having alleged 3. or 4. authorities for the former point (which he may
see sufficiently answered in Cardinal Bellar de Sanct. beatit. lib. 1. ca. 1.
and 2.
Bellarmines Controversies) he says for the letter, Andr. vbi supra lin. 4.
mortuos autem rebus nostris non interuenire sensit Augustinus. Augustine was
of opinion that the dead are not present at our affairs, for the which he
quoteth no place of S. Augustine, but adds, quis hoc refert? Cardinalis. Who
relates or affirms this? the Cardinal: and for this M. Andrews cites in
his margent the Cardinals treatise of the beatitude of Saints in his books of
Controversies, Bell. de Beatit. lib. 1. ca. 20.
where indeed the Cardinal handling that question, and laying down the
objection of heretics, has amongst the rest a place of S. Augustine in his
books de cura pro mortuis, S. Aug. li. de cura pro mort. ca. 12.
where he affirms that the dead are not present at men's affairs, neither yet
do know what is done upon earth; nevertheless afterward the Cardinal answering
the same objection in the same Chapter, proves out of the very same treatise
of S. Augustine (from whence the objection is taken) that albeit the dead are
not usually present at men's affairs, nor do naturally know what is done upon
earth, yet they may know it, not only by Angels, Idem ibid. c. 15.
but also supernaturally, to wit, by divine revelation, yea and that the holy
Martyrs, Ibid. c. 1^.
and Saints are present amongst men, per diuinam potentiam, by the divine power.

63. And to show this, the Cardinal alleges these words out of the said
treatise of S. Augustine, non ideo putandum est etc. It is not therefore to be
thought that every one of the dead may be present at the affairs of men,
because the Martyrs are present in healing and helping some men, but rather it
is to be understood, that because the dead cannot be present amongst men by
their own nature, therefore the Martyrs are present at men's affairs by the
divine power. Thus says S. Augustine: where you see he distinguishes betwixt
natural, and supernatural means, and betwixt the glorified Saints of God
(for such are the Martyrs of whom he speaks) and other dead men, granting
that the Mar^yrs do that by supernatural, and divine means, which other dead
men cannot naturally do; and this is the same in effect that all Catholics
hold concerning the knowledge that the glorified Saints have of things don in
earth, to wit, that they do not know the same naturally, but by supernatural
means, whether they see it in seeing the divine essence, or know it otherwise
by revelation; so as; thereby it is manifest that M. Andrews has notably
abused both S. Augustine and the Cardinal; S. Augustine, in making him to
affirm of glorified Saints, that which he spoke of other dead men, as if he
made no difference between the supernatural knowledge and power of the one,
and the natural of the other, which he evidently distinguishes; Also he
abuses the Cardinal in taking hold of his objection, and dissembling his
solution, which is one of the most gross and palpable frauds or rather
fooleries that may be imagined in this kind. A most gross and palpable fraud
or rather foolery of M. Andrews.


64. Furthermore whereas the Cardinal produces the evident and clear
testimony of S. Augustine, to prove that many Miracles were done by the
Relics of S. Stephen in Afric, M. Andrews wishes the Cardinal to consider
how he can well and handsomely reconcile Augustine with Augustine concerning
those Miracles, Card. Apolog. c. 12. p. 157.
and his reason is, because Augustine says in an Epistle to his Clergy, S.
Aug. de ciuit. Dei l. 22. cap. 8. Andre. ca. 12. page 284.. 1.
and all the people of Hippo, nusquam hic in Africa, t^lia fieri se scire, he
knew that such things were not don any where in Africa, which I beseech thee
good Reader, to note, and thou shall evidently see the good Conscience of M.
Andrews, Epist. 137
who abuses S. Augustine notably two ways, the one in making him seem to
contradict himself most manifestly, M. Andrews his bad conscience in abusing
S. Augustine most impudently.
yea and to give himself, as it were, the lie, witnessing in one place matters
of fact upon his own knowledge, (for so he testifies those Miracles don by S.
Stephens relics,) and in another place affirming that he knew the same to be
false, for so must it needs be, if he knew that such things were not done
any where in Africa. The other abuse is in that he peruerteth the sense of S.
Augustins Epistle, as it will easily appear, if we consider the occasion why
S. Augustine wrote the same; which therefore I think good here to relate.

65. A Scandalous quarrel being fallen out betwixt a Chaplain of S. Augustine,
and a young man concerning an infamous calumniation raised by the young man
against the Priest (whereof the truth could not be tried or known, because the
matter depended wholly upon their own oaths, and testimonies) S. Augustine
advised them to go to Nola in Italy to the body of S. Felix, where it pleased
God ordinarily in like cases to discover periuries, by the miraculous
punishment of the perjured person; and of this he thought good afterward to
give account unto his Clergy and People for their satisfaction, which he did
by the Epistle that M. Andrews cites, wherein discoursing, by the occasion of
this matter, why Almighty God, does such Miracles in some places, and not in
others, he says, S. Aug. Ep. ^37.
Multis notissima est sanctitas loci etc. Many do very well know the holiness
of the place, where lies the body of Blessed Felix of Nola, whither I
ordained them to go, because from thence I might more easily and truly
understand by letters whatsoever that should please God to manifest in either
of them. So he; and then having added that also in Millan a perjured thief was
discovered miraculously at the Monuments of certain Saints, and forced to
restore that which he had stolen, he says further thus; numquid non Africa
etc. Is not Afric full of the bodies of holy Martyrs? and tamen nusquam hic
scimus talia fieri etc. And nevertheless we know that such things (that is to
say Miracles in this kind) are not don any where here in Africa. For even as
the Apostle says that all holy men have not the gifts of healing, so also, he
who divides things proper, or peculiar to every one as it pleases him, would
not have these things to be done at all the memories or monuments of Saints.
Thus says S. Augustine.

66. Whereby I doubt not but thou see, good Reader, in what sense he denies
Miracles to have been done in Afric, that is to say, such Miracles as were
done at the body of S. Felix, for the discovery and punishment of perjury and
not such as he testifies else where, to have been ordinarily don at the Relics
of S. Stephen, S. Aug. de ciuit. Dei l. 22. cap. 8.
whereof he recounteth such a multitude, with such asseueration of his own
knowledge thereof, and public testymony of an infinite number of witnesses,
and such particular relation of circumstances, times, and places, that a man
must hold him for the most impudent liar, that ever wrote, if they were not
most true. Besides, that writing the same, as he did, for the proof of
Christian Religion against Pagans, and Infidells, it cannot without extreme
folly be imagined that such a learned, wise, and holy man, as he, would be so
prodigal not only of his own credit, and reputation, but also of the honor
of Christian Religion, as to expose the same to the derision of the Paynims, by
seking to confirm it by fables and lies, which every man in those parts (as
well the Paynimes themselves as others) might have co^trolled and would have
derided, if they had been fained.

67. Finally, these miracles of S. Stephen which M. Andrews calls here in
question, are testified by S. Augustine in that work which M. Andrews
himself so much esteems else where, Andr. c. 1. p. 46.. at id nu^quam.
that alleging out of it a sentence which he thought might make for him, he
calls it opus palmare de ciuitate Dei, the principal or most excellent work
of Augustine of the city of God. And yet now he would feign disgrace it, or
rather S. Augustine himself by the imputation of a contradiction, which he
would the Reader should suppose to be betwixt it, and the foresaid Epistle of
S. Augustine, whereas you see (and M. Andrews knows it in his own
conscience) that there is no contradiction in the world betwixt them, but that
both of them do notably and clearly testify the ancient and venerable use of
holy Relics, and the miraculous assistance, and help that God gives to his
faithful people thereby, and by the prayers and Relics of his holy Martyrs
and Saints. So that truly a man may wonder at the impudency, M. Andrews his
abuse of S. Augustine inexcusable.
and seared Conscience of M. Andrews, who seeks to delude his Reader with
such a fraudulent and inexcusable abuse of this holy Father.

68. But no wonder that he is so bold with the Fathers, seeing that the Sacred
authority of the holy Scriptures cannot suffice to free them from his fraud:
Wherein it seems he has conspired with M. Barlow, with whom he concurreth
in the corruption and abuse of one and the self same place. To which purpose I
must desire the good Reader to call to mind what I debated with M. Barlow
concerning this point in the sixth Chapter of my Supplement, See suppl. c. 6.
number. 14 15.16.
where I showed evidently how he abused the holy Scripture, in saying that God
in his word appointed Kings to be guardians of both the tables, to command and
prohibit in matters of Religion, Ibidem.
for which he quoted in his marge^t the 17. of Deuteronomy, and 18. verse,
where no such thing is to be found, but rather the clean contrary is to be
inferred thereon, Andr. ca. 1. p. 22.. Sed nec.
as I amply declared in the foresaid Chapter: and now M. Andrews having
occasion to treat of the antiquity of the spiritual primacy of temporal
Kings, The holy Scripture abused by M. Andrews.
draws it partly from the same place, deducing it even from Moses, who when
he delivered, says he, the Copy of the law to the King, cum eo sic tradito
summam religionis (quae prima, summaque legis pars est) custodiendae, and
custodiri faciendae potestatem tradidit; gave together with it the chief power
to keep Religion and cause it to be kept, which Religion is the first and
chief part of the law. Thus says M. Andrews, and though he quot no place,
yet he must either ground this his assertion upon the same place of
Deuteronomy, which M. Barlow alleges, or else he shall find it no where, for
it was ordained only there and no where else, that the King should have a Copy
of the law.

69. Wherein nevertheless that is to be noted by the way, that Moses did not
there, or any where else, give a Copy of the law to any King, (for there were
no Kings of the people of Israel for 4. hundred years after Moses) but God
ordained by Moses in 17. of Deuteronomy that the future King, should take a
Copy of the law, from the Priest of the Tribe of Leui, and have the same with
him, and read it all the days of his life. But what? Will M. Andrews say that
the King was made hereby supreme head or governor of the Church in
Ecclesiastical causes? or (to use his own manner of speech) that the Chief or
supreme power to keep Religion and cause it to be kept, was given him hereby?
Truly the words immediately following do show another reason why the King
should have the Copy of the law, to wit, vt discat etc. to the end he may
learn to fear his Lord God, and keep his word, and ceremonies commanded in
the law. That is to say, he should have it for his own private use, and
instruction, that he might punctually observe it all the days of his life, to
which purpose I am sure M. Andrews will allow every man and woman to have a
Copy of it as well as the King. How then was su^ma potestas the supreme power,
whereof he speaks, given hereby to the King more then to any other man or
woman?

70. But if we consider what was expressly ordained a little before in the
same Chapter touching the supreme authority of the high Priest, Deuteronomy. 17.
and that the future King was presently after commanded to keep exactly the
whole law of God (whereof the ordinance touching the obedience to the high
Priest was a principal part) yea and to take a Copy of the law of the
Priests, who kept the original (and therefore as I argued against M. Barlow,
were the true Gardia^s of the law, and not the King, who had but the Copy) and
if we weigh withal that he was to learn of them also the sense and
interpretation of the law, because they only, and not the King had authority to
teach and interpret it, and to resolve all doubts and difficulties which should
occur therein (as I proved clearly out of the Deuteronomy. 17. and. 24. Exodus 28.
Ezech 44. Malach 2. See chap. 1. a nu. 10 ad nu. 24.
Scriptures in the first Chapter of my Supplement) if all this, I say be well
considered, it may be wondered, with what face M. Barlow and M. Andrews could
infer any spiritual supremacy of the King upon this place, which does in
truth prove their subjection in matters of Religion to Priests, and specially
to the high Priest. So as it is evident that M. Andrews has no less
shamefully abused the holy Scriptures in this point, then M. Barlow: in so much
that it is hard to say whether of them is more shameless, especially seeing that
they both do also exceed in a prodigious kind of impudency, wherein I thought no
man could have matched M. Barlow, until I had read M. Andrews, I mean in
facing and bragging out a bad matter, when arguments and proofs are to weak,
whereof I gave some Instances in M. Barlow, and will now do the like in M.
Andrews.

71. Thou may remember, good Reader, what poor stuff he produced Andr. ca.
1. p. 16.
to prove that S. Peter had nothing peculiar to himself by his pastoral
Commission, and how he triumphed in two or three paragraphes, as though he had
trodden the Cardinal under his feet, M. Andrews his facing-out of matters.
yea and bragged also afterward in another place, saying: ca. 8. p. 214..
Negat^
Clarius id loquuntur Ambrosius and Augustinus quam vt obstrepere possint
nostri nouitij: Ambrose and Augustine do speak or affirm it more clearly then
that our nouices (meaning the Catholics) are able any way to contradict it.
When nevertheless to make good his idle co^ceipt he was feign to use great
fraud and corruption in the allegation of those two Fathers, corrupting the
text of S. Ambrose, and dissembling the circumstances of the place in S.
Augustine, which clearly proves the Primacy of S. Peter, as I have amply
declared in the first Chapter of this Cap. 1. nu. 3. and sequent. ad nu 12.
Adioynder, so that his braggs and vaunts had no other ground, but his own
vanity, corruption, and falsity.

72. The like may be noted also in his vain insultations against the Cardinal
about the Council of Chalcedon. For when he himself had shamefully abused,
perverted, and mangled the 28. Canon (as I have clearly showed in the second
Chapter of this Adioinder c. 2. nu. 3.4.6.7.59. and. 64.
he admonishes the Cardinal seriously not to produce his proofs, tamquam e
vepreculis, as it were out of the briars, not out of the superscriptions of
letters, or of some corner of a period, or perhaps some piece of a title, or
fragment of a little clause, but to bring out some Canon, for that the Canons
are the voice of the Counsels. As though forsooth he had beaten down the
Cardinal with the shot of a Canon; whereas not only the most important parts
of that Council, but also the very Canon, which he mangled, and perverted, do
evidently prove the Cardinals intent, to wit, the primacy of the Roman Sea,
Ibidem.
as I have amply showed in the second Chapter aforesaid: so as it is hard to
say whether he was more impudent in his corruption and falsity, or in his vain
brags afterward, as if he had used all the sincerity in the world, and got a
great victory.

73. And in like sort dealt he with the Cardinal about the adoration of
Relics, when he triumphed saying: Tenetur hic Cardinalis vt elabi non possit.
Here the Cardinal is caught, and held so fast, that he cannot escape away:
nevertheless the testimony which he himself produced, being laid down whole
with the circumstances does convince him both of folly and fraud, as has been
manifestly showed a little before even in this See before nu. 21. and seq. ad
nu. 27.
Chapter, and therefore I forbear to speak further thereof, and will only add
one other Instance in this kind, Card. Apolog. ca. 15. page 197. and 198.
of a matter which has not been touched hitherto.

74. The Cardinal as well in his Matthaeus Tortus, as also in his Apology; M.
Andrews impudently affirms that the Puritans have recalled their doctrine
concerning the Kings supremacy.
auoweth that the Puritans in England do no less abhor the oath of supremacy
then the Catholics, and in his Apology alleges for the proof thereof, not
only his Majesty's monitorie Preface, and his Basilico^ Doron, but also Caluins
doctrine (which the Puritanes profess) and the testimony of M. Bancroft late
pretended Bishop of Canterbury, who plainly witnesses the same, as well
concerning the profession and practice of the Puritans, as also touching
Caluins expressed doctrine in that behalf; and M. Andrews finding himself
hardly p^est therewith, and having no other remedy but to face out the matter,
calls the Cardinal not only Mendacem, a Ly^r, but also D^lirum, Andr. cap.
15. p. 342.. ad quartum.
a Dotard, and why? Marry because the Puritans (says M. Andrews) do daily in
their Sermons give the title of supreme Governor to the King, yea and do not
stick to swear somtymes to the Kings supremacy, in so much, that, facto,
says he, res tenetur, the matter is clear in fact, and experience; and
afterward acknowledging that indeed M. Bancroft did twenty years ago gather
out of diverse Theses or positions of theirs, some suspicion that they were
alienated from the Kings supremacy, yea and that perhaps it was so then, he
concludes, that now of late recognouerunt errores suos, they have
acknowledged, or recalled their errors.

75. This is M. Andrews his discourse, which how true it is (notwithstanding
his impudent asseueration thereof) I do appeal to the consciences of the
learneder sort of Puritans, and Precisians in England, whether they have of
late time, or at any time, retracted, and recanted Caluins doctrine and theirs
in this point as an erour. For albeit I make no doubt but that some of them may
now in their sermons (as others of the weaker sort of them did even in M.
Bancrofts time, The fact of some Puritans in taking the oath cannot prejudice
the opinion or doctrine of the rest.
and always before) use the ordinary style of his Majesty's title, yea and
that otherwyles some of them also do dispense with their consciences, and
swallow the Oath to get some Benefice, or Ecclesiastical dignity: yet I assure
my self that the more zealous, and precise Puritans, and especially their
whole Congregation will not acknowledge this fact of some of them for any
definition, or decree of theirs, or for a recantation of their doctrine, and
belief in this point, neither is it sufficient for the recalling of an error
of a whole sect standing still on foot (as this of the Puritans yet does) that
some of them chang their opinion, or for fear, or promotion dissemble it, when
the same is not ratified by some public testimony of their whole company.

76. Therefore I must now urge M. Andrews to show us in what printed book, or
general decree of their Congregatio^s they have recanted their opinion, and
acknowledged it for an error, seeing that the same was published before to the
world by themselves, in such sort, that M. Bancroft (by M. Andrews his own
confession) gathered it out of their own books; Andr. p. 34^.. Porro.
and ita forte tum fuit, says he, and so perhaps it was then (he means 20.
years ago) and yet you see, he says it with a perhaps, as if the matter were
in doubt, and that perhaps it was not so. But I dare say without all
peradventure that it was so; not only 20. years ago, but also much later,
even since his Majesty came into England, for I am sure there are enough who
know and remember, that Burges a Puritan preacher was committed to Prison, for
that in a Sermon before his Majesty, he would not give him his ordinary style,
and title of supreme Governor of the Church.

77. But what if I produce a very substa^tiall witness of their continuance in
that opinion some years after, and such a one as M. Andrews has great reason
to admit, for that he still lives, yea rules in the English Clergy no less
the^ M. Andrews himself, M. Barlow a witness against M. Andrews.
I mean the learned Doctor and worthy superintendent M. Barlow, who in his
Epistle to the Ministers of Scotland, prefixed to the Sermon which he prated
before his Majesty against the Puritans the 21. of September in the year 1606.
(which is not past 6. years ago) coupleth the Puritans with the Papists for
their opinion in that point, saying, M. Barlow in his Epistle to the ministers^
of Scotland.
that Papists, and Puritans will have the King to be but an honorable member,
not a chief governor in the Churches of his dominions. Thus says M. Barlow,
whom M. Andrews must needs allow for a man of credit, except he will discredit
his own occupation, and ministry.

78. Besides that, I will add to M. Barlow another authentical witness, who
wrote the year after, and represents the authority of all the Clergy of
England, I mean M. Thomas Rogers in his book intytled; The faith, doctrine,
and religion professed, and protected in the realm of England etc. wherein he
sets down 39. Articles agreed upon by the whole Clergy, and analised by him
into propositions, with a discovery, and confutation (as he pretends) of all
those that have at any time contradicted the said articles; and all this he
says was perused, The testimony of all the English Clergy against M. Andrews.
and by the lawful authority of the Church of England allowed to be public;
So that this is a witness of sufficient credit, if there be any credit to be
given to the Church, and Clergy of England, yea to M. Andrews himself, who is
a principal member thereof, and therefore by all lykelyhood gave his suffrage
to the approbation of M. Rogers his book.

Thom. Rogers Artic. 37. propos. 2. p. 206.
79. This man having set down the 37. Article, and the second proposition
(which concerns his Majesty's Ecclesiastical Supremacy) produces only two
sorts of adversaries to that Article, to wit, the Papists and the Puritans, and
says of the later thus: False it is which the Puritans do hold, namely that T.
C. ^^p. p. 144.
Princes must be servants to the Church, be subject to the Church, submit
themselves to the Church, and throw down their Crowns before the Church; That
Ecc. dis. p. 185.
Magistrates as well as other men must submit them selves, and be obedient to
the just and lawful authority of the Church, that is, of Lear. disc. p. 89.
the Presbitery. Quis tandem Reges, and Principes, who can exempt even Kings
and Princes from this, non humana, sed diuina dominatione, not humane but
divine domination (meaning the Presbitery says, Beza d^ presb. p. 124.
Beza, which Lear. disc. p. 84.
presbitery they would have to be in every parish, quotquot Ecclesiae Christi,
as many as be members of Christ, and of the Church, they must subject
themselves to the consistorian discipline, non hic excipitur Episcopus, aut
Imperator, neither Bishop, or Emperor is excepted here. Thus says M. Rogers,
Tho. Rogers. p. 208.. penult.
concerning the doctrine of the Puritans, and adds further also in the next
leaf, that if the King be not included in the number of Pastors, Elders,
Deacons, and Widows, he cannot possibly have any thing to do in
Church-affaires in these men's opinions, meaning the Puritans.

80. All this wrote M. Thomas Rogers touching the doctrine of the Puritans not
past five years ago, for his book was printed in Ca^bridge by John Legate in
the year of our Lord 1607. If then the Puritans were so lately (as five years
ago, of the opinion that M. Barlow, and M. Rogers report, which is the same
that the Cardinal affirms) either let M. Andrews tell us precisely in what
books, or sermons since that time they have recalled this error, or else if he
will needs say that they did it before, I will turn him to these two for
answer, not doubting but they are able to give him full satisfaction therein,
especially M. Rogers, who has pawned the credit of all the English Clergy for
the truth of his testimony. M. Andrews his immodesty in reuyling the Cardinal
most injuriously.
And in the mean time I will desire thee, good Reader, to consider, whether M.
Andrews could have any just cause, or pretense to revile the Cardinal, and
call him liar, and dotard as he does, for affirming a matter belonging to our
Country, which he finds expressly testified by the greatest superintendent
of our English Clergy, besides other sufficient reasons moving him thereto.

81. For put the case it were true (as it is most false) that the Puritans have
of late recanted their error (as M. Andrews terms it) yet the same having
never been hitherto so published that strangers can take notice thereof, has M.
Andrew^ any reason in the world to reprehend and reuyle any stranger for not
acknowledging it, being but a matter of fact, which he neither knows, nor is
bound to know? Truly, albeit M. Andrews be of a most intemperate tongue, and
malignant disposition toward Catholykes (as has appeared diverse ways) yet I
verily think that if the weakness of his cause had not forced him to brave, and
face it out with railing for lack of reason to defend it, he would not in this
case have been so immoderate in contumelies, and reproaches toward the
Cardinal, as he has been without any cause given of his part. But heerin he
concurreth so well with his companion M. Barlow, that it appears evidently
they are both guided by one spirit. To conclude this point concerning the
Puritans, whereas M. Andrews says that they have of late acknowledged their
error touching the Kings supremacy, I will in the next Chapter Chap. 10. nu.
61. and seque^t.
make it evident, that not they, but he (if he be an English Protestant) may
be said to have acknowledged his error, and that he is turned Puritan in that
point, admitting the Kings Ecclesiastical supremacy no otherwise, but so, as
they may safely grant it without change of opinion, yea subscribe, or swear to
it in the same sense that he teaches it (and so perhaps such of them do as
take the Oath of supremacy: Andr. p. 15.. verum.
) and this I say, I make no doubt to prove clearly in the next Chapter, quod
scio punget Doctorem, as he said once of the Cardinal.

82. To these examples of his egregious impudency in this kind, I may well add
one, or two other examples of his impudent assertion of notable lies without
allegation of author, or witness; as when he charge certain Jesuits to
have affirmed, or (as it seems) to have written, that they committed no sin
abannis, An impudent lie of M. Andrews touching certain Jesuits.
says he, nescio quot, I know not for how many years together; which I dare
boldly affirm to be a monstrous lie, I mean; that any Jesuit has so written,
or said either of himself, or any other man; for although I make no doubt but
that many Jesuits, and other good men both Religious, and secular by the help
of Gods grace, do live free from all mortal sins (that is to say such
sins as do utterly deprive men of Gods favor, and grace, and deserve
eternal damnation) yet I am well assured, that no Catholyke will say, that any
man lives free from all sins (such I mean as are called venial) which
could not be said of the Apostles themselves, as S. John testifies, 1. John 1.
saying, si dixerimus quod peccatum non habemus etc. If we say that we have no
sin, we seduce our selves, and truth is not in us; and to the same purpose
also the Scripture says else where, Proverb. 24.
Septies in die cadet iustus etc. The just man shall fall seven times a day,
and shall rise again.

83. And this is so known, and firmly believed of all Catholykes, that it is
incredible that any one who professes the Catholyke Religion should affirm of
any man (and much less be so vain to say of him self) that he committed no
sin for some years; and therefore M. Andrews must not think it strange if
we take this for an egregious lie, until he produce some other author, or
witness then himself, as I doubt not but he would have do^e, if he had any
worth the naming, or else had not (perhaps) forgot his name, as well as the
number of years in which those Jesuits committed no sin, for so it appears
by his ab annis, nescio quot; whereby we may see what substa^tiall tales he
tells us, seeing he writes, either he knows not, or at least he cares not
what.

84. The like I say also of another matter auowed by him with more
particularities, Another egregious lie of M. Andrews concerning a Jesuit in
prison.
and circumstances, to wit, that a Jesuit being in Prison at the same time when
he wrote, confessed upon his own accord without all compulsion, fear, or
examination, (moved merely with remorse of conscience) that the Popesent to
England 3. Bulls of excommunication to be kept in readiness, and published in
three several parts of the realm upon the execution of the powder plot,
whereupon he infers that the Pope must needs be privy unto the said plot.
But for as much as I assure my self, and know right well, that no such Bulls,
as he mentions were ever made, I do not only deny the inference of the Popes
knowledge of the powder plot, but also may justly charge M. Andrews to have
faygned the whole matter himself, until he name the Jesuit, who confessed it,
yea, and procure him also to give publyke testimony of it, which by all
lykelyhood would have been done long ere this, if any secular Priest, Jesuit, or
other Catholyke man (of any credit, or reputation amongst Catholykes) had
confessed, and acknowledged any such matter, especially in such manner as he
has declared.

85. Besides, that it is not unknown what Jesuits have bin in prison of late
years, or were when he wrote, whereby also it may easily be judged by such as
know them, how unlikely it is, that any of them would (upon pretense to
discharge his conscience) charge, and stayne it with such a horrible forgery as
this is. Neither are we ignorant of the common practice of M. Andrews, and his
fellow-ministers to calumniate, and slander such Catholic Priests, and
Jesuits, as they have under lock and key in close prison; whereof sufficient
experience was seen when F. Garnet was in the tower, of whom a hundredth false
bruits were spread, not only over all England, but also in foreign countries,
yea over all christendom. And albeit he sufficiently purged, and cleared
himself at his death of all the slanderous imputatious, yet M. Andrews is not
ashamed still to auow some of them; Andr. ca. 15. page 342. lin. 5.6. and 7.
as that he acknowledged by writing diverse times under his own hand, and
thryse publykly at his death, that he had understood of the powder treason out
of confession; whereas he publykely protested the contrary: F. Garnet
impudently belyed by M. Andrews.
for being greatly urged to confess, and acknowledge that he heard it out of
confession, he flatly denied it, repeating thryse, never, never, never; and
wheareas he was charged to have already acknowledged it under his hand, he also
denied it, bidding his accusers show it if they could; and of all this I am
well assured by the relation of credible persons, who were there present, and
especially of an honorable Gentleman, who stood so nere him that he heard every
word he said, and has upon his credit, and conscience affirmed it unto me. In
so much that I dare boldly appeal for the truth of this matter, to the
consciences, and knowledge of all those that were within the hearing of him;
whom I also beseech to consider what credit is to be given to M. Andrews his
report of the other thing touching the Jesuit in prison (which passed in
secret) seeing he is so shameless to lie concerning a publyk matter, wherein he
may be disproued by some hundreths of witnesses.

86. But it is not to be wondered that he speaks his pleasure of F. Garnet,
and other Jesuits, whom he professes to hate, seeing he uses (as you have
heard) to belly the ancient Fathers, whom he pretends to love and honor, for
he that belieth those whom he supposes to be his friends, will care little
what he says of such as he holds for enemies. And this shall suffice for
this matter, and Chapter, wherein I doubt not, but it evidently appears that
M. Andrews will not yield a jot to M. Barlow for all kind of cosenages, lies,
and fraudulent devises to cover the nakedness, and poverty of his cause.

THAT Mr. ANDREVVS OVERTHROWS HIS own cause, and fortifieth ours, granting
many important points of Catholic Religion. THAT he is turned Puritan in the
point of the Kings Ecclesiastical Supremacy, and betrayeth his Majesty's cause
under hand, prete^ding to defend it: and therefore is neither good English
Protestant, nor yet good Subject. LASTLY what is the opinion of learned
Strangers concerning him, and his Book: with a good advise for a friendly
farewell
CHAP. X.
Now there rests only one point to be handled which is of far different
quality from the former. For thou may remember, good Reader, that amongst
many things which I censured and reproved in M. Barlow, See Sup. c. 8. nu.
I greatly allowed and approved one which is ordinary in him, to wit, that he
does very often overthrow his own cause, and fortify ours, which truly is no
less but rather more ordinary in M. Andrews, as it may appear by many
examples which partly have already occurred in this Adioynder, and partly may
be noted throughout his whole work. In the first Chapter I showed how he
confirmed (though against his will) the Catholic doctrine concerning the
Primacy of the Pope, by the allegation of certain places of S. Augustine See
Cap. 1. nu. 3.4.5.22. and 23.
and S. Cyril, and of a place of Deuteronomy concerning Ibidem nu. 19.
Iosue, as also of a fact of Ibid. nu. 44.45.46.47.48. and sequent.
Justinian the Emperor against Syluerius the Pope.

2. In the second Chapter the same is also evident in his allegation of the 28
Chap. 2. nu. 4 and seq. vsque ad nu. 11. Item nu. 64.65. and 66.
Canon of the Council of Chalcedon which he seriously and mightily urges
against the supremacy of the Roman Sea, though it does clearly prove the
same. In the third Chapter the like occurreth in certain places of S. Chap. 3.
nu. 13.14. and 15.
Cyprian and S. Ibid. nu. 30.37. and sequent.
Hierome, by occasion whereof he is forced to grant as much in effect as we
teach concerning the supreme authority of the Pope. In the fourth Chap. 4. nu.
21. and seq. ad nu. 31.
Chapter the discovery of certain Ibid. nu. 34.35. and seq.
notable lies, and corruptions of his, does evidently prove the clean contrary
to that which he falsely auoweth, concerning the Roman Sea. And lastly in the
last Chapter you may remember a place of Chap. 6. nu. 21.22 and sequent. vsque
ad nu. 27.
S. Hierome concerning the Adoration of Relics, which being truly laid down
with the circumstances does soundly confirm the Catholic doctrine, which he
sought to impugn thereby; whereof, as also of all the former examples, I
forbear to lay down the perticulars, because thou may (good Reader) either
call them to mind, or at least easily find them out by the quotations of the
Chapters and numbers in the margent, whereto I remit thee, and will now add
thereto some other examples in the same kind.

3. Whereby it will appear that howsoever M. Barlow may in other points before
mentioned go beyond M. Andrews: yet in this he comes far behynd him. M.
Andrews tries how near he can go to Catholic Religion and miss it
For you are to consider that M. Andrews seeinge evidently that the Protestants
religion cannot be defended with any probability in the rigor of the first
grounds thereof laid by Luther, Calvin and others, takes a new course; which
is to see how near he can go to the Catholyke Religion and miss it,
persuading himself that he shall be the more able in that manner to answer
our objections, and find always some occasion or other which how little soever
it be, seems to him sufficient: for he makes account that he shall always
be a Protestant good enough, if he be not a Catholic; wherein nevertheless it
befalls him as it does to the fly that plays with the flame, coming now
and then so nere it, that she burns her wings, and falls into it, whereof
you shall see sufficient experience in this Chapter.

4. It appears Cap. ^. nu. 7. and 8.
before that he admits the adoration not only of our Savior Christ in the
Sacrament of the Eucharist, but also of the Sacrament together with Christ,
Andr. ca^ 8. p. 195.. In adorati^one.
for as he denies with us the adoration of the bare Sacrament, that is to say,
the exterior forms of bread and wine without the presence of our Savior
Christ, whom he calls (and that very well rem Sacramenti, Ibidem.
the thing of the Sacrament) so also he acknowledges that Christ is to be
adored in, and cum Sacramento, in, and with the Sacrament; as being there vere
presens, and vere adorandus, truly present and truly to be adored (for so he
says) and shows also afterward how the Sacrament may be adored together
with Christ. Ibidem p. 201. lin. 8.
For treating of the same matter, he alleges S. Augustine teaching how the
humanity of Christ may be adored, and how not. Ipsa humanitas, Ibidem.
says he, vt disputat, Augustinus non nuda vel sola adoranda est etc. The very
humanity of Christ, is not to be adored naked, or alone by it self but with
the divinity, as the Kings Royal Robe, not when it lies by it self, but when
the King is vested or clad, with it. How the Sacrament (that is to say the
exterior forms of bread and wine) may be adored according to M. Andrews.
So he

5. And then he adds also further out of S. Augustine concerning the flesh of
Christ in the Sacrament, and cum vel illam adoras, ait, ne cogitatione remaneas
in carne etc. And when thou adorest that (flesh) do not (says Augustine) rest
with thy cogitation in the flesh, whereby thou shall not be quickened with the
spirit, for the spirit, says he, quickneth, or gives life, the flesh
profits nothing, thus says M. Andrews out of S. Augustine, explicating
notably how the very Sacrament (that is to say the exterior forms of bread
and wine) may be adored, to wit, together with the person of Christ which it
contains: for as the humanity, or flesh of Christ in the Sacrament may be
adored because it is joined with the Divinity, so also the Sacrament containing
Christ truly and really present, may be adored together with him, as the
Kings royal Robe (says M. Andrews) may be together with the Kings person,
though not without it; so that in this point you see he teaches the very same
that we do, concerning the adoration of the blessed Sacrament, though Calvin
Calvin li. 4. Instit. c. 17.. 35.
and all the Sacrame^taries with Mela^ch. in Iudicio suo de Coena Dom. ed an.
1559.
Melancthon, Illyric. in confess. Antuerp. and Apolog. ca. 14. See Bellar. de
Euchar. li. 4. c. 29.
Illyricus and diverse other Lutherans do hold it for Idolatry, and so I am sure
it has been commonly held by the Protestants of England heretofore, as it
appears in the 39. Articles agreed upon by the whole English Clergy, and set
forth by M. Thomas Tho. Rogers art: 28. propos. 5. p 176. and 177.
Rogers in his book entitled the Faith, Doctrine, and Religion professed and
protected in the Realm of England etc. Thus much for this point and now let us
pass to another. Luther. li. de libert. Christia. and in asser. ar. 2.31.32.
and 36. Calvin l. 3. Instit. ca. 14.. 9. and in Antido. Council. sess. 6. ca.
11. Melancth. in locis co^. an. 1521. tit. de peccatis. See Bellar. de Iustif.
li. 4. ca. 10. and li. 5. ca. 1.


6. No man I think that understands the matter^ in controversy betwixt our
adversaries and us, is ignorant what is their opinion concerning the reward of
good works, as that Luther, Calvin, and most of their followers are so far
from houlding them to be meritorious of eternal reward, that they teach, the
best works of the iustest man to be mortal sins, and to deserve eternal
damnation, though they say they are reputed as just for the merits of Christ:
and those who seem to have the most favorable opinion of good works, do
teach, that howsoever they may have some reward even in the next life, yet they
cannot merit eternal Salvation, because the same is merited for us by Christ,
and apprehended by only faith. But M. Andrews goes much further, and comes
indeed so near the Catholic doctrine that he acknowledges it. For although
he take some exceptions to merit, yet he understands it otherwise then we
do, and so in effect does not deny or impugn that which we teach concerning
the same, notwithstanding his vain cauils, See chap. 6. nu 45.46.47.48. and
sequent.
and malicious interpretation of our doctrine, whereof I have already touched
some particulers in the last Chapter.

7. Therefore it is to be understood, that he grants, and teaches
expressly, that eternal reward shall be given to good works, albeit he do
it with this restriction, Andr. ca. 7. p. 165.. Reddi.
non ex pondere humani meriti, sed ex vi promissi diuini, not by the weight of
man's merit, but by the force of Gods promise, whereof grace is the foundation,
by the which, says he, our merciful Savior has promised mercede^ plenam
operi non pleno, mercede^ diaria^ operi horario, a full hire to a scant or
imperfect work, a days wages to an hours work. Math. 20.
So he, alluding, no doubt, to the Parable of the Gospel of the workme^, who
having labored in the vineyard, Hieron. li. 2. in Iouin. Aug. li. de Sancta
virgin. c. 26. Gregor. Moral. li. 4. ca. 31. See also the Co^mentaryes upon ca.
20. Math. Andr. vbi supra.
some a whole day, and some but an hour, had nevertheless all of them equal
pay, to wit the penny promised for the days work, which penny the Fathers
understand to signify eternal Salvation promised for our labor in Gods
service during our life, and so does M. Andrews, no doubt, understand it, who
proceeds thus, And that which he promised of his me^re grace, and goodness, he
renders by Justice; for he should not be just except he should stand to his
promise. We may say (to God) with convenient humility, give me the reward
which thou have promised, but I think we cannot say, give me that which I
have deserved, or that which thou owe me for my merit; for setting aside the
promise of God, there is not any sufficient title for the which, Valent. 8.9.4.
God ought to recompense such a work with eternal life. Thus says M. Andrews.

8. Wherein although he exclude all consideration of merit from the reward of
works, M. Andrews grants the merit of good works by co^seque^ce.
nevertheless gra^ting, as he does, the reward to be due by the force of Gods
promise, he grants in effect as much as we desire. To which purpose, I wish
two things to be noted in this his discourse, the one, that he speaks
clearly of eternal reward and life everlasting, acknowledging the same to be
due to good works by the force of Christ's promise; the other that the merit
which he impugneth, is only such as excludes the consideration of Gods
promise, as it appears by the reason which he gives out of Gregory de
Valentia, to wit, Andr. vbi supra.
because setting aside the promise of God, there is not any sufficient title or
cause why God is bound to reward good works with life everlasting. This then
being the reason why he excludes merit, it is clear that he does not exclude
the merit whereof we speak, nor conclude any thing against us, but rather
argues for us; for we are so far from rejecting the consideration of Gods
promise from our merit, that we grant the merit of everlasting life especially
thereupon.

9. For albeit we teach, that the grace of God does give a great dignity and
valor to the work, and therefore co^curreth to the merit thereof, yet we
teach withal, that the same were not sufficient for the merit of eternal
salvation, The consideration of Gods promise for the merits of Christ
necessarily included in the consideration of our merit.
if God had not promised it for the merits of our Saviors passion (which is
the ground of all man's merit) and therefore almighty God having couenanted and
bargayned with us to give such a reward for such a work, yea and assisting us
with his grace to do the work, has not only made himself our debtor, if we
do it, but also makes us able to merit the reward promised. I say merit,
though M. Andrews does not admit the word, who nevertheless does acknowledge it
sufficiently when he says, that God has promised, and will render mercedem
diariam operi horario, Reward and merit are correlatiues, and cannot be, but in
respect of one another.
the days wages to an hours work, for merces and meritum, reward and merit
are correlatiues, and cannot be the one, but in respect of the other, for
reward is never due but to him that does merit or deserve it, and he only that
meriteth may justly claim reward. And therefore the Apostle says expressly,
^i qui operatur mer^^s imputatur, non secu^dum gratiam, sed secundum debitum:
to him that works the reward is imputed, not according to Grace, but
according to debt. M. Andrews acknowledging the reward of the work grants
the merit of the work, and the worker.


10. So as M. Andrews acknowledging that God has promised, and does render
mercedem operi, a r^ward to the work, does consequently acknowledge meritum
operis, and operantis, the merit both of your work, and of the worker; for,
dignus est operarius mercede sua, (says our Savior) the workman is worthy of
his wages, that is to say, he meriteth or deserves it. In which respect also
the Apostle says, Vnusquisque mercedem accipiet secundum laborem suum, Every
one shall receive reward according to his labor, that is to say, as his labor
deserves, or as he meriteth for his labor. And a^beit almighty God of his
infinite bounty has promised greater rewards then our works do in rigor of
Justice merit, ^. Reg. 18. The question of the reward, and merit of good works
explicated by an example of king David.
yet the covenant, and promise being made, he that does the works, does justly
merit the rewards. As for example, King Saul promised to give his daughter
Mich^l to David in marriage, y^ he brought him a hundred prepaces of the
Philistines, and albeit David thought himself unworthy to marry the Kings
daughter (saying that he was a poor man, and of s^^al ability) yet when he had
performed the condition, he claymed performance of the Covenant, and had her to
wife; and afterward when she was taken from him by Saul, and given to
Phaltiel, he required her again (after Saul's death) not only because she was
his wife, but also because he had bargayned for her, and got her by Covenant,
^. Reg. 3.
quam despondi mihi, says he, centu^ praeputijs Philistinorum; whom I
betrothed unto me, with a hundred prepuces of the Philistines, as who should
say, that it was reason he should have her, because he had deserved her.

11. And much more truly may the like be said of the good works of just men,
The dignity of Gods grace increases the value of merit.
proceeding from Gods grace, which works besides the covenant and promise of
reward, are enobled also, and dignified by grace, and so made not only
acceptable unto God, but also much more worthy of the reward promised, then any
moral works could be, though God should promise to reward them eternally^ so
that the dignity of Gods grace concurring in the good work, with Gods promise
of reward, makes the same truly meritorious, be the work never so small, and
the reward promised never so great; and therefore whosoever does for the pure
love of God, forsake his lands, or parents, or wife, he meriteth that great
reward which our Savior promised, to wit Math. 19. Mar. 10. Luc. 19.
Magdeburg. ca. 4. Calvin. l. 3. Inst. c. 15.. 2. and seq. See Bellar. lib. ^^
de ^us^if. c. 1.2.3.4. and seq.
Centuplum etc. an hundredth fold in this world, and life everlasting in the
other. And in this sense do all the Fathers teach the merit of works so
expressly, that not only the Magdeburgenses, but also Calvin takes exceptions
to them all, for using the word merit so frequently as they do, which indeed is
most evident in their wrorkes, and may be seen by innumerable places of the
said Fathers alleged by Cardinal Bellarmine and others, to prove the merit of
good works; which I pretermit, for that my meaning is not here so much to
prove or confirm our doctrine in this point, as somewhat to explicate it, upon
this occasion offered.

12. Andr. vbi supra.
This then being the constant doctrine of Catholics, it appears how idle is
M. Andrews his distinction, in his Conclusion, to wit, reddendum cuique
secundum opera, sed ex vi promissi, non valor meriti. Every one is to rewarded
according to his works, but by the force of the promise, M. Andrews makes an
idle distinction, and why^
and not by the valor of the merit. This distinction, I say, is very
impertinent for two causes, the one, for that it excludes the effect by the
cause, that is to say, the merit by the promise of reward, from whence the said
merit grows: for albeit we add thereto another consideration, to wit the
dignity of Gods grace, increasing the valor of the merit, yet the same
follows also upon the promise, because God has promised to reward eternally
such works only as proceed from his grace, and are dignified thereby, and
consequently made the more meritorious, in which respect we always say with
S. Augustine, S. Aug. ep. 105.
that omne bonum meritum nostrum non facit in nobis nisi gratia, nothing but
grace does cause in us all our good merit, and cum Deus coronat merita nostra,
nihil aliud coronat nisi munera sua, When God does crown our merits, M.
Andrews cannot deny, that the dignity of Gods grace increases the valor of
merit, except he will take part with the Pelagians.
he does crown nothing else but his own gifts. And truly I cannot see how M.
Andrews can deny that grace increases the valor of the merit, except he will
take part with Pelagius the heretic, and impugn the dignity of Gods grace, so
as he must needs grant that the worthiness of grace being added to the force
of Gods promise, does make the work more worthy of reward. The other cause
why I say the distinction is idle (or rather M. Andrews for making it) is
because he makes the same to confute the Cardinal, as if the Cardinal did
exclude the Consideration of Gods promise from the reward of works, whereof he
might see the contrary in the Cardinals controversies, Bellar. de Iustifi^.
lib. 5. c. 14.
where he debated the question at large, and substantially proves the
necessity of Gods promise to make a work meritorious, and therefore whereas M.
Andrews seeks also to prove the same by Greg. de vale^. de effec. great.
disput. 8. quaest. 16. punct. 4.
Gregorius de Valentia whom he alleges to that purpose (as if he would
confute the Cardinal by one of his own profession) he is, as I have said,
very impertinent therein, laboring to prove that which the Cardinal denies
not, but expressly teaches. So as, you see still M. Andrews does nothing else
but idly beat the air, and fight with his own shadow, impugning only his
own conceit, and in the rest granting our doctrine concerning the reward and
merit of good works. Thus much for this point.

13. Amongst the examples which I gave in the last Cap. 6. nu. 10.
Chapter of his changing the state of the question, one was concerning the
veneration of relics, for that he will Andr. ca. 1.1.47.48.49. and 50.
needs suppose that we do worship relics with divine adoration, and honor;
and therefore Ibid. p. 50. Necesse habet.
he impugneth, and derideth the Cardinals distinction, of diverse kinds of
adoration, See before Ca. 6. nu. 11. Apoc. 19. and 22.
laboring to prove that adoration is not to be taken otherwise, then for
divine honor; but in this I have sufficiently showed his ignorance and
absurdity, and have also proved Ibid. from nu. 10. to nu. 31.
that we do not honor and worship relics with divine adoration, but with a
Religious worship due to holy men, or holy things for the honor and love of
God: in which point it seems M. Andrews agrees fully with us, confessing
that the dead bodies and relics of holy Martyrs, and Saints (which are truly
known to be such) are to be honored, Greg. Nys. in orat. in S. Theodor. Card.
ca. 1. p. 13.
and kept with reverence, and therefore answering to a place of S. Gregory
Nyssen, alleged by the Cardinal, he allows that the body of a Martyr, Andr.
ca. 1. p. 48.. Nyssen.
si very Martyris verum corpus, if it be the true body of a true Martyr, is to
be adorned, and decked with honor, and in Augusto, Sacratoque loco poni,
Praefat. Monitor. page 43.
and to be placed in a Maiesticall and Sacred place: yea and he confirms it
with the authority of his Majesty, saying, Idem hoc vult, and Rex honorifico
loco solemniter inferri. The King also will have the same to be solemnly
carried into an honorable place.

14. And afterward answering to a place of S. Ambrose which the Cardinal
obiecteth, he says that whereas Ambrose will have us to honor the body of the
dead Martyr, S. Ambros. ser. 14. de Sanct. Card. vbi supra p. 15. Andr. vbi
supra.. Honorare.
and the seed of eternity in him, Facimus, says he, non illibe^ter, we do it
willingly, and then adds: Quid porro quaerit? sed pallium breue est, hon^s
non pertingit ad adorationem. What does he desire more? but the cloak is too
short, honor does not reach to adoration. So he. Meaning by adoration, divine
honor, which we grant him; for we say also that the honor due to Relics,
does not extend it self to a divine adoration, and therefore we desire no more
of him then that he do a religious honor and worship thereto; for such is the
honor whereof S. Ambrose speaks, because it is due, and exhibited to Saints
for the honor and love of God whose servants they are, S. Hieron. vbi supra.
quin seruorum honos, says S. Hierome, redundat ad Dominum, the honor of the
servants redoundeth to their Lord. In which respect the same holy Father
signifies that all the adoration which was done to the Relics of the Prophet
Samuel (when they were transported with great solemnity and honor from
Palestine to Constantinople) was not done so much to Samuel as to Christ, whose
Leuite and Prophet Samuel was, as I have signified more at large in the last
See ca. 9. nu. 25.
Chapter

15. Whereby it appears that the honor done to the servants of Christ for
Christ's sake only (and not for any civil and temporal respect) must needs be
a religious honor: such I mean, as I have declared in the last Ibidem nu.
14.15
Chapter to have bin often exhibited in the holy Scripture to Angels, and holy
men with the term of adoration, and with the exhibition of a Corporal
reverence, which may be more or less according to the devotion of the
exhibitours thereof, so that it be in their mind and intention distinguished
from divine honor due to God alone, in which intention consists the true
difference and distinction of divine, religious, and civil adoration, as I have
also declared before in the last Ibidem
Chapter. So as M. Andrews confessing an honor to be due to holy Relics,
cannot with reason exclude from the same any Corporal reverence, so that the
intention be to do only a religious and not divine worship; As he must needs
also acknowledge the like in civil adoration and honor done to Princes and
great personages.

16. For whereas the same is diversely performed, somtymes by putting of the
cap, sometimes by bowing the body, and somtymes by kneeling, and other whiles
also by prostration upon the ground (which manner of civil adoration is often
mentioned in the old testament, and was used in times past amongst the Persians
to their Kings) there is no doubt, but that as all these may lawfully be used
when the intention is no other but to do a Civil honor thereby, so also the
least of them were unlawful, yea Idolatry, if the intention of the doer were
to give thereby a divine honor to any man: and the like, I say must needs be
granted, concerning the externe honor due to the holy Relics of Saints,
which how great it was in the time of S. Ambrose, S. Hierome, S. Hieron.
aduers. Vigilant.
and S. Augustine we may understand by the custom then usual to kiss them
for devotion sake; and to carry them about in procession (as we now term it)
with great solemnity and reverence; which appears not only in S. Hierome, who
severely reprehended Vigilantius for carping at the same (as I have signified
in the last Cap. 6. nu 22.23.24. and 25.
Chapter) but also by the testimony of S. S. Aug de ciuit. Dei l. 22. ca. 8.
Augustine, who recounteth diverse Miracles done by relics while they were so
carried by Bishops; as namely that Lucillus the Bishop was himself cured of a
fistula carrying a certain relic of S. Stephen, populo praecedente and
sequente, the people going before him, and following him; and that a blind
woman being brought to the Bishop Proiectus, as he carried Sacra pignora (so
terms he the holy Relics of S. Stephen) was restored to her sight by
applying to her eyes certain flowers which had touched them.

17. Such was the honor that Catholic people bare to holy Relics in those
days, that they sought either to touch them, or to have some thing that had
touched them, or been near about them; whereby diverse great Miracles were
done, Idem ibid.
yea dead men revived, as S. Augustine testifies in the same place by diverse
examples which he relates, and therefore I leave it to the Judgment of any
reasonable man how great the devotion, and the religious honor was which then
was usual in the Church, and allowed by these Fathers to be done to the
relics of Saints, especially seeing that the same was also approved, and
confirmed from heaven by innumerable Miracles; which M. Andrews himself
grants, saying, Augustino assentimur etc. we grant with Augustine that the
body of the Protomartyr was conveniently, Andr. vbi supra. p. 5.
or duly to be honored, after that it pleased god to work certain Miracles
thereat. M. Andrews grants that Miracles were do^ne at the relics of
Martyrs in S. Augustins time
So he; wherein besides the grant of due honor to be done to holy relics
(whereof now I speak) I wish also to be noted, that he grants that Miracles
were done in Gods Church in S. Augustins time, which most of the Sectaries of
these days have hitherto denied, affirming that Miracles ceased after the
time of the Apostles, which they are forced to say because we exact of them to
show Miracles in their Church as an undoubted sign of the true Church; showing
on our part the continuance thereof in our Church from the Apostles to this
day, whereof sufficient experience has been seen in every age, Many notable
miracles lately done at Vale^tia in Spain.
and even now lately by innumerable cures of all sorts of diseases, at Sichem
in Flanders, at Minich in Bauiere, in diverse parts of Italy, and at this
present at Valentia in Spain, at the body of a holy Priest who dyed in April
last, all so public and so sufficiently testified to the world, that
impudency it self cannot deny the truth thereof.

18. So that seeing M. Andrews grants that Miracles were done in the Church
of God, for 4. hundredth years, and we can prove the continuance thereof in our
Church until this day, either he must show us in what age they ceased after
S. Augustines time, and why then rather then before, yea and prove also that
all the miracles done in the Catholic Church ever since, have been diabolical
illusions; or else he must confess, that the Protestants Church is not the true
Church, No Miracles done in the protestants Church.
seeing that they have not hitherto had so much as a lame or sickd og healed in
all their Congregations by the virtue of any of their profession dead or alive,
notwithstanding their lively and strong faith whereof they are wont so much to
vaunt. And this I say the rather, because I find that M. Andrews is very
silent about this point, even when the Cardinal gives him sufficient cause to
speak thereof, who answering an objection of the Apology for the Oath
concerning witchcraft imputed to Catholics (because they quench fire with
Agnus Deis) says Card. c. 1^. p. 116.. R^spondeo.
: Respondeo miracula diuina etc. I answer that divine Miracles are seen only
amongst the Catholics; and M. Andr. ca. 12. p. 283.. Veneficia.
Andrews coming to answer that paragraph which begins with those words,
left them out wholly, and sets down the next words following for the
beginning of the Cardinals text in that place, perhaps he lakt Idem praefat ad
Lector.
paper and place for them, or took them for words quae abesse poterant, which
might well be spared; for such as you may remember See before chap. ^. nu. 31.
he said he would leave out sometimes.

19. But to conclude concerning holy Relics, it appears sufficiently hereby
that M. Andrews grants as much concerning them as we desire, to wit, that
they are to be decked, and adorned, laid up with honor and solemnity,
reserved and kept in honorable and holy places, and finally that they are to
be honored, yea and that God does sometimes work Miracles by the^ (which he
cannot deny to be a notable and divine confirmation of the honor that is done
unto them) and therefore for as much as the honor that he grants to be due
unto them, is neither divine honor (which both he and we conclude in this
case) nor civil honor, (seeing it is not done for any temporal or civil
respect, but proceeds out of devotion, and tends directly to the honor of
God) he must needs grant it to be a religious honor, and that the same may be
exhibited with much more external worship and reverence then the civil honor
or worship, which is due to any Prince: yea so much more, as respect of
devotion and Religion surpasses and excels temporal and civil respects: so
that if civil honor do require corporal reverence with cap and knee, bowing
and prostrating of the body, much more does the Religious honor due to Saints,
and their Relics require the same. Thus much for this point.

20. Whereas the Cardinal having occasion to speak of Monks, Card. c. 12. p.
157.. d^ multitudine.
and Religious women, he says, that their Institute cannot be reprehended,
except we reprehend all the Fathers of the first 500. years, M. Andrews
gra^teth it to be true, Andr. c. 12. p. 284.. nec instituta^
for he says that his Majesty mea^t not to reprehend the Institute of Monks,
but the Monks themselves, because they have long since gone from their
Instituts or rule, being degenerated into Locusts, apud quos, says he, desidia
nimium vere, nimium saepe in luxuriam despumauit, whose Idleness, or sloth has
too truly, and too often turned to a very foame, or froath of luxurious and
licentious life. So he, and then he adds, that because their Institute was
not of the divine law, but only of the positive, and now gone in merum abusum,
into a mere abuse, therefore it is worthily antiquated, or abolished amongst
the Protestants; wherein that which I wish especially to be noted, is, that he
approves the first Institute of Monks, and consequently must needs approve
diverse important points of Catholic doctrine, and utterly condemn his own
Religion.

21. For it is most evident that the first Institut and discipline of Religious
life, In what consisted the religious discipline of the ancient Monks.
consisted principally, as still it does, in the observation of the
Evangelical Counsels of our Savior, to wit, of voluntary pouety, Chastity,
and obedience, abnegation of a man's self, and Chastisment of his flesh, by
fasting, Penance, wearing of hairecloath, disciplines, and diverse other
Mortificatio^s as it is manifest partly in the Monasterial discipline observed
by the first Monks in the Apostles time, and related by Philo de vita.
contemp.^
the Jew, (as Eusebus Eccles. hist. l. 2. c. 16.
, S. Hi^rome de Scriptor. Eccles. in Phil.
Epiphanius de haeres. l. 1. haer. 29.
S. Bid in Prologo super Matthew.
Sozomen l. 1. c. 12.
and Nicephorus l. 2. c. 16.
do testify) and partly in the Monastical constitutions which are to be seen
expressly set down in S. Basil in constit. Mon^st and regul. breuior. Item de
institut. Monach.
and often touched and mentioned by Cassianus de institut. renuntiant.
Palladius Histor. Lausia.
Theodoretus Histor. religios.
Ioa^nes Climacus in scala paradisi.
, Seuerus Suspitius Vita Sancti Martini.
S. Augustine de moribus Eccl. ca. 3^.
S. Hierome ad Marcella^ vt co^mig. Beethlem. S. Dionys. Eccles. Hierar. ca.
10. S. Basil.
and other Fathers of the first 400. years, to omit S. Benets Rules yet extant
which were made in the age following. So that M. Andrews approving the
Institutes of the old Monks, allows the practice of all that Catholic
doctrine before mentioned, which other Sectaries of this time have hitherto
condemned, derided and abhorred, as repugnant to the liberty of their Gospel
and their own sensuality.

22. Besides that, he also approves thereby works of supererogation, (such I
mean as are not commanded, but counseled and left to our own free choice) and
consequently he grants the difference betwixt a Counsel, and a Precept,
contrary to the doctrine of Luther Calvin, and other Sectaries. Finally he
allows vows of Poverty, Chastity, and Obedience which are, and always have
been as it were, the link and band of Monastical and Religious profession, as
it appears evidently in the ancient Fathers, as in Dionysius S. Paul's
disciple, who testifies that those who were made Monks in his time (which was
the time of the Apostles) made a solemn promise and covenant before the Altar
to renounce the world, and embrace the Monastical life. And S. Basil writing
to a Monk that was fallen, Ep. 1. ad Monach. lapsum in fine. and in ep. ad
Virgin. laps. Idem. reg. 14. fusius explic.

S. Aug. in psalm. 75. ante finem.


puts him in mind of his covenant made with God, and pr^fessed coram multis
testibus, before many witnesses: and in his Monastical rules signifies that
he which has vowed himself to God in this Religious profession, and passes
afterward to another state of life, sacrilegij se scelere obstringit, is guilty
of Sacriledg, because he has, says he, as it were stolen himself from God,
to whom he had dedicated and consecrated himself.

23. Also S. Augustine says to the same purpose, Nemo potius in Monasterio
frater dicat etc. Let no brother or religious man that is in a monastery, say,
I will leave and forsake it, or that it is not to be thought, that only those
shall be saved who live in Monasteries, or that others which live abroad, do
not pertain to god, for to him that should say so, it is to be answered, illi
non vouerunt, tu vouisti. They have not vowed, but thou have vowed. So he.
Finally Ioannes Cassianus who lived also in the same time, treating of the
perfection of Religious men, and having said, that inestimable glory in heaven,
is promised them if they keep their Rules, and most grievous pains prepared
for them if they neglect them, concludes, Meliusest enim etc. For it is better
according to the sentence of the Scripture not to vow, then to vow and not to
perform it. Thus says Cassianus, to whom I might add many other witnesses,
Joan Cass. de Iustit. renu^ti. li 4. c. 13.
but that it is needless, seeing these may suffice to show M. Andrews allowing
as he does the Instituts of the Monks of the primitive Church must needs
admit, and allow religious vows of Poverty, Chastity, and Obedience, whereto
all Religious men are, and ever have been bound by their Institutes.

24. So as it is clear by all this, that in this one point he has granted
diverse important points of Catholic religion, yea and utterly condemned his
own, which denies and impugneth all those things practiced in Monastical
life, according to the first Institutes thereof. Besides that it also follows
thero^, that his religion is utterly void of all christian perfection, which
specially consists in the true imitation of Christ's life, by the observation
of the Evangelical Counsels professed and practiced in Religious discipline;
for which cause all the Ancient Fathers placed the highest perfection of
christian Religion therein, as I have evidently showed in any Supplement by the
clear testimonies of S. Dionysius Areopagita, See supl. c. 7. nu. 59. and 60.
Eusebius, S. Gregory Nazianzen, S. Basil, S. Chrysostom, S. Hierome, S.
Augustine, Sozomenus, and S. Bernard.

25. Therefore it little imports for the matter in hand what he iangleth
against Monks: for put the case it were true that they were all degenerated
from their first institute (as it is most false, and affirmed by him without
any proof, and therefore to be answered with a bare denial) yet it suffiseth
for the proof of that which I have here undertaken, M. Andrews approving the
first institute of monks approves many important points of Catholke Religion.
that the said institut consisted in the practice of many notable, and
important points of Catholic religion, and that he has by an evident
consequent granted, and approved the said points, together with the institut
against the curre^t of the doctrine, and profession of all his fellows; in
which respect I shall not need to trouble thee, good Reader with any answer to
the rest of his impertine^t discourse, and namely to his frivolous stale
objection, concerning the idleness of Monks, See Card. Bellar. l. de. monachis.
c. 42 43. and seq.
answered fully long since by diverse Catholics, and namely by Cardinal
Bellarmine in his Controversies, whereto I remit him, because I am forced to
have to an end: for otherwise truly, I would not only say somewhat thereto, but
also I would examine, and debate with him 2. or 3. other points which he
touches, and especially what was the true cause, why monastical profession
was first abrogated amongst the Protestants, and why they pretending to reform
the Church in these our days, did rather quite abolish the institute of Monks,
the^ seek to restore it to the first integrity, if it were good at the first,
and only fallen to decay, and corruption, as he signifies.

26. For whereas he seems to give two causes thereof, the one that Monks
were grown to be idle, and the other, that their idleness was turned to
licentiousnes; if that were true, those reformers should rather have sought to
redress the abuse, and to reduce the Monks to their first rules, then to
antiquate the whole Institute, which being grounded upon the holy Scriptures,
the express Counsels of our Savior, and the example of his life, was ordained
See Supplem Chap 7. n. 58 59.60.
by the Apostles (as I have showed in my Supplement) and does conteyn in it all
true Christian perfection according to the opinion of all the Fathers, in which
respect it could not by any humane authority be lawfully abrogated, and taken
quite out of the Church. Besides that it is evident that the Ringleaders in
that pretended reformation, I mean Luther, Oecol^mpadius, Bucer, Peter Martyr,
Ochinus, Michonius, Menius, Musculus, Pelicanus, Pomeranus, and Munsterus,
being all of them Votaries, that is to say Monks, Friars, and religious men,
abolished the Institutes of monastical life, only because they themselves were
so transported with the fury of lust, and sensuality, that they could no longer
endure the restraint thereof in religious discipline.

27. And therefore they resolved not only to teach most beastly and fleshly
doctrine tending to all liberty of the flesh (as that, it Luther in colloqu.
Germa. c. de matrimo.
is no more possible to live chaste, then to live without meat. That Idem. to.
8. de matrimo. fol. 119.
if the wife will not come, let the maid come. That Poligamy or the having of
many wives at once, is Idem de Bigamia Episcop. proposit. 62. Ite^ Ochinus
dialog. l. 2. dial. 21. See Caluinoturcis. l. 2. cap. 11.
not forbidden in the new law: Yea and that it is not lawful for a man to
Bucer in cap. 1. and 19. Mat.
pray for the gift of Chastity, except he surely know that God will give it
him:) They resolved I say not only to teach this beastly and Mahometicall
doctrine, but also to incite men thereto by their examples, even with the
damnable breach of their own vows, 1. Tim. ^.
habentes damnationem quia primam fidem Tertul. lib. de monogam. c. 13.

S. Epiphanius lib. 2. haeres. 61. in fine.

S. Chrysostom. hom. 19. in 1. Cor. 7. and in 1. Tim. 8. hom. 15. S. Aug. in
Psalm. 75. Ite^ Council. Carthag. 4. can. 104.


irritam fecerunt, having damnation because they broke their first faith, as S.
Paul said of the young widows, who after their vows of chastity, had but only
a will and desire to marry, whereas these deformers having bound themselves both
to Chastity, and Monastical life by solemn vow, abandoned both the one and
the other, and (as S. S. Basil. de vera virginitate. The first Evangelists of
the Protestants Gospel, were the true Locusts that destroyed religiou^
profession and perfection.
Basil says of such) did seek to cover stupri scelus honesto co^iugij nomine,
the wickedness of whordome with the honest name of Marriage, most of them taking
harlots under the name of wives.

28. So as M. Andrews may see who were indeed those Locusts, whose slothful
idleness turning to a froath of licencious life destroyed monastical perfection
and profession amongst the Prostestants, to wit, the very first Apostles, and
Evangelists of their Gospel, I mean the votaries above named, and other such
of their humor, and crew, who being weary of the severity of Monastical
discipline became Apostata's, and renegats, and the better to cloak and excuse
their own Apostasy, not only sought to abrogate all monastical discipline,
but did also set abroach the new doctrine which M. Andrews and all other
Protestants now profess, and therefore it is easy to judge what good fruit
such bad trees could yield, and consequently from what spirit as well the
abrogation of monastical profession amongst the Protestants, as their whole
doctrine proceeds. And thus much for this point.

29. The Cardinal to prove that the name Catholic does most properly belong
to them that live in the unity, and obedience of the Roman Church, alleges
S. Ambrose; who having declared that his brother Satyrus being by shipwreck
cast upon a coast where there were many Schismatiks called Luciferia^s, That
the name Catholic belongs only to the Apostolic Roman Church, and to the
children thereof.
asked the Bishop of the place, whether he did agree with the Catholic
Bishops, and explicated the same presently saying, id est, an cum Romana
Ecclesia consentiret, that is to say, whether he agreed with the Roman Church,
whereto M. Andrews answers that Ambrose did ask the Bishop with great
reason whether he agreed with the Roman Church, sciebat enim Episcopum tum
Romae Catholicum, for he knew that the Bishop of Rome then was a Catholic. So
he; wherein he grants consequently that the Pope is supreme and universal
Pastor of the whole Church, Andr. c. 5. page 125.. Quod affert.
for that must needs follow of his grant; seeing it is evident that he who
then was Bishop of Rome, and whom he allows for Catholic, had, and exercised
a supreme and universal authority; to which purpose it is to be considered who
was Bishop of Rome at that time; whereto M. Andrews himself gives us no small
light, signifying presently after, that Liberius was Bishop a little before him;
and sure it is, that Damasus succeeded Liberius, and reigned many years, who
therefore must needs be the Catholic Bishop that M. Andrews means.

30. Now then what authority Damasus had, and exercised during his reign, it
appears sufficiently by that which I signified before concerning him and his
supremacy, in the 4. See Chap. 4. nu. 57.58. and sequent.
Chapter, where I showed that the same was acknowledged not only in Afric, by
the Bishops of 3. African Synods, who in a common Epistle to him, gave clear
and evident testimony thereof, but also in the East Church, even by the chief
Patriarchs thereof, to wit, by Ibid. nu. 61.
Peter the holy Bishop of Alexandria, who immediately succeeded Athanasius and
being expelled from his Church by the Arians, fled to Pope Damasus, Magdeb.
cent. 4. c. 10.

Socrat. l. 4. c. 30.


and by the virtue and authority of his letters was restored to his seat, as
the Magdeburgians themselves do relate, out of the Ecclesiastical histories.
And in the Church of Antioch, his authority was acknowledged by Paulinus Bishop
thereof, receiving instructions and orders from him, Cap. 4. nu. 62.
for the absolution of Vitalis the Heritick. Also afterward Ibid. nu. 63.
Theopilus Bishop of Alexandria, and S. Chrysostom Bishop of Constantinople,
were suitors to him to obtain pardon for Flauianus Bishop of Antioch, as may be
seen more particulerly in the fourth Chapter of this Adioynder, where I have
also set down the clear Ibid. nu. 58. and 59.
testimonies of some Fathers, who lived at the same time, and evidently
acknowledged his supremacy.

31. So that M. Andrews granting that Pope Damasus was a Catholic Bishop, and
that the Church of Rome was in such integrity under him, that S. Ambrose had
reason to hold none for Catholics, but such as held union therewith. It m^st
needs follow that the supreme and universal authority, which Pope Damasus had
and used, was not usurped, but due to him, and his Sea, and consequently to his
successors. And whereas M. Andrews signifies that the Roman Church, and
Bishops were not always in the like integrity, that they were at that time, to
wit, neither a little before in the time of Liberius, nor shortly after in the
time of Honorius, because both of them subscribed to heresy, (as he says) I
will not now stand to debate that point with him, both because I should
digress too much from the matter in hand (having here undertaken to show what
he grants in favor of Catholics, and not to disprove what he denies or
affirms otherwise) as also because he may see those old and stale objections
fully answered by the Cardinal himself in his Controversies, Bellar. d^ Pont.
Ro^. l. 4. ca. 8. and 11.
not only concerning those two Popes, but also touching all the rest, whom our
adversaries were wont to calumniate in like manner, and therefore I remit him
thereto.

32. There follows presently after a large and liberal grant of M. Andrews
right worth the noting. For whereas the Cardinal still prosecuteth the same
matter (touching the application of the name Catholic to the Roman Church)
and having produced the precedent authority of S. Ambrose remitteth his Reader
for further proof thereof, to the last page of his Idem Resp. ad Apolog. p. vlt.
former Book (which was his Answer to the Apology for the Oath) it is to be
understood, that in the said book and page, he proves by the authority of 3.
Ancient Fathers (to wit Pa^id. Ep. ad Sympronian.
Pacianus S. Ciril Hier. c. 18.
S. Cyrill and Aug. in lib co^tra ep. Fu^dame^. cap. ^^
S. Augustine) that the name Catholic is a most true and proper note of the
true Church, and that it could never be usurped by Heretics, yea and that our
adversaries themselves (namely in the Apology for the Oath) do so call us,
Andr. c. 5. p. 125. Nam quae.
and distinguish us from themselves by that name, and do consequently
acknowledge us to be members of the true Church, whereto M. Andrews answers
thus. Nam quae in extrema pagina etc. For as for those things which the
Cardinal wrote in the last page of his former book, and would gladly have his
Reader to see, fatemur omnia, we grant and acknowledge them all. So he.
Whereby he grants that we being called Catholics, even by our adversaries
themselves have the true sign and note of the true Church, and are therefore
true members thereof, and that he and his fellows, who have not the same note
are Heretics or Schismatiks. For this is in effect the Argument of the
Cardinal, grounded upon the authority of the Fathers aforesaid, which (you
see) M. Andrews grants saying, fatemur omnia.

Andr. vbi supra.
33. And albeit he seeks presently an evasion, by a distinction, yet it
helps him nothing, for thus he says. Nec de nominis honor lis vlla, sed
vtri e re magis nomen habeant, M. Andr. his distinction helps him nothing.
neither is there any contention (betwixt us) about the honor of the name, but
whether of both have the name (derived) from the thing. So he, allowing us as
you see, the honor of the name (for the which he says they do not contend with
us) and calling in question only to whom belongs the thing, signified by
that name, whereas nevertheless it is evident, that according to the authorities
alleged and urged by the Cardinal out of the Fathers, the name and the thing
expressed by the name do always so co^cur, that they are never separated; for
which cause those Fathers do hold and teach, that the very name, and word
Catholyke is an evident note, to distinguish the true Catholic faith and
Church, from the false doctrine and Congregation of Heretics, which they
could not do, if some might have only the name Catholic, and others the faith,
or Church which it signifies.

34. And therefore S. Augustine in the place alleged by the Cardinal, Aug.
vbi supra. Item de vera religione c. 7.
says that the very name Catholic held him in the Catholic Church: quod
(says he) non sine caus^ inter tot haereses ista Ecclesia sola obtinuit, which
name this Church only has obtained amongst so many heresies not without cause.
So says S. Augustine, whereto the other Fathers, which the Cardinal also
cyteth, do agree, all teaching that heretics or heretical congregations never
did or could usurp the name Catholic, but that the same has always been,
and ever shall be peculiar to the true Church; whereby they teach evidently that
the name, and the thing signified by the name do ever concur. So as M. Andrews
granting not only the Fathers doctrine in this point, but also giving us freely
the honor of the name, allows us to have the thing expressed by the name,
and so in conclusion with his fatemur omnia, he acknowledges us for true
Catholics and himself, and his fellows for heretics, Luc. c. 19.
and therefore I may well say unto him with our Savior in the Gospel ex ore
tuo te iudico serve nequam.

35. And the like I may also say concerning his grant in another matter, Andr.
c. 7. pa. 168.. Nam de nostr.
to wit, that our Bishops are true Bishops, and that the Protestant Bishops of
England had their ordination from ours, yea from 3. of ours (for so he gives
to understand) whereupon he also infers, that he and his fellow
Superinte^dents have a true ordination and succession from the Catholic
Church, whereas the quite contrary follows upon his grant, for if our Bishops
be true Bishops (as having a true succession from the Apostles) and that the
protestant Bishops have no other lawful ordinatio^ but from ours, two
consequents do directly follow thereon, the one; that we have the true Church
and doctrine if M. Andrews his fellow and friend M. Barlow Barl. Ser. an.
1606. 21. September.
say true, who in his famous sermon (mentioned by me See before chap. 6. nu. 77.
else where) affirms, the Successiue propagation of Bishops from the Apostles,
to be the main root of Christian Society (according to S. Augustine) and the
main proof of Christian doctrine (according to Tertullian) as I have showed
amply in my See Suppl. Chap. 4. nu. 54.55. and seq.
Suplement, and proved thereby that M. Barlow, and his fellows are (e)
heretykes and Schismatikes. The other consequent is, that if the English
Protestant Bishops had no other lawful ordination then from the Catholics,
they had none at all; for that at the change of religion in Queen Elizabeth's
time, they were not ordained by any one Catholyke Bishop and much less by
three (as M. Andrews says they were) but by themselves, and by the authority
of the Parliament as I have also declared at large in my Supplement Suppl. ca.
5. nu. 2.3.4. and 5.
. Where nevertheless, I am to advertise thee, good Reader, of an error not
corrected amongst the faults escaped in the Print. For, whereas it is said
there, they had almost seduced an Irish Archbishop, and persuaded him to
consecrate some of them Bishops, there want certain words, to wit, a Welsh
Bishop, having in vain solicited, which words, are to be inserted thus; they
had almost seduced a Welsh Bishop ( having in vain solicited an Irish
Archbishop) and persuaded him to consecrate some of them Bishops after the
Catholic manner etc. And again a little after, whereas it is said thus; seeing
the Irish Bishop would not perform his promise, they resolved to ordain
themselves etc. there want also these words, cons^^t, nor the Welsh Bishop;
which words are to be added thus^ seeing the Irish Bishop would not consent,
nor the Welsh Bishop perform his promise, they resolved to ordain themselves.
Thus, I say, it should be corrected.

36. Whereby it may evidently appear what a beggarly Church and Clergy they
then had, What a beggarly Church and Clergy the Sectaries have in England
and still have: for having then not so much as any pretended Archbishop, or
Bishop of their own profession, they were forced to beg their consecration
even of the Catholics their adversaries, and having solicited an Archbishop in
vain, and being out of hope to have the consent of a Metropolitan to their
ordination, and much more to be consecrated by 2. or 3. Bishops, according to
the ancient Canons of the Church, they determined, as I may say, to play small
game, rather then to sit forth, being desirous to have some kind of ordination
from any one Catholic, though inferior Bishop, yea and in fine they sought to
have it from such a one, as was held to be the simplest man that then was, or
perhaps ever had been of the English Clergy; for so indeed was esteemed the
Bishop of Land^^^, whom they had almost inueygled, and induced (...) their
turn. But Almighty God out of his infinite providence so disposed (for the
eternal shame of their pretended Prelacy, and Clergy) that he also in the end
refused to do it, upon a sharp message which he received from Bishop ^onner
then Prisoner, who being Bishop of London (and consequently chief Bishop in
the province of Canterbury by the death of Cardinal Pole Archbishop thereof)
sent one M. Cosen his Chaplen to the said Bishop of Landaff to threaten him
with excommunication in case he did consecrate any of them, whereupon he
defisted from his purpose, and they resolved to ordain, and consecrate one
another, and so they did, as I have signified in my Supplement, upon the
testimony of one that was an eye-witnes of what passed amongst them at their
ordination, See Supl. vbi supra nu. 5.
to wit, M.I Thomas N^ale a graueman, well known, no doubt, to many yet living
in Oxford, where he was many years after Reader of the Hebrew Lecture.

37. Whereupon I infer two things, the one that they have no Clergy nor
Church; for ha^ing no Bishops, they have no Priests, (because none can make
Priests but Bishops) and having neither Bishops, See Supl. vbi supra nu. 6.
nor Priests, they have no Clergy and consequently no Church as I have showed
in my Supplement out of S. Hierome. S. Hieron. aduers. Lucifer.
The other is, that M. Andrews, and his fellows are neither true Bishops, nor
have any succession from the Catholic Church (as he says they have) no^ yet
any lawful mission or vocation^ and that therefore they are not those good
shepherds which as our Savior says) enter into the fold by the door, John.
10.
but fures and (...), thieves and robbers^ who clymbe up another way, or break
into it by intrusion and force, vt mactent ^^^^rdant, to kill, and destroy the
flock and so they are rotten bought broken of from the may n^ root of
Christian society, and consequently heretics and schismatikes, as well by M.
Barlowes ground before See before nu. 35. also Suppl. chap. 4 nu. 54.55. and
seq.
mentioned as according to M. Andrews his own grant else let him name unto us
those 3. Catholic Bishops who (as he says) consecrated their first Bishops,
at the change of religion in Queen Elizabeth's time, Luc. 19.
which I know he cannot do, and therefore I conclude of him in this point, as
I did in the last, ex ore tuo te iudico.

38. And this truly might suffice to show how he fortifieth our cause, and
overthrows his own; but that, besides diverse other points which I might
handle to this purpose (and am forced to omit for lack of time) there is one,
whereof I promised in the last Chap. 6^ nu. 81^
Chapter to say somewhat, to wit, his doctrine touching the Kings
Ecclesiastical Supremacy, which in very truth he abaseth, disgraceth, and
utterly supplanteth, whiles he seeks, or at least pretends to confirm, and
establish it, as has partly appeared already by his grant that our Savior
made S. Peter head of the Apostles, to take away all occasion of Schism, yea
and that he gave him as much authority as was necessary to that end, whereupon
I inferred necessarily that not only S. Peter but also his successors have all
that power, and authority which we attribute unto them (as may be seen in the
third Chapter Chap. 3. nu. 37. and sequent.
of this Adioynder) and upon this it follows also directly that no temporal
Prince is Supreme head of the Church. What a poor co^ceipt M. Andrews has of
the Kings ecclesiastical supremacy.
But his opinion concerning the Kings Ecclesiastical supremacy will be much
more manifest, if we consider what a poor conceit he has of it, and how he
abaseth it, being so far from granting it, to be a principal article of
faith, (as we hold the Popes Primacy to be) that he says it is, ne articulus
quidem, not so much as an Article, vtpote de exteriori modo regimine etc. as of
a thing which concerns only the external gou^rment of the Church, Andr. c.
1. page 21.. Neque tam^
so far forth as it requires, and admits humane help, and authority. And
therefore h^ places it not amongst points which are to be believed, Ibidem.
but amongst matters of persuasion, such I mean as we are persuaded to be
true; and therefore he says, nec sic singula trahimus ad fidem etc. we do not
so draw all things to faith, it suffices for some heads or points of religion
to believe them with the Apostle, and of some others to be persuaded only, quae
tame^ infra fide^ subsistant, which nevertheless are beneath, or under matters
of faith. Therefore it is enough if it be without the compass of faith, so
that it may have place only amongst orthodox, or true doctrine. So he; Ibid. p.
29.. A^ recepta.
and to the same purpose he also says in another place, that it is a truth,
but extra symbolum, out of the creed, The Ecclesiastical Supremacy of temporal
Princes, may be in M. Andrews his Pater noster but is not in his Creed.
so that it may perhaps be come into his Pater noster, but is not yet into
Creed. Whereupon diverse things might be inferred worth the noting; but I will
touch only two or three.

39. If the Kings Supremacy be not a matter of Faith, then is it neither
expressly taught in Scripture, nor necessarily deduced from it; for if it
were, then must it needs be a matter of Faith, and thereupon it follows that
although M. Andrews do allege Scripture to prove it, yet he himself is of
opinion that it is but only probably gathered out of Scripture, and
consequently that a man may without danger of damnation, choose whether he
will believe it or no. For of things which are in Controversy, and not
defined, but only probably gathered out of Scripture, a man may without danger
of his soul adhere to either part, which truly may serve for a great Motive
to all Protestants to make small account of the Kings Ecclesiastical
Su^remacy, otherwise then in respect of the temporal Laws, especially seeing
that so great a Doctor as M. Andrews, (who pretends expressly to maintain
and defend it) teaches, The oath of the supremacy unlawful, if the supremacy
be no matter of faith
that it is no matter of faith. Besides that I cannot see how he can approve
the Oath of the Kings Ecclesiastical supremacy, to be lawfully te^dred or
taken, as of an undoubted truth, if it be no matter of faith. For he that
swears a thing to be simply true, which he does not certainly believe, but
only is probably persuaded that it is true, Aureol. in 3. did. 39^ Ang. verb.
periurium. See Nauar. manuale c. 12. nu. 3. and Suarez de relig. Tom. 2. li. 3.
ca. 4. nu. 7.
sins in the opinion of the Divines and Canonists^ Whereupon it follows
that M. Andrews who holds the Kings Supremacy to be no matter of faith, but
only a probable truth, can neither lawfully take the Oath of the said
Supremacy, nor justly approve it to be exacted of any, and this will be as
clear as the Sun, if we consider by what Scriptures he labors to prove the
Kings Supremacy, whereby we shall easily see that the same is not so much as
probably gathered out of Scripture, and therefore not to be held for an
undoubted truth, and much less to be sworn for such. Card. c. 1. page 7.


40. For whereas the Cardinal obiecteth that it is a new doctrine, taught first
in the time of King Henry the 8. who first took upon him the title of supreme
head of the Church, Andr. c. 1. p. 22.. Sed. nec.
M. Andrews denies it saying, tantum abest etc. It is so far from being (so
new as the Cardinal says (to wit) a thousand five hundred years after
Christ) that it was a thousand five hundred years before Christ was borne.
Neither was Henry the 8. the Author of that in our age, but Moses in his, who
having put off (or laid away) his Priesthood, was nevertheless above Aaron:
and when he gave to the King the Law, he gave him withal the chief power to
keep Religion (which is the first and chiefest part of the Law) and to cause
it to be kept. So he. Wherein he gives two reasons or grounds out of the old
Law, for the spiritual Supremacy of temporal Princes. The one because Moses
laid aside his Priesthood (and being therefore but a temporal man) was
superior to Aaron. M. Andrews his gross ignorance.
And the other, because he gave to Kings, the chief power and charge of
Religion, when he gave them the copy of the Law.

41. In the former point of the two, he notably bewrays his own ignorance,
in saying that Moses laid aside his Priesthood, or ceased to be Priest, after
he was once Priest, as if Moses his Priesthood had bin like to the Ministry of
the Protestants, which may be put of and on like a Ierkin, or a Cloak when
they list, whereas his Priesthood was so permanent and inseparably annexed to
his person, that albeit he might cease from the execution of the function, yet
he could never put off the power of his Priesthood during his life. Besides
that he was so far from putting off his Priesthood, that he was not only
still Priest after Aaron was consecrated, S. Aug. Quaest. in. Leuit. li. 3.
quaest. 23.
but also (as S. Augustine teaches expressly) chief Priest either together
with Aaron, or else above him. Ambo, says he, tunc summi Sacerdotes erant: both
Moses and Aaron were the^ high Priests, or rather was not Moses high Priest,
and Aaron under him? Thus says S. Augustine, whereby you see how weak and
seelly is M. Andrews his first reason grounded upon his own ignorant conceit,
that Moses left off his Priesthood, and that nevertheless he was still
superior to Aaron, being a mere temporal Prince (for if he meant not so, his
argument, for the temporal Princes supremacy is not worth a rush:) but you
have heard out of S. Augustine, that Moses was not only a Priest after the
Consecration of Aaron, but also chief Priest, I mean above Aaron in which
respect it may be thought that God commanded Moses and not Aaron to cloth
Eleazar Aaron Sonne^ Number. 2^.
with Aarons vestments in the pre^^nce of Aaron himself, to succeed him in the
office of high Priest:

42. In his second reason (concerning the chief power and charge of Religion
given to Kings by Moses together with the copy of the Law) he shows most
evident and notorious malice in the manifest abuse and corruption of Scripture,
M. Andrew his notorious malice in the abuse of holy Scripture.
no such thing, but rather the clean contrary, being to be gathered out of
that place of Deuteronomy, Deuteronomy. 17.
where Moses ordained that the copy of the Law, should be given by the
Priests, to the future Kings. I say future, for that there was no King over
Gods people in the time of Moses, See c. 6. nu. 68.69.70.
nor of 400. years after, as I have signified in the last Chapter, where I also
charged as well M. Andrews as M. Barlow with the evident abuse of this place of
holy Scripture in diverse respects, and therefore I beseech thee good Reader,
take pains to reuiew what I have said there, if thou do not well remember
it. So as I may now conclude upon these two reasons of M. Andrews, that he is
both an ignorant and a corrupt Doctor: ignorant in affirming that Moses laid a
way his Priesthood, and corrupt in notably abusing the holy Scriptures.

43. And whereas he very of^ recurreth for the proof of this point to the
examples of the Kings in the old Testament, See Suppl. c. 1. nu. 10. and seq.
I have sufficiently answered thereto in my Supplement, where I have proved
first, that the law of Moses did expressly and manifestly give to the high
Priest the supreme authority not only in matters of religion, but also even in
temporal affairs, forasmuch as concerned the decision of doubts and difficult
questions. Secondly that the Ibid. nu. ^4. and seq.
Kings were not at their institution exempt from this law, but rather
commanded to observe it. Thirdly that the Ibid. nu. 3^. and seq.
particular examples which he and others are wont to alledg of Joshua, nu. 44.
David, nu. 45. and 50.
Solomon, nu. 49. and seq.
Ezechtas nu. 3^. and seq.
, and Josias do make nothing for their purpose, and that diverse other nu. 28.
and seq.
examples do clearly prove the contrary. And lastly that although it were true,
that Kings were superior to Priests in the old law, yet it does not nu.
53.54.55. and 56.
follow thereon that they are so now also in the new law, as well because the
law of Moses (at least the judicial and ceremonial part thereof) was wholly
abrogated by the law of Christ, as also because our Savior ordained a new and
far more excellent Preisthood, and manner of government in his Church, which
beginning in the Apostles and spiritual Pastors, was continued also most
evidently in them for 300: years, without interruption (to wit during the
paganism of the Emperors) and no new commission ever since that time known
to be given by Christ to Kings, whereby they were authorized to take upon them
the government of the Church.

44. So that I am to demand of M. Andrews (as I also did of M. Barlow in my
See sup. Chap. 1. nu. 83. and 84. It cannot be showed how Kings af^ter they
were Christened came to have the government of the Church.
Supplement) how, and by what Commission the supreme authority in
Ecclesiastical affairs was transferred from the Apostles and their
Successors, to Kings after they were Christened; seeing that they can neither
claim any succession therein from the Kings of the old law (which as I have
said was quite abrogated by Christ) nor pretend any new authority given the^ in
the new law, it being most manifest that all the texts of Scripture, which M.
Andrews or other of our adversaries do, or can allege for the spiritual
Supremacy of temporal Kings out of the new Testament, do ordeyne obedience to
the Pagan Princes that the reigned, no less then to others, which therefore
cannot be understood to concern spiritual matters, and much less to make
them heads of the Church, except M. Andrews will be so absurd to say, that
the most wicked Emperors, Tyberius, Caius, Claudius, and Nero were heads or
supreme Governors of the Church, and that they could command and ought to be
obeyed in spiritual and Ecclesiastical affairs.

45. Now then seeing M. Andrews neither brings, nor is able to bring, any
other proofs then these out of the old or new Testament for the
Ecclesiastical Supremacy of Kings, I may well conclude, that as he has great
reason to hold it for no matter of faith, and therefore not to admit it into
his Creed (as being neither expressly taught in Scripture, nor necessarily
deduced from it) so I may with no less reason advise him also to put it out of
his Pater noster (if it be gotten so far into his books) seeing it is not so
much as probably gathered out of Scripture; The Ecclesiastical supremacy of
temporal Princes excluded by a rule of M. Andrewes^
in which respect also I am to put him in mind of a rule given by himself in
another question, to wit, that nothing is to be admitted and practiced in the
Church, whereof some precept is not to be showed in holy Scriptures, for so
does he tell us concerning prayer to Saints, saying, non audemus vota nostra
etc. We dare not direct our prayers to Saints, because we have no precept
thereof, having a precept in express words. Andr. c. 1. page 37.. Verum.
Quod tibi praecepero hoc tantum facies, Thou shall only do this which I shall
command thee, whereupon we dare only do that whereof we have a precept.

46. Thus says he, and therefore according to this his own rule, I must now
exact of him to show us some precept whereby the Kings spiritual Supremacy
is commanded or ordained in Scripture, but this he acknowledges sufficiently
he cannot do, seeing he teaches that we are not bound to believe it as an
article of faith but to be persuaded only that it is a truth, which he neither
could, nor as I think, would say if he could show any precept or commandment
of it in Scripture. And this being so, how then dare he and his fellows admit
it into their Church, seeing he says, Id tantum audemus facere and^ we dare
only do that whereof we have a precept? And how can he approve that men should
be compelled to swear it as an undoubted truth, when nevertheless it is no
matter of faith (by his own confession) nor has any ground in Scripture, (as
I have showed) and much less is ordained and commanded in Scripture, and
therefore, according to his own rule, not to be admitted and practiced in the
Church, and consequently not to be ratified by a solemn Oath for an infallible
verity, as if it were one of the most important Articles of our Creed.

47. But yet let us examine the matter a little further and sound the depth of
M. Andrews his doctrine concerning the Kings Ecclesiastical Supremacy, I
doubt not but we shall find that he is neither good English Protestant, nor yet
a good subject; for if it fall out that his doctrine agreeeth not with the
modern Laws and Statuts of the Realm, he is neither of both, seeing that
according to the doctrine of English Protestants, none can be accounted to be
of their congregation, neither yet a good subject who belieueth not the Kings
Supremacy as it is taught, M. Andrews does not allow any spiritual authority
to the King.
and ordained by the Statutes of King Henry the 8. King Edward the 6. and ^he
late Queen Elizabeth: but this M. Andrews does not, for he does not allow
the King any spiritual power at all, ^eaching expressly that the King himself
acknowledges, non se aliter esse supra Ecclesiam quam vt^ nutritious and ^utor.
Andr. ci 14. p^ 323. lin. 33.
That he is not otherwise over the Church, but as a foster-father and defender.
Which he also explicateth adding, vt eam scilicet nutriat and tu^atur, that is
to say, to the end that he may nou^^sh and defend it, to which purpose he also
said nu. 37.
before (as you have heard) that the Kings Supremacy is no matter or article of
faith, because it concerns only external gouerme^t so far forth as the
Church requires, Ibid. c. 1. p. 21.. nequ^ tamen.
and admits humane help and authority.

48. Therefore whereas in the government of the Church, two things are specially
con^idered, the one internal and divine, and the other external and humane,
the former (which is a spiritual and heavenly power, communicated by almighty
God to man) he excludes from the Kings Supremacy, and admits only the
latter, which is a mere external and humane power; and the same also, non
aliter, no oth^rwise, then for the nourishment and defense of the Church, so as
you see he acknowledges thereby no other power over the Church, but only
external, humane, and temporal, whereto I make no doubt but all the Puritans
in England and Scotland will subscribe; What manner of Ecclesiastical power M.
Andrewe^ acknowledges in temporal Princes.
neither do the Catholics deny, but affirm and teach, that Kings are bound to
nourish the Church with their purses, and defend it with their power and
authority; as all or most Christian Kings at their Coronation are sworn to
do. And not only Christian Kings have this power, but also any Pagan Prince
has, and may exercise the same, as the Kings of Chinae and Persia (the one a
Paga^ and the other a Mahumetan) do at this day.

49. For the King of China nourishes, and defends the Church of Christ in
the Colleges and Residences of the Fathers of the Society, A Pagan Prince has
as much authority over the Church, as M Andrews allows to his Majesty.
not only in his principal City called Pachyn (where he keeps his Court)
but also in diverse other parts of his Dominions, giving them mayntenance,
immunities and privileges, and showing them many other particular favors. As
also the King of P^rsia does the like to the Carmelitan Fathers in his Country,
though I think no man will say, that these Kings have any spiritual power
over the Church of Christ, as our late Statutes have given to our Kings; An.
26. Hen. 8. ^. 1.
which may appear by a Statute of King Henry the 8. whereby it was ordained in
these words: Be it enacted etc. that the King our Sovereign Lord, his heirs,
and successors Kings of his Realm, shall be taken, accepted, and reputed the
only supreme head of the Church of England, The Parliament Statutes give
spiritual authority to the Kings, and Queens of England.
called Anglicana Ecclesia, and shall have and enjoy, annexed and united to the
Imperial Crown of this Realm, as well the Title, and style thereof, as all
Honors, Dignities, Preheminences, Jurisdictions, Privileges, Authorities,
Immunities, profits and commodities to the said Dignity of supreme head of the
same Church belonging. So says the Statute, which must needs be understood to
give spiritual authority, when it gives all that Power, Dignity, and
Jurisdiction which belongs to the head of the Church.

50. For seeing that the Church is a spiritual and Ecclesiastical body, it
must needs be governed by a Spiritual and Ecclesiastical power, residing in
the head thereof. And therefore it was also enacted by our Parliaments that King
H^nry might not only visit all Ecclesiastical Persons, Ibidem.
and reform all kind of errors, heresies and abuses in the Church of England,
but also assign 32. persons to examine all manner of Canons, con^^itutions and
ordinances Prouin^iall and synodicall. And further to set in order and
establish all such Laws Ecclesiastical, as should be thought by him, and them
convenient to be used, and set forth within his Realm and Dominions, in all
spiritual Courts, and Conuentions, and that such Laws, and Ordinances
Eccl^siasticall, as should be devised, and made by the Kings Majesty, and
these 32. persons and declared by his Majesty's Proclamation under his great
Seal, should be only taken, reputed, and used as the Kings Laws
Ecclesiastical etc.

51. Furthermore King Henry made the L. Cro^mwell his Vicar general for the
exercise of his spiritual, and Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, by virtue whereof
the said L. Cromwell ordained Ecclesiastical Laws, The Lord Cromwell Vicar
General to K. Henry the 8. for the exercise of his spiritual Iurisdictio^^
or injunctions and published them under the Seal of his Vicariat, directing
them to all Archbishops, Abbots, and the rest of the Clergy^ And albeit Queen
Elizab^th did not use in her stil^ and Ti^le, the name of supreme head, as K.
Henry and K. Edward did (but of Supreme Gouernesse) yet it is evident that she
did hold the same and all the authority belonging thereto, to be no less due
to her, then to her Father, seeing that in her first Parliament she revived her
Fathes Laws concerning the same, An. 1. Elizab. c. 1.
ordayning, that all and every branch, word, and sentence of the said several
acts, and every of them, should be judged, deemed and taken, to extend to her
Highness, her heirs, and successors, as fully, and largely, as every of the
^ame act, or any of them did extend to the said K. Henry the 8. her Highness
Father. Whereby it appears that as well the Title of Sup^^me head, as all the
spiritual preheminences, prerogatives, authority, and Jurisdiction granted
by the Parliament to King Henry, and exercised by him, belonged in like manner
to the Queen his daughter, her heirs, and successors, and consequently, to
his Majesty that now is.

52. Besides that, the Parliament granted also expressly to the Queen
spiritual authority, Spiritual Jurisdiction granted to Q. Elizabeth by the
Parliament.

An. 1. Elizab. c. 1.


ordayning that such Jurisdiction, Privileges, Superiorities, Preheminences
spiritual or ecclesiastical, as by any spiritual or Ecclesiastical power,
or authority has heretofore bin, or may lawfully be exercised, or used for the
visitation of the ecclesiastical state, or persons, and for the reformation,
order, and correction of the same, and of all manner of errors, heresies,
schisms, abuses, offenses, contempts, and enormities shall be for ever united,
and annexed to the Imperial Crown of this Realm. Thus far the Statute;
which you see annexeth to the Crown all such spiritual, and ecclesiastical
power, or Jurisdiction as may lawfully be exercised in the visitation of
Ecclesiastical persons and the reformation of heresies etc.

53. Moreover it was also granted to our Kings, that they should have power not
only to give license by their Letters Patents to consecrate Bishops, but also
to grant Commissions in certain cases, to give all manner of such Licenses,
Dispensations, Compositions, Faculties, Grantes etc. For causes not being
contrary to the Scripture, and Laws of God as heretofore has bin used, and
accustomed to be had, and obtained at the Sea of Rome: all which power must
needs be granted to be mere spiritual, besides that it was declared by a
statute of King Ed^. the 6. Th^^ all ^^tha^^y of Jurisdiction spiritual, and
temporal, is derived and deduced from the Kings Majesty as supreme head of the
Churches, An. 1. Edward. 6. c. 2. All the Spiritual Jurisdiction and
authority of the Clergy of England declared by a statute to be deryued from
the Prince.
and Realms of England, and Ireland, and so justly acknowledged by the Clergy
of the said Realms. Whereby it appears evidently that the King according to
these Laws and statutes (yea and by the confession and acknowledgement of all
the English Clergy) not only has spiritual authority, power, and
jurisdiction, but also is the very fountain and spring, from whence it flows
to all Bishops and Clergy in his dominions^ Whereupon it follows that if
there be any spiritual jurisdiction and power in the Church^ and Clergy of
England, the same is much more in the King then in them, seeing it is deduced
and derived from him, to the Church, as from the head to the body.

54. Now then this being most evident, how does M. Andrews his doctrine agree
with this? seeing he teaches that the King is no otherwise over the Church,
(that is to say) he has no power or authority over it, but as a foster-father
and a tutor^ vt eam nutriat et defe^dat that he may nourish and defend it,
which as I have said, M. Andrews depriueth the Kings Majesty of all the
spiritual authority that the Parliaments have given him.
all Catholic Princes do, and Pagan Princes may do without any spiritual
power at all. So that you see M. Andrews depriueth his Majesty of all the
spiritual authority and jurisdiction, which the Parliament has given him. And
the like he does also in other places, where he overthrows the Kings
Ecclesiastical Supremacy in other manner; for whereas the Cardinal obiecteth
Caluins doctrine, that no man ought to be called Head of the Church, M. Andrews
says that Calvin indeed did not like it quo s^nsu Papa etc. in the sense that
the Pope is called the Ministerial head, but I know says he, it would not
dislike Calvin in the sense that Saul was head of the Tribes of Israel, and so
also the head of the Tribe of Leui: so he. Giving to understand that Kings are
heads of the Church, in no other sense then as Saul was head of the Tribe of
Leui.

55. Whereupon i^ follows, that Kings are neither heads of the Church, nor
yet have any authority at all over it; for that Saul had none over the tribe
of Leui, which (as I have showed in the Sea before chap. ^. nu. 13.
first Chapter of this adioynder, and much more amply in my suppl. c. 1. nu.
18.19. and seq.
supplement) was by the express commandment of God exempted from the
temporal and political state, in such sort, that the L^uits were not so much
as to be numbered Number. ^.
amongst the people, being Gods own portion, Deuteronomy. 10. and 18.
part, and inheritance, and given by him for a gift (says the Numer. 8.
Scripture) to Aaron and his children, so as the temporal Magistrate had
nothing to do with them. And although it should be granted that Saul was head
of the Tribe of Leui, as well as of the rest, it would not follow, that he was
their spiritual head, it being manifest, that all the spiritual authority and
jurisdiction in the law of Moses resyded in the Priests, and especially in
the high Priest, as I have proved at large in my Suppl. c. 1. from nu. 10. to
53.
supplement, where I have also showed Ibid. nu. 51.52.
that King Saul had no lawful power and authority either spiritual or
temporal over the person of the high Priest, as it appeared, in that his own
natural subjects (who knew the law of God) refused to obey him when he
commanded them to kill Achimelech the high Priest, K. Saul had no authority
over the high Priest. S. Aug. in psalm. 51.
which therefore he caused to be done by Doeg the Idumean, who being a
stranger, and not knowing the law of God, or contemning it (and representing,
as S. Augustine testifies, the Earthly Kingdom and society of wicked men)
executed his tyranicall and sacrilegious commandment.

56. Therefore whereas M. Andrews signifies that our Kings are Heads of the
Church of God in England, as Saul was head of the tribe of Leui, he allows
them no authority at all over the Church, neither spiritual nor temporal; for
that, as I have said, the Leuiticall tribe was wholly exempt from the temporal
state, and subject only to the high Priest: and albeit Saul was truly head of
all the other tribes, yet he was only their temporal head, and had no other
but temporal power over them. And therefore M. Andrews does also by this
example deprive his Majesty (if not of all authority) at least of all the
spiritual power and jurisdiction which our Parliaments have granted him.

57. To this may be added also his doctrine in his Tortura Torti, Andr. Tort.
Torti. p. 151.
where he says, Nos Principi censurae potestatem non facimus^ we do not
grant the power of censure to the Prince, whereby he takes from the King all
that ample authority above mentioned, which is a^nexed to the Crown by the
statutes aforesaid, An. 26. Hen. 8. c. 1. and an 1. Eliz. ca. 1. The King might
(according to the statut) excommunicate an heretyke, as well as any Bishop.
to wit, all such Iurisdictio^s, privileges, superiorityes, and preheminences
spiritual and Ecclesiastical, as by any Spiritual or Ecclesiastical power
has heretofore been, or may lawfully be exercised or used for the visitation of
Ecclesiastical persons, and the reformation and correction of errors,
heresies, and abuses etc. In which words (being the words of the Statute) no
man can deny but that all manner of Censures are co^prehe^ded^ without the
which, heresies and abuses can never be sufficiently corrected, and reformed;
and therefore if the Prince thought good to excommunicate any obstinat heretic
he might (according to this Statute) do it as well or better then any Bishop in
his Realm, seeing that no Bishop can do it otherwise then by the authority
and jurisdiction which he has from the Prince, as I have Supra nu. 53.
declared before out of the Statuts; neither could the Prince give it to any
other, if he had it not truly and properly in himself, in whose person the
same must needs principally reside, seeing that by the express words of the
Statute, it is united and annexed to the Imperial Crown of England, The King
could not give the power of censure to other if he had it not in himfelse.
for what right, Power, of Jurisdiction soever is in the Crown, the same must
needs be understood to be principally and most properly in the Prince.

58. Whereby it is manifest that the Kings of England may according to this
Statute, not only give all manner of Jurisdiction (wherein all kind of Censures
are included) but also exercise the same themselves if it please them, as in
like case they might (if they thought it convenient) do and exercise the acts
of all the civil offices in the common wealth, as well as the officers
themselves, See suppl. c. 6^ nu. 61.
who have their Power and Jurisdiction from them, as I have signified more at
large in my Supplement upon the like occasion ministered by M. Barlow, M.
Andrews neither good Subject nor. good English Protestant.
and therefore M. Andrews denying the Power of Censures to the King, denies
him the Royal prerogative, and supreme spiritual authority wherewith our
Parliaments have endued him: whereupon it follows directly that he is neither
good subject nor good English Protestant. For seeing he abridgeth his Majesty's
authority, denying his Ecclesiastical Supremacy in the sense and manner that
our late Parliaments have ordained the same, he cannot be accounted a good
subject.

59. And if he say that by this argument, I confess that we our selves are no
good Subjects, because we deny the Kings Ecclesiastical Supremacy, A great
difference to be noted betwixt M. Andrews his denial of the Kings supremacy
and ours.
he is to understand, that the case betwixt him and us, is far different;
for, we deny it only of mere conscience, because we hold our selves bound to
believe, as a matter of faith, that S. Peter and his successors are supreme
heads of the Church (being a doctrine deduced from our Saviors express words
and commission given to S. Peter, acknowledged by the uniform consent of the
ancient Fathers, and confirmed by the continual practice of the Church, even
from S. Peter's time to these our days, as I have proved sufficiently
throughout this Treatise,) in which respect we have great reason to say with
the Apostles, Act. 5.
opertet magis obedire Deo, quam hominibus, and to give our lives, rather then
to offend God, and our consciences, in the denial of such an important article
of our faith, to the everlasting damnation of our souls. M. Andrews has no
such obligation to deny the Kings supremacy, as we have.
But M. Andrews holding the Kings Supremacy to be no article of faith, or
belief, but only a matter of persuasion, (which passes not the bounds of
probability) has no such cause and obligation to deny it, as we have, and yet
nevertheless (under the color and pretense to defend it) he does so extenuate
and abase it, that he makes it nothing, but an external, human and mere
temporal authority, and consequently as any Pagan Prince may exercise, as well
as a Christan. M. Andrews like to a treacherous friend or a preuaricating
advocate.


60. And therefore he deals therein no otherwise then one who being chosen by
his friend to maintain his quarrel, draws his sword with pretense to defend
him, and gives him a deadly wound behind his back: or like to some
preuaricating Advocate, who being hired to defend a cause, pleads for the
adverse party: for so does he, who being specially chosen by his Majesty, to
defend and maintain his Ecclesiastical Supremacy, does covertly, and
underhand betray him, M. Andrews does underhand betray the Kings cause.
depriving him of all the spiritual power that the Parliament has given him,
and leaving him only the bare title without the effect; which kind of dealing,
if it were but amongst friends and equals, were no less then treacherous and
perfidious, and therefore what it is in a subject toward his Prince,
especially in a man so much honored and advanced by his Majesty, as M. Andrews
has bin, I leave it to the judgment of any indifferent man, but sure I am it
cannot be counted the part of a good subject.

61. Neither can he be thought to be a good Enlish Protestant, for who knows
not that the English Protestant differs from all other Protestants of other
Nations, especially in holding and maintayning the Ecclesiastical and
spiritual Supremacy, that our Parliament first gave to King Henry the 8. which
you see M. Andrews does not, Why M. Andrews is no good English Protestant.
who (as I have said) has so pared, shaued, and abridged it, that he has made
it nothing in effect, at least much less, and of far other condition then
the Parliament ordained it. Whereby he is not only subject to the penalties of
the Parliamentall statutes, See co^stitut. and Canons Ecclesiastical, printed.
by Rob. Barker, Anno. 1604. Can. 2.
as a Traitor, but also incurreth the censure of excommunication imposed by a
late Synodicall constitution of the Bishops and Clergy of the Province of
Canterbury, upon such, as impeach in any part, (says the Canon) his Majesty's
Regal supremacy in Ecclesiastical causes, restored to the Crown by the Laws
of this Realm therein established, and so strickt is the Canon against such
persons, that it ordayneth further, that they being excommunicated ipso facto,
shall not be restored, but only by the Archbishop, after their repentance, and
public reuocation of their wicked error. So as this Canon, and all the rest
made in that Convocation, being authorized by his Majesty, and published by his
Regal authority, under the great Seal of England, I remit to the judgment of
all true English Protestants, whether M. Andrews having incurred the censure
of this Canon (and being consequently cut off from the union of their
Congregation) can be a member of their body, or any other to them, then an
Ethnic, or a Publican, until he have publikly revoked his error, and be
absolved, and restored by the Archbishop.

62. And no marvel, seeing that he is (as it seems) so far from being an
English Protestant (whatsoever he has been hertofore) that he is now turned
flat Puritan in this point, M. Andrews seems to be turned Puritan, in the
point of the K. Supremacy.
allowing the King no more power over the Church then to maintain, and defend
it, which is the very doctrine of the Puritans, who therefore do willingly
swear obedience to their Princes for the defense, and conservation of the
Church, as it appears by the Oath of the Puritans in Scotland, who swear
thus: Quoniam percepimus Ecclesiae, and religionis nostrae tranquillitatem etc.
Forasmuch as we perceive that the tranquillity, The Oath of the Puritans of
Scotland, set forth in the year 1584.
and stability of our Church, and religion does depend on the health, and good
government of his Majesty, as of the comfortable instrument of gods mercy,
granted the Realm for the conservation of the Church, and the administration of
justice amongst us; we do covenant, and promise with our heart, under the same
Oath, subscription, and penalties, to defend his person, authority, and
dignity, with our goods, bodies, and lives, for the defense of the Gospel of
Christ, and the liberty of our Country.

63. Thus swear they, and no more teaches M. Andrews in substance, granting
no other power to Kings over the Church, then they do, to wit, that Kings are
but as Foster-fathers, and defe^ders of it. Wherein nevertheless this
difference may be noted betwixt the Puritans and him, What difference may be
noted betwixt M. Andrews and the Puritans.
that they do believe it as a matter of faith (no less then we) whereas M.
Andrews is only persuaded that it is true, seeing that he places therein the
Kings Ecclesiastical Supremacy, which he holds to be no matter of faith, and
therefore if the said Supremacy consist only in the defense of the Church, (as
it does according to his doctrine) then both we, and the Puritans are better
subjects then he, Both Catholics and Puritans are better Subjects then M.
Andrews.
because we believe the same to be a matter of faith, and consequently do think
our selves bound in conscience to maintain it, though it be with los^e of our
lives, whereas he taking it to be but only a matter of persuasion, will not, by
all liklyhood, loose six pence to defend it.

64. Furthermore to show that he does truly Puritanize in the point of the
Supremacy, it is to be understood, that whereas the Card. Apol. ca. 1. page 10
Cardinal obiecteth out of the Basilicon Doron of his Majesty, that the
Puritans do not admit the Kings Ecclesiastical primacy, because they introduce
a certain parity into the Church, he Andr. c. 1. p. 30.. Postremo.
answers that albeit they maintain a parity a among themselves (rejecting
the distinction of degrees of Bishops above Ministers or of one Minister, above
another) yet they do not hold, that there is any parity betwixt the King, and
them, but do admit and acknowledge his Supremacy over them; thus teaches M.
Andrews, and adds presently after in the Ibid. Nec habet.
next paragraph, that wheresoever the Religion is reformed, the supreme
temporal Magistrates have this Power, even this self same, which the King
has. So he, whereupon two things may be evidently gathered. The one, that the
Puritans have the same doctrine concerning the Ecclesiastical primacy of
temporal Princes, that is taught in all the reformed Churches, which indeed
they also affirm of themselves. The other is, that the King has no other
Ecclesiastical power but the self same that the Puritans, and all the reformed
Churches do grant to their temporal Magistrate.

65. But what the Puritans teach concerning this point, See c. 6. n. 78.79.
you heard in the last Chapter by the testimony of M. Rogers, approved, and
warranted by all the Clergy of England, to wit, that Princes must be servants
to the Church, The Puritans doctrine concerning the Kings subjection to their
Presbytery.
subject to the Church, submit their Scepters to the Church, and throw down
their Crowns before the Church, and that ( as Beza testifies) they cannot be
exempted from this divine domination of the presbitery; whereupon I gather two
things, the one, that the Supremacy which (as M. Andrews says) the Puritans do
acknowledge in the King, is to be understood only in temporal matters, wherein
they do indeed admit him to be their supreme head, and Governor, though (as
you see in M. Rogers) they hold him in spiritual matters to be wholly subject
to the Presbitery. The other is, that all the reformed Churches are also of the
same mind, seeing that they profess the same doctrine concerning the Kings
Ecclesiastical supremacy, that the Puritans do, as M. Andrews himself
confesseth^ whereupon it also follows that the Kings Majesty has no
spiritual power, or authority at all over the English Church, seeing that (by
M. Andrews his own confession) he has no other power but that which the
Puritans and the reformed Churches do admit in their temporal Princes.

66. Besides that, albeit we should grant, that the Puritans and reformed
Churches do allow the te^porall Magistrate to have some power, and authority in
Ecclesiastical matters, yet it is evident that they do not allow them that
spiritual Jurisdiction and authority, The pretended reformed churches do not
allow in te^porall Princes any such spiritual authority as our Parlame^ts have
granted to our Kings.
which our Parliaments have granted to our Kings, to wit, that all the
spiritual power of the Church shall reside principally in them, and is to be
deduced from them to the Church, as from the head to the body, and that they
may give Dispensations, Licenses, and Faculties in matters of Conscience, make
Ecclesiastical Laws, give Commissions to consecrate Bishops, to exco^municat,
interdict, suspend, ce^sure, to visit and correct all Ecclesiastical Persons,
and to reform all heresies, and abuses: this I say being a mere spiritual
power, and exercised by our Kings in England (according to the grant of the
Parliament) is not admitted, and much less practiced in any of the reformed
Churches, M. Andrews professing the doctrine of the Puritans and reformed
Churches concerning the Kings supremacy denies it to be spiritual.
as all those know, who know any thing of their doctrine and practice.

67. Therefore whereas M. Andrews says, that as well the reformed Churches as the
Puritans, do grant the self same authority to the temporal Prince, which our
King has, and exercises in England: he shows evidently that in his opinion
his Majesty has no such spiritual jurisdiction, and authority as has bin
granted him by our Parliament, for that (as I have said) the Puritans and
reformed Churches (whose doctrine in this point he approves) do not acknowledge
any such spiritual authority in temporal Princes, but only a temporal power,
and obligation to maintain, and defend the Church, so far forth as the same
has need of external, and humane help, assistance, or defense, which is
indeed the self same, and all that M. Andrews (as you have heard supr^ nu. 47.
before) allows to the Kings Majesty, when he says, that he is no otherwise
over the Church, but as a foster-father and a tutor to nourish and defend it,
and that the question of the Kings Ecclesiastical supremacy concerns nu. 37.
only the external government of the Church, M. Andrews no English Protestant
but a flat Puritan.
so far forth as it requires, and admits humane help and authority. So
that you see M. Andrews is not in this point an English Protestant, but rather
a flat Puritan.

68. And if this be now the common opinion of the Protestants in England (as M.
Andrews would have us to suppose) we may more truly say of them, The learned
English Protestants ashamed o^ their wo^ted doctrine concerning the
Ecclesiastical supremacy of te^porall Princes.
then he said of the Puritans, dies diem docuit, and ex eo facti aequiores
recognouerunt errorem suum: time has taught them more wit, and so now they
have recanted their error. And no marvel, seeing that their former doctrine
is of it self so absurd, and has bin so canuassed, and battered by
Catholics, that they are worthily ashamed of it, especially such of the^ as,
have any learning, or shame at all, for some no doubt there are of the
ministry, that will not stick to defend it, or any thing else, how absurd soever
it be, amongst whom M. Barlow may go for one, who in his Preambler Epistle to
the ministers of Scotland, which I have mentioned before upon another occasion)
is not ashamed to make the Pagan, See before nu. 35. and^ chap. 6. nu. 77.
and Infidel Emperors supreme heads of the Church, in the time of the
Apostles, saying that S. Paul appealed to Caesar's judgment as the supreme,
whereas Papists and Puritans will have the King to be but an honorable member,
not a chief governor in the Churches of his dominions. So he.

69. Wherein two things are to be noted, the one that he does ridiculously make
the Pagan Emperors the chief members, that is to say, the heads, or governors
of the Church, who nevertheless being Idolatours, could not be so much as the
meanest members thereof. The other, that he seems to make the Kings Majesty
no other wise chief governor in the Church, then they were, albeit I think he
will not be so absurd, as to acknowledge any spiritual authority in the^, M.
Barl. seems to make the King head of the Church no otherwise the^ as the
Pagan Emperors were.
seeing they were altogether incapable thereof, being as I have said,
Idolatours, enemies, and violent persecutors of the Church, and faith of
Christ. So as herby it appears that he also concurreth with M. Andrews to
deprive his Majesty of all the spiritual jurisdiction, and authority which the
Parliaments have granted to our Kings, and that consequently they are both of
them in one predicament of disloyalty toward his Majesty, and defection from
the wonted Protesta^tisme of England, in the point of the Kings Ecclesiastical
Supremacy.

70. Now then to conclude concerning them both, and all the premises, thou have
seen, good Reader, how well these two Prelates of the English Church do
simbolize, and agree, not only in seeking to delude their Readers with diverse
lies, fraudulent shifts, and devises, but also in betraying their own cause,
and fortifying ours which is so evident in them both, that they may well be
accounted the most harmles, or rather the most propitious enemies that ever the
Catholics had, and therefore may in some sort be compared to the Scorpion,
which being a most venomous Serpent, M. Barlow and M. Andrews, like to the
Scorpion, and why.
yields a sufficient remedy against his own poison, and so do they; for
albeit they are replenished with venom, and malignity, yea and sting sometimes
most maliciously, (not with solid arguments, but with spiteful gibes, and
contumelious jests) yet their malice does commonly carry with it the remedy of
it self, being for the most part so manifest, and accompanied with such
apparent falsehood, and evident folly, that no man of learning, and
consideration can receive any harm thereby, but rather great benefit by the
discovery of their imbecility, and the weakness of their cause^ Seeing they
cannot otherwise defend it, then by such contumelious, and malicious
proceedings.

71. Insomuch that the learned strangers, who read M. Andrews his book in
latin, The opinion of the learned strangers concerning M. Andrews his books
against Cardinal Bellarmine.
and do consider withal the special choice that the English Clergy has made
of him to maintain the combat against Cardinal Bellarmine, in the eye, and
view of the Christian world, do exceedingly wonder, as well at the penury of
learned Deuines in England, as at their want of judgment in venturing the
credit of their cause, upon so weak a Champion, whose valor consists in
nothing else, but in certain Thrasonicall braggs, Satyricall scoffs, and a
vain presumption of his latin style; M. Andrews gerally disliked for his
obscurity^
which nevertheless seems to learned men more fit for a Comicall, or Satyriall
Poet, the^ for a Doctor of Divinity; wherein also they observe such obsurdity^
that they hold it for no less vicious in a Divine writing of matters in
controversy, then it would be in an Orator or Aduocat pleading a cause, in
whom nothing is more requisite, then perspicuity: and therefore Quintilian
greatly reprehendeth such as affecting an extraordinary breuity, necessaria
subtrahunt verba etc. do leave out, says he, necessary words. And (as if it
were sufficient that they know their own meaning) care not whether others
understand them or no. So says Quintilian.

72. And truly the same is so well verifyed in M. Andrews that he may justly
say with the Poet dum breuis esse laboro obscurus fio, whiles I labor to be
brief I become obseure, in so much that he is far more easy to be confuted,
M. Andrews compared for his obscurity to a fish called a Cuttle.
then understood, seeming somtymes rather to propound riddles, then to argue or
discourse; which he does (perhaps) of purpose to the end that being obscure,
and ambiguous he may always have some starting hole, or other, when he is
pressed by his adversary; not unlike to a fish (called in latin sepia, in
English a Cuttle) which when she is in danger to be taken casts out a kind of
black licour like ink, Plyn. l. 9. ca. 29.
wherewith she obscureth, and troubles the water in such sort that she cannot
be seen, and so the more easily escapes.

73. Nevertheless M. Andrews reapeth not the like benefit by his obscurity,
being discovered wheresoever he lurketh, and taken tardy at every turn,
whereof sufficient experience has been seen in these few points of his book,
which I have had occasion to handle, being only such as are incident to matters
treated in my Supplement, besides diverse others of the same sort, which I am
forced, for lack of time, to omit, wherein I might much more amply have
displayed his insufficiency, falsity, and folly: and therefore I leave it to
thee good Reader, to imagine what a number of absurdityes, lies, frauds, and
corruptions his whole work would affoard, if it were well examined.

74 But now to end in no less charitable manner with him, A good advise for a
friendly farewell to M. Andrews.
then I did with M. Barlow, I will only wish him well to consider those few
aduyses which I gave to M. Barlow in the 8. last paragraphs of my Se sup. ca.
8. nu. 100. and seq.
Supplement, and to take them also as meant, and given to himself, to the end
he may seriously reflect upon them, and specially upon his vain endeauours,
and lost Ibid. nu. 103. and 104.
labor in impugning the Apostolic Roman Sea, weyghing withal in what a
dangerous, and miserable state he stands, so long as he is separated from the
union thereof, which I have there Ibid. nu. 105. and seq.
evidently showed by the testimony of the most ancient, and holy Fathers.
Almighty God (of his infinite mercy) open his eyes that he may see it, and duly
ponder our Saviors most important advise, and golden lesson Mat. 16. Mar. 8.
Quid prodest homini etc. What does it profit a man, if he gain all the world,
and loose his own soul?

FINIS.
AN APPENDIX TOUCHING A Register alleged by M. Francis Mason, to prove THAT
The first Protestant Bishops, in the reign of Queen Elizabeth, had a lawful
Consecration.
THIS Adioynder being printed, and some copyes ready to be diuulged, it was my
chance to understand by a Letter written to a friend of mine, that one M. Mason
has lately published a Book, Touching the cause and subject of this Appendix.
wherein he prete^deth to answer the Preface to Fa. Persons his Discussion,
especially concerning one point treated therein, to wit, the Consecration of the
first Protestant Bishops in the reign of Queen Elizabeth: and further, that
he indeauoureth to prove their consecration by a Register, testifying that 4.
Bishops consecrated M. Parker, the first Archbishop of Canterbury in the said
Queens days; whereupon, if it be true, it must needs follow that all other
Bishops consecrated after him, and his successors, even until this day, have
some more show of lawful consecration, and succession, then the Catholics
have hitherto known or imagined.

2. And therefore for as much, as not only the Author of the Preface to Fa.
Persons his Discussion, but also my self in my Supplement, See Suppl. p. 208.
nu. 3 Adioy^d. ca. 10. nu. 35.
and in this Adioynder have constantly denied, that they had any such
consecration, I thought good to stay the publication of this Adioynder, until
I had added thereto this brief Appendix concerning M. Masons pretended
Register, left otherwise M. Barlow, and M. Andrews may hold me to be
sufficiently answered by M. Mason, and remit me to his Register for that point.
Thou shall therefore understand, Good Reader, that this our exception, touching
the lawful vocation, and Consecration of the first Protestant Bishops in the
late Queens days, The exception taken by Catholik^ to the first Protestant
Bishopes in Q. Elizabeth^ days, i^ no new quarrel.
is not a new quarrel now lately raised by us two only, (I mean the Author
of the foresaid Preface, and my self) but vehemently urged diverse times
heretofore by many other Catholykes many years ago, yea in the very beginning
of the late Queens reygne, as namely to omit others, by the two learned
Doctors Harding, and Stapleton in their books against the Apology of the
Church of England, M. Jewel, and M. Horn, whom they pressed mightily with
the defect of due vocation, and consecration, urging them to prove the same,
and to show how, and by whom they were made Priests, and Bishops.

3. To which purpose M. D. Harding in his confutation of the Apology, D. Hard.
confut. of the Apolog. par. 2. fol. 59. printed an. Dom. 1565.
speaking to M. Jewel the pretended Bishop of Salisbury, and having already
proved, that he had no succession in his Episcopal function from the Apostles,
says thus: Therefore to go from your succession, to your vocation, how say
you Sir? You bear your self, D. Hardings chaleng to M. Jewel concerning the
consecration of the first Protestant Bishops.
as though you were a Bishop of Salisbury; but how can you prove your vocation?
By what authority vsurp you the administration of doctrine, and Sacraments?
What can you alledg for the right, and proof of your ministry? Who has called
you? Who has laid hands on you? By what example has he done it? how, and by
whom are you consecrated? Who has sent you etc. So he.

4. In like manner M. Doctor Stapleton in his answer to M. Jewels book
entitled, D. Staplet. return of untrue. fol. 130. lin. 26.
A reply etc. says thus: How chanced then M. Jewel, that you and your
fellows bearing your selves for Bishops, have not so much as this congruity,
D. Stapletons challenge to M. Jewel, and M. Horn touching their consecration.
and consent, I will not say of the Pope, but of any Christian Bishop at all
throughout all Christendom, neither are lyked, and allowed of any one of them
all, but have taken upon you that office without any imposition of hands,
without all Ecclesiastical authority, without all order of Canons and right? I
ask not who gave you Bishoprikes, but who made you Bishops etc. So he. Who
also in his Counterblast against M. Horn the pretended Bishop of Winchester,
says to him thus: It is not the Princes only pleasure that makes a Bishop,
Idem counterblast fol. 301.
but there must be both free election, without either forcing the Clergy to a
choice, or forcing the chosen to filthy brybery, and also there must follow a
due consecration, which you, and all your fellows do lack, and therefore you
are indeed (by the way to conclude it) no true Bishops, An. 1. Elizab. ca. 1.
neither by the law of the Church, neither yet by the laws of the Realm, for
want of due consecration, expressly required by an act of Parliament renewed
in this Queens days in suffraga^ Bishops, much more in you. Thus says M.
Stapleton, which I have laid down at large in his own words, together with
the like out of D. Harding before, to the end it may appear how earnestly they
pressed M. Jewel, and M. Horn (who were two of the first pretended Bishops in
Queen Elizabeth's time) to show from whom, and by whom, they had their
vocation, and consecration.

5. And what, M. Horn answered nothing concerning his consecration.
trow you, was answered thereto? was there any Bishop named who had consecrated
them? were there any witnesses alleged of their consecration? was M. Masons
register, or any other authentical proof thereof produced, either by M. Jewel,
or M. Horn? Jewel defense of the Apology page 130.
No truly; for as for M. Horn he never replied, or any man for him, for ought
I ever heard. And M. Jewel though he took upon him to answer it, yet did it
so weakly, coldly, and ambiguously, that he sufficiently fortified and
justified his adversaries objection.

6. For whereas D. Harding had demanded of him how he could prove that he was a
Bishop^ who had called him, who had laid hands on him, and who had consecrated
him; he answered, that he was a Bishop by the free, and accustomed Canonical
election of the whole Chapter of Salisbury, M. Jewels ambiguous and weak
answer touching his lawful consecration.
but to the question how he was consecrated, or by whom, he answers no
otherwise, then thus, Our Bishops are made, says he, in form and order, as
they have been ever, by free election of the Chapter, by consecration of the
Archbishop, and 3. other Bishops, wherein you see, he says not, I was made, or
we were made, by the consecration of the Archbishop, and 3. other Bishops (as
he should have said, to answer directly to the question) but our Bishops are
made etc. declaring directly, and truly nothing else, but the custom that then
was received, and used amongst them, for the making of Bishops, which was not
denied, or doubted of by D^ Harding, neither was it any thing at all to the
purpose, because the same concerned not the institution, and consecration of M.
Jewel himself, or the first pretended Bishops, and much less did it concern
the ordination, and consecration of their Archbishop, which as M. Jewel could
not but know, most imported to be declared.

7. For albeit it should be true, that the Archbishop, and 3. others
consecrated M. Jewel himself, and the rest, How much it imported M. Jewel to
have proved the consecration of their Archbishop.
yet if the said Archbishop, and those three others, had themselves no
consecration, neither they, nor any other ordained by them were Bishops; and
therefore this was the difficulty which M. Jewel should principally have
cleared, as M. Doctor Harding afterward in his detection told him roundly,
saying thus: And how I pray you was your Archbishop himself consecrated? what
3. Bishops in the realm were there to lay hands upon him? You have now uttered
a worse case for your selves, Doct. Har. detect. fol. 234. p. 2.
then was by me before named, for your Metropolitan, who should give authority
to all your consecrations, himself had no lawful consecration. If you had been
consecrated after the form, and order which has ever been used, ye might have
had Bishops out of France to have consecrated you, in case there had lacked in
England. But now there were ancient Bishops enough in England, who either were
not required, or refused to consecrate you, which is an evident sign that you
sought not such a consecration, as had been ever used, but such a one, whereof
all the former Bishops were ashamed. Thus says D. Harding.

8. Now then, good Reader, I wish here certain things to be considered,
first, that this controversy betwixt D. Harding, and M. Jewel, was thus
debated, as you have heard, in the very beginning of the Queens reygne, not
past 5. or 6. years after the institution of those first pretended Bishops, as
it may appear by Doctor Hardings confutation of the Apology, printed in the
year of our Lord 1565. and by Doctor Stapletons Return of untruths, printed
the year following.

9. Secondly I wish it well to be weighed, whether it be probable, that these
two learned men (Doctor Harding, and Doctor Stapleton) would have objected to
M. Jewel, and M. Horn, this defect of their consecration in printed books,
so confidently, and resolutely, as they did, if they had not bin well assured
of it, especially the^, when their consecration would have been so fresh in
memory (if they had been consecrated at all) that the denyers of it might have
been convinced by multitudes of witnesses to their perpetual shame.

10. Thirdly, Touching M. Jewels irresolute ambiguous and indirect answer.
let it be considered, whether M. Jewel being expressly demanded, and urged to
show who consecrated him and his fellows, would have answered so irresolutly,
ambiguously, and indirectly as he did, if he could have proved their
consecration either by witnesses, or by Registers, or any other authentical
proof; to which purpose it is also to be noted, that he made no doubt at all,
to speak resolutly, and clearly of his election, because it was true, and
evident, that he was chosen by the Chapter of Salisbury, How much it imported
the first Protestant Bishops to have had a public and most solemn
Consecration.
and therefore for that point he boldly appealed to D. Hardings own knowledge.
And would he not trow you, have spoken as resolutly and clearly of his
consecration, if he could have produced the like proof thereof, or any other
probability at all? especially seeing that it was the point which was the^
chiefly in question? nay would not he have cried shame on D. Harding for
denying, or calling in question a matter that must needs have bin most
notorious at the sa^e time if there had bin any such thing at all? For besides
that the co^secratio^ of Bishops is always wo^t to be don in publik, who
knows not that it greatly imported those new pretended Bishops, for the
credit of their cause, and honor of all their future Clergy, to have been
consecrated with all the publicity, and solemnity in the world, if they could
have had any show of lawful consecration, espicially by 4. Bishops, as M.
Masons register reports? How improbably M. Mason affirms out of his
Registers that 4. Bishops consecrated M. Parker the first Archbishop.


11. Neither can it be imagned that M. D. Harding would have been so
inconsiderate as to demand of M. Jewel expressly, what three Bishops in the
Realm were to lay hands upon him (meaning Protestant Bishops) if there had
been 4. it being a thing whereof neither he, nor any man else could have been
ignorant at that time, if there had been so many, the persons themselves being
then all alive by all lyklyhood when D. Harding wrote this, which was within 6.
or 7. years after this pretended consecration; at least if any of them should
have been dead, the memory of them would have been so fresh, that M. Jewel
might, and no doubt would, not only have named them, How little credit M. Masons
newfound Register deserves.
but also have appealed to the knowledge, and testimony of hundreths of
witnesses, who must needs have known them, and remembered, this pretended
Consecration; which was as I have said so constantly denied by Catholics at
the same time, that it highly imported M. Jewel, and his fellows to lay down
their best, and most substantial, and authentical proofs of it, for the
defense of their own honor and credit of their whole Clergy and Cause.

12. This then being so, I report me to the judgment of any indifferent man,
what credit M. Masons new found register deserves, being produced now after
fifty and odd years to testify this consecration, Andr. Resp. ad Apol. p. 41..
proximi.
whereof not so much as any one witness was named, nor any register pretended by
those whom it most imported to prove it, within 5. or 6. years after it was
supposed to be done. Barl. answ^ to a name. Catholic p. 283.


13. And therefore seeing it pleases M. Andrews to say of S. Ephraems Tomes
translated by Vossius, that they are Crypticae fidei, With how great reason
exception is to be taken to M. Maso^s Register until he show it to Catholics,
who may give testimony of it.
because they were found in Crypta ferrata, and M. Barlow in his pleasant
humor iesteth at an Author alleged by Cardinal Baronius out of a
manuscript, calling him a Corner-creeping relatour, and a Vatican
deske-creeper; as also others of our adversaries are wont to reject what soever
we allege out of the manuscripts of the Vatican, and other Libraries, upon no
better ground, but because they will needs have an uncharitable, or rather
malicious conceit, and imagination of fraudulent dealing in us; I hope it will
not seem to any reasonable man, unreasonable, or strange, that upon so good
ground, and reason, as I have here declared, I take a main exception to this
Register of M. Masons, until he, or some of his fellows do show the same to
some learned, discreet, and sincere Catholics, who upon the view, and due
consideration thereof, may give judgment, and testimony of the truth, and
validity of it.

What is to be considered in M. Maso^s Register to make it aute^ticall.
14. For I doubt not but that it will easily appear, whether it be an old, and
authentical Register, as well by the antiquity of the book, and letter, and
the formalities requisite thereto, as also by the matters antecedent, and
consequent to this pretended Consecration. For as there were many things, no
doubt, done before, worth the Registring, so also diverse things have passed
since in the space of 55. years, which will be found in their due order and
place, whereby the validity of the pretended Register may be the more easily
discerned; therefore I say, let it be showed, and in recompense thereof I
promise as well in my own behalf, as for other Catholics here in Rome, that
if any English Protestant come hither, (as many do daily) and shall desire to
see any manuscript in Rome alleged by any Catholic author, we will procure
him ample satisfaction therein, and do him what other service we may, An offer
to show any manuscript in Rome to English Protestants.
as we are wont to do to all our loving countrymen that come into these parts;
which many Noblemen, and Gentlemen of great reputation, and some of the
greatest, (who have received courtesy, and service at our hands) may, and no
doubt will testify. And thus much I have thought good to say to M. Masons
Register in general, leaving the particular examination, and answer thereof
to such Catholics as shall have the sight of it, and occasion withal to
treat of the matter which it handles, as I doubt not, but some will have, ere
it be long.

Faults escaped in the Printing.
Page 22. lin. 12. much confirmed by these very places etc. sic corrig^ much
confirmed even by those Fathers, to wit, S. Augustine etc. Also in the
marginall note, which is, The places of 3. Fathers alleged etc. corrige, The
3. Fathers alleged etc. Page 24 lin. 12. So that says this famous, dele,
that. Page 31. lin. 11. of the City, read of, that City. Page 40. lin. 16.
saying, read suyng, Page 48. lin. penult from the subjection of the Church to
the Roman Sea, read, from subjection to the Roman Sea. Page 69. lin 12. out of
the book, read, out of the backside of the book, Page 75. lin. 28. I have
also showed, read, where I have also showed Page 130. lin. 11. notice, read,
motiue^ Page 139. lin. 11. schism; and thereby etc. read, schism, which (as
you have heard) M. Andrews himself confesses; and thereby etc. Page 140. lin.
2. break, read, breaking, Page 142. lin. 4. favor, read, fervor. Page 143.
lin. 13. Power of the Church, read, Pastor of the Church. Page 147. lin. 24.
where it is said, as S. Fulgentius S. Augustines scholar and others, those
words must be placed in the margent for a citation, thus: See S. Fulgentius
etc. Page 191. lin. 11. says S. Augustine, read, says of S. Augustine, Page
238. lin. 22. which faith, read, with faith. Page 268. lin. 24. vnswerable,
read, unanswerable. Page 378. lin. 18 seem, read, seen. Page 380. lin. vlt.
taught, read, caught Page 383. lin. 1. when in it is, read, when it is. Page
395. lin. 1. quod per, read, quos per. Page 418. lin. 21. by noted, read, be
noted.

A TABLE OF THE PRINCIPAL MATTERS HANDLED IN THIS ADIOYNDER.
A
ADORATION diversely mentioned in Scripture. 371.373.376. S. Ambrose his proof
of S. Peter's Supremacy out of the words Pasce oues meas. page 8. abused by M.
Andrews, 281.282.283 Anatolius Bishop of Constantinople censured by Pope Leo.
p. 62.63. His submission, p. 65. M. Andrews his abuse of S. Augustine and S.
Ambrose, p. 5.6.7. 8.18.415. His vain braggs, p. 9. his beggarly proof of
Princes spiritual Supremacy, p. 12. savors of Iudaisme ibid. His egregious
equivocation, page 13. confounded by his own Instance, page 14. How he is a
pecuniary Pastor, page 16. His abuse of S. Cyril, page 19. His shuttlecocks
and fools bolts, page 24. His abuse of the Law Inter Claras, p. 33.34.35. and
38. His belying and corrupting the Council of Calcedon, page 40.43. and 82.
his Galli-maufrey or hoch-potch page 79. his strange paradox, page 75. His
strayning of the Greek text^ ib. His cause overthrown by himself. page 89. his
seared conscience p. 97. His foolish Gloss, and fraud upon S. Cyprian, page
102.105. etc. His abuse of Cardinal Bellarmine, page 113.116.117.355. His
profession of Iouianisme 120. His idle head, page 130. His impertinent trifling
page 1^8. His trifling tale of Latinos. page 144 His zeal greater then his
wit, page 154. His Tra^smarinus Nemo, page 162. His Father a Father of lies,
192. proved a wrangler, cap. 5. and 6. pertotum. he overthrows all
subordination in the Church, 198. His petty frauds, 202. his fantastical
conceits, 203. His dull head, 204. His (...). 207.360. greatly troubled with
little words. 208. His ^igh^ in the air, page ^09. A pecuniary Pastor, 210.
Confuteth himself, 220. A mere wrangler, page 222.268. His inference of
Quidlibet ex Quolibet, page 233. His Cripticall Cavil against S. Ephrem. 23^.
His Goggery. page 241. His abuse of S^ Epiphanius. 254. Of S. Ambrose, 269. His
evil fortune, 274. His clipping and paring of Fathers authorities when they
make against him 278. His confusion of the Priest with the people, Mass with
Mattines etc. 298. His abuse of Theodoret, 307. his scrupulosity in alleging
of Authorityes, 323. Pressed with his own Argument, 324. Proves himself a
Jew, 325. His transgressio^ of the Synodicall Canons of England. 333. His silly
discourse about prayer to Saints 337. Prodigal of his Rhetorick^ 343. Wrongeth
his Majesty, 349. His erring of malice ^56. His trifling objections,
357.358.359. His changing the state of the Question about the Popes Primacy,
362. Concerning holy relics, 368. His poor conceit of S. John the
Evangelist, 370. A jest of his spoiled, 374. Triumphs when he loses, 377.
His Dissimulation of matters that most import to be explicated 386.388. His
want of paper in text and margent to set down the truth 394. His Lucidum
interuallum, 405. His abuse of S. Gregory 407. his bad conscience 412. His
outfacing of matters when he cannot answer, 418. His abuse of the Jesuits,
425.426. He tri^th how near he can go to the Catholic Religion and miss it,
430.431. his poor conceyt of the K. Ecclesiastical Supremacy, 459. How it may
be in his Pater noster, but not in his Creed, 460. Excluded by M. Andrews, 467.
from his Majesty 471. How he is turned Puritan, page 477.480. Angel in the
Apocalypse for bad S. John to adore him and why? page 370. Appeals to Rome,
page 155. by Anthony Bishop of Fussula, 160. allowed by the Primate of Numidia,
164. testified by S. Augustine and others, page 165. by S. John Chrysostom,
184. S. Augustine abused by M. Andr. p^ 4.5.6. his acknowledgment and respect
of S. Peter's Supremacy p. 17. p. 150.159.167.189. his approving of prayers to
Saints 296.297.298. Authority of the Sea of Rome in all ages, p.
169.170.173.180.181.188. proved by all the ancient Fathers, passim. by Origin,
198. by S. Hilary, 189.200. Authors reason and intention of this Book p. 2.3.
what question handled therein. ibid. page 4.
B
M. BARLOW and M. Andrews disagree about our English Clergies government,
422. S. Basils discourse of prayer to Saints 218. of Invocation of Martyrs.
223. Beggary of the Church and Clergy of England, 457. Ca. Bellarmine abused by
M. Andrews and cleared page 108.221. 355. his meaning about our prayers to
Saints, and their praying for us explicated, 215. Bishops of the East-church
deposed by the Pope pag^ 53.
C
CHRIST our Mediator and Advocate, 339. S. Chrysostom proves S. Peter's
Supremacy page 22. and 142. His appeal to Pope Innocentius 184. His testimony
for invocation of Saints. 244. Church of the East subject to the West, page 49.
Church why it is called one Mother page 105. built equally upon the Apostles,
page 144. how it only challenges the name Catholic 451. Church of England
beggarly, 457. Collyridians their heresy, 255. Constantinople subject to the
Church of Rome, page 50. Gods Judgment upon that Church for her schism, page
54. Constitutions of the pretended Bishops of England, page 330. convinced of
fraud by his Majesty 332. Conference at Hampton Court before his Majesty. 332.
L. Cromwell Vicar General to K. Henry 8. in spiritualibus 469. Council of
Calcedon approved the Popes Supremacy, page 39.40. Council of Ephesus and head
thereof 187. Councels why assembled, page 227. Council of Loadicea forbids
Idolatry to Angels 308. Customs Ecclesiastical of what force and validity
page 293. S. Cyprian proves the unity of the Church by the unity of the head
thereof 101.104. also the Primacy of S. Peter. page 106. S. Cyril acknowledged
S. Peter's Supremacy. page 17. abused by M. Andrews page 19.
D
DAMASVS Pope what authority attributed to him by S. Hierome page 173.
Difference between the Primacy of S. Peter, and the privileges granted to
the Roman Sea. 83. Dignity of Gods grace increases the value of merit. 437.
Dioscorus Patriark of Constantinople deprived by Pope Leo. p. 94.
E
S. EPHREM calumniated by M^ Andrews 239. S. Epiphanius abused by M. Andrews,
254. Equality how it is sometimes to be understood, page 45.46. Equality of
obligation requires equality of care, page 80.
F
FATHERS of the Church abused, misconstrued, belyed and falsified by M
Andrews. page 5.6.7.18.19.415. and passim. Father of Lies M. Andrews his
Father, 192. Fall of S. Peter no prejudice to his Primacy. page 148.149.150.
Francis, vide Mason.
G
F. GARNET impudently belyed by M. Andrews 247. Grace of Christ works a true
inherent Justification in us. page 391.
H
HERETICS the later follow the elder. page 152. Heresy to condemn prayer to
Saints, 249. Heresy of the Collyridians, 255. Heretics their tricks to
overthrow plain places by obscure. 279. S. Hierome abused by M. Andrews, page
113. how he acknowledges S. Peter's Supremacy page 119. His contradiction of
Vigilantius for denying prayer to Saints, p. 228. S. Hilaryes proof for S.
Peter's Primacy, page 199.200.
I
IDOLATRY of the Phrygians done to Angels 310. Jesuits belyed by M. Andrews
for not synning. 425. Images of Saints used in the Church, 264. approved by S.
Gregor. Nissen. ibid. Invocation of him in whom we believe, how it is meant by
S. Paul page 213. Invocation of Martyrs, ^23. miraculous effects thereby 225.
not confirmed by any decree in the primitive Church and why? p. 227. warranted
by S. Chrysostom page 244. Universal in his time, 245. How the belief thereof
is necessary to salvation 248. approved by S. Gregory Nazianz. 253. by Nissen.
264. practiced by Theodosius the Emperor, 286. defended by S. Paulinus, 295.
by S. Augustine 296. impugned by Protestants, 336.337. Justinian the Emperor
his law for the Popes Supremacy, page 25. His facts against two Popes examined
and reproved page 30. His ignorance, page 32. His death and repentance, page
33.36.37.
K
KEYS and Pastoral Commission given to S. Peter not mentioned in the Cano^ of
the Counsel of Constantinople, page 84. Kings never came to the Government of
the Church 464. Excluded by a Rule of M. Andrews, 465. King of England takes
his power E^clesiasticall from the Parliament. 468.
L
LAW of Moses, how Christians may ground thereon. p. 11. P. Leo his controversy
with Martian the Emperor and Anatolius Bishop of Constantinople, page
62.63.64.70.72.73. His primacy acknowledge by the Council of Calcedon. page
90.92. 93.94. Locusts that destroy Religious profession and perfection are
Protestants. 450.
M
Mr. MASON his Register for the Consecration of the first Protestant Bishops
confuted. In appendice per totum. Martian the Emperor his controversy with
Pope Leo, page 61. Martyrs inuocated 223. miraculous effects thereby 225. S.
Maximus B. of Turin his homiles of Saints, page 205. Merits of Christ how we
are saved by them 342. Merit of good works granted by M. Andrews 434.436.
Miracles in the Cath. Church done at the Relics of Saints 443. at Valentia in
Spain ibid. None wrought in the Protestants Church and why ibid. Monks of the
Primitive Church and their discipline.449. their first Institute approved by M.
Andrews 448.
N
NAME Catholic belongs only to the Roman Church 451. S. Greg. Nazianz. his
approbation of prayer to Saints. page 253. to our B. Lady. ibid. S. Greg.
Nissen his approbation of holy relics in the Church, 264. of prayer to Saints
ibid. His prayer to S. Theodor the Martyr, 267.
O
OATH of Supremacy, why it is unlawful, 461. Origin his proof of S. Peter's
Primacy, 198.
P
PASTORS their obligation of care of their Churches, page 76.78. Prayer to
Saints approved by S. Basil 218. Impugned by Protestants 336.337. conform to
Scripture and deduced from it 344. Power over the soul, implies power over
the body. page 126. Privileges granted to the Church of Constantinople. page
44.45.46. Abrogated by Pope Leo pa. 47. Puritans their Doctrine concerning the
Kings Supremacy, 419. How some of them take the Oath of Supremacy, 420. S.
Peter how he bare the person of the Church when he received the Keys, page 5.
His Supremacy grounded upon the words Pasce oues meas page 8. acknowledged by
S. Augustine page 17. By S: Cyril, ibid. and by S. Hierome, page 119. by Origin
198. by S. Hilary, 199. How he was called the light of the Church page 103. How
he was reprehended by S. Paul page 107. how he is the foundation of the Church,
page 109. preferred before S. John and why. page 118, How he may be called a
Monarch page 134. His fall no prejudice to his Primacy, page 148.
Q
QVEENE Elizabeth her spiritual Government given unto her by the Parliament
476.
R
RELIQVES of Saints used in the Church, 284. approved by S. Gregory Nissen.
ibid. M. Rogers against M. Andrews concerning our English Clergy, 422 423.
Roman Church never failed in Faith by Gods providence page 124.
S
SAINTS prayed unto in all ages, passim. how they hear our prayers and help
us, page 288. how they know our prayers and actions, 291.318.319. practiced in
the primitive Church 334. impugned by Protestants out of Scripture 336.337. How
they help us by the participation of Christ's power, 347. Protectors of Cities
and Countries, ibid. Schism whence it commonly arises, page 125. Sign of the
Cross in Baptism 334.336. Sermons de tempore in Latin and Greek in S.
Augustines time page 146. by S. Maximus Bishop of Turin. 205. Siluerius the
Pope his usage by Theodora, and Justinian, page 32.33. defended by the Bishop
of Patera, 24.35.36. Speeches conditional do not always suppose a doubt in
the Speaker. 261. Supremacy of S. Peter grounded upon the words Pasce oues
meas, page 8. proved by S. Chrysostom, 142. Supremacy Ecclesiastical of the
King of England and M. Andrews conceit thereof.459, excluded by a Rule of M.
Andrews 465.
T
THEODOSIUS the Emperor inuocated Saints page 286. particulerly S. John
Baptist. ibid. Theodoretus restored to his Bishoprike by Pope Leo page 59.
Abused by Master Andrews, 307. Theodora the Empress her practice against
Pope Siluerius, page 31. Tyranny more frequent in small States, then in great
Monarchies. page 130.
V
VIGILANTIVS his heresy against prayer to Saints page 228. resisted by S.
Hierome ibid. 377.378.379. M. Andrews his progenitour. 377. Universal Bishop
the title given to the Pope by the Counsel of Calcedon, page 68. Votiue
represe^tations of hands, feet, eyes etc. hung up in Churches, in the Primitive
Church 2^0.
W
VVORKS^ good Works how the are said to save us. 272. Writers of diverse parts
of Scripture uncertain, page 250.
FINIS.

