THE HISTORY OF THE Perfect-Cursed-Blessed MAN: Setting-forth Man's Excellency
by his Generation, Man's Misery by his Degeneration, Man's Felicity by his
Regeneration.
By I. F. Master of Arts, Preacher of Gods Word, and Rector of Wilbie in Suff.

Bernardus in Meditat. Anima insignita Dei imagine; decorata similitudine;
desponsata fide; dotata Spiritu; redempta sanguine; haeres bonitatis; capax
beatitudinis; deputata cum Angelis. LONDON, Printed by M. Flesher, and are to
be sold at the sign of the Greyhound in Paul's Churchyard. 1628.

Formae natura, lue morum, morte subacta,
Almus eram, ater eo, mox tamen albus ero.
CHRISTIANVS MILITANS
I wrestle not against flesh and blood only, but against principalities and
powers. Ephesians. 6. 12.

All-spotless fair I formed was, But am by Sin deformed;
Yet trust ere long by Death to pass, To glorious life conformed.
ERRATA
ARe not many, and yet fewer in some Copies then in other: for as they were
spyed in the Press, they were amended in the remaining Copies. Let those that
are found, be thus amended.

In the Epistle Dedic. read (like flesh-flyes.

In the Epist. to the Reader p. 5. l. antepenult. excellency and goodness. p.
13. l. 2. calls for more wrath.


In the Book. p. 28. l. the last. were all destroyed. p. 41. l. 25. threw them
headlong instantly.


There are some other, but they are so sleighty, as the Read^r cannot but amend
them in the reading.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful Sir Anthony Wingfeld Knight Baronet, the p^ime Heir
of that Right-Noble, Generous, and Renowned Family of the prime House of the
Wingfelds, the growth and increase of Grace and Honor here, and the fruition
of Glory and Happiness hereafter.
SIR:
AS you take-notice of this happiness and blessing of God upon you to be the
Heir of this great and worthy Family; so take-notice also (I beseech you) of
the true cause of that worth and greatness of your Ancestors, and imitate them
ther-in: and then, inheriting their worth, together with their wealth, you
shall also most undoubtedly enrich your self with the obsequious attendance
and hearty affection of your native Countrymen; and so grow in Grace and Favor
with God and Man.

Your Noble Progenitors have bin famous for their Piety to God; for they were
always noted to be zealous in Religion. They have bin renowned for their
Loialtie to their Sovereign, for they were always of great and high
Commission, many of them being ex intimis Regum Consiliis. They have always
bin much honored of their Country, for their great care of the Public Good
and Welfare thereof: which, as occasions required, they did manifest, sometimes
by their Valor, though it were to hazard the loss of Life or Living: sometimes
by their Wisdom and Jntegrity; in so much that weighty causes in difference
have bin by the Parties consent referred to their sole Arbitration: sometimes
by their Lenity, for this was their ancient Motto, and revived by the last of
your name, Posse, and nolle, Nobile: and always by their great Hospitality,
upon which to their great Renown and Glory, they yearly spent the greatest
part of their Revenues.

All these, with many such, lived together with your Predecessors, and whiles
they lived, were the Life of their fame and worth. And, let me tell you Sir,
there is an expectation (the tedious Months of your Minority being worn-out)
of their reviving, and, together with your Person, of their keeping residence
in some or other of your Mansions. God enable you with such a competency of
Gifts and Graces as you may satisfy expectation.

I speak not thus out of doubtful fear, but in officious love: for since it
pleased the Divine Providence when you were baptized to use the hand of my
Ministry for the receiving of you into the Church: (I living then in your
worthy Fathers house, who never entertained any other Chaplain, but mine
unworthy self) and since I live still in statu quo, as your Father placed me;
me thinks the same Providence leads me by the hand to do some service for you,
now when his Majesty the King sends you so timely into the Commonwealth, by
gracing you Honoris onere, with the dignity of Knight-Baronet, and by trusting
you Onoris honor, with the command of some of his Forces for the Countries
defense.

My prayer is that you may walk worthy of the several Callings wher-unto you
are called: and my desire is to do something for you to further you therein.
For which purpose I have presumed to present you with this History, though
weakly contrived, yet strongly warranted: for it has the undoubted truth of
God for its authority. Wher-in I endeavor to let you see your self in your
triple estate: for it does not praedicare de uno Homine in specie individuo,
but de singulis Hominibus in toto genere Humano: and is verified particularly
in every One, being cursed or blessed in their imitation of it.

It will advertise you to take-heed, that you give no way to Natural
Inclinations, but as you find them renewed by Grace: and to stop your ears
against the buzzings of fawning Sycophants, which (life flesh-flies that
corrupt sweet ointments) always breathe infection: and serpent-like never
insinuate but for secret mischievous ends. God give you the Spirit of Wisdom
to discern, and the Grace of Zeal to detest, illud pessimum hominum genus.

In a word, it will (I hope) help to direct you, how to recover the perfection
of pure Nature; how to get-out of the misery of corrupt Nature; and how to
attain to the fruition of that super-naturall Felicity that the world cannot
apprehend.

Many Tractates, I confess, you may find tending to these ends; but all that I
have seen, are merely indicative; teaching only by instruction; wher-as this
is exemplarie, and teaches by demonstration: and therefore though they may be
more punctual and pithie, yet I am sure this is more plain, I trust not
unpleasant. God give grace to make them all profitable.

If this shall further you but one step toward any of those ends, either for
your mortification or vivification, (a double work, but must be singlie
performed by you, and by all that intend to save their souls) I shall rejoice
in my pains; and you, I trust, be encouraged to press-on toward the mark
set-before you, for the price of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus.

This is the maine thing that you have to do in this world: without which you
shall never here deserve the Happiness you have, nor ever hereafter attain to
the Happiness you desire. Your Riches, Honor, the Favor of this World,
these were the desert of your Ancestors, which outlived their Persons, and
are now cast upon you their undoubted Heir to make you worldly happy. But it is
Religion, and the love and practice of Religion only in the exercise of
virtuous, and pious actions that can bring you to deserve this temporal
Happiness, and assure you to enherite that which is immortal.

Thus commending these broken lines to your acceptance, and your self to the
Grace in Christ Jesus; I humbly take my leave, and rest

Your Worships truly devoted, JOSEPH FLETCHER.

TO THE LEARNED AND JUDICIOUS READERS.
NOt that I desire such Readers only, do I prefix this Epistle; but only to
desire, if any such shall vouchsafe to read this poor Labor, that they would
also vouchsafe to make a favorable construction of what they read: and to
take-notice that I do not hold, that all the ther-in mentioned Decrees,
Consultations, Judgments, etc. were just so in actu, as they are therein
set-down; or as the tenor of the Story may seem to import. For I have learned
another lesson, which I desire those that have not, to learn, and believe with
me.

For mine own part, I know and believe that all things whatsoever that either
have bin, are, or shall be* so far as they have reference unto God, the Primus
Motor, original Author, and principal Actor of them; of whom, through whom,
and for whom, they have and receive their being and motion: (all secondary
causes being contained within the sphere of their first cause; I believe, I
say) that being thus considered in God, they have neither p^ius nor posterius;
first nor last: because God is Alpha and Omega, both first and last: the first
of Causes, the last of Ends, that is, all in all: they being in Him semel and
simul, as one individual substance, or continued motion; He being in
Himself, Ens cujus centrum est ubique and cujus circumferentia nullibi: so
that nothing can be besides Him, He being of Himself every way infinite.

Upon this ground all Gods Purposes, Motions, Actions, (whether in respect of
the Creature, necessary or contingent;) as also the subject whereon He works,
yea and likewise the isntrumental Causes whereby He works, are all present
unto Him: because He beholds all things, uno and eodem intuitu, at one
instant; there being no difference to Him at all betwixt things past, and
present, and to come: these being merely and only the distinctions of time.
But GOD who is Light, and dwells in light; which was, and which is, and which
is to come; the same yesterday and to day, and the same for ever; needs not
the distinctions of Time for the resolution and execution of his Decrees and
Actions.

All things then being in God, God in Himself is to be considered as a most
rich, beautiful, and glorious Treasury, of such transcendent, superexcellent,
and incomprehensible Nature, Majesty, and Order, as that not any Creature in
Heaven or Earth is able to conceive how any one thing in Him is either decreed,
promoted, or acted, simply, truly, and as it is indeed: for Creatures are
circumscribed in all their faculties and powers, and cannot go beyond their
extent.

For us then positively to describe, define, or determine any thing of Gods
Decrees, Consultations, and Actions (I mean ad intus;) or of his order of
doing them, as, that first He did that, afterward this, and last of all thus,
it is Satanicall pride, and arrogant presumption: so insearchable is his
Wisdom, and his ways past finding out.

Yet again the same insearchable things of God, being considered quoad nos, and
referred to their visible and apprehensible Causes, Ends, Objects, and Effects;
so they admit of prius and posterius, and may be said to be first or second
according to the settled order of Nature, Time, or Being. And upon this ground
we may look upon the Actions of God, as issuing or proceeding from Him in a
most perfect, comely, and beautiful order and succession, whereby He
manifests his own glory, and advances the good of his Creatures. And yet
this acceptance, distinction, or interpretation of Gods doings arises from
our own weak capacities and apprehensions, and not from the things of God
them-selves: for as we conceive and understand them to be, or have been done,
so do we judge of them, and no otherwise.

Now, for that we are weak to conceive, and understand aright the wonderful
things of God (as indeed the least work of his is wonderful in it self, and
infinitely surpasses our imagination,) God therefore in mercy affords us many
helps to further us therein; per corporalia spiritualia docens; and per
visibilia invisibilia demonstrans, and so speaks to us of his own immense
and incomprehensible Resolutions and Actions, in phrases and terms suitable and
agreeable to our own weak capacities. Not for that we are to conceive it to
be just so, and so with the Lord concerning that thing of which He speaks,
and no otherwise; but for that otherwise than so or so as He speaks, we
cannot possibly conceive it to be. He stoopeth to our infirmity, and speaks
to us concerning Himself in our own dialect, and gives us leave to speak of
Him and his Actions, as we do of our selves and our own.

And because we always contrive and frame to our selves a methodicall order of
what we do before it be done; and cannot attain to the consummation of our
ends, but by some orderly proceedings; as by intentions, meditations,
consultations, endeavors, executions, and the like: so likewise we (measuring
the great works of God by the same compass we do our own) do conceive them
to be begun and effected by such like passages and progressions as our own are;
as by decrees, consultations, resolutions, or some means or other to ripen and
bring them to their productions.

And thus it is that we dare take-upon us to speak of Gods great works of
wonder: as (not to name any other) of these, of Man's Creation, and Redemption,
both which we conceive to be on this manner:

First touching Man's Creation; we conceive that God moved with zeal of
propagating his own glory, did take in hand, even out of Nothing to frame and
create Man, as a fit matter or subject, where-on to stamp and set the likeness
of his own Image, that so He might communicate his own everlasting Goodness
to a Creature so qualified and endowed. Which Creature notwithstanding so
formed and enabled, is not, nor cannot be equal to his Creator in the
excellency of Goodness or power of Perseverance: though for quality He
partake of his Creators Goodness, and for form He be made in his Creators Image.

And for this we conceive a double reason; the one from God, the other from
Man: from God, because He is (notwithstanding this his work of Creation, that
is, of bringing another thing besides Himself into Esse, and so into open
view, yet we say, He is) still infinite, and so no whit lessened, or any way
impaired, either in quality of Essence, or in ability of perpetuity. For all
excellency or goodness is fontally in Him; and what excellency or goodness
soever is in any Creature, it is but guttula illius formositatis, bonitatis,
suavitatis quae est in Creatore: which, being severed from God, does ther^upon
instantly perish, and turn to nothing. And therefore Man no longer bears the
perfect quality of his Creators Image, than that He continues in Him good,
and constantly the same He was, according to that stamp and tincture which He
received from God in his Creation. So that Man's perfection is not so excellent
as his Makers, no nor any whit equivalent ther-unto; because perfection in Man
is but as a beam of glory issuing from God the fountain of glory: whereas in
God it is originally essential, and everlastingly infinite.

Again Man is not so excellent as his Maker; for we must consider his
original matter, wher-on He was made; which was Nothing: now this Nothing, by
the operative Goodness of God, was made something, and this something was made
Man bearing the stamp of his Creators goodness. Yet this goodness in Man, though
derived from the unchangeable goodness of God, was not otherwise than
changeably good: because it was now seated or inherent in a dissoluble subject
of a changeable disposition, able to stand in, or fall from its goodness, as it
self should resolve.

Now, I say, the receptivitie of created matter affords no room for
unchangeable goodness. As it stood with Gods goodness to make Man good, yea and
very good: so it stood with the nature of Man's essence, being a made matter,
not to be capable of unchangeable goodness. For unchangeableness and
immutability in goodness is proper only to Omnipotency, or the creating Power,
because that only has subsistence in it self; which subsistence in it self
is that only which gives life and being to unchangeablness. Nor again can the
thing created comprehend the Creators goodness, because that is finite, this
infinite: and it is a certain rule, Minus non habet in se majus, and therefore
Man cannot comprehend his Makers goodness. Which if we should fondly imagine,
that God, if He had pleased, might have made Man absolutely and constantly
good like Himself, no way liable to change or alteration: then we must also
imagine that Man should have bin more than made in the image of God, or after
his likeness; for then he should have bin all one with his Creator, both in
Essence and quality: for there is less difference betwixt the Essence of God,
and unchangeable goodness, than betwixt fire, and the heat thereof; or the
Sun and the light thereof, though the one really and inseparably express the
other. For set any subject in such an equal distance to the fire, as that it
shall receive the heat thereof, and yet not be enflamed therewith: or conveigh
the light of the Sun by a reflecting object to enlighten a dark body; yet
that heat, or this light thus divided from their proper seats and subjects, is
neither the heat of the fire, nor yet the light of the Sun: their subjects
being hot, or light, remissis gradibus, perhaps that but warm, it may be this
but dim. Whereas the true heat of the fire in its proper nature and quality
does always burn and consume; and the true light in the body of the Sun does
always dazzle and confound the sense of all humane sight to behold it. And yet
it must be confessed that that heat, being but warm; and this light, being but
dim, did both of them come originally the one from the very fire, the other
from the very Sun.

So likewise, touching the Goodness that is in Man, though it came originally
from the unchangeable Goodness that is in God, yet being now seated or inherent
in a created substance (whose continent is infinitely less than the original of
the thing infused) it is no more of that unchangeable condition which is in
God, than either the forementioned heat or light can truly and properly be said
to be either Sun or fire.

But here I know some object the condition of the blessed Angels, saying, that
since they kept their first station and perfection, and never lost that goodness
and holiness they were created in, therefore their goodness is unchangeable: to
which I answer, it follows no more, that because they have not fallen from
their goodness, that therefore their goodness is unchangeable; then because a
clear Cristall glass is not yet broken, or a fair timber-house is not yet
burnt, that the one is not brickle, nor the other combustible. Though we grant
that the blessed Angels neither ever did, nor ever shall fall from their
goodness; yet we must know it was in their nature to have fallen as well as the
Angels that did fall, (who as some are bold to affirm, were not inferior, but
more excellent in glory than the constant Angels.) But these good Angels have
resisted all inducements and allurements to procure their change: and happily
by their resistance are now so confirmed in their goodness, (or else by some
other than by an infused or created power, are now so upholden and enabled)
that they shall never fall: the Providence of God over them enabling them to
stand.

But to return to the goodness in Man: let us know it was changeable; that is,
might continue, or vanish, even as himself would: as that warm heat or dim
light might last, or be extinct, as their subjects were kept to, or removed*
from their original causes. So whiles Man kept that state and disposition that
God created him in, so long he continued constant and perfectly such as he was
created: but going-about to alter or ad any thing to his state and being;
(which by Satan's procurement he did) he ther-upon did alter his quality and
condition: the image of God in him after which he was made, to wit, in his
Natural and Personal Essence, remaining what it was, but the likeness or
similitude of God in that image, being altogether depraved and spoiled in the
beautiful form and qualities ther-of: his Good, being turned into Ill; his
Knowledge, into Ignorance; his Holiness, into Pollution; his Domination, into
Subjectio^; his Glory, into Shame; his Life, into Death; and all his Felicity
into extreme Misery.

Now this change was simply Man's own act, and no way imputable to his
Creator: for God had made Him such, as (if He had would) He might as well
have stood steadfast in his perfection and integrity, as thus to have fallen
into this state of corruption and iniquity. But He lost that heat of Life,
which he had received from the all-quickning fire of Gods breath: He put-out
that light of Grace which reflected upon him, from the all-enlightning
Sunshine of Gods Love: and all because he tooke-upon himself (contrary to
Gods will) to alter his state and being from that, which God had set him in.
This extinguishment came from himself, and not from the will of God. God had
indeed given him freedom of Will, but he used it in pejorem partem, to his
own destruction: not for that God had made him for that end to destroy him;
but for that he used not his freedom to stand and continue in that state of
holy Life, and light of Grace which He might have stood and continued in, if
himself had would.

And thus He made, not Himself only, but all his Posterity subject to Death
and Damnation. For as by his Creation He had received Life and Grace from God,
not for him-self only, but for all that should come of him: so likewise by his
transgression he made all his whole Posterity liable to Gods wrath, as well as
himself: so that all were alike changed with him into the same state of
corruption, and all were fallen alike with Him into the same pit of perdition.
There being no difference nor degrees at all, as if his Posterity were some of
them less, some more or deeper plunged ther-in than other. For the same Death
that by Sin entered upon the first Offender, I say the same Death, both in
measure and degree, went-over all Mankind alike: because all had in Adam alike
offended, all were alike deprived of the Glory of God. Thus all Mankind was by
Creation perfect, by Sin corrupted, and by the guilt of Sin accursed.

Now then for Man's Redemption, as God at first consulted with Himself how and
after what manner He might make Man, and at last resolved to make Him in his
own Image, after his likeness: so here again finding Man to be thus fallen
from that happy state into this woeful plight, surely much more did He now
consult with Himself, how, and by what means He might set Man on his feet
again, and so restore Him and his whole Race into their former state and happy
being. This being a work (if we may compare Gods works one with another) of
greater glory, difficulty, and labor (humano more loquor) than that of
Creation.

Which Consultation I mention not here, for that I imagine that God did not
think nor provide for Man's Redemption before He was fallen: for (I believe) as
Gods all-seeing eye did foresee the fall; so his insearchable Wisdom did
provide for the same, even from all eternity. Yet seeing I have taken-in hand
to speak of this Consultation, it falls best into our order and method to
speak of it here in this place.

Here then to express and set-forth this wonderful work of God for the
Redemption of Mankind, we imagine him first to be moved ther-to by his
Compassion or Pity; his Pity to stir up his Mercy; his Mercy for Truth and
Justice sake to submit her self to his Wrath; his Wrath to be assuaged by his
Peace: and so one Grace to advise and deal with another, till at last they
sweetly agree, and join all in one, how to perfect and effect a work for the
deliverance of all Mankind out of its misery. Which work was put upon Christ,
the anointed Messiah, who cheerfully undertook it, and for his part
effectually performed it.

And as many of all Man kind as (according to Gods purpose) do receive this
blessed and gracious Mediator, apprehending Him by Faith, cleaving unto Him by
Hope, and giving obedience unto Him through Charity, so many are freed from
their thraldom and misery, and are restored to the inheritance and
participation of life and felicity.

Those again that either carelessly neglect, or wilfully reject this great love
of God in Christ, they not only still remain overwhelmed in the same pit of
perdition into which they were plunged by the sin of the first Father; but they
also provoke God again unto further wrath, for so lightly respecting his love,
and casting his Mercy behind them. For Grace not offered will it-selfe plead
mercy for the offender; but offered and contemned, justly calls for more wrath,
and severity of punishment. But for those that thirst for deliverance, and
embrace that means which is offered to them in Christ Jesus, they are
borne-anew; they are inspired with good Graces; they are freely justified;
sanctified; and assured of Salvation: and shall at last attain eternal
Happiness.

Now for the further divulging of this happy means to the increase of Gods
glory; as also for the better winning and alluring of more to embrace the same
for the saving of their Souls, did I take-in hand to compose this Subject into
a History, and to set it out in a familiar verse, that so the younger (who are
more ready to read Poetry than Prose) may, (as in a Map, or Glass) behold
one personating them selves, and chalking out the way, or treading as it were
those very steps whereby them-selves have departed from that Excellency and
Perfection they were created in, and run headlong into most cursed misery,
and thraldom: and yet again how by new means offered, and by circumspect
walking therein, they may come to the fruition of eternal Life, and Felicity.

These together are the scope of my intendment; which, if in any measure I
shall further and promote, I trust it shall repent neither me to have spent
some hours stolen from my ordinary studies for the work of the Ministry in
my Pastoral charge, upon this kind of writing; nor any other of their pains
in reading; but shall occasion us all more seriously to praise the Lord: for
whose sake I desire to become all unto all, to win some.

TO THE COURTEOUS READER.
Kind Friend:
IN friendly kindness I thee send
This little Book, which I have penned.
A Book? unworthy: yet does bring,
Of what is penned the worthiest thing.
Thy Life, or Death, it does thee show,
In matter old; in method new.
The matter then do not reject,
Since Life or Death it does reflect.
And if the method thee distaste,
My good will for amends thou have.
Yet read it not for ought that is mine;
But 'cause the subject is divine.
Stirpe sacra, morsu scelerato, sanguine Divo,
Integer, infoelix, and benedictus Homo.


THE PERFECT-CVRSED-BLESSED MAN.
The Argument.
In h's form, in h's fault, through Christ's peacemaking blood,
Man's Perfect, Cursed, and again made Good.
The Argument enlarged.
When As by cursed Disobedience
Man first did fall from perfect Innocence,
He purchased to Himself, and his whole Race
The gain of endless Pain, the loss of Grace.
Heaven, Hell, Earth, Sea, Wife, Children, all maintain
His woeful gain of Loss, his sense of Pain.
Whose cursed state by blessed Consultation
Is blessed made through perfect Consolation.
So loss of Pain at last he finds in this,
That Life must die, that Death may bring him Bliss.
The Authors Preamble upon it.
THou Infinite! that can in every place
Breathe into poor, yea dead Souls Life, and Grace;
And them indow with rich gifts from thy treasure:
O power into my barren heart such measure
Of wisdom, knowledge, truth, humility,
Faith, holiness, grace, and ability,
That I may, after serious meditation,
Commend unto the world a true relation,
How thou did frame Man in his excellence
A curious Model of thy glorious Essence.
How Him again, having Himself defaced,
Thou did vouchsafe thy Son should be abas'd
By humane Life, by Death, by h's unknown Passion,
To re-invest in Grace, and glorious station.
A work of no less wonderment, I ween,
Than that which was in his Creation seen.
Both infinite in Goodness, Love, and Glory;
Not what, but that they are shall be my story.
In which discourse I shun industriously
All idle vernish of quaint Poe^trie,
"In speaking of Gods simple verity,
"Naught more beseems than true simplicity.
Then what I know of his all-knowing worth,
With single heart, I simply thus set-forth.
THE PERFECT MAN, Setting-forth MAN'S EXCELLENCY By His GENERATION. Dum stetit
innocuus, stetit Omnipotentis Image
Viva Dei, prima sort statutus Homo.

MAN'S EXCELLENCY BY HIS GENERATION.
The Argument.
Whiles Man, once placed in Innocence, so stood;
He bare the stamp of all the All-Mighties Good.
ANd this I know, and firmly do believe,
That by his Word, who made both morn and eeve; The Creation of Man by God, who
is a Spirit Omnipotent.

The spangled Heavens with Lights the great'st and least;
The Air, Sea, Earth, peopled with foul, fish, beast;
Man and his wife 'bove earthly creatures blessed;
Six days for work, the Sev'nth for holy rest:
That He, I say, which thus did ordinate
All things of Naught, and real them create,
Must needs be God; a Spirit all-sufficient;
All-knowing; all-procuring; all-efficient;
Vp-holding all things by his Word and Will;
Before, and after Time enduring still;
Not subject unto change, all chance disposing;
Maintaining Truth, and Errors all opposing;
Rewarding right; Avenger of all wrong;
Most wise; most just; most good; to whom belong
These and all Attributes of good pretense,
As well in abstract, as in concreet sense.
As good as Goodness; as just as Justice:
So Infinite in all, as that He is
As able to reduce, as erst to frame
All real things into the state, and name
Of Nothing; late their prime original:
So great He was, He is, and ever shall.
To us made known by th'Pers'nall Trinity,
Of Father, Son, and Spirit of Unity.
This infinite Creator, this was He,
Man's perfection being made* in the ^mage of God, rarely understood.
That made, and placed Man in that degree,
That he did shine with perfect glory dight;
Having no spot in his Creators sight:
Framed of earthly mould, a heavenly creature,
Bearing the stamp of his Creators feature;
Beyond all earthly creatures having might
To know, to will, to do even all things right:
With sovereign power the whole World to over-sway;
Having like power his Sovereign to obey;
Free from all Ill: to all Good likewise free:
To will, or nill, at perfect liberty.
Nor could have bin of these by Time bereaved,
For into him Eternity was breathed.
Thus was he made of his Creators Deity
A living Image, a quick Anatomy.
This is a truth which few conceive aright,
How Man was made in The Image of th'Al-might,
Which only thus they labor to express,
In that he bare his Makers Holiness:
Set in the state of perfect purity,
Without all blemish, and infirmity.
And this is all some care to understand
Of that likeness Man had from h's Sov'raigns hand.
But as for Gods Essentialitie
Expressed by personal propriety:
This is a Truth acknowledged so transcendent,
As that of this they think no sparks resplendent
In that likness wher-in Man was created:
Nor that thereto he was assimilated.
Wher-as I think (and so dare here avouch)
As fair a spark ther-of in Man does couch,
As of Gods other Powers Essential:
Though made a Person individual.
Which lest I seem to talk-of all in vain,
Thou great Inspirer help me to explain.
The Dust once formed, the Spirit of Life was breathed,
Both which, to both by God were so bequeathed, The image of God in Man
expounded.

That instantly one Person they became,
A Reasonable Creature Man by name.
And thus the Man was made Spiritual
By reason of his Soul celestial;
Which does enable him to represent
The 3 persons of the Trinity resembl^d by 3 faculties in the soul.
Th'Essentiall Spirit of the Omnipotent.
This Soul, like Gods Essentialitie
Contains in it a threefold faculty,
Whereby the Trinity is figured,
That God-like Man might be more honored.
Mind,
First is the Mind, which gives power and skill,
Wher-by we know, we judge what is good, what is ill.
Will,
Next is the Will, begotten of the Mind:
For till we know, to will we are not enclinde.
A Power to do^.
Then from the Minds conceit, and Wills affection
Proceeds an active Power of Operation.
This Intellect, or Mind conceiving rather
Derived from none, resembles God the Father.
The Will, Childe-like the Minds election,
Does rightly personate even God the Son.
From Mind and Will proceeds apparent most,
A Power to do, like God the Holy Ghost.
As 3 Persons, and but one God: so diverse faculties and but one Soul.
And as we know those glorious Persons three
Essentially but one God only be:
So for undoubted truth we may it take,
These faculties but one Soul only make.
But as the Holy Father works not
Without the Son, who was of Him begot;
Nor yet the Son without the Fathers Mind,
The Holy Ghost neither, but all conjoined.
So neither does the Mind, nor yet the Will,
Nor yet the working-Pow'r seek to fulfill,
And bring to act the easiest work alone,
Till all agree, even jointly all in one.
Yet as we attribute the great Creation
To God the Father; to the Son, Redemption;
And to the blessed Sp'rit the sweet effect
Of working holiness in Gods Elect:
So we refer to the Mind all understanding;
Election to the Will; to the Power of working
The work that is done: and so these faculties
Are all employed in several offices.
Besides, As no priority of Persons in the Deity: so neither of faculties in
the Soul*
as in that glorious Deity
Of sacred Persons there is a Trinity;
And yet in time, or any kind of worth
No inequalitie's in them set-forth.
If any seem, it only seems we know,
By order of some sweet external show
To us, who only judge things outwardly,
Not able to discern them inwardly.
So in the Soul, the several Faculties
Admit not of any priorities
Among themselves: for Soul no sooner's named,
But Mind, and Will, and Power to do are framed:
Withouten which, or all, or any one,
Man is not Reasonable, Soul is none.
And further yet, touching the Deity:
Who does create? redeem? and sanctify?
We answer God at every demand:
When we not three, but one God understand.
So touching Man; if any would perceive
What Power it is that makes the Mind conceive?
Or what wher-by the Will to Choosing's led?
Or what wher-by to do He Is enabled?
To all of these one answer we do make,
It is the Soul, whence they their Powers take.
And yet in Man one Soul, not three exist,
In which one Soul all Faculties subsist.
The image of Gods infinity in man.
There Is yet one knot in this Divinity:
How Man resembles Gods Infinity?
In h's little Soul so great varietie's,
That in it is stamped all Gods Proprieties.
As God is Infinite, all-comprehending,
Both past, and present, and without ending:
So does the Soul of Man in ample sort
Discern all these, and of them make report.
Memory.
His Memory retains things of old:
Understanding. Providence.
Things present Understanding does behold:
And things to come by the eye of Providence
He does foresee: so clear's his inward Sense.
Thus as in these, so great is Gods Goodness,
So in all else Man bears the Lords likness.
Which rests not barely in the quality
Of outward, or of inward sanctity:
(Though this be all that usually is said
T'express the Image in which Man was made)
But in those real Faculties of his,
Wher-by He rightly works in Holiness:
Ruling all things with supreme Domination, Man's Sovereignty.

That are within this sublunary Nation:
Enjoying eke, to bring full joy to h's Life,
The joyful consort of a joyous Wife.
Yet as the most accomplished Pourtrature
Is but the bare Idaea of some Creature;
Which can by no means actually express
The vital Faculties ther-of: much less
Can finite Man th'Infinite adaequate
In power; though inf'nite Powers He actuate.
Man is in deed of the World but a point:
Yet points He out the whole World every joint.
His Soul Sun-like the measurer of how'rs The excellency of the Soule^
facultie^.

Gives Life, and Sense to all the Bodies Powers:
Which being sphaer'd in'ts Bodies organon,
(And that though centered in this Horizon)
Can send its winged thoughts from East, to West,
And yet it Self immov'ably to rest.
Mind.
His Minde's a Map with such varieties fraught,
As in the greater World at large are taught.
Or it is a shop where Virtues works are framed,
Which sent abroad, they just, wise, good are named.
Intellect.
His Intellect a clear Prospective glass
Attracts to Mind what shall be, is, and was.
Or it is an eye to pry into the cause
Of Natures secret work, of Reasons Laws.
Reason.
His Reason Queen of all his Faculties
Enacteth Laws, and Rules, and Liberties.
Or it is the scrutinie of Verity,
Dispelling clouds of Ambiguitie.
Will.
His Will commands free as an Emperess,
Subduable by neither wile nor prowess.
Or it is a Castle of Resolution,
Wher-in are Engines of execution.
Wit.
His Wit's a living wellspring of Invention,
Affording unto Will all due Attention.
Or it is a Hand to reach from Memory
The things for use that ther-in hidden lie.
Heart.
His Heart's the Temple of all Reverence
VVher-in the Graces keep their Residence.
Or it is the sacred Altar of Devotion,
When Grace and Will consent upon the motion.
Conscience.
His Conscience is a little God in h's breast,
To tell him of his Deeds what is cursed, what is blessed.
Or it is else, the sentence being found,
A secret friend, or foe, to cheer, or wound.
His close un-seen Affections appear Affections.

Like sparks blown-up with sorrow, joy, love, fear.
Or else like greedy flames devour and wast
Their Natural forces whiles their fuel last.
His Inward Senses outwardly are blind, Inward Senses.

Discerning only what the Outward find.
Much like neat inward Rooms, dark like the night,
Till that with outward beams they be made light.
His Common-Sense is Senses Common Hall, Common-Sense.

Where outward Senses forms assemble all.
For all the Outward Senses serve, I wis,
Their abstract forms to retransmit to this.
His Fantasie's a Childish Lord, Fantasy.
like pleased
With Good, or Ill; when once on either seized.
Or like a brainless Tyrant, raging still
Against Reason, Consc'ence, Right, to have his Will.
His Memorie's the storehouse of the Mind, Memory.

To lay-up close what th'Intellect does find.
Or it is his Register for aftertimes,
Where He records Men's Glories, or their Crimes.
His Out-ward Senses are the known Cinque Ports, Outward Senses.

VVher-to, and whence all knowledge safe resorts.
Or they are else, each in their proper kind,
So many several Touch-stones of the Mind.
Touching.
The Sense of Touch all over the Body spreads
His Medium, and so his Object reads:
For subtle Nerves twixt skin and flesh do grow,
Which from the Brain diffusedly do flow.
Seeing.
The Sense of Sight has cristall eyes to see
All visibles that in the Horizon be:
Which like a seal do true expression make
Of the outward forms which they do inward take.
Hearing.
The Hearing through the Organon of Ears,
Once struck with Ay'r, all sounds distinctly hears:
Which Eccho-like into the Brain resownd
The qualities of each received sownd.
Tasting.
The Taste all savours by the Tongue receives,
Through its moist porie superficies.
Whose liquid touch, on wholesome feeding things,
To the Power Nutritive his foyson brings.
Smelling.
The Smelling-Sense does all such sents assume
As do the Nostrils through the Ay'r perfume.
Whose object it embraces, or rejects,
As Good or Ill the Organon reflects.
Body.
His Body though in show a slender stem,
Yet is it of real things the richest gemme.
Or for the Soul a curious built Palace,
Lodging her Powers each in a royal place.
Head.
His Head's the watch-towre of that goodly frame,
Keeping a Sentinel over all the same.
Or of this Microcosme the highest Sphaere,
Whence his Souls star-like faculties appear.
His Speech is princely Reasons Messenger Speech.

Making the Tongue his Hearts Interpreter:
Or it is a Caracter wher-by He Is known,
As well as by his Face of all his own.
His Face of outward beauty is the mirror, Face.

Yet strikes Brutes with a Majestic terror.
Or it is the Ensign of his inward breast,
Displaying love, or hate, ther-in to rest.
His Hands the scale, and sword of Justice hold, Hands.

To render weal or woe to young and old.
Or for himself they are servants ready pressed
Always at hand to do their service best.
His Feet the Basis wher-on all are builded, Feet.

Do make Him stand, no further help b'ing yielded.
Or they are stedie Porters to convey Him,
When that He stirs what way his Mind does sway him.
It were too much to tell what Powers reign
In h's sinews, veins, lungs, lights, blood, livour, brain.
But last of all, of all things the Heavens under,
All these in One make Man the greatest wonder.
All these in One must needs be wonder great'st:
For every one's a wonder, even the least.
Is It not a wonder Man should be create
Of Nothing? That from thence to such estate
He should be raised, as to become partaker
Of all that is good? In The Image of his Maker?
That finite should the Inf'nite actuate?
That He in one thought should capitulate
Things past, and present, and to come? That He
Should of this Universe the Sovereign be?
And rule all things with Majesty, and might?
And yet a naked, and a little Wight?
That He of this world but a Point should be,
Yet comprehend the worlds variety?
The Earth? the Sea? the Regions of the Ay'r?
Heavens altitude? their distances compare?
The secret virtues of Earth-hidden Mines?
The open aspect of Stars crossing the Signs?
Where the Artick, and the Antartick Pole is fixed?
Where Zenith, Nadir, and their Center's mixed?
The revolutions of the restless Sphaeres?
Whose un-eav'n motions make even days, months, years?
The circled Confines of the wide Worlds center?
The Reign of Kings, both where, and when they enter?
That He beyond the Worlds circumference
Should in his thought transcend, and fix his Sense
On that which all Sense, and all thought exceeds?
O this great wonder breeds! great wonder breeds!
All these great wonders are. Oh then who can
VVonder enough all these should be in Man?
O Men! O Angels! admire every how'r!
Admire! and praise the great Creatours Power!
That powered into Man such inf'nite worth!
That worthily no tongue can it set-forth!
Let Men, let Angels set-forth what they can,
They can set-forth no worthier thing than Man.
So great! So good! So absolutely free!
That independent, save of God, was He.
Perfect in all: (to perfect-up this story)
Had He stood still, H'ad still stood full of glory.
THE CVRSED MAN, Setting-forth MAN'S MISERY By His DEGENERATION. Mortalis
vitae, vitalis Mortis amara,
Illicitum gustans, gustat avarus Homo.

MAN'S MISERY BY HIS DEGENERATION.
The Argument.
Above which height of Bliss when He would rise,
Headlong He fell to depth of miseries.
But fickle Man, Man asp^ring
ambitiously bent
With glorious state not holding Him content,
Proud Lucifer-like greedy to arise
To higher pitch of glory, did devise
To throw Himself, ^verthrew Himself, and his posterity.
and his Posterity
Into the lake of all extremity.
Their Bodies, Souls, their Persons, their estate,
By Sin, Death, Hell, for aye to ruinate.
For here this Man must be considered,
As the main root from whence are issued
The several branches of each several Man
Which shall, are, have bin since the World began.
"When root's corrupt, then must the branches needs
"Corrupted be: for root the branches feeds.
So is it with Him, and His; He drank corruption,
Which poys'ned Him, and all his Generation.
For soon as He, his great Creatours will,
(Having full power it freely to fulfill)
The entrance of Sin.
Did wilfully reject to choose a toy;
He ther-upon bad farewell to all joy.
By which first fault, He shook hands with the Devil,
And promised wel-come t'ev'ry kind of Evil.
For He ( blind Soul!) misled by fond conceit,
Thought Evil, Good; and Good a plain deceit.
Then Sins like Caterpillars 'gan to swarm,
Or Souldjer-like by strength, and mighty arm,
Came rushing-in upon Him: and with snares
The guilt and reward of Sin.
Of guilt and Death bound Him, and all his Heirs.
" Foes now He finds them whom He took for friends:
"Though all too late He sees it by their ends:
"For though Sins seem to better our estate,
"They are of utter ruin but the bait.
"And Satan Syren-like does us allure
"With flattering shows Sins poison to procure.
The effects of Sin in his Person,
For all Man's Powers, and Pers'nall Faculties
Were pois'ned all; changed their Abilities.
In doing well, He once did well resemble
The glorious God: but now (woe's me!) I tremble
So horrid thing to tell of mine own Kin,
He rightly represents the Devil in
Pravitie of perverse disposition,
And active Power of Devilish expedition.
In his Soul,
Those some-time sweet abilities of Soul,
Not one but now deserves a sharp controwle.
In stead of divine knowledge, the Intellect
Gross error interteins: in which respect
The Rational Powers, the Sensitive,
The Concupiscible, the Operative,
Are disaffected, all disabled so;
That'mongst them all, not one their office know.
His Wit devises, Will resolves Ill,
Reason mainteins; his Act expresses still.
For's Body too, his Souls fit Organon, In his Body,

Is made unfit by his transgression
To do its office well: yea well how can it?
Since all corruption since has seized on it.
Its Members all must needs be slaves to Sin,
When all the Body's held captive ther-in.
Which makes him to all Ill be ready bent,
But unto Good always malevolent.
Such is this Monster-Cripple, Devill-Man, Manifested in his actions.

That all things ill, but nothing well He can.
Hence errors, schisms, heresies in Religion:
Hence murders, thefts, fraud in his conversation:
Hence to a cursed Death his Body's thrall, The wages of Sin, Death temporal,
eternal.

And so's his Soul to Death, Death Infernal.
Where damned Ghosts of dead men raging cry,
They do at once in torments live, and die:
They die, they think, flames of eternal fire
So burn their Souls: but Death's no whit the nigher.
wher-upon Man flees, and fears.
The Man thus plunged by cruel Sins invasion,
Tries, though in vain, to escape by sly evasion.
Here close He creeps, lurks there behind the trees
In's levy suit, and thinks that no eye sees.
"His Consc'ence told Him He had God offended,
"And, if He stir, He will be apprehended.
"Yet (out alas!) He felt within his breast,
"The sting of guilt, of horror, and unrest.
So restless there He could not rest at all:
For when He heard his dreadful Maker call,
As his fear-strucken heart had made Him skour,
So now again the same fear driv' Him out.
"Grace, and the fear of God, who have forsook,
"For plagues and vengeance, cannot choose but look.
And as He feared, so forth with it befell:
God finds him, examineth his fault; and proceeds to censure.
For this great God, with wrath, and fury fell,
Did not long hold the Man in deep suspense,
But censured Him for's disobedience.
Yet first enquired how the Sin was wrought,
(Not that He knew not, but) to show we ought
"Not rashly unto Judgment to proceed,
"Till that we know both circumstance and deed.
"And as we find by certain information,
"Then, lo, to judge with due deliberation.
The fact, with all the passages b'ing scand,
The Actours with their Accessaries stand,
All present there found guilty at the bar,
Hearing how they in order censured are.
Old Satan first, (sometime an Angel bright, Satan,

Like Serpent now, for so He seemed in sight)
'Cause He was first of all Sin the Deviser,
Pretending Man ther-by should be made wiser:
Hence Sins of all kinds He shall covet still,
But above all, as his most good, most ill.
For dust of Sin, and sins the dregs of Dust,
(Though deadly poison) be his diet must.
But when by Sin He ayms at greatest spoil,
From Woman's Seed He shall have greatest foil.
Yet He in h's horrid Den will peevish lurk,
And all un-seen promote his cursed work.
As here his foul intent He made seem fair,
And caught the simple Woman by the snair
Of Serpents subtlety: The Serpent,
for which pretense
Twixt their two Natures grows such hatred thence,
That Serpents and such creeping things shall fright
Mankind; but women most upon the sight.
And 'bove all cattle He is cursed so,
He shall most basely feed, most beastly go.
"These Accessaries served thus, may serve
"To make's take-heed how we make other swerve.
The Woman next (for she it was next offended) The Woman,

Stood after them the first to be condemned.
Though Satan Father, she was Mother first
Of Sin: and so for Sin was next accursed.
She had indeed both formerly conceived;
And brought-forth Sin to Man: but was deceived;
For when she looked for joy, it turned to pain,
Not only to her self: but to remain^
To Hers, and theirs for ever; for our God
Did lay it on that Sex, as a just rod,
That Women all with bitter gripings wrung
With throws, and pangs, should breed, and bear their young.
That they should also live in strict subjection
Unto their Husbands will: whose sweet direction
Must be their law. And so their whole desire
Must subject be to what their Lords require.
"Ye lovely Women, when yee'r loving Wives
"Your Husbands then do not disquiet your lives
"By any kind of unkind imposition:
"Naught wins them so, as your kind disposition.
"What boots it them over you to play the Rex,
"Since for their help they chiefly choose your Sex
"To join with them, and be their Comforters
"In woe: at least their fellow sufferers.
The Man: for whose sake God curses the earth:
For see how God be-set the Man with woes,
Making all Natures Children turn his foes.
'Cause Man Himself from God was now declined,
God made the Creatures all goe-out of kind.
He cursed the Ground, or with sterility,
Or else with hurtful weeds fertility:
Which (once b'ing blessed to bring-forth wholesome meat
Of its accord, without Man's care, or sweat:
Now) yields Him naught, or things that are worth naught
Till by his pains to goodness they be brought.
He Is therefore forced with sorrow and with toil,
For his relief to dig and till the Soil:
Lest by Life-wasting hunger raw-bon'd Death,
Through want of Bread do bring him to want breath.
The Living-creatures also, once all tame, the living creatures,

Now refractary, and all wild became.
All things b'ing harmless, now all harmfull grew;
And still than old, more harmfull is the new. and all other creatures.

For Natures self, and all that is natural,
Vnnat'rally proved all unnatural.
Thus all for Him, and He for his offense
Became accursed: lo here Sins recompense.
But this not all: Man punished in his person,
for even in h's Person He
Is made a prey to endless misery.
While that He lives Life Natural in the flesh,
Diseases, or inveterate or fresh,
Do daily vex his Body more or less:
And crosses eke his Soul with care oppress.
"For God, who in bestowing gifts takes pleasure,
"Does look for a proportionable measure
"Of strict and exquisite obedience,
"As homage due in lieu of recompense.
In stead of which when He beholds that we
Delight our selves in thankless jolitie,
And wilful disobedience to his Laws:
Then lo in furious anger down He throws
Upon our heads the firebrarnds of his wrath,
That He for our destruction treasured has.
by the creatures
He makes the Creatures of all kinds to swell
With raging zeal each other to excel
In prodigal effusion of their ire,
By thunder, tempests, lightning, water, fire.
celestial,
The cristall Heavens, whose kind benevolence
Man's life maintained by wholesome influence;
Left all their proper offices to power
Deserved destruction in a flaming shower
Of fire and brimstone on a reachless Rout,
Whose sins for vengeance loud to Heaven did shout.
"Thus Hell from Heaven God sent to punish Sin:
"A Hell in deed to those, whose lot was in.
The fruitful showers, and mollifying Rain
Forsook likewise their fructifying vain,
And fell so fierce at Gods just indignation,
That by an universal Inundation,
All living things, and whatsoever grew,
Where all destroyed of all kinds, save a few.
"Observe we here the different respects
"Of what Gods love, and what his wrath effects.
"It is our wealth, if God in Mercy rain:
"But, if in Wrath, alas! it is our bain.
The Earth also that sluggish Element
(Not able longer through sad discontent
To bear rebellious Sinners weight) did cleave
Asunder in the midst, and so bereave
Them of them-selves, their houses, goods, and all:
For down alive into the pit they fall.
"Since wrong to God dead things did thus aright,
"O let us fear Gods all revenging might.
"Who can as well by any other thing
"On careless Sinners dreadful judgments bring,
As here by these. For how did He, alas!
Strike dead a company as they did pass
Near to the tower of Silo, accidentally,
which did fall
With violence on them, and slew them all.
"Not that they were of some abomination
"More guilty, or more lewd in conversation,
"Than other men that escaped that mischance:
"But that his glory God might so advance.
Full many have the secret judgments been,
And still are many fearful to be seen,
That God inflicts on Man by Sea and Land, intentionally*

To show the power of Gods reveng'ing hand.
"All which undoubtedly for Sin are wrought,
"Though that not always unto light be brought.
"For Sin no sooner had the power t'invade us,
"But to Gods judgments straight it subject made us.
Sometimes by Dearth: by bloody Wars sometimes:
Sometimes by Plagues God punishes our crimes:
Sometimes by Shame, by Grief, by slandr'ous lies:
Sometimes by Lions, Bears; by Frogs, and Flies:
Sometimes by mighty troops of Rats, and Mice:
And schoals of Worms, and huge armies of Lice.
Which little vermin are the full'st of wrath,
And fierce revenge: as the old Poet says;
"The basest ever is the most severe,
"Once having got the power to dominere.
All other Creatures likewise of all kinds,
Both quick and dead have shown revengefull minds
Against Man for Sin: so that He Is in that case,
That surely safe He Is not in any place.
By his Wife:
His wife besides, which is his other self,
Does often play the Chang'ling, and the Elfe;
Not caring how she vex, nor how she grieve Him:
Wher-as with comfort she should still relieve Him.
"And yet here-in she does but as did He,
"He to Himself was foe, and so is she.
By his Children:
His Children also, blossoms of his strength,
His present hope of future joy at-length,
Do often prove unruly, and do vex Him
With rude exploits which inwardly perplex Him.
"For He in them Himself beholds aright,
"How slightly He respected God All-might:
"Preferring more his longing Wifes desire,
"Than love of Heaven, or fear of Hellish fire.
"Right so his Sons, they think themselves so wise,
"That folly 'twere to follow his advise.
And as for Neighbor-people round about Him, By his Neighbors.

It is a world to see how they do flout Him.
If He be great, a King, a Duke, a Lord,
They basely praise his indiscreetest word.
If He be born a man of low degree,
They keep Him down in base servilitie.
If rich, they rob Him, lest too well He fare;
If poor, then hang Him, such but vermin are.
If He do well, through envy they do carp:
If ill; it is their tabret and their harp.
Let Him be great, or good, or friend, or foe,
He wants not them that will procure his woe.
What e're He be, He Is not without this cross,
He Is sensible of grief, or pain, or loss.
Now, lo the Man! that whilom was so neat, Man's miserable condition.

So glorious, so God-like, and so great,
Is now become most vile, yea most abhorred
Of those Creatures of whom He was the Lord.
As He to God rebellious was first,
So they to Him, ere since He was accursed.
O cursed Man! o miserable wight!
On whom all plagues of Hell, Earth, Heaven are light.
Both what He has without, or Him within,
Are all ore-thrown through guilt of deadly Sin.
Look-on his person; look-on his estate;
That Is totally depraved; this desperate.
So that He must in grievous misery
First spend his days; then die eternally.
From Grace and Glory being once deposed,
To shame and woe for ever He Is exposed
For'ts not in Him to work a remedy,
B'ing quite deprived of all ability.
THE BLESSED MAN, Setting-forth MAN'S FELICITY, In that His REGENERATION Is
consulted-of by the Heavenly POWERS. Ejus commiserens Sortis Divina Potestas
Vt redeat Civis, consulit, Exul Homo.

MAN'S FELICITY CONSVLTED-OF.
The Argument.
Whose woeful state the Heavenly Powers pity,
And do consult to bring Him to their City.
Lo then the All able God, Man's Redem^tion p^opounded, and discust by the
Heavenly Powers;
the God of Love
To help this helpless Wight Himself did move.
Which caused immediately, even with th'intentio^
(...) and sweet, but yet a sharp contention,
Amongst the Powers of Gods own Hierarchy:
Some said it could, some said it could not be,
Some wished it might, but knew not how it could.
Some knew it could, and also that it should.
About this wretch thus sundry parts were taken:
As some would have Him saved, so some forsaken.
Pity 'gan first with tenderhearted speech moved by Pity,

For grace, the God of all Grace to beseech
On Man's behalf: repeating all the story
Of his Creation; how that He for Glory
Everlasting, not for everlasting
Shame and woe, was made in the beginning.
Albeit then He fell from that estate,
Yet since O God thou did Him create
After the likeness of thy self to be
A living Image of Eternity:
O then let not the Power of Sin disgrace
This some-time glorious Man! But show thy face
Of Mercy unto Him, and to his Wife,
And to their Progeny! O grant them life!
Life of Glory! But first the life of Grace!
So shall not Sin, nor Death, nor Hell deface,
Nor blot-out of thy Book of Blessedness
Their silly Souls now drowned with cursedness.
O hear! o help! the glory will be thine.
All hearts will praise thy Mercy so divine.
Pity had thus her speech no sooner ended,
granted by Mercy:
But Mercy moved with Pity condescended.
And urged the same before the Eternals throne,
That favor might for Pities sake be shown.
resisted by Justice.
Which Justice, swollen with angry discontent,
Opposed forthwith: saying, reconcilement
Twixt God, and Man, without due recompense,
Were wrong to God, to Me'twere just offense.
And therefore Sister Mercy, said Justice,
Before you plead for Man take good advice.
Enquire of Truth to know how the case stands,
If pardon may be had; and at whose hands:
For take this as an Oracle most true,
"Where wrong's not satisfied, no favour's due.
Do you forbear, than Mercy straight replied,
To speak of Oracles: let them abide
In Truths all-knowing breast them to declare
For resolution, when Suitors repair.
Nor think not, Justice, think not that I fear
That this my suit before Truth should appear.
For I, to Truth, to any, or to all
For their consent, will give consent to call. They appeal to Truth.

Hear then, o Truth! to thee we do appeal,
Do thou to us this mystery reveal:
And say, if not in me the power lies
To work Man into Grace in h's Makers eyes.
Or if that Justice in it have a share;
Resolve us this: speak Truth, and do not spare.
But sparingly did Truth begin to speak,
Pretending she for such task was too weak;
When she indeed to meddle in it was loath,
Because show knew she could not please them both.
"O this desire to please does often hide
"The secret truth, when Right and Wrong are tried.
But she, nathles, because they both desired her,
Spoke to the point, that Heaven and Earth admired her.
I do confess (said she) great pity 'twas, Truth resolves. against Mercy:
and sideth with justice.

That against his Maker Man did so trespass;
As that thereby deprived of all Good,
And with all Evil He depraved stood.
But for that fact, that He Gods vengeance bear
Eternally, certes no pity it were.
"For better it were that Men, that Angels all
"Should aye be damned, than Gods decree should fall.
"But Gods decree will constant stand for ever,
"And Sin and Death will always go together.
To plead Man's pardon then, sweet Mercy, Dear,
Till Justice be avenged, do you forbear.
For God did say to Man, in that same day
Thou do transgress, thou do thy self betray
To Death, and all th'extremities of Hell:
Which to endure in wrath I Will thee compel.
But God did jest, the Devil Man persuaded,
Who from obedience was soon dissuaded.
In earnest then that vengeance God inflict
Upon the Man it stands with Justice strict.
"For his Decrees God never will dissolve:
"But aye fulfils what once He did resolve.
Nor can Man for his fault make God amends,
Since by his fault his Powers all He spends.
Nor is it in you kind Sister to releeve Him
From all or any one of h's pains which grieve Him.
For it directly makes both against Me,
And against our Sister Iustice-Equitie.
Wherefore dear Sister Justice stoutly stand;
Maintain thy right in this cause now in hand:
See thou yield not, without due satisfaction,
To free the Man guilty of so foul action.
Which if you should, you God dishonored,
And cruelly your Self abolished.
And Me you banish from Gods Heavenly throne,
From whence the beams of Truth have ever shone:
And then forthwith will lies, and errors vile
Gods glorious Chair eternally defile.
The sum of all dear Sisters then is this,
That either Man for what He did amiss
Must satisfy; which He can never do:
Or else must suffer pain of endless woe.
This is the state which now does best beseem Him.
You Mercy may bemone, but not redeem Him.
The case once thus by sacred Truth made plain, Whereupon Mercy complains,
expostulateth, and prays.

Made tenderhearted Mercy to complain,
That she her self, if she be thus restrained
From pardoning, was needlessly ordained.
For only Man, said Mercy, needs me most,
Whom since I may not help, my power is lost.
What loss therefore to Heaven can acrue,
If all the Heavenly Powr's I bid adue!
Or if likewise those glorious Angels all,
(Who glory in it that they them-selves may call
The Messengers and Ministers of Mercy)
Be banished from their society
With other Angels! who from Heaven dismissed,
May from their due attendance then desist.
O Heavens! In all the works of Gods Creation,
To his great glory, his great Mercy shone.
And over all, in all He does preserve,
Mercy does never from his Goodness swerve.
And when likewise He ought does sanctify,
Mercy does still that blessing beautify.
And shall not Mercy Man's Redemption move,
When to have-mercy, Mercy most does love?
Creation chiefly power does require:
And Preservation, wisdom does desire;
Sanctification, Holiness respects:
Yet Mercy on all these her beams reflects.
And shall no Mercy in that office shine,
Which so restrictively I challenge mine?
Namely, to pardon? to remit? forgive?
Oh! this is that, which makes Mercy to live:
Which if in Justice Heavens will take-away,
Mercy must dye, and Mankind must decay.
Father of Spirits! o do as well delight
Of Mercy to be God, as God of Right!
This Sin fallen Man raise-up t'integrity,
Or raze Me out from Heavens society.
What though He sinned? alas He was but Earth!
Though dead in Sin? thy Grace can give new birth!
Though grieved with pains? O thou can 'ford him ease!
Though Hell gape for Him? thou can Hell appease!
Thou made Him Thee to bless eternally:
But damned Souls curse everlastingly.
What glory will from Him to Thee arise,
When He in burning Hell blaspheming lies.
Restore Him gentle God! Restore Him then!
Thou shall be praised of Angels, and of Men.
And Me thou crown'st with glory, and renown,
When over all! Wher-at Wrath 'gan to frown: Wrath interrupts Mercy. and
joineth with Justice and Truth: exalts Gods zeal.and threatens Man's
punishment.

And ere that she could end her supplication,
Thus cut her off, with this sharp replication.
Our Sister Truth did tell you truth of late,
In saving Man Justice you ruinate.
But though for Man so earnestly you crave,
Yet it is a Crown (belike) that you would have.
Which, so you get, you naught at all regard,
Though Truth and Justice have no honor spared:
Who notwithstanding are to God as dear,
As Mercy; or what Attributes soever.
"But Heaven and Earth shall know what Truth affirms,
"Iehovahs Zeal for Justice sake confirms,
When mighty Angels did them-selves exalt,
Down from the Heavens to Hels infernal vault
I threw them instantly: how than?
Can this proud worm? this traitorous cative-Man!
That has not power weak motions to withstand,
How can He escape the force of my strong hand?
For, before that Heavens should grant Man a remission,
And not on some equivalent condition;
Or that the Earth should yield Him nutriment
By annuall-successive increment;
The fruitful plains with barrenness I Will strike,
And make his dwelling places Sodom-like.
The showring clouds I Will turn to banks of brass:
And The Earth to iron that so fruitful was.
The flintie Rocks to shivers I will tear,
And kernell-sands to mighty mountains rear.
The gladsome day, and rest-affording night,
That by their intercourse had wont delight,
I Will turn to timeless motions, never changing
Their constant changes of unconstant ranging
Among the Infernal Furies; where the Man
Shall be tormented while those Furies can.
To plague Him thus, is rightly to reward Him,
From which, nor heaven nor earth shall ever guard him.
Yea all the forces they are able make,
As thunder, lightning, famine, plague, earthquake:
And whatsoever else, as grave, and hell,
Angels, and Devils, all I will compel
To become furious Agents in the cause:
So strict and pow'full are Iehovah's laws.
Thus as Truth said, Man's state you may bewail;
But to redeem't, you never shall prevail.
Peace here-upon (for Mercy could not answer, Peace mitigateth Wrath: pacifieth
Justice, and Truth; cheareth and animateth Mercy: and admonisneth to refer the
cause to Wisdom.

She was through Wraths peremptory censure
So speechless grown, and heartless; like to fall:
But Peace) stept-in, affected like to all,
And with soft speech did sweetly moderate,
What these her Sisters could not arbitrate.
First she began with mildest exhortation
To move them to take-heed of emulation:
"For that (quoth she) does often kindle hate;
"The bane of Bliss, and ruin of a State.
We Sisters are, in one we must consent,
And not by strict exactions once dissent.
We know our parts, wherefore let be our care
Them to discharge, as it comes to our share.
You Wrath, Truth, Justice, ye desire no more,
But as Man sinned, so Man be plagued therefore.
Well, fear it not: but constantly expect
The constant God will duly it effect.
And Sister Mercy, you desire no less;
Than for Man's Sin that God give forgiveness.
Desire so still: that by importunity
God may be moved to grant him immunitie:
Which yet believe it may not prejudice
Th'inviolable right of strict Justice:
Nor any of our worthy Sisters dear,
Who equally to God are seated near.
And though nor you, nor I, Justice, nor Truth,
Can see the mean whereby our God renu'th
The broke estate of miserable Man;
Yet certainly our Sister Wisdom can.
"For what soever our Sovereign God decrees,
"She th'equitie thereof always fore-sees.
"Yea she devises things beyond all thought:
"And then propounds how they may be wrought.
"And happy they, whose actions she directs,
"For only them in favor Gods respects.
To her therefore have ye recourse for this,
And ye shall see, she will not devise amiss.
They applaud it:
Herewith was Mercy inwardly well pleased:
Truth, Justice, Wrath, were every one appeased.
To Wisdom then they all referred the cause:
Wisdom undertaketh it* opens it, decideth it: and ascribes to every one
their due.
When she (making a long, but decent pause,
"For Wisdome's always slow to speak inclined,
"She does so duly ponder all in mind.
When she) this controverted cause had waigh'd,
She orderly the same before them laid.
The one side pleads (quoth she) that since Mankind
From Life to Death by Sin are all declined,
Then Death, due wage to all our God must give,
Else can nor Wrath, nor Truth, nor Justice live.
If all Mankind (the other side replies)
Must suffer Death for their iniquities;
No pity had of any in Gods sight,
Then Mercy, Pity, Peace, are banished quite.
So prejudicial then, since the issue is,
That Man, or saved, or damned, all is amiss:
Justice, if saved; but Mercy, if He die;
That the one of these perforce from Heaven must fly:
And many other of our Heavenly train
Shall thereby base indignity sustain.
My doom is this; To salve, and keep all eav'n,
That Man by Death to Life, by Hell to Heaven
Shall take his course. T'enabl'Him for which end,
Let all the punishments Justice can send
Be all made good: yea Sin, and Death, and Hell,
And whatsoever most with Evil swell
Let all of them be made good unto Man,
And then let Wrath inflict even what she can.
So Mercy may for Man's Sin satisfy,
And Justice punish Man's iniquity,
Most reverend Truth exactly shall appear:
And austere Justice strictly dominere.
Consuming Wrath shall sweetly be appeased:
And all-preserving Mercy shall be pleased.
Remorsefull Pity shall be highly praised:
And death-deserving Man to new life raised.
Contentment thus we Sisters all may have,
And all of us accomplish what we crave.
So God in all, and of all shall be known,
The God of Life, Death, Glory, Praise, Renown.
Her decision is applauded.
No sooner Wisdom had this case decided,
But Heaven and Earth, who stood by Sin divided,
Were both of them with wonderment astonished
At th'equity of what she had admonisht.
All things with joy 'gan instantly be cheared,
As soon as hope of reconcilement 'peared
Reasons Quaere:
Twixt God and Man. Yet Reason made this Quaere,
How Sin:? how Death? how Hell? so dark! so dreary!
How these could be made good? since for Man's fall
They are the pain to plague the Man withal.
To second this, says Truth, there is none so good,
That ever yet did spring from tainted blood,
Who Man's depraved Nature could control
By changing Ill to Good, to save his soul.
To change Ill into Good! it is to create;
A work of inf'nite Power: wherefore no state
Of finite force can be so virtuall,
As to make Death to Life effectual.
"By Sin Man did an inf'nite Power offend,
"Which none but inf'nite Power can amend.
Neither can God Man's Mediator be:
For who offended was by sin but He?
It Is God in Justice that looks for amends;
Therefore not He, which satisfaction sends.
Who then is it that makes this Evil, Good?
Nor God, nor Man: by Reason they are withstood.
It Is I, quoth Goodness, I as Wisdom bod, to which Goodness answers.

Will heal Man's sores, and make all eav'n that is od.
I Will make his Evil, Good; his Death the way
Whereby eternal Life attain He may.
I Will yield my self, my uncorrupted Essence
To purify his Soul, his Sp'rite, his Sense.
Yea here (behold!) I offer all I have:
I Will withold naught that is needful Man to save.
Quoth Truth again, kind Sister you do well: Truth replieth that Reason is
not yet satisfied: for one alone cannot make satisfaction.

You offer more than Angels tongues can tell.
Yet cannot your beneficence alone
Vnright'ous Man with right'ous God atone.
It Is more to reconcile Man to his Maker,
Than one can do, who ere be th'undertaker.
When Charity, who all this while attended, Whereupon Charity inciteth all the
divine Powers to join in one for the business.

Did understand how Goodness was commended
For her kind offer: and withal did hear
No one of th'Heav'nly Powers sufficient were
Both to begin and end that work for Man:
She straight with love inflamed, like lightning ran
From Heaven to The Earth; and back again, and so
Incessantly still posted to and fro,
And never ceased, till she had through-perswaded
All Powers that ever Heaven and Earth invaded:
(Not only those whose names you have heard enrold,
But all the rest that Heavenly functions hold.
As that high virtue low Humility;
And never-daunted Magnanimity;
All wrong-enduring humble Patience;
And Fortitude, Power of Omnipotence.
These, as was said, and all the rest that dwell
In heavenly Palaces, were pleased well)
To bring their force, and join in unity
To purchase Man that same immunitie
They all meet and promise assistance.
That Mercy craved. Lo then they all did meet,
And prostrate fell at the Eternals feet;
Commending all they had to be employed,
To save the Man, that Sin might be destroyed.
Yea severe Wrath, that late so strictly stood,
To punish Man; now vowed to be so good,
As (after worthy satisfaction taken
For Man's offense) she would thence-forth refrain
Old torment to inflict for new offense,
Whens'ere he came in humble penitence.
The like did Truth; all Graces did the like:
And kissing each heart-joyning hands did strike.
But Mercy here was the most joyful Sister,
When all of them thus promised to assist her;
She weighed not what task she under-went,
Since, to save Man, they all had given consent.
When God th'All-ruling King of Heaven did see, God approves their consent:
and declares how Man's Redemption shall be wrought; by his Word incarnate, to
fulfill righteousness, and to suffer punishment for Man.

How sweetly they did all in one agree;
He let them know that now He was contented
Man should be saved, since they in one consented.
And here, behold, says this great gracious King,
I Will now declare how this same wondrous thing
Of Man's Redemption shall be brought-to-pass:
Which does both Man's and Angels power surpass.
Even I, that by my word the World did frame;
That dwell in light, and am Light of the same;
That all things made, whom Nothing can annoy;
That nothing need, and all things can destroy:
That powerful Word, that true Selfe-Light of mine,
That out of darkness did creating shine,
I say, that Self-same Word I Will send to take
Man's Essence Pers'nally; and so partake
With Man of humane Nature: that so He
Of divine Nature may partake with Me.
And for this purpose, lo! A Virgin Mother
Shall by my Sp'rit conceive, and by no other:
And when the Time of fullness comes, bring-forth
That heav'nly-humane Seed of inf'nite worth.
In whose Person two Natures shall be knit,
The Godhead bodily, Manhood in it.
So God, and Man, yea God-Man shall He be,
The second Person of our Trinity,
In whom all Graces really shall dwell,
With all Man's Powers to make Him Men excel.
Whose office is our sacred will to obey:
And for Man's breach thereof Man's debt to pay.
In whom with Man we will be fully pleased,
All rigor of our wrath b'ing quite appeased.
No other Person The Earth nor Heavens contain
That able is such favor to regain.
Yea none can be the sinless Savior
Of sinful Flesh, save One of inf'nite Power.
For which work He promises to enable the Messiah.
All power therefore, I Will power into his hand,
That He not only ever may withstand
All Satan's base malicious temptations;
Or all Man's vain and carnal inclinations:
But also may full satisfaction make
For all Man's Sin, when Justice it shall take.
Which penalty that He may under-goe,
Even Mortall-like to shame-full death and woe,
His sacred Body shall be basely bound:
Though Sin and Ill shall nere with Him be found.
"For since He stands in Malefactors stead,
" Justice may justly Him to torments lead.
"And since again that Sinners stand in Him,
"As He is Righteous, so count we them.
This is our will: yea this have we decreed,
Whereby from servile state Man shall be freed:
And for these ends, that He perform them all,
All our own Powers shall serve Him at his call.
This gracious promise made, This promise was found effectual upon the
revealing of it, both to Jew and Gentile.
most firmly stood
A law unchangeable; approved good
To Man, and to his whole succeeding Race
As they to have faith therein obtained Grace.
And though to Israel it was first made known,
Yet was the light thereof to the Gentiles shown:
They holding Him their glorious Consolation;
These, their comfortable Expectation.
And thus for many Ages both were fed
With saving-health from this Seed promised.
For soon as God this saving-promise made,
It made them live that to beleeve't assai'd:
And that as well before CHRIST'S Incarnation
As after his most glorious Exaltation.
THE BLESSED MAN, Setting-forth MAN'S FELICITY, In that His REGENERATION Is
Procured. Verbera, sputa, crucem Verbum patitur Caro factum,
Vt vivat Coelis, morte solutus Homo.

MAN'S FELICITY PROCVRED.
The Argument.
To cursed Death then CHRIST Himself does give;
That blessed in Heaven, Man freed from Death may live.
THis Christ was He, CHRIST conceived, and born.
that was that promised Seed
That long was longed-for: who (though God in deed,
Yet that He might be also very Man,
And so an equal Mediator) ran
Sun-like through all the Signs of humane race,
Appearing first in blessed Virgo's face.
Who all the World contains, was now contained
Within Her happy womb: who still remained
A spotless Virgin; and anon the Mother
Of her first Father, Savior, and Brother.
"A Virgin Mother of a Son a Father,
"The World nere had, shall nere again have either.
When He was born, such joy was at his birth,
That Heaven and Earth did echo with the mirth*
Young John un-born, old Simeon half in's grave,
Poor Swains, rich Sophies in Him comfort have.
Sing then for joy, sing still, sing, do not cease:
For now is born the Savior King of peace.
Being one Person He is jointly described in his Divine and Humane Nature.
He was the richest ( He was poorest) born:
Right Heir of all: (of all the most forlorn.)
The great Creator He: (poor little Creature.)
Not made as God: (made Man of fleshly feature.)
Maker of all laws: (all laws fulfilling.)
The Author of all life: (to die most willing.)
The fairest of Men: (of Men the most defiled.)
Aye-King of Bliss: (of woe the cursed Child.)
Inf'nite each way: (each way He greater grew.)
All good, no ill, (all humane frailties) knew.
Admired of the wise: (contemned of fools.)
Confuted greatest Doctors in their Schools.
His works.
None ever spoke like Him, He spoke so well;
Nor wrought: yet was He counted Prince of Hell.
Whose words, whose works, who Mary-like do ponder,
Have all their hearts even filled with joy and wonder.
He raised the Dead; gave health; gave sight to blind;
Conquered the Devils; calmed both Seas and Wind:
Was always doing good; or suffering ill;
That so all right'ousness He might fulfill.
All virtues flowed from Him, all graces shined
Clearly in Him: in Him all Pow'r's combined.
He was the fountain of all harmless mirth;
With smiling cheeks, yet nere sent laughter forth:
His intertainment.
But tears, alas! and heavy sighs, and groans,
And stripes, and blows, and scoffs from wicked ones
Were often his fare: and stead of dainty diet,
Hunger and thirst, and weariness for quiet.
Such though He was, yet was his usage such:
Some loved Him dear, some hated Him as much.
Concerning Him the World stood all divided: What the wo^ld thought of Him: few
well; most ill.

Few thought him God, the most such thoghts derided.
"Blind Souls that could not see when true Light shone
"From God's own face on earth to every one;
"Which graciously did offer unto all
"Soule-saving beams of Light celestial.
"This soul of mine, I Am sure found light of Grace
"By the eye of faith fixed on his glorious face:
"Which wholly was till then averse to Good;
"Prone to all Ill; and in corruption stood.
"Yet was it reclaimed, and quickly better reasoned,
"B'ing once by faith in my Redeemer seasoned.
Some few there were left all to follow Him: How dearly He was affected of
those ^ew.

Esteeming all too base to fellow Him:
And joyfully received Him as their Lord,
Deriving their salvation from his Word,
For when they heard his words were Oracles,
And saw his deeds no less than Miracles;
They did conclude He was the very same,
That had for all Salvation in his Name.
But for the most part Kings and Potentates, How the great ones band against
him.

Their Officers and chiefest Magistrates;
Though'mongst themselv's they were at hot defiance,
Yet against Him they joined in leagues alliance:
Seeking by secret fraud, and open strife,
The dire destruction of this Lord of Life.
The Multitude at first applaud him, but after to humor their great ones
deride Him.
The giddy-headed brainless Multitude,
(Whom great Ones hold in slavish servitude)
Adoring Him with shouts of joy did sing
At first, Hosanna! save us Lord our King!
At last their throats, blaspheming Him, they stretch,
Hosanneca! now save thy self thou wretch!
"O blessed Lord! how balefull was thy state!
"When so great love was turned to so great hate!
"How vain is it to feed on popular breath!
"Which causlesly is cause of Life, of Death.
As here a Man-destroyer these refused;
And to destroy this Man preserver chus'd.
Thus basely humored they their Sovereigns
These Kingly Rebels, in their base designs:
Assaulting often at their fittest seasons
They watch, attache, arraign, condem^* and kill Him.
This King of Kings by stratagems and treasons.
But yet He lived, for all their vile intent,
No Lamb so meek, no Dove so innocent.
Who if H'ad pleased had power his life to enjoy:
To destroy Death, yet it let Death destroy.
This graceless Crew enraged with hellish spite,
Sought daily thus to quench this Light of Light:
And trait'rously attach't Him as a Thief,
Then led Him bound to be judged by their Chief:
Who worthily judged Him unworthy dye,
And yet to Death gave Him unworthily.
That heady-headless Rout then headlong ran
Against this clear innocent condemned Man:
Pursuing Him to Death with living hate,
Who being dead became Deaths deadly bate.
For with their lingering torments though He dies,
Within three days his Godhead makes Him rise.
"But tell me here, dear Saints! o God come tell me!
"(The various thought of these does overwhelm me)
"Whether their hate, his death, I shall deplore?
"Or else his Love, and Life in Death adore?
"Their deed, no doubt, all good men do detest;
"But that of his! who counts it not the best?
"To murder Him that gives Life unto all!
"Let all that Fact most execrable call.
Abash't ther-at was The Earth, the Sun, and Moon:
For Midnight-light was then Daylight at Noon.
But when He rose, the Sun came dauncing-out,
And graves did open, and Saints for joy'gan shout.
Thus whiles He lived, He lived but to die, The end of his death.

That by his Death He endless Life might buy
For Man: for his pure blood in sacrifice
Once spent, was held of meritorious price.
Their manner of killing Him.
But long, alas! long was my Lord a-suff'ring,
Ere He could fully finish-up his offering.
Their devilish malice was so odious
They sought to make his torments tedious;
By slow degrees inflicting on Him pain
To make it long ere they would have Him slain.
Nor was his-pain from them so tedious,
As to Himself incomparably grievous.
His constitution pure, his unstained sense,
Most apt to feel the smart of each offense.
His blessed Body though to cursed Death
He gave, to pacify the Almighties Wrath.
For by his suffering He did under-take
To pay Man's debt of Sin for Justice sake.
Setting Himself a mark, wher-at even all
Might fling their darts of envy, spit their gall.
The Devils then stird-up those devilish men,
Who spent their venom all upon Him then.
Each rascall-Iew, whose fury yielded might,
How to torment Him made it his delight.
They stripped Him naked, then clothed Him in scorn,
And scorning crowned Him with plats of thorn.
His Head, his Face, his Side, his Hands, his Feet,
They beat, they wound, they pearc'd. And yet as meet
To honor Him, they bowed as to their King:
Which to Him glory, to them shame did bring.
For they like wretches glori'ed in their shame:
Not shaming once to make his Death their game.
To see the Lord of Life to Death thus bound,
Those few that were his friends it did confound.
One had forsworn Him: one had Him betrayed.
Not one, but all forsook Him, all afraid.
Nor thus alone, but which encreast his pain,
The Deity now seemed to refrain
To look-on Him with shows of cheerful Grace,
And in fierce wrath to turn-away the face.
"Which doubtless was to Him more dolourous,
"Than all that all could do, notorious.
And strictest Justice all this spite maintained:
That, was He less than infinitely pained?
All these thus heapt-on Him, oh did not they
Make It known to all He was a public prey?
When carnal men, Him trait'rously convented?
Unjustly judged? mocked? whipped? to death tormented?
When friends forsook Him? when by foes cast-down
To all contempt? when God did seem to frown?
To Endure all these? oh! it was a very Hell,
Which tongue (which thought) cannot conceive to tell.
All these He felt, all these He over-past;
Into all these it was Man's Sin Him cast.
They punished Him for sin, who no sin knew:
And that to Death, from whom their Life they drew.
But though as Man to Death they led Him bound
The effects of his death.
As God, He did them all in Death confound,
Making Sin lose his strength; Death lose his sting;
Hell lose his triumph through Christ's suffering.
First let He them prevail'gainst Him at pleasure,
Till that by an immeasurable measure
Of pain assigned, He had discharged the debt,
That rigid Justice for Man's Sin had set.
His Resurrection; Ascension: and Glorification.
Then did his Godhead gloriously appear,
And his tormenters inly shake for fear.
For maugre them, He rid Himself from pain,
Himself enliving his dead body slain:
Enabl'ing it to live, not as before
To dye; but so live as to dye no more.
For Champion-like after the victory,
He did ascend to his own seat of Glory.
Where He enthroned sits, wearing the crown
Of all his Fathers Glory, all his own.
"Whose heavenly Scepter swayes all earthly Kings.
"Whose Spirit to his Church all comfort brings,
"Whose Goodness makes man's life a Life of Grace,
"All Evil to eschew, all Good to embrace.
(For He had sent before, with large Commission
Faithful Ambassadors to give remission
Of all Man's past offenses; and to call
Him by new Grace to keep Gods Precepts all.
Which acceptable time of Grace once ended,
This conquering glorious King completely tended His coming to Judgment.

With thousand-thousand Angels armed with power,
Will terribly descend, as in a shower
Of flaming fire, to render vengeance due
To that rebellious unbeleeving Crew,
That his mild Precepts stubbornly refused;
And their own carnal minds to follow chus'd.
Nor will his coming be to these selfe-foes
More terrible; than joyful unto those
His friends, that in cheerful obedience
In Faith, and Hope, and humble Patience,
At that his glorious return expect
To reap of all their labors the effect.
"For though they Sinners were, their sins yet laid
"On Christ his Passion, the debt is paid.
For since Christ died for Sin, and Sin had none,
Sins debt was paid by that his Death alone.
Thus Christ b'ing free, for Man's Sin became bound.
Thus Sin bound Man through Christ was guiltles found.
Thus was the Lord enthralled, at last enthroned.
Thus was the Slave enlarged, and God atton'd.
Which being done, Man's enemies b'ing foiled,
The Tort'rers torments against themselves recoiled,
Disabling them his welfare to impeach,
When He for help, his faith to Christ does reach*
For even for Man, as for Himself Christ had
Power to resist, and overcome the bad,
And base assaults of the enemies of Grace,
That would from endless Bliss Man's soul erace.
Yea this puissant matchless Conqueror
Not only did expel Sins venom, rancour;
Or satisfy for Man's Iniquity;
Or re-invest Himself in Majesty:
But also did Man's Natural Powers control,
By breathing life of Grace into his Soul.
Man's Natural parts refined.
His Intellect He did illuminate
With beams of Truth: all error dissipate.
He his Affections all did sanctify:
And his crookt-perverse Will did rectify.
For howsoever Man's will was first made free,
As well to Good, as to Iniquity:
But choosing Ill, in Ill confirmed it stood,
Yet Grace in Christ reclaimes it all to Good.
Yea Grace converts his Bodies Faculties
To the right use of their Abilities.
His Head, his Feet, his Tongue, his Heart, his Hand,
Moved by Grace, to Good inclined stand.
And all Man's other parts, b'ing all declined,
Grace does reduce into their proper kind.
And though Gods Image in which Man was made,
By Sins approach was totally decaid;
That He could then, nor do, nor think aright,
All was so faulty in his Makers sight.
Yet is it by Grace in Christ so well refined,
That God with Man-renu'd no fault will find.
For Man thereby is all so purified,
As that He can Gods fiery trial bide.
Nathles though Christ redeemed Him perfectly, Man's corruption and Sin
ab^l^s^ed by Baptism: and the Lords Supper.

Yet what He does, He does imperfectly.
For old corruption still sticks close unto Him,
And all is imperfect that is known come fro Him.
Which imperfections, Christ the perfect heals,
Affording perfect help under his Seals
Of those two saving- Sacraments: for, by
The first of them Christ bids Him rely,
That all the leven of Soule-slaying Sin
Wherewith He poisoned was, is purged clean.
And He thence-forth by Grace renewed stands,
Though weakly, yet to do what God commands.
In which, when He through humane frailty falls,
By new-enspired Grace his Savior calls,
Reclaiming Him; and bids Him first abhor it,
And bring forth fruits of due Repentance for it:
Laying his hand, his constant hand of Faith
On that Obedience his Savior has
To all Gods Laws in full perfection wrought
In's Life, in's Death: believing He has bought
The full remission of each several Sin,
That he through want of Grace offended-in;
And so in humble confidence appeal
Unto the covenant of that other Seal,
Trusting that guilt of Sins both old and new,
With whatsoever can from thence acrue,
Are all abolisht: if He strive to rise
By Grace, from Sin, to holy exercise.
The miseries of this life sweetened.
And though in this his military strife
To please his God by holiness of life,
Some bitter storms of Miseries befall Him;
Yet Grace so calmeth them that none appall Him.
For He is taught to trust on his Protector,
Who, sorrows how to bear, was his Directour.
Is He from Regal Dignity deposed?
Is He to basest Poverty exposed?
Is He to joyless banishment cast-out?
Is He with deadly foes beset-about?
Is He with foulest slanders vilifi'd?
Is He for fairest qualities envied?
Is He with Bodies pain distempered?
Is He with grief of Mind entortured?
Is He by faithless friends to danger set?
Is He in stead of joy with sorrow met:
Is He with shame to live, or die, mad^ thrall?
Is He with one of these? Is He with all?
It matters not: His Savior has before Him
Endured them all; and in all does restore Him
To this true light of Grace: to know his state
Is from Gods certain love, though seeming hate.
To give God hearty thanks when things work well,
Or take with silent patience what comes ill.
And then cross Accidents Him none can move,
B'ing all substantial tokens of Gods love.
"For though it be true, great troubles on Him chance,
"'It Is also true, God sends deliverance.
And greater ones, nay none so great betide Him,
As did to Christ, when God it seemed denied Him.
(It seemed so to seem:) so though to Man
Sometimes they seem hopeless of help: yet can
The Almighty God, the Father of all aid,
No more forbear to help Man so dismayed,
Than dearest Mother can her dearling-Son;
Who newly born, unholpen is undone.
From's infant-cradle to his dying-bed,
The Man is still by God's Grace succored.
And in his Death, what waves soever toss him, His death is made the way to
eternal life: where He is rewarded with joys privative: positive.

Be It sense of pain, or pangs of fear that cross him,
Christ bids him fix his hopes in h's wounded side,
For He Deaths killing instruments has tried,
And spoiled them all. None then has power to sting
His Soul to death: they are Porters it to bring
From-out Deaths ghastly dungeon to the Hill
Of Heavenly Life; where Heavenly joys it fill.
Where Christ, the Al glorious King with glory crowned,
Crowns all his subjects that are loyal found,
With his own glory: making them all Kings,
Enjoying Him, in Him to enjoy all things.
Thus Grace conducts Man through the miseries
Of Life and Death, to Heavens felicities.
Where no misfortune, cold, nor hunger dwells:
Where no proud hope Him with ambition swells:
Where storms of clowding cares none hang o're's head:
Where pale-lookt sickness nere sends Him to bed:
Where fearful dreams affright Him not asleep:
Where crasie Old Age on Him cannot creep:
Where fatal vespers, Ill-portending stars:
Where bloodless fear, where noise of bloody wars:
Where none of these to vex Him once are found:
Where no false shows, but true delights abound:
Where always is the absence of all evil:
Where never comes nor Sin, nor Death, nor Devil.
What e're is to be wished, b'ing wished is there:
All Knowledge, Goodness, Truth, Content. And where*
Soever He turns his eye, or ear, they light
Upon some welcome objects of delight.
So what He hears, or sees; He sees it raise
Joy to Himself, and to his Maker praise.
"Pray there He needs not* Prayer complains of need.
" Need breeds Pain: and Pain Complaint does breed.
"But no Complaint, no Pain, no Need, no Prayer,
" Hosannas none: all Alleluiahs there.
His Body there is not subject to corruption: Hi^ emploiment in Heaven.

His Soul new clothed with flesh shines in perfection:
His Soul and Body both in one rejoined,
Find fullness of all joys in One conjoined.
"Which fullness joined to Him, Him nere accloies:
"And yet such fullness always He enjoyes.
His Senses all on perfect objects feed:
His Faculties aright their actions speed.
His Appetities are all acquieted:
His Parts, his Powers, are all engloried.
His Bliss is this, He Is endlesly emploi'd,
In blessing Him Destruction has destroyed:
And op'ned-wide Heavens narrow gate to those,
That in Christ's Death their hope of life repose.
No other Heaven, no other Help He has
To escape the Hell of Gods eternal wrath,
But to believe: and by his life disclose,
That for Him Christ did dye, and for Him rose.
In which Belief He lives; and living, dies;
And dying, lives; his life t'immortalize.
And in this Faith He Is confident to plead, His plea at the bar of Gods
Judgment

When He at Gods Tribunal shall hear read
The Bill of his Indictment for h's offense;
Not guilty Lord: thy dear Sons Innocence,
And his most perfect-perfect observation
Of all thy Laws; his upright conversation,
His bitter-bitter Passion on the tree:
O these! o these have paid Sins debt for me!
It Is true indeed, my Sins thy Wrath provoked,
Most dreadful Judge; and I with guilt stood yoked,
To feel the smart of horrid Death and Hell:
But such sweet gladsome news thy Truth does tell,
That in thy Son, since Wrath and Mercy kissed,
Wrath hitting Him, in Justice I am mist.
Which double Justice may be equal ranged,
'Cause Sin for Grace, and Grace for Sin we changed.
Thy Son my Lord was perfectly so pure,
As, had not I on Him my Sins fixed sure,
And clad my self with his bright-shining Grace,
Not Him, but Me, Death had had power to embrace.
Then stead of me, since Wrath seaz'd on thy Son,
He ther-by Death, I ther-by Life have won.
This is my rest: I rest upon my Lord:
Lord let me live according to thy Word.
The issue of his plea.
The Man in this strong confidence of his
In Life, in Death no whit deceived is:
For God on Him in Mercy does bestow
What he to him for his Christ's sake does owe.
First Life of Grace, with some false woes oppressed:
Next Life of Glory, with all true joys blessed.
Which woes are truly called false: for why?
They vanish straight like mists or cloudy Sky:
And then come-in (to make od reck'nings eav'n)
The Eternal, true, substantial joys of Heaven.
In the Interim whiles He is militant,
In honest labors He is conversant:
Using the things with sober moderation,
That God affords Him for his Preservation.
Abusing nothing; ord'ring all aright,
As always being in his Makers sight.
If God give much, He thanks the Giver much;
Or if but little, yet His Heart is such
As He Is content: for that his little serves
To let Him know it is more than He deserves.
Amongst whom He lives, He lives with wary eyes,
That He nor envy Rich, nor Poor despise.
And with his Equals He just equal waighes;
Nor up, nor down, for fear or favor swaies.
To all He Is friendly, humble, charitable,
Just, constant, cheerful, patient, peaceable.
And waits all turns when with heart, hands, and voice,
He may or work, or rest, sigh, or rejoice.
As turns and returns turn Him many ways,
So still He turns his heart to pray or praise
The great All-turning God: who for Man's good
Turned Death to Life; hard Rocks into a flood.
"Whose Greatness is so good! Goodness so great!
"As Man's most worthy praise, when most complete
"Is all-unworthy, the all-worthy fame
"To blazon-out, of Gods most worthy Name.
Nathles to do his best Man stands resolved:
But wishes daily that He were dissolved;
That so He might send-forth some perfect strains
Of perfect glory amongst the glorious Trains,
That spend their nere-spent time in holy lays,
Chanting-aloud their Alleluiahs.
Till when amongst Saints on earth assembled thickly,
He cries to Heaven* o come Lord Jesus quickly!
Lord Jesus, come! the end of all I crave.
I crave the end of all, my Soul to save.
To save my Soul, Lord Jesus no time spend.
Spend though to 'gin that time, time cannot end.
FINIS.
Triumphans.
Eus, tumidus, tenuis; fulsi, cecidi, resilivi;
Dives, inops, ingens; sort, dolor, fide.
The Light and glory of the Lord is risen upon thee. Isai. 60. 1.

As Man, aspiring, penitent; I stood, I fell, I ris'; Most rich, most poor,
most eminent; In state, through woe, to Bliss.


