Eirenopolis: THE CITY OF PEACE.

Surueyed and commended to all Christians.

By THO. ADAMS.

LONDON, Printed by Aug. Matthewes for John Grismand, and are to be sold at
his Shop in Paul's Alley, at the Sign of the Gunne. 1622.

ERRATA.
PAge 7. for proposition, read pro portion. page 18. for imitates, read
intimates. page 19. for if read as.

To all that love PEACE and TRVTH.
PEACE, take it with all faults, is better then War: and the end of a just
war, is but Studium Pacis, the intention of a right peace. The Subject then
is beyond exception, to all that love Peace. But commonly they, with whom it
meddles, refuse to meddle with it. Let such take the course of their unhappy
precipice into everlasting unquietness, who wilfully reject the cure of their
affected malady: denying their consciences a trouble that may save them, for
fear of loosing a trouble that ^o^h please them. As if a man were less then
mad, that will leap into the fire, o avoid the smoke. There is Pax fundamenti,
the peace of Doctrine: and Pax Ordinis, the peace of Discipline. The Heretic
would pull down the first Pillar, the Schismaticke the other: The former would
break our peace with Christ; the latter with our selves and the Church: both
these are almost desperate. But there is a third, Pax Politica, a civil Peace:
and the common disturbers of this are such contentious spirits; that either
unprovoked, out of mischievous intention: or being provoked, out of malicious
revenge; set all in uproar, make a mutiny in manners, an ataxie in the course
of life. To cure this Babel, if at least she will be cured, is the scope of
this Tractate. Peace was Christ's blessed Legacy to his Church; and we are the
Ministers whom he has chosen to see it paid. Executours are often sued for
the bequests given by dead Testators: Lo here a Legacy without suing from a
living Father. Embrace it, and be regulated by it: so shall your hearts find
present comfort, and your souls eternal life in it.

The hearty desirer of your Peace. TH. ADAMS.

THE CITY OF PEACE.
PEACE is the Daughter of Righteousness, and the moher of knowledge, the nurse
of Arts, and the improuement of all blessings. It is delectable to all that
taste it, profitable to the^ that practice it; to the^ that look upon it,
amiable; to them that enjoy it, a benefit inualuable. The building of
Christianity knows no other materials: if we look upon the Church it self,
Ephesians. 4. 4
There is one body: if upon the very soul of it, There is one Spirit: if upon
the endowment of it, There is one Hope: if upon the head of it, There is one
Lord: if upon the life of it, There is one Faith: if upon the door of it,
There is one Baptism: if upon the Father of it, There is one God, and Father
of all.

Peace is a fair Virgin, every ones Love, The Picture of Peace.
the praise of all tongues, the object of all eyes, the wish of all hearts;
Pace^ ^te poscimus omnes. She has a smiling look, which never frowned with
the lest scowle of anger: snowy arms, soft as Down, and whiter then the
Swannes feathers; always open to pious embracements. Her milken hand carries
an Olive branch, the Symbol and Emblem of quietness. She has the face of a
glorious Angel, always looking toward righteousness, as the two Cherubins
looked one upon the other, and both unto the Mercy-Seate. Her Court is the
invincible Fort of integrity; so guarded by the diuiue providence; that
Drums, Trumpets, and thundering Canons, those loud Instruments of war, (I
mean Blasphemy, Contention, Violence) may affront her, but never affright her.
She has a bounteous hand, virtuall like the Garment of Christ; if a faithful
soul can come to touch it, to kiss it; all her vexations are fled, her
conscience is at rest. Her bowels are full of pity: she is always composing
salues for all the wounds of a broken heart, Sedition and tumult her very soul
hates: she tramples injuries and discords under her triumphant feet. She sits
in a Throne of Joy, and wears a Crown of Eternity: and to all those that open
the door of their heart to bid her welcome, she will open the door of Heaven
to bid them welcome, and repose their souls in everlasting Peace. The
requisitenesse and revvard of Peace.
In these continual Dogge-daies of ours, wherein love waxes cold, and strife
hot, we had need set our Instruments to the tune of Peace. This was the
blessed legacy which Christ bequeathed to his Church: the Apostle from his
Master sent it as a token to the Corinthians: and I from the Apostle commend it
as a Jewel to all Christians; 2. Cor. 13. 11
Live in Peace, and the God of Love and Peace shall be with you. Which
conclusion of the Epistle contains the blessing of the Apostle': a
Valediction, and a Benediction. They are in part Hortatory, in part
Consolatory: the virtue to which he persuades them, and the reward which he
promises them. There is a sweet symphony, and respondent proposition between
the Counsel and the Comfort; the Active Peace, and the Factiue Peace: for
seeking peace on Earth, we shall find peace in Heaven: for keeping the peace of
God, we shall be kept by the God of peace. The one is the regular Compass of
our life on Earth, the other is the glorious Crown of our life in Heaven.

That we may not cherish too weak an opinion of this duty, we must know,
that this Apostolical counsel is an Evangelical law; The form of a right
Law.
and binds us all to the peace. Live in Peace: there are in it all the
concurring qualities, that define a good law; as Lycurgus taught: Generalitas,
Bonitas, Possibilitas. It must be General, Good, Possible.

General, so that all be tied to the obedience of it. Else it were like
Anacharsis law, a cobweb to catch flies: or those tyranous ce^sures, which are
made to vex Doves, while they are indulgent to Buzzards.

It must be Good, for none are bound to the obedience of unjust things. If it
have an indifferent extent to good or bad, there is easily found some color of
evasion.

It must be Possible; for if things be imposed vltra posse, and so men be made
liable to the mulct, when they are not culpable of the guilt; they may object
that Naturae dictamen. Nemo tenetur ad impossible: none are to be tied to the
obedience of impossible things. Such are Tyrants Laws; not vincula, sed retia:
not limits to confine, but netts to ensnare: not Pales, but Toiles.

But the Law of Peace is General, the equity of Peace
none can plead immunitie. Good, none tax it of iniquity. Possible, none can
say, it is beyond their ability. But it may be objected. If you require it
General, it is not Possible: for we cannot have peace with all men. If it
were Possible, yet is it not lawful and good; for we may not have peace with
all men. To direct us in this, the Apostle inserts two cautions. If it be
possible, To. 12. 18 (...), and (...)
as much as lies in you; live peaceably with all men. For there are some cases
in which (...), it is not possible. ^ Cor. 6, 15
What communion has light with darkness! and what concord has Christ with
Belial! We must have no peace with it, if there be no grace in it. Psalm 1
Blessed is he that walks not in the counsel of the ungodly, etc. Forbear
not only to sit in the Chair of pestilence with them, which is Sin reigning:
Peccatum dominans, Peccatum delectans, peccatum ^n^^ans.
but even to stand and discourse with them, which is Sin delighting: yea even
to walk a turn with them, which is Sin entering: teaching us to shun the
very acquaintance of their counsels.

But wicked men cannot be avoided; The terms of Peace distinguished.
and so long as we are in this world, we must con uerse with men of the
world. To answer this, we must distinguish between offenders, and offenses: we
may have no peace with the one, true peace with the other. There are two names,
August.
Homo and Peccator: a Man, and a Sinner. Quod Peccator est, corripe: quod Homo,
miserere. As he is a Sinner, reform him: as he is a man, the Image of God,
pity him. Does thy Brother sin of ignorance? Dilige errantem, interfice
errorem: kill the error, preserve thy brother. Does he offend of frailty? Be
at peace (cum hominibus, non cummoribus) with the man, not with the manners.
Trespasseth he of malice? Hate ( vitium, not virum) the disease, not the
patient. Howsoever these infirmities are inevitable, still we may have Peace,
Cum malis, licet non in malis: with evil men, though not in evil matters.

Indeed let him that has anthority, correct malicious offenses: for that is
not like a rauisher to abuse, but like a Cha^pion to vindicate the honor of
peace. Yet still Cum corrigat malitiam, diligat personam; let him correct the
transgression, love the person.

But how shall we answer that of the Psalmist? Psalm. 59. 5.
Be not merciful to them that sin of malicious wickedness. This was not
Precantis votum, sed Prophetantis vaticinium: not the request of a Petitioner,
but the prediction of a Prophecier. He did not wish it should be so, but saw
it would be so.

But if all this be true, we may then admit peace with Rome? We do accept a
Civil, not a Religious peace. In a treatise of pacification, both parties must
yield somewhat: but nothing is to be yielded that may prejudice the Truth. In a
Musical Instrument the strings that be out of tune, are set up, or set down
to the rest: the strings that be in tune, are not stirred. Our Doctrine and
Profession are tuned to the blessed Gospel, that infallible Canon of Truth,
and therefore must not be changed. Their Faith and Religion iarreth and erreth
from that; therefore must be proportioned to ours, if they will endenour a
perfect Harmony.

Thus far, The life of Peace.
and upon these terms we may have peace, if we seek it: we may live in
peace, and peace may live in us, if we desire it. Therefore still (...) Live in
peace. Calvin renders it, Pacem agite, Do peace. Or, as if God should say to
men, whom he found quarrelling, or too loud; Peace. The word is emphaticall,
and imitates a continual habit: we may call it, The Exercise of peace, or the
Practice of peace.

Some have a good mind to peace, The neglect.
but they will be at no labor about it: many are content to embrace it, but
they are ashamed to seek it: most men love it, few practice it. The use
commends the virtue: the beauty and praise of peace consists not in motion,
but in action: nor is the benefit of it in a knowing discourse, but in a
feeling sense. A Speculatiue peace, is like an Historical knowledge: such as
he that has bin always confined to his study, may have of foreign countries:
so we make a conquest of peace, as the byword says, our Fathers won
Boloigne; who never came within the report of the Canon. Or if the Grecians
kept Philosophy in their leaves, but kept it not in their lives. A ieiune and
empty speculation, like some subtle air in the head, only breaks out into
crochets: it is experience that brings the sweetness of peace home to the
heart. Use breeds perfectness, and disuse loses the most serviceable things.
Gold loses more of the weight by rusting in corners, then by continual
running in commerces, the proper end it was coined for. The best land will
yield small increase, if it be not tilled: though some have the most profitable
trades, the want of industry has made them the poorest men. The throne of
peace is in the heart, not in the head.

To recover, The Method.
therefore the swouning life of this virtue, I will compare Peace to a City:
if you will, to this City: which should be like Jerusalem, A City of Peace.
And so much we will pray for it; that it may preserve peace, and peace may
preserve it, to the worlds end.

Let the walls of this City be Unity and Concord. Let her have four Gates;
Innocence, and Patience; Benefaction, and Satisfaction. The first gate of peace
is Innocence; she must do no wrong. The second is Patience; she must suffer
wrong. The third is Beneficence; she must do good in stead of wrong. The
fourth is Recompense; she must make liberal and just satisfaction for any
committed wrong. There is also a Posterne Gate, and that is Humility. A gate
indeed, but a small and low one; whosoever enters the City of peace that way,
must stoop before he get in. The enemies of this City are many; divided into
two bands; Hostility and Mutiny The Governor of it, is Magistracy: the Law,
Religion: the Palace, the Temple: the life of the Citizens is Love. It is
served by the River of Prosperity; the State of it, is Felicity: the
Inheritance, eternal Glory.

The Walls of Peace.
Are Unity and Concord. Omnis Societas est corpus politicum: and it is in a
City, as in a Body: there are many members, one body: many Citizens, one
City. The Body is a figure of Unity.
The Body is one of the most lively figures and examples of peace. We are all
one Body: 1 Cor. 12
not only one Kingdom; so disparitie in Religions make many differences. Nor
only one City, Inter dites erunt lites; so disparitie of estates will breed
quarrels. Nor only one House, so we may have enemies of our own household. But
one Body, here must be al love and peace. Where all are tied by bonds, joints,
and ligaments to the head; there also by the fame Nerves one to another.

Some members are single; as the tongue is one, to speak one truth: Mutual
Love.
the heart one, to entertain one God. Other are Gemina, Germana; their forces
are doubled to supply mutual defects. Some are stronger, as the arms and
legs; for the supportation of the weaker. Thus qualified are all the faithful
citizens of Peace; preserving an unanimity in affection, a sympathy in
affliction, a ready help to the most needful condition. Comforting the minds
of those that are perplexed, supplying the wants of those that are distressed,
rectifying the weakness of those that are unsettled, informing the ignorance of
those that are seduced, and reforming the errors of those that are perverted:
all endeavoring the deliverance of the oppressed.

The members provide one for another: Providence of parts for the whole*
the eye sees not only for it self, but for the Body: the hand works not only
for it self, but for the Body: the ear hearkens, the tongue talks, the foot
walks, all parts exercise their functions for the good of the whole. In the
City of peace men must not only seek their own, but the glory of their Maker,
and the good of their Society. That God who has given us honor by our
Ancestors, would also have us add honor to our Successors. To prefer a
private good before a public; is to famish* and starve the whole Body, to fatt
a toe, or pleafe a finger. Such Monopolies and Patents, as impouerish the
whole, to enrich a part are not tolerable in the City of Peace.

There is no envy and grudging among the members: Discontents removed.
the eye does not grieve to see the arm grow strong, nor the foot to be
sensible of the Stomachs health. In this City, one should not envy another
thriuing; as if all were taken from our selves that is given to our neighbors.
The Lord sees that an inequality is best for his glory: distributing (to
whomsoever lest, yet) to every one more then he deserves. Shall the Ear say,
^ Cor. 12. 16.
Because I am not the Eye, I am not of the Body? No, but as John Baptist said
of Christ* He comes after me, yet is before me: Some come after us in wealth,
that may go before us in grace. The poor man is not so many pounds behind
the rich for this world, as he may be talents before him for the world to come.
They often with their poverty, misery, ignominy, are saved; whiles others
with all their honor and opulencie go to hell.

If one member suffer, Condolency of the members.
the rest suffer with it. If there be a thorn in the foot, the eye shedds a
tear, the heart aches, the head grieves, the hand is ready to pull it out. If a
man tread on our toe, we say, Why do you tread on Me? Quod cuiquam, cuivis:
let us sorrow for the afflictions of others, as if we were in the body. He is
no son of Peace, that forgets the breaking of his brother Joseph. Amo. 6. 6.


The Walls of the City must be whole, Schism dangerous.
no breaches in them, least this advantage the enemies entrance. There must be
no schism in a City, as no division in the Body: one must not be for Paul,
another for Apollos, another for Cephas; but all for Christ; and all for Peace.
Many evil men may have one will in wickedness. It is said of Pilate Tradidit
Iesum volun^a ti^earum; Luk 23. 25
He delivered Jesus to their Will; not wills: many sinners, one will. Shall
then the Sons of grace jar? The Children of Peace be mutinous? Vnica
columba mea, says Christ: My Dove is but one; the Dove is a Bird of peace.
Many of them can agree lovingly together in one house: every one has a little
cottage by her self, wherein she sits content without disquieting her
neighbors. Thus Dum singulae quaerunt vnionem, omnes conseruant vnitatem. We
have them that rush into others Tabernacles, swallowing a man and his heritage:
would Doves do thus? Poor Nabaoths portion is many a rich Ahabs eyesore;
would Doves do thus? Numbers are still on the wing, to prey upon prostrate
fortunes; these be Ravens, not Doves: If the Law cannot make work for their
malice, their malice shall make work for the law. This is like Cocks of the
Game, to pecke out one another eyes, to make the Lawyers sport. When two
friends are fallen out of loves into blows, and are fighting; a third adversary
has a fair advantage to kill them both. We have an enemy that watches his
time, and while we wound one another, he wounds us all.

If the members be pulled a sunder, Distraction mortal.
they all rott: the distraction of parts is the dissolution of the whole. If we
forsake the peace of our Mother, we put our selves upon record for bastards
Disconte^t with our own portions and places, overthrows the City of Peace. 2
Esdr. 4. 1.
When the Woods and the Floods were at variance, the Sand and the Fire were
fain^ to quiet their insurrections. While men will not rest satisfied with
their own determinate stations; but invade the seueralls and proprieties of
others; what can be expected but destruction? If there be Contention on this
side, and Ambition on that side, there will be confusion on all sides. While
Judah was hot against Israel, and Israel hott against Judah, the King of Syria
smote them both. God shall supply the part of Syria; and when brother is
against brother, he will be against them all. He that does not what he can to
mainetaine the walls does what he can to betray the City. So I come from the
Walls to the Gates.

The first Gate
Is Innocence; The first Foundation of Peace.
and this may be called Bishopsgate; the Ministers of the Gospel being both
the Preachers and Precedents of Innocence. If men would abstain from doing
wrong* the Peace could not be broken. St. Bernard writes of the Dove, that
Fell caret, she has no Gall: Let us be such Doves to purge our hearts from
all bitterness.

Now the first shelfe that wracks Innocence, is Anger. It were rare if the
wrath of man should fulfill the righteousness of God: The angry man cannot be
Innocent.
even a cursed anger breaks the Peace. It is an evidence whereby God will judge
men guilty: now there is no malefactor going to the bar for his try all,
would willingly have that evidence found about him, that should cast him.
Iratus non videt legem, sed Lex videt iratum. The wrathful man takes no notice
of the Law, but the Law takes notice of the wrathful man. Let us take heed
lest we carry our anger with us unto God. That which offends our eyes, we
remove either our sight from it, or it from our sight* but that which offends
our souls, we too often lay next our heart. But, it is the voice of
transportiue fury, I cannot moderate my anger. Cannot? Wherefore serves grace,
but to mortify such natural, yea rather unnatural passions?

How easily does this rage often inueter at; making some so angry with men,
that they will searse be pleased with God himself! And either he must take
the^ with their anger, or let them alone. So soon it rankles into malice, and
that is full opposite to Innocence.

What shall a man do? In this sudden fit shall he come to the Lords Table, or
forbear it? Si non accesserit, periculum: Si accesserit, damnum. To refuse the
Sacrament in anger, is evil: to receive it in anger, that's worse. Is the Body
and Blood of Christ no more worth, but that for love of a peevish humor we
should neglect it? Shall we starve our consciences, to feed our misbegotten
passions? What is then to be done in this straight? The answer is easy: Let us
excommunicate our wrath, that we may communicate with the Church: leave our
lusts behind us, and we are welcome; Genesis 22. 5
as Abraham left his Ass when he went about his Sacrifice. In the Leuiticall
Law no unclean thing might be touched: if it were touched, the Temple by that
person must not be approached. Now for the Israelite to absent himself from the
assembly of Saints, and service of God, was ponderous: to come so polluted, was
dangerous. He knew the remedy; either not to be unclean at all, or soon to
get himself cleansed. The first best is to harbor no malice; the next to
deliver our selves from it with all possible speed.

In a word, let us turn our anger when it comes, another way. Let all our hate
be the hate of sin; and all our anger bent against our own corruptions. Let
our wrath, like the Shepherds dog, sleep till the Wolf comes. Be we at
peace with God by repentance, with our neighbor by innocence, with our own
heart by a purified and pacified conscience; and the Prince of peace, the Lord
Jesus shall embrace us.

The second Gate
Is Patience; The second Foundation of Peace.
which is not unlike to Ludgate: for that is a School of patience; the poor
souls there learn to suffer. The first entrance of peace is to do no injury,
the next is to suffer injury. It is one special commendation of Charity, that
it Suffers all things; Pro fratribus, a fratribus, propter fratres. For our
brethren we must sustain some loss: he that suffers not an abatement of his
own fullness, to supply their emptiness, is no brother. Of our brethren we
must put up some wrong, rather then make a slaw in the smooth passage of peace.
Because of our brethren, and for the Elects sake, 2 Timothy 2. 18
we must endure all things, that they may obtain Salvation. Let us be
infirmed, to have them confirmed: brooking a temporal loss, to procure their
eternal good.

According to the Apostles counsel, Let us bear the burden one of another,
Gal. 62.
and God shall bear the burden of us all. As in the Arch of a building, one
stone bears mutually, though not equally, the weight of the rest. Or as Dear
swimming over a great water, do ease themselves in laying their heads, one
upon the back of another: the foremost having none to support him, changes his
place, and rests his head upon the hindmost. Bear thou with his curiousnes,
he does bear with thy furiousnes: let me bear with his arrogance, he does
bear with my ignorance. In Architecture, all stones are not fit to be laid in
every part of the building: but some below, as the fundamental, and chief
cornerstone to sustain the load of the rest: some higher in the wall, other in
the top for ornament. In the Church, which is built of Living Stones, Christ is
the Head of the corner, the Foundation that supports all. Gracious Saints have
the next places, and are so set that they may help to bear up the weaker.

Materials that be only of a hard nature, will never fadge well in an
Edifice. The Italians have a Proverb; Hard without soft, the wall is naught.
Stones cobbled up together, without mortar to combine them, make but a
tottering wall. But if there be mortar to ciment them, and with the tractable
softness of the one to glue and fix the solid ha^dnesse of the other; this
may fortify it against the shocke of the Ram, or shot of the Canon. The
society that consists of nothing but stones, intractable and refractory
spirits, one as froward and perverse as an other, soon dissolues. But when one
is reaking with the fire of rage, and another shall bring the water of patience
to cool and quench it; here is a duration of peace. When iron meets iron,
there is a harsh and stubborn jar: let wool meet that rougher metal, and
this yielding turns resistance into embracements.

Let not then the voice be an echo of ill words, nor the hand a Racket to
bandy back fire-bals. Patience makes even the wicked confess; Thou art more
righteous then I. Infoelix victoria qua hominem superamus, 1. Sam. 24.
vitio succu^bi. 18. Bern.
It is a wretched victory that ouercomes our souls, and slaves us to our
lusts. Patientia mea a Domino, Psalm. 62. 5.
as the Fathers read it: and indeed who can give this patience, but God? Paul
had many lives, yet he sacrificed them all; Cor. 15.
I die daily. Etsi non mortis experientia, 31. Chrysostom.
tamen proposito. Though he could loose but one, yet in regard of his patience
and purpose, he was ready to loose them all.

Nor is Christian patience thus confined within the bearing of injuries; but it
extends also to the remitting of them. Some can suffer for the present, as
Haman before Mordecay, Animo vindicandi. Forgiveness is the demonstration of
patience. Not to contest because we cannot conquer, is called Patience
perforce: but can we remit? The civil man can forbear, the Christian must
forgive. Let us be remiss to note a wrong, remissiue to forget it, writing
all our injuries in the dust. Yea, let humility sweetly order our forgiveness:
Sen.
for Grauissima poena est contumeliosa venia: a proud and scornful pardon, is
a reproachful wrong; there is in it more bitterness then mercy; more
punishment then reconcilement.

Otherwise how can we pray, Forgive us our trespasses, As we forgive them that
trespass against us? O but say some, God is merciful: what, shall we
therefore be unmerciful? I may forgive, but I cannot forget; is the faint
reservation of another. Take we heed, let not us be in jest with God, least he
be in earnest with us. Do we not otherwise beg a remouall of mercy and pardon
from our own souls? Will not God say, Evil servant, Ex ore tuo, out of thy
own mouth will I judge thee? Has Christ with his own blood made thee friends
with God, and cannot that blood entreat thee to be friends with thy brother,
Mat. ^* 24.
when thou come to the holy Altar with thy gift, and remembrest thy offended
brother: Leave there thy gift* first be reconciled to him, then offer to God. A
gift does pacify wrath, and God is pleased with our Sacrifice upon his Altar:
yet Cum omnis culpa munere soluatur, Aug.
sola iniuria incondonata reijcitur: when every fault is solued with a gift,
Injury alone is sent away without pardon.

Therefore Qualem vis erga te esse Deum, Isodo^.
talem te exhibeas erga proximum: be thou to thy brother on earth, as thou
would have thy Father in heaven be to thee. Si laedens, pete veniam: st
laesus, da veniam. If an iniurer, ask pardon: if a sufferer, give pardon. Be
we so far from expecting his submission, that we tender our^^emission; and
meet the trespasser with a pardon before he ask it. Sen.
Dissensio ab alijs, a te reconciliatio incipiat. Let strife begin from others,
be thou first in reconcilement. Christ healed Malchus his ear, that came to
arrest him. Which amongst us so loves his benefactors, as Paul loved his
malefactors? He would do any thing to save them, that would do any thing to
kill him. Others offenses to us are but small; valued with ours against God who
is infinite. If he forgive the pounds, let not us stick at the farthing tokens.

The next Gate
Is Beneficence; Doing good, The third foundation of Peace.
is the fortification of peace. This may be called Ald-gate; not only because
there is the picture of Charity: (at the gate: I do not say, as near going
out; but at the gate, to keep goodness in.) But because that is called the
Old-gate, and Charity was a virtue of old times, not so much now in fashion.
The heathen Moralist said, we must use men thus; Benevelle omnibus, benefacere
amicis; wish well to all, and do good only to our friends. But the clear
light of nature, which is the Gospel, charge us while we have opportunity,
Gal. 6. 10.
to do good to all men; albeit with some preferment of the best, especially to
the household of Faith.

All men may be ranked under one of these combinations: Rich and poor,
home-borne and strangers, friends and enemies. First for the rich and poor;
the Pharisee will stand on good terms with the rich, inuit them for a
re-inuitation as men at Tennisse, toss the ball to another, that he may toss
it to them again: but who helps the poor? Pro. 19. 4.
Wealth makes many friends, but the poor is separated from his neighbors. If
he do well, he is not regarded: if ill, he is destroyed. The poor man by
his wisdom delivered the city from the force of a puissant enemy; yet when
all was done, Eccl. 9. 15.
no man remembered that poor man. But if he stumble, Ecclus. 13. 23.
they will help to overthrow him. How contemptibly does a rich epicure look
upon a poor beggar! yet the rich and the poor meet together, Prou. 22. 2
and the Lord is the maker of them all. In all our graund Feasts, the guestes
that Christ spoke for, Luke 14. 14.
are left out.

For Domestickes and strangers; many have so much religion as to provide for
their own; yea so much irreligion as to do it with the prejudice of the
public good, and hazard of their own souls: but who prouides for strangers?
Heb. 13. 2.
Entertain strangers, for thereby some have entertained Angels unawares: but
for all this possible happiness, few will put it to the venture: and were they
indeed Angels without angels in their purses to pay for it, they should find
cold entertainment.

Friends and enemies; for friends, many will be at peace with them, till they
be put to the trial by some expressiue action. And then they will rather
hazard the loss of a friend, then the lest loss by a friend. But suppose we
answer our friends in some slight courtesy, hoping for a greater: who will
do good to his enemies? If thine enemy hunger, To. 12. 20.
feed him* so thou shall heap soales of fire on his head. Do it, not with an
intent to make his reckoning more, but thy own reckoning less. Love your
enemies, Mat. 5. 44.
bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them
that despitefully use you. Do unto them deeds of amity, deeds of charity,
deeds of piety. Of amity, Love them that hate you: of Charity, Do good to
them that hurt you: of Piety, Pray for the^ that persecute you. There is the
Diligite of the Heart, Love your enemies. The Benedicite of the Tongu, Bless
them that curse you. The Benefacite of the Hand, Do good to them that hate
you. The Beneuelle of all, Pray for the^ that persecute you. Love your enemies,
there is Affectus cordis: Do them good, there is Effectus operis: Pray for
them, there is Perfectio charitatis. But the wiseman counsels; Eccl. 12. 5. 7.
Do well to him that is lowly, but give not to the ungodly. And Give unto the
good, not to the sinner. Though not Qua impius, and quia impiu^; yet qua homo;
and quia homo, we must relieve him. Cherish himself, not his sin. We must
love him, non quoad culpam, sed quoad naturam. They are Gods children, licet
insani, although they be sick; and our brethren, licet infirmi, although they
be weak. Therefore for the conformity of nature, because we are the same
workmanship: for our own benefit, for he that does good to his enemy, even
in that does better to himself: and for the imitation of Him we worship, let
us uphold Peace by Charity. His Sun rises, and rain falls, both on the just
and unjust. Noli negare, Mat. 5, 45.
quod Deus nulli negat. Thus looking up with piety to the Lords perfection,
and down with pity upon man's imperfection, let us do good to all.

Through the gate of Beneficence, does the charitable man enter into the City
of Peace. He that is covetous, must needs be mutinous. He that is greedy of
gain, Pro. 15. 27.
troubles his own house Solomon calls him a trouble-house, and we do find
him a trouble-citie; as Demetrius did all Ephesus. But Charity makes peace;
Diuitem voluit Deus vt pauperem adiuvaret, Pauperem voluit vt diuitem probaret.
God makes some rich, to help the poor: and suffers some poor, to try the
rich. The laden would be glad of ease: now charity lighteneth the rich man
of his superfluous and unwieldy carriage. When the poor find mercy, they will be
tractable: when the rich find quiet, they should be charitable. Would you have
your goods kept in Peace? First, lock them up by your prayers, then open them
again with your thankful use, and trust them in the hands of Christ by your
Charity.

This City hears ill for oppression, and is (I fear too justly) suspected of
Injustice: now the most noble confutation of jealousy, is by deeds of
charity. This is the Eastgate to the City of Peace, and I may (from Saint
Paul) call it the principal, and most excllent way. 1. Cor. 12. 31.
Whosoever can show you the way better, yet certainly none can show you a
better way.

The fourth Gate
Is Recompense, or Satisfaction; and this we may liken to Creeple-gate. It is
the lamest way to peace, yet a way: it is a halting gate, but a gate. It were
far better coming into this City by any of the former gates, yet better at
this then none. All come not in by Innocence, nor all by Patience, nor all by
Beneficence: but if they have failed in these, they must be admitted by
recompense, or not at all. The first best is to do no injury; the next is
Satisfaction, to make amends for that we have done. Hortensins said of his
mother, Ego nunquam cum ea inivi gratiam, I never was reconciled to her,
because we two never fell out. O that the Inhabitants of this city could say
so of their neighbors; We never were made friends, because we never were
foes. Non operter Officii, sed potius officiendi.
But as our Savior says, It is necessary that offenses do come: not that it
should be so, but that it will be so. There is no necessity that compels a man
to sin; except that the heart being evil, will give offense. As it is
necessary for him that comes to the fire, to be made hot: Hieron.
but there is no necessity that he come unto the fire.

The malady of offenses, will be contracted, therefore the only Cure is by
Satisfaction. That we may know how to do this, the Scripture sets down
diverse degrees in the accomplishment of this Satisfaction for injuries. First,
he must go to the party wronged. Secondly, He must confess his fault.
Thirdly, He must humble himself. Fourthly, He must make restitution. Fifthly,
He must reconcile himself. Sixthly, and this must be done quickly, with all
possible speed.

He must go to him, not tarry till he meet him, or till some occasion bring
them together; Mat. 5. 24.
not Obuiamda; But Go to thine adversary, go on purpose: enquire for him,
seek him out, rest not till thou find him.

Humanity may work some to this undertaking, and ouertaking of peace: but man
is naturally so good a constructor of his own doings, that will he confess
his fault? Number. 5. 7.
Yes, He shall confess his trespass.

An ingenious nature may be brought to acknowledge his fault: but will Pride,
the contention-maker, admit Humility? will he stoop to him he has abused?
From insultation will he descend to submission? He must; Go and humble thy
self. Prou. 6. 3.


Touch of conscience may procure Humility; but yet wll he not spend twice as
much at Law, ere he make restitution? Yet even here, a quiet man for his own
peace sake may be brought to give somewhat, for a part of amends: but will he
satisfy him the whole? The law of nature requires total satisfaction, but will
he besides give damages? The law of the Land allows damages; but now will
he give any overplus to make an atonement? or be at so much coast as to buy
a reconcilement, rather then miss it? He must: Zacheus restores fourefold; and
by the Law he is bound to add a fifth part. Number. 5. 7.


But if all this be done, will he yet ever be friends with him? will he be
truly reconciled? He must: Mat. 5. 24.
Reconcile thy self to thy brother. Otherwise, when he desires of the Lord to
be forgiven, as he forgiueth; God will answer as Joseph did to his brethren;
Genesis 43. 3.
Look me not in the face, unless thy brother be with thee. Shall the father
think well of that son, which rejects his brother? Do we call the Author
of Peace, our God, while we are the children of dissension? Will he ever agree
with him, that delights to quarrel with his? But suppose the iniurer does
entreat and persuade himself, without pr^uailing, will he use his friends
about such a business? Yes, says Seolomon, he must employ his friends.

Time may work all this, but to do it when the flesh trembles, and the blood
boyles for revenge, suddenly; who can so prevail over him self? He must do
it quickly; Mat 5. 25.
Agree with thine adversary quickly. Yes perhaps, when leisure may serve: but
will any man neglect business to go about it? Yes, all business set apart,
though it were as important as offering sacrifice at Gods own Altar; Leave
there thy gift, Pelican.
etc. Non experieris Deum tibi propitium, nisi proximus te sentiat sibi
placatum. Strife with our brother makes our best services unacceptable to our
Father. The Lord despises his own worship, to maintain our charity: and will
not be found of us, Chysost.
till we have found our brother, to make our peace with him. Come not to the
Temples, hear no Sermons, say not your prayers, forbear all worship and
devotions, while a festring and rankling hatred is in your souls.

Yet now all this may be done of an Inferior to a Superior, either for fear
or hope of gain by his love: but would you have a Superior yield thus to an
Inferior, to deprecate strife? Yes, Abraham disdained not to go unto Lot, the
elder to the younger, the uncle to the nephew, the worthier to the meaner, and
that in the kindest manner, to compose a controversy begun by their servants.
O that this age, which seldom wakes but to do mischief, would yet think, how
after all injuries to others, they do this greatest injury to their own
souls; that for want of a just compensation, they exclude themselves from the
blessing of Peace!

These be the maine Gates, there is a little Posterne besides, that is
Humility: for of all vices, Humility the conservation of Peace.
Pride is a stranger to Peace. The proud man is too guilty, to come in by
Innocence: too surly, to come in by Patience: he has no mind to come in by
Benefaction: and he scorns to come in by Satisfaction. All these Portcullises
be shut against him: there is no way left but the Postern for him, he must
stoop, or never be admitted to peace. Pride is always envious and
contumelious, thinking she adds so much to her own reputation, as she
detracts from others: she is no fit neighbor for Peace.

Heaven is a high City, yet has but a low Gate. Aug.
Celsa patria, via humilis. Toll super biam, quod habes meum est* toll
inuidiam, quod habe^ tuum est. Take away pride, and that which thou have is
mine: take away envy, and that which I have is thine. Pride and envy are too
uncivil for a peaceable city: the one cannot endure a vicine prosperity, nor
the other a superior eminency. All men must be poor to please the one, and
all must be base to content the other. Peace is humble, pride quite ouer-lookes
her. The Philosopher might have seen the stars in the water, he could not
see the water in the stars, when he stumbled into the ditch. Men may behold
glory in humility, they shall never find peace in ambition. The safest way to
keep fire, is to take it up in embers: the best means to preserve peace, is in
humbleness. The tall Cedars feel the fury of tempests; which blow over the
humble shrubs in the low valleys. There was no rule with Paul at first; raising
tumults, speeding Commissions, breathing out slaughters against poor
Christians. But when Christ had thundered him from his horse, broken his wild
spirit to humility, the^ he was fit for peace. God, that often effectuates his
own will by contraries, makes trouble the preparation for peace: as a father
corrects his unruly children that they may be quiet. Let us examine our own
experience: when the Lord has soundly scourged us, we go from under his
fingers as tame as lambs: farewell strife, all our care is to find rest and
peace in Jesus Christ.

We have seen the City of Peace, with her walls and gates, and we wish
well to her; Peace be within thy walls, Psalm. 122. 7.
and prosperity within thy palaces. But has she no aduersaties? Yes, there is
an enemic that beleaguers this City; Contention. Whose army is divided into
two Bands or Troops; The Enemies of Peace.
the one called the Civil, the other the Uncivil: the Civil are
Law-quarrels, the uncivil are Sword-quarrels. The one is the smooth-faced
company, the other the rugged or ragged Regiment. The city of peace has gates
for these also, when she has subdued them. Either she turns them out at
Moore-gate, as fitter for the society of Moors and Pagans; she banisheth
them. Or lays them up in Newgate; a place very convenient, being not so old
as peace, built since the birth of strife. These enemies pursue us, vel ferro,
vel foro, Aug.
as that Father says.

Ferro, The first Troop.
when upon every punctilio of honor, as they falsely call it, Reason and
Religion must be thrown by, and Fury govern. The Gallant, as if he knew no
Law but his own will, or as if the least aspertion upon his honor were more
weighty, then if the state of Christen dome, or the glory of God lay upon it;
cries Revenge, offers the stab, threatens the pistol. How is that precious
account forgotten which God requires of man and beast! Genesis 9. 5.
Men study to be mad with reason, they have an Art of killing, that teaches
murder by the book: as cunning as Ioab was, that could stabbe in the fifth
rib, ^ Sam. 3. 27. and 20. 10.
a speeding place: so he treacherously slew Abner and Amasa. O that men should
venture their lives upon one another sword, as if they had no souls to be
ventured upon the sword of Gods vengeance! That he should be held base, who
being challenged, does not write his mind with a pen of steel, in the ink of
blood, on the white paper of man's life!

Cannot the tears of our Mother preuail with us, when seeing us quarrel, she
says as Iocasta advised her two unbrotherly sons; Bella geri placuit nullos
habitura triumphos. Or as Rebecca said of her twins; Genesis 27. 45.
Why should I be deprived of you both in one day? But if our Mother cannot
still us, our Father will part us: and they whose souls have peace, shall be
sent to a prison where is no peace: that seeing they love quarrels, they may
have fighting enough with infernal spirits. But perhaps there be some who
make no other reckoning, resolving with him in the Orator, Hodie coenabimus
apud Inferos: to night we will sup together in hell. As it is reported of two
to have fought under the gallows: desperately fore-casting, that if the one
were there killed, the other should there be hanged.

By the toleration of this Duel in France, that kingdom lost in ten years
six thousand Gentlemen; as themselves report. Wretched men! for Occiser
lethaliter peccat, Bern.
and occisus aeternaliter perit: the homicide sins deadly, and the slain
(without vnexpectable mercy) perishes eternally. How dare they lift up those
hands to God for mercy, that have been lifted up against their brother in
cruelty? Every base vermin can kill, Aug.
it is true prowess and honor to give life, and preserve it Simeon and Leui
seemed to have just cause; Genesis 34. 31
the Whoring of their own Sister: Genesis 49. 6.
yet their father calls them brethren in evil for it, blesses his honor from
their company, and his soul from their secrecy. Thou say of thy contendent,
he shall have as good as he brings, yet thy self condemnest that he brings for
evil. Basil.
Ne vtaris inimico praeceptore, let not thy enemy teach thee to due that,
which thy self detestest in him. Because we receive injuries without right,
shall we return them without law?

Sometimes this arises from the wine, Bacchus ad arma vocat: and lightly it
makes men aptest to use their arms, when they cannot stand on their legs.
But shall this serve for a plea, and get a pardon, it was done in drink? no,
this rather deserves a double punishment, as it is a double fault. Commonly it
proceeds from unadvised anger; as if any thing done in fury, were not done in
folly. The choleric man is like one that dwells in a thatched house; who being
rich in the morning, by a sudden fire is a beggar before night. It was the
decree of Theodosius, by the counsel of S. Ambrose; that execution after a
severe sentence should be deferred thirty days: that the heat being
qualified, the severity might be moderated.

But they object, This is to stand by like fools, while we suffer others to
abuse us: no, that is not folly, which the Lord has commended for wisdom. The
shot of the Cannon hurts not Wool, and such yielding things; but that which is
hard, stubborn, and resisting: the rage of our roaring sons is tamed by
patience. Turn to the brawling curre, and he will be more fierce: ride on
neglecting him, and he will soon be quiet. This is the furious Band.

Foro; The other Troop.
there is another Battalia of adversaries that turn their challenge into a
Writ; the field appointed is Westminster Hall, or some other Court of Justice:
the weapons, the Law: the postures of the fight are Demurres, Delays, Quirks,
Remoouals: the Victory, a Verdict: the Doom, a Sentence: and the death it
self, an Execution. One says, To bear this, is against my conscience: when
indeed he means it is against his concupisce^ce. If the Plaintiff go no
further then the Court of his own affections, the defendant shall never have
audience: for he is Amicus Curiae. Pro. 18. 17.
He that is first in his own cause, seems just: but his neighbor comes,
and searches him: he is no competent Judge in his own matter. It will bear
an action, says the Lawgiuer, this enflameth passion in the Law-goer.

O that men could see the folly of this litigiousnesse. 1. That he is not in
the state of grace, but a mere carnal man. This is Saint Paul's argument to the
Corinthians; If there be contentions amongst you, Are ye not carnal? 1. Cor.
3. 4.
whereas the Fruit of the Spirit is Peace, Gal. 5. 22.
Long-suffering, Gentleness. 2. That he does not so much find, as make
himself enemies: we may say of him as the Angel said to Hagar concerning her
son Ishmael; Genesis 16. 12
His hand is against every man, and every man's hand against him. 3. That he
vexes himself without need: they that go to Law for trifles, are like nice
people that continually lie in the hands of Chirurgians, and Phisicians, for
pimples and warts: whereas as the Physician and Lawyer are for necessity, not
wantonness. Their boxes and papers are the Books and Badges of their
profession: they trudge up and down, more busy to cast away their money, then
Lawyers are to catch it: their word is Currat Lex, let the law have his course:
but by their wills that course should never have an end.

They plead, we have stood before the best, in Courts of highest honor: alas,
so does the spider, Pro. 30. 28.
even in kings palaces. So did the Devil, when the Sons of God presented
themselus before him, Job. 2. 1.
Satan was there also. 4. They consider not the root of contentions, as the
Apostle describes them: want of Wisdom to compound controversies; Is there not
one wise man among you, 1 Cor. 6. 5. etc.
able to judge between brethren? Want of love, Brother is against brother.
Want of Patience; Why do ye not rather suffer wrong? Want of Justice; Ye
defraud and do wrong. For want of Justice, foro conscientiae, they prosecute
their malice, foro Iustitiae. We may add, want of Mercy, they cannot forgive:
but if they forgive not others, their final Quietus est was never yet sealed;
and they shall be called to an after-reckoning. As that wicked servant sped;
notwithstanding the Lord forgave him at his request, Mat. 18. 22
because he did not forgive his brother at his entreaty, he was delivered over
to the tormentors.

Fifthly, they weigh not how they are deceived. Lawyers first invented Laws to
secure our lands and titles: now they make those laws engines to get away our
lands and titles. Their frequent Session has not been evermore to preserve a
man's possession. And for those that can tarry the leisure of the Law, they
have quirks and delays: which are like the corrosiue plasters of an
vnconscinable Leach, that turns a small green wound to an incurable Fistula,
by poisoning and exulceration of it for filthy lucre. When a man must die
without mercy, it is some ease to die quickly, and be out of his pain. But
such, when they purpose to murder a man's estate, have tricks to keep him long
a dying: that he may still languish and pine away in hope of recovery.

And what does the winner get, that at the Terms end, he may brag of his
gains? Does he not come home dry-founderd? Does he not follow the Mill so
long, till the toll be more then the griest? It is a token of unwholesome air,
where the country is full of thriuing Physicians: Sivaleant homines, arstua,
Phaebe, iacet. It argues little health in that kingdom, which has so many
thriuing Lawyers: who while unquietness feeds us, do quietly feed upon us.

We are willing to give such self-molesters some counsel, if they will take it,
and ask them no fees for it. Yea we give it not, but Christ gives it: will
they take his advice, that great Counselor of the Father? He counsels his
clients to the everlasting possession of their souls by patience. In
Olympiacis certaminibus, Diabolo consecratis; ^hysoft.
In the games of Olympus consecrated to the Devil, he had the glory of the
day, that gave most wounds, and came off himself untouched. In stadio Christi
non est ea certa^di lex, sed contraria: In the race of Christianity, there is
a contrary Law of striving: not he that offers most blows, but he that
suffers most blows, is crowned. A man is stricken, will he go to law for
this? no, rather let him turn the other cheek; this is Christ's counsel. His
cloak is taken from him, it is near him a garment; of necessary comeliness, a
cloak: of singular use, he has but one cloak: he has the propriety of it,
it is his cloak: must he go to Law for this? no, rather let him take his coat
also. Foelix ille, si nudus corpore, sit nudus malicia: there is a wedding
garment to cloth such.

I am no Anabaptist, nor Libertine, to deny the Magistracy, or lawfulnes of
authority, and our just appeal thereto. Rather then every man should be his
own Judge, I would appease vprores with the Town-clerke of Ephesus; The Law is
open, Act. 19. 38.
and there are Deputies, let them implead one another. Saint Paul himself took
this course, appealing to the Judgment seat of Caesar. Act 25. 10.
Our Saviors practice is a clear Comment and declaration of his Law: he that
bade us rather turn out other check to the smiter, then revenge our selves;
did himself sweetly reprove him that smote him. John 18. 23
If I have spoken evil, bear witness of the evil: but if well, why smitest
thou me? So Paul to Ananias, Sit thou to judge me after the Law, Act. 23.
3.
and command me to be smitten contrary to the Law? The Lord himself has
appointed Tribunals: and no law, no love. I know there is a Christianly seeking
of Justice, when injurious persons grow worse by forbearance, and ground their
insolence upon others patience. As Christians may war in love, so they may
jar in love: when the party cast in the suit, may be bettered, if not in his
money, yet in his manners; and Satan only conquered. Vt qui vincitur, simul
vincat, and vnus tantummodo vincatur diabolus. Sed reprima^ me, I will hold me
where I was. I have labored to bring men into peace, I must show them no way
out again. The Fathers sometimes in confuting an Heresy much spread; if they
did run a little within the brinks of a contrary error, not then questioned,
nor so dangerous; were never censured for that to have erred Dogmatice. So if
to convince that Heresy in manners, (It is lawful to go to law for every
thing;) I should a little lean to and favor that other opinion, (It is lawful
to go to law for nothing;) either excuse me, or at least suspend your
judgments, till I come on purpose to handle that point. If men would promise
not to go to Law till then, I would promise, when they did go to Law, to
bear all their charges.

Howsoever, let them not do it animo litigandi, nor for every wrong enter an
action, lest God enter his action against them. Hos. 4. 1.
The Lord has a controversy with the Inhabitants of the land: a terrible
action, which the Jury of heaven and earth will find. Let them therefore leave
all, and study Gods Law, with that royal Prophet; Thy Testimonies are my
delight and my Counselors: Psalm. 119. 24. 48.
and I will meditate in thy Statutes. Blessed is he that meditates on Gods Law
day and night: Psalm. 1. 2.
but cursed is he that wastes his time to meditate and study Law-trickes. Let
the litigious soul learn a new course of law: let Conscience be his Chancery,
Charity his Chancellor, Patience his Counselor, Truth his Attorney, and Peace
his Solicitor. Litem in proximum, diuertat in seipsum. Let him go to Law with
his own heart; arraigne his passionat will at the Bar of Gods Judgment; let
the twelve Apostles be a Jury against him, who all condemned Contention. Thus
let him judge himself, that he be not judged of Jesus Christ. For he that
auengeth his own quarrel, steps into the Princes Chair of Estate, yea into
Gods own Seat; dethroning both; and so disturbes neauen and earth. Mad men,
that thus presume, as if God did not see malice in the heart! Pro ^5. 11
Hell and destruction are before the Lord, much more then the hearts of the
children of men. Or as if seeing men contend, he had nothing to do with it: but
must sit still like an idle looker on, and take part with neither.

Dearly beloved, Romans 12. 19.
avenge not your selves, but rather give place unto wrath: for it is written,
Vengeance is mine, I will repay, says the Lord. This sounds a Retreat to all
quarrels: Paul seeing the Daggers drawn, and the peace in danger to be
broken; steps in with the sword of the Spirit, to part the fray. It is a Writ
of Reuersment from the high Court of heaven: if we break open the writ, we
shall find the Kings pleasure in it; an Arrest of reuengers. He begins with
Dearly beloved; a sweet ingredience, to qualify a bitter medicine. As if he
should say, It is my love that I write so much against malice: not for your
hurt, but for your eternal good: if you will not believe me, believe God
himself: Deu. 32. 35
To me belongs vengeance.

The Devil when he gets audience, tells a man how much he is hated of others:
the holy Spirit tells him how much he is loved of others. The argument of our
charity to them, is Gods charity to us. Put on (as the elect of God, Col. 3. 12
holy and beloved) bowels of mercies, kindness, humblenes of mind, long
suffering: seeing you are beloved of God, love his.

This is Gods challenge, Vengeance is mine: Gods execution, I will repay: Gods
Subscription, to which his great Name is affixed, Thus says the Lord. Scriptum
est, it is a transcript and faithful copy out of the Original, to show it the
Lords true act and deed: twice written, that it might never be forgotten. Once
has God spoken, twice have I heard it, Psalm. 62. 11
that Vengeance (so well as Power) belongs unto God. He pleads the
continuance of Succession without interruption; vengeance, Judgment, and Glory
are His alone. Therefore to avenge our selves, is both to lose Gods protection,
and to incur his condemnation. It is faithless and fruitless: faithless,
not to believe that God will deal with us according to his Word. Psalm. 91. 8.
With thine eyes thou shall see the reward of the wicked. It is then
infidelity not to commit our case to God, and his Deputy the Prince; but to
make them both our deputies and instruments of revenge. What is this but to
exalt our selves above all that is called God; and to play the Devil in jest,
and the Pope in good earnest? Fruitless, for if being wronged, we draw out our
wooden dagger of revenge, God will put up his sword, and leave us to our
selves. The injured child turns not again, but runs to his father. When the
Italians hear how God has reserved Vengeance to himself, they say
blasphemously, He knew it was too sweet a bit for man, therefore kept it for
his own tooth. But if man were is own caruer, he would carue too deep. God
only is wise and just, wise to know, and just to give the due proportion. Now
the Great and Omnipotent Lord chief Justice, bind us all to the peace on
earth, and bring us all to the peace of heaven.

Now because every City must have an established Government; Order being the
good of every creature, and it is better not to be, then to be out of order:
therefore this City of Peace must have a Lord, and a Law: a Ruler to govern
it, and a Rule whereby it must be governed. The King is Christ, who is therefore
called Princeps Pacis, The Prince of Peace. And he has a Deputy or
Vicegerent under him, whom he has set to promoue the good, and to remove the
evil, of Peace. The Law is Truth, that is the Gospel, Regula Pacis, the Rule
of Truth.

The Governor of this City
Is supreme Authority: The King of Peace.
as God is a great King, so the king is (as it were) a little God. I have said,
Ye are Gods. God is an invisible King, the King is a visible god. Romans 13. 5.
Ye must be subject, not only for wrath, but also for Conscience sake. All
must obey: the bad for fear, the good for love. To compel the one, there is a
Writ out of the Kings Bench: to persuade the other, there is a motion in the
Chancery.

Of all Nations we are blessed with peace, under a King of peace: therefore all
bound to be children of peace. There are three ways of choosing Kings. 1. An
immediate nomination from God. 2. A Succession of blood. 3. An election of the
people. The first cease, the last has been found dangerous, the best
remains. They that are suddenly chosen out of the flock, do seldom manifest
such royal behavior, nor become their Maieiestie; for it is not their Trade.
Iehu remitted much of his noble zeal, when he was settled in his kingdom. It
is one thing to say, With a great sum of money, Acts 22. 28
obtained I this kingdom: and for another to say, I was a King borne. We may
justly say of our King, Dignissimus Regno, si non natus ad Regnum. When the
Poets called some men the Sons and offspring of the gods; they meant that
they were men of a more noble and uncommon nature: and that those graces were,
Ex Diuino afflatu. It was as familiar with Homer, to make a King fight with a
god at his elbowe, as a common Soldier with his sword in his hand. To whom the
Lord gives most honor, he gives most assistance. The heart of the King is in
his hand, as rivers of waters; the heart of a private man as a little brook: in
the former is more need of his omnipotence. Howsoever, the grace of adoption,
in the Apostles time, 1 Cor. 1. 26
was not given to many mighty or noble; yet the graces of administration are.

Anarchie is the mother of division, the stepmother of peace. While the State
of Italy wants a King, all runs into civil broiles. It is the happiness of
this City, that there is no distraction. Not a King at Judah, and another at
Dan: not one in Hebron, another in Gibeon: not the redd Rose here, and the
white there. We are not shuffled into a popular government, nor cut into
Cantons, by a headles, headstrong Aristocracie: but Henricus Rosas, Regna
Iacobus: in Henry was the union of Roses, in James of the kingdoms. Every King
is not a Peacemaker; ours, like a second Augustus, has shut the rustie door
of Ianus Temple; so making Peace, as if he were made of peace. That blessed
Queen of sweet and sacred memory before him, was Filia Pacis: who, as by her
Sexuall graces shed deserved to be the Queen of women, so by her masculine
virtues to be the Queen of men. Certainly, it would have troubled any King but
Him, to have succeeded such a Queen; yet no man complains the want of peace.
This he promised, and Verbum Regis, Rex Regi, this he has performed to
every good souls content. When he was first proclaimed, what heard we but
peace? What heard the Nobles? a King that would honor them. What the Senators?
a King that would counsel them. What the Schools? a King that would grace
the^. What the Divines? a King that would encourage them. What the rich? a King
that would defend the^. What the poor? a King that would relieve them.

When a Tyrant comes abroad, all seek to hide themselves: Pro. 28. 28
When the wicked rise, men hide themselves. But when a clement Prince
progresseth, all flock to him, the streets and ways are filled with people,
the air with acclamations. We call our peace, the Kings peace: and say to
brawlers, Keep the Kings peace. Peace, Plenty, Traffic, Learning,
Administration of Justice, flourishing of arts, preaching of the Gospel, Rex
Jupiter omnibus idem. Like David, he leads the Dance to heaven: and like
Augustus, makes a sweet spring wheresoever he goes. Israel had rest forty
years, we have had a Iubile of fifty years, and begun again. Judge. 5. 31
The Peacemaker does both bless, and is blessed: therefore let us bless him,
and bless God for him, and hold our selves blessed in him.

Away then with those discontented spirits, that grudge these outward rights,
whether tributes of money, or attributes of Supremacy. Soluatur subsidium, ne
contingat excidium. For this cause pay we tribute also, etc. Romans 13. 6
It is the mediate due to God, as prayers and praises are his immediate rents.
Some have observed, that Christ did no miracle about Honor or money, except
that one of giving tribute to Caesar. Mat. 17. 27
Much more intolerable are those our Cosens of Samaria, that fly off in a rage;
What portion have we in David? For this cause certainly, if David were now a
live, he would never admit a Jesuit to his Chaplain. But perish his enemies,
and upon his own Head let his Crown flourish. May not the Scepter depart from
Jacob, nor a Seed from his loins, till Shiloh come again. May his Posterity
have a Crown on earth, when himself has a crown in heaven. Amen.

The Law of this City
Is the Gospel of Christ: The Law of Peace.
a law indeed, but a law of peace. It made peace betwixt God and man, and it
must make peace between man and man. If it cannot reconcile us one to another,
it shall reconcile none of us to the Lord. It is a law, not to be observed
for State, but for Conscience. Indeed those Catuli Catilinarij, Statising
Jesuits, turn all their Religion into Statisme, yea into Atheism. And there
be many Church-Recusants, a monstrous, menstruous brood, the Moone-calues of
that lunatic religion. Come they do, but more for fear of the Law, then for
love of the Gospel. And all the children that even hang on the breasts of peace,
cannot be excused: for some through nescience or negligence, scarce cast an eye
on the statutes of peace.

I will hear what the Lord will speak: Psalm. 85. 8
for he will speak peace unto his people. One takes snuff at his poor
neighbor; perhaps it is Mordecai's cap that has put Haman out of his princely
wits: and now he resolves to trounce him: proud beggar! He will teach him to
know his betters. O but tarry, and hear the Statute of Peace. Pro. 22. 22.
Rob not the poor because he is poor: for the Lord will plead his cause,
and spoil the soul of them that spoil him. Lust makes this a spur to
opression, Quia pauper, because he is poor: the Law makes this a bridle from
it, Quia pauper, because he is poor. Another is erop-sicke of Ceremonies; he
has a toy in his head, that the Churches garment should not be embroydered,
nor have more lace and fringe then his own coat: there is in him so little of
man, that he talks of nothing but the Beast. Rather then his children shall
be crossed in Baptism, he will out of the Arc into some fantastical
Wherry. Let him tarry, and hear what the Lord speaks, in his Law of peace.
Gal. 6. 15.
In Christ Jesus neither Circumcision avails anything, nor uncircumcision,
but a New creature. That is, neither Ceremony, nor no Ceremony, but the
Substantial; a new Creature.

Another flatters himself; I need not stand on strict performance of Tithes,
the Gospel requires nothing but Benevolence: experienced men justify it, I
have the warrant of good Lawyers for it. O but such a Lawyer is the Barrister
of Barathrum, a sworn enemy to the law of peace. The voice of Christ is not in
it, hear that. Let him that is taught in the word, Gal. 6. 6
communicate unto him that teaches, in all good things.

This City of Peace has one immutable Rule, and it is sufficient to direct all
actions. And as many as walk according to this Rule, Gal. 6, 16
peace be on them, and mercy, and upon the Israel of God. A man is proud of
his victorious mischiefs, fleshed with his fortunat wickedness; thinks he
has carried himself bravely, in out-bribing his adversary, fooling Judge and
Jury by false testimony, and triumphs in his unblessed gain; but is this
according to the rule of Peace. Vincat veritas, let Truth ouercom. The loser
may sit down with content, but the winner shall ye down in torment. A rich man
carries himself proudly,; above others in scorn, above himself in folly: he
thinks all his Titles beneath him, and even those that worship him, still to
undervalue him: others he looks upon, as if they were made to serve him, yea,
and be proud to be commanded by him. Cross him, and he rages, swelles,
foames, like the Sea in a storm: but is this after the Rule of Peace? Mat. 11.
29
Learn of me who am meek and lowly in heart. Alas, what is the difference in
dust? The Beggar dies, Luke 16. 22
so does the rich man. Before, the rich could not endure the beggar near him,
here one verse contains the^ both. In life the rich has the pre-eminence of
ease, and wealth, and honor: in death the poor man goes first to peace.

In driving a trade, it is Mammons prime policy, to take advantage of others
necessity, or simplicity. Sold you it for so much? Acts 5. 8.
Says Peter: For so much, answers Ananias. Did it cost so much? says the
buyer: yes, says the seller. Let him tremble at the Judgment, which was a
sudden death. This is the Rule of an unjust City, not of the City of Peace.
Pereat mundi lucrum, ne fia^ animae damnum. Perish that gain which comes with
the souls loss.

Many think Charity to the poor, to be a work of mere Supererogation; that
they are not bound liberally to give part of that to lasie beggars, which they
have laboriously gotten by their endeauours. But hear the Rule of Peace;
Break thy bread unto the hungry; Sell that thou have, Mat. 19. 21
and give to the poor. But as when Christ dissuaded from Couetice, by the
difficulty of entrance that wealth finds to heaven, they amazedly replied, Who
then can be saved? Who can walk after this Rule? When we preach this doctrine,
the world cries, Durus Sermo, this is a hard saying, a harsh Sermon. Yet is
this the law of peace, and thus minded are the citizens of peace. When the
poor at your gates ask you Panem quotidinum, their daily bread; they after a
sort make you gods; therefore show your selves at least to be men. Charity is
the food of Peace on earth, and the Seed of peace in heaven.

The Palace of Peace
Is the Temple: The Court or Palace of Peace.
the peace of man can never be preserved without the worship of God. It is not
enough for the city to have laws, but these must be diuulged, made known to
the Inhabitants; the observation of them continually urged: for by nature men
are apt enough to fly out. Howsoever the Romans built their Templu^ Pacis
without the gates, yet here it is the chief honor and ornament of the City.
Here Peace keepsher Court, and sits like a royal Queen in her Chair of
Estate. Which is not like Solomon's Throne, guarded with Lions; but with
milke-white Doves, and covered over with Olive branches.

But alas! how does her Palace now fall to ruin for want of reparation? Few
there be that repair it, but to impair it thousands are ready. The question
was once; 1 Samuel 9. 7
What shall we bring to the man of God? Now it is a motion suffered in all
Courts, What shall we take away from the man of God? The noble Shunamite built
him a chamber, with a bed and a candlestick: We have those that pull down his
rooms, disturb his rest, and put out his light. Nehemiah reduced the Tithes
to the primitive institution and order: But if any Nehemiah should now
undertake it, and restore our portion to our own hands; there are ten
thousand Harpies ready to catch it ere it come to our mouths. We may sing, or
rather sigh one to another, as little children chaunt in the streets: When
shall we eat white Bread? When the Puttock is dead: when there is not a
Sacrilegious Lawyer left. If the walls of Jerusalem should begin to rise,
there is a Tobiah or Samballat to flout us, Neh. 4. 3.
that a Fox is able to break them down. Corrupt Advocates are those Foxes,
and by their wills the Vine of Peace should bear no Grapes that ecape their
fingers. Some have written wittily in the praise of folly, some have commended
Baldness; other in a quaint Paradoxe extolled deformity: but in former times
it was never heard that any wrote Encomiums of Sacrilege.

That the Kings of the earth should conspire against Christ, Psalm. 2. 2.
it was no wonder: 1 Cor. 2. 8
for they knew him not. Psalm. 13. 6.
That the Edomites and Ishmaelites should oppose him, Acts 4. 27
no wonder: for they stood on terms of hostility. That the Jews should
confederat against him, no wonder: for they hated him. But that men baptized in
his Faith, bearing his Name as their honorable Title, and wearing his
Profession, as their chief ornament; should consent to rob him, and justify
it by their law! this is such a thing as the very Barbarians would blush at.
Suppose the Ministers of this City, the Pencioners of Peace, by some humble
complaint request their own, or (at most but) so me small part of their own;
is the Spoyler at a nonplus? Cannot he find an Advocate to plead for him,
and make his cause (though not be, yet) appear good? What, not one for his
fees, that can cry down the Temple, the Gospel, Christ himself? Is there no
Bill to be framed? no false plea to be found? Is Satan turned fool? Has
none of his scholars any brains left? Yes, we might think the devil were
dead, if there could not be found an Advocate to plead for Sacrilege. The
Lord in his Justice for sin, has broken down her hedges; Psalm. 80. 12
and now every hand has a snatch at her Grapes.

In many places, Ahab- like, they have engrossed the whole vineyard: but if the
poor, exposed, and vnsupported Vine be left, it shall bear the owner but a
few grapes. This may hold in Iure Fori, it never shall hold in Iure Poli. God
promised that the faith of the Church should remove mountains: such were
Domitian, Dioclesian, and those Imperial persecutors. The Church prays,
Dorsum little incurua, Bow down their backs; and so the Lord did. Valerian was
so bowed down, that he became a footstool for the King of Persia, to mount
up to his horse O that the Church of Peace had still this miraculous Faith, to
remove these mountains; malicious and truth-hating pleaders, the pioners of
the Temple, and the maintainers of those that pillage it.

They tell us, the Law is open, and there be deputies; Acts 19. 38
but who be the deputies in this City? Is there any other then a Judge of
their own? And is it not then a prouerbiall answer of any man questioned in
this Sacrilege; Ask my father if I be a thief? When David decided the
matter to Mephibosheth; Thou and Ziba divide the land: 2 Samuel 19. 30.
he answered, Yea let him take all: For the misery of Law, I never by
experience found it, because I never tried it: but when they have leave to
divide the Inheritance of Christ with their Ministers (and it were something
tolerable if they did but divide it) I say, yea let the^ take all, seeing all
they will have, rather then we go to recover it by such a Judgment. But
certainly God cannot long abide to see that people prosper, who cannot abide to
see his Church prosper. They that spoil the Palace of Peace on earth, shall
never be entertained into her glorious Court of heaven.

The River that serves this City of Peace
Is Prosperity. The River of this City.
It is one principal happiness of a City, to be situated by a Rivers side:
that as it has fortified it self by land, so it may have command of the Sea.
Prosperity is the River to this City, that like a loving Meander, winds it
self about, throwing his silver Arms upon her sides; ebbing slowly, but
flowing merrily, as if he longed to embrace his love. Peace is the mother of
Prosperity, but Prosperity is too often the murderer of Peace. For peace
breeds wealth, wealth breeds pride, pride breeds contention, and contention
kills peace. Thus she is often destroyed by her own issue, as Senacherib was
by his own bowels.

Take this City we live in for an Instance. Peace has brought Gods plenty:
the Inhabitants neither plowe, nor sow, nor reap; yet are fed like the fowls
of heaven. They fare well with less trouble, then if come grew at their
doors, and cattle grased in their streets. But as Nylus may rise too high,
and water Egypt too much; so the inundation of opulency may do the^ hurt. Thus
may the influence of heaven, and the plenty of earth, be a Snare unto us; and
our abundance, an occasion of our falling. Prosperity is hearty meat, but not
digestible by a weak stomach, strong wine, but naught for a weak brain. The
prosperity of fools destroys them. Pro. 1, 32
It is not simply prosperity, but the prosperity of fools that destroys
them. The swelling River by the surfeit of a Tide, does not sooner bring in our
increase; but our increase does breed in our minds another swelling, in our
bodies another surfeting: we swell in pride, and surfeit in wantonness. The
Israelites never fared so well, as when they lived at Gods immediate finding;
and at night expected their morrowes breakfast from the clouds. When they did
daily ask, and daily receive their daily bread.

There be (as I heard a worthy Divine observe) three maine Rivers in the land,
whereof this is held the best: and this City is placed in the best Seat of
the River, upon the gentle rising of a hill, in the best air, and richest
soil. When a Courtier gave it out, That Queen Mary being displeased with the
City, threatened to divert both Term and Parliament to Oxford: an Alderman
asked whether she meant to turn the channel of the Thames thither, or no* if
not, says he, by Gods grace we shall do well enough. The lines are fallen to
us in pleasant places, Psalm. 16. 6
we have a goodly Heritage. Both the Elements are our friends; the Earth sends
us in her fruits, the Sea her merchandise. We are near enough the benefits,
and far enough from the dangers of the Ocean. Nothing is wanting to the
consummation of our happiness: to keep us in our own Country, in our own
City, in our own Houses, but that which keeps men in their wits, Temperance,
and Thankfulness.

But do we not requite this River of Prosperity, with ungrateful impiety?
and use the Ocean of Gods bounty, as we do the Thames? It brings us in all
manner of provision; Clothes to cover us, Fuel to warm us, Food to nourish
us, Wine to cheer us, Gold to enrich us: and we in recompense, foil it with
our rubbish, filth, common sewers, and such excretions. It yeeldes us all
manner of good things, and we requite it with all plenty of bad things. It
comes flowing in with our commodities, and we send it laden back with our
injuries.

Such toward God is the impious ingratitude of this famous City, which else
had no Parallel under the Sun. She may not unfitly be compared to certain
Pictures, that represent to diverse beholders, at diverse stations, diverse
forms. Looking one way, you see a beautiful Virgin: another way, some
deformed monster. Cast an eye upon her Profession, she is a well graced
creature: turn it upon her conversation, she is a misshapen stigmaticke. View
her Peace, she is fayrer then the daughters of men: view her Pride, the
children of the Hittites and Amorites are beauteous to her. Think of her good
works, then Blessed art thou of the Lord: number her sins, then How is that
faithful City become an harlot (...) Esa. 1. 21.
To tell of her Charity, and how many hundreds she feeds in a year, you will
say with Paul, In this I praise her. To tell of her oppressions, and how many
thousands she undoes in a year, you will say with him again, In this I
praise her not. Behold her like a Nourse drawing her Breasts, and giving milk
to Orphans, you wish her Cup to run over with fullness. Behold her like a
Horse leech, sucking the blood of the Church, to feed her own sacrilegious
avarice; you will say her Cup is too full. When we think of her prosperity,
we wonder at her impiety: when we think of her impiety, we wonder at her
prosperity. O that her Citizens would learn to manage their liberal
fortunes, and to entertain the River of Peace that makes glad the City of
God, with Humility and Sobriety. That when Death shall disfranchise them
here, they may be made free above, in that tryumphant City, whose glory has
neither measure, nor end.

The Life of the Citizens
Is Love: The life of Peace.
for without the love of men there can be no peace of God, and there is no love
of God in them that desire not peace with men. He that loves not the members,
was never a friend to the Head. To say we love Christ, and hate a Christian; is
as if a man, while he was saluting or protesting love to his friend, should
tread on his toes. I know indeed, that every creature is to be loved, but in
ordine ad Deum: Religion does not forbid, but rectify our affections. Our
Parents, spouses, children, allies, countrymen, neighbors, friends; have all
their due places in our love: and it were a brutifh doctrine to dispossess us
of these humane relations. Only they must know their orders and stations, and
by no means usurp upon God: they must not be mistresses, but handmaides to
the love of Christ.

But let us love them, because they love God: as reflections of our sight,
which glaunce from the Lord upon his Image: if God have their hearts, let them
have our hearts. It is poor to love a man for that is about him: he must be
loved for that is within him. If we should account of men as we do of bags;
prize them best that weigh heauiest, and measure out our love by the
Subsidie-booke; honoring a man because he is well clothed: I see then no
reason, but we should do greater reverence to the Basin and Ever on the
stall, then to the Goldsmith in the Shop; and most humbly salute Satin and
Velvet in whole pieces, because their virgin-glory was never yet ravished and
abused into fashion.

No, but especially let us love others, because they fear God, and serve Jesus
Christ. For as the brain is to the sinews, the liver to the veins, and the
heart to the arteries; so is Gods love to humane societies: as the very soul
by which they live, and the form that gives them being. Otherwise our
companies are conspiracies; when we fall in one with another, to fall out with
God. Let us begin our loves above, deriuing this holy fire from the Altar of
Heaven; let our faith inkindle it at the heart of Christ, and then like the
Cherubins, we shall look graciously one upon another, while all faithfully
look up to the Mercy-seate of God.

The general State of this City.
This is the Corollary of all; The Estate.
every particular being cast up, here is the sum; her universal felicity.
For the illustration whereof, it will not be unuseful, to borrow an instance:
and we need not travel far to seek out such an image or resemblance.

Look we upon our own Nation, the happy Module of this City of peace. It
was said, that in Rome a man might see all Countries: and the Romans used to
solace themselves; It is good looking on a Map of the World, vbi nihil in orb
videmus alienum, when we find nothing in the world which is not our own. What
does the whole earth produce, which is not yielded to our enjoying? What was
once said of Ormus, is true of this City, Turn the world into a Ring, and
this is the Diamond of it. Like to Gideons Fleece, it has been wet with the
dew of heaven, when drought was on the whole earth besides: Or like Nylus,
which keeps within the Banks, when other Rivers ouerflow their continents.
Some Nations have peace, but without the Truth: other have the Truth, but
without Peace: we have both Truth and Peace. Our neighbors have been
exercised with troubles, whirled about with hostile tumults; their ears
affrighted with the thunder of those murdering pieces: their eyes agashed with
their Temples and Tabernacles flaming about their heads: Infants bleeding upon
the stones, and their amazed mothers ravished ere they can be permitted to
die. The shrikes of the dying, and slavery of the living, under the merciless
hands of a killing or insulting adversary; these have been their distracting
objects: none of them come near us. There is no rifling of houses, no flying
to refuges, no rotting in Dungeons, no ruinating of Monuments, no swelling the
channels with blood, no fiering of Cities, no Rapes of Virgins, no dashing of
Babes against the stones, nor casting them, as they drop from their mothers
wombes, into their mothers flames. But in stead of these, the truth of the
Gospel is preached, piety professed, the practice of it encouraged; Grace
promising, and Peace performing, blessed rewards.

That is verified in us, which is recorded of the days of Solomon; That he
had peace on all sides round about him: 1. Kings 4. 25.
and Judah and Israel dwelt safely, every man under his Vine, and under his
Figgetree, from Dan to Beersheba. Or as Syluius said of Rhodes; Semper in sole
sita est. The Sunshine of mercy embraces us, and has made us a day of peace,
not shorter then sixty years: the favors of God over shadowing us, as the
Cherubins did the Mercie-Seat. I know that Rome frets at this, and let the
Harlot rage her heart out: she thunders out Curses, but (praised be God) we
never more prospered, then when the Pope most cursed us. Yea, O Lord, though
they curse, do thou bless: their thunder does more fear then hurt, thy favor
does more good then they can blast. Convert or confound them that have evil
will at Sion: and still let us inherit thy Peace, that thou may inherit our
praise.

This is the Reward of Peace, and of all those that in sincerity of heart love
her: 2. Cor. 13. 11.
the God of peace shall be with them. There be six kinds of peace, but the
peace of God contains all the rest. The peace of God passes all
understanding: therefore whosoever loses this peace, has a loss past all
understanding. But Christ foretold us, that in the world we shall have no
peace. Ioh. 16. 33.
Indeed no peace Quoad oppositionem seculi, yet much peace quoad dispositione^
Domini. The most savage disturbers, Si non reformentur ne pereant, tamen
reprimentur ne perimant: if they be not reformed to save the^ themselves, they
shall be restrained from harming us. If they will not do us the good they
should, yet they shall not do us the evil they would. Vel inimieus tuus non
manebit, vel non manebit inimicus. Either our enemies shall not live, or they
shall not live our enemies. Psalm. 58. 1^.
Either the righteous shall rejoice when they see the vengeance, and wash their
feet in the blood of the wicked. Or the Lord will give them favor in the sight
of their enemies, Exodus 11. 3
and those that hated them, shall cleave unto them.

From hence arises peace with our selves: a conformity of affection to
reason, of reason to grace: that the conflicts which a distressed conscience
finds with legal terrors, shall be turned to mild embracements. Faith leading
the understanding, the understanding guiding the will, the will ruling the
operative powers, and Christ Jesus governing all. For indeed he is the
Fountain of peace, Romans 5. 1.
and we through him being justified by faith, have peace with God. Through
the corruption of our nature, and Justice of Gods nature, we are enemies: and
there is no reconciliation, but through the blood o the everlasting Covenant.
He reconciles us to God, as Ioab did Absolon to David by the woman of Tekoah:
when the whole family rose up, and said, Deliver him that smote his brother, 2 Samuel 14 7
that we may take his life for the life of the slain: and so the father and
mother shall have no name nor remainder upon earth. God has two sorts of sons
Angels and men: the Angels that fell, are lost for ever: men fell, if they were
lost too, where should God have sons? I know that he needs not man: he has
still the elect Angels, and is able to raise sons of stones: he can want
nothingwhile he possesses himself. Well, yet in mercy Christ reconciles us:
David asks, Verse 19.
Is not the hand of Ioab in all this? so we may admire, Is not the hand of
Jesus in all this? Yes, he has made our peace. The Minister always ends his
public devotions with the peace of God, and the blessing of this Peace rest
upon us.

Thus we have a real abridgment of this mystical City of Peace; happy every
way. Vigilancie is her Officer of Peace; that has an eye in the darkest
angles, and discouers the first conceptions of strife. Discipline is her Clerk
of the peace, that keeps the Records, and indicts offenders. Authority is her
Justice of peace: that if any will not be ruled, binds them over to the peace.
Equity is her Burse, where men exchange kindness for kindness: on whose stayres
Injury and imposture durst never set their foul feet. Truth is her Standard,
which with the Trumpet of Fame shall resound her happiness to all nations.
Plenty is her Treasurer, Liberality her Almoner, Conscience her Chancellor,
Wisdom her Counselor, Prayer her Clerk of the Closet, Faith her Crown,
Justice her Scepter, Masculine Virtues her Peers, Graces her Attendants, and
Nobility her Maid of Honor.

All her Garments are green and orient; all her paths be Milk, her words
Oracles, and her works Miracles: making the blind to see, and the lame to go,
by a merciful supply to their defects. Her breath is sweeter then the new
blown Rose; millions of souls lie sucking their life from it: and the smell
of her garments is like the smell of Lebanon. Her smiles are more reviving then
the Vertumnall Sunneshine: and her favors, like seasonable dewes, spring up
flowers and fruits wheresoever she walks. Holiness is the Canopie of State
over her head, and Tranquillity the Arras where she sets her foot. All her
Servants wait in order; and can with contentfull knowledge, distinguish and
accept their own places. Her Court is an Image of Paradise; all her channels
slow with milk, and her Conduits run wine. Envy and murmuring, as privy to
their own guilt, fly from her Presence. Her Guard consists not of men, but
Angels: and they pitch their Tents about her Palace. Lastly, having preserved
and blessed all her children on earth, she goes with them to heaven; is
welcomed into the arms of her Father, invested Queen with a Diadem of glory,
and possessed of those joys, unto which Time shall never put

An End.

