FOUR SERMONS, LATELY PREAched, by Martin Fotherby Doctor in Divinity, and
Chaplain unto the Kings Majesty.

The first at Cambridge, at the Masters Commencement. July 7. Anno 1607.

The second at Canterbury, at the Lord Archbishops visitation. September. 14.
Anno 1607.

The third at Paul's Cross, upon the day of our deliverance from the
gunpowder treason. Nouemb. 5. Anno 1607.

The fourth at the Court, before the Kings Majesty. Nouemb. 15. Anno 1607.

Whereunto is added, An answer unto certain objections of one unresolved, as
concerning the use of the Cross in Baptism: written by him in Anno 1604. and
now commanded to be published by authority.

AT LONDON, Printed by HENRY BALLARD, for C. K. and W.C. 1608.

TO THE MOST REVEREND Father in God, and singular Patron of all good learning,
the Lord Archbishop of Canturbury his Grace, Primate of all England, and
Metropolitan, and one of the Lords of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy
Counsel.
RIGHT honorable, and my gracious good Lord, I make bold to present to the
view of your wisdom, four Sermons preached by me, though not very lately, yet
not very long since, upon special occasions, as their titles show. Being
hitherto unwilling that they should see the light; though thereunto I have been
greatly importuned, both by the instance of diverse my judicious friends, and
(for some of them) pressed, by the reverend authority of your Graces own name,
which (notwithstanding) I have hitherto detrected; as knowing how little
needful it is, to pester the world with any more books, which groneth already
under the burden of them: Yet am I now beaten from my former resolution, by the
incessant importunity of certain seduced, and seducing spirits, who (swelling
with a windy opinion of knowledge, falsely so called) have taken great
exception at the second of these Sermons, which was preached at your Graces
visitation, and as yet, make no end of traducing it to the world, as tending
directly unto the disgrace of preaching. For the detecting of whose ignorance,
and conuincing of their malice, I am now not unwilling, to publish to the world
what was spoken at that time: if your Grace do not esteem it, as a thing
borne out of time. Not doubting, but that which passed the favorable censure of
so reverend and so learned an assembly as then were the hearers, will now find
like acceptance, with all that be judicious and indifferent Readers. As for
Papists, and (their confederates in this cause) our schismatickes and
Sectaries, I neither expect, nor respect their approbation of it. They be now
(as we hope) not in any so great number, as that any great reckoning is to be
made of them: especially, in your Graces peculiar Dioces, which (I am verily
persuaded) is better defecated and purged, both from Papists and Schismatiks,
then any other quarter of this land; which as it is our most blessed peace and
quiet, so may it be your Graces exceeding joy and comfort.

These slender labors and endeavors of mine, I presume to offer unto your
Graces patronage, not only in respect of my strict obligation unto your
Lordship for many of your forepassed most honorable favors: but also, because
(in true account) your Grace may rightly be esteemed the very anchor of all
these, and my self but the instrument: they all of them receiving their first
motion and being (either directly, or occasionately) from your gracious favor,
as from their first mouer: which, as it gives me full assurance of your
honorable acceptance; so it binds me to performance of all dutiful
observance; and to pray for the continuance of your Graces most prosperous and
happy estate, that as God has made you hitherto a notable instrument, to
settle and establish both his truth and Church amongst us, so we may long
enjoy you, to the comfort of all them that wish well unto them both.

Your Graces most obliged to all humble duty, MARTIN FOTHERBY.

The first Sermon, at Cambridge.
ECCLES. 1. VER. 2. Vanity of vanities, says the Preacher: Vanity of
vanities, all is Vanity.


THE Jewish Rabbines prescribed us this excellent rule for the right
understanding of every text of Scripture: Qui non aduertit, and quid supra, and
quid infra scriptum, is plane peruertit viuentis Dei verbum: He that weighs
not what is written, both above and below, shall never well expound that is
written between them. Now, if we proceed by this rule in expounding of this
Scripture, we shall find that King Solomon in this book of the Preacher, had
a twofold end, the one of them subordinate unto the other. For first, if we
look upward to the beginning of this book, we shall there find this sentence
which I now have read unto you, Vanity of vanities, all is vanity: wherein his
end and scope must needs be, to bring us out of love and conceit with earthly
things, as being vile and unprofitable, nay, hurtful and damageable; which
there he implies by this title of Vanity. Secondly, if we look downward to
the end of this book, we shall there find this sentence, Let us hear the
sum of al, Fear God and keep his commandments, for this is the whole
duty of man: Cap. 12.13
wherein his end must needs again be, to bring us into love with divine and
heavenly things, Col. 3.1.
and (as the Apostle Paul advises) to make us seek those things that are
above, as comprehending in them the only true felicity; So that King Solomon
in this book has (as I said) a double end: The first is to revoke us from the
love of the world: The second to provoke us unto the love of God, which will
certainly ensue and follow in us, if the former obstacle be removed from us.

1. John 4 16.
For our God and Creator, who is perfect love himself, has made us his
creatures of such a loving nature, Plut. in vita Solon.
that (as Plutarch well observes) we needs must be always loving of some
thing: so that if our love be diuerted from the world, it needs must be
converted unto God; or else it should lie idle, which love cannot do; that is
against the very nature of it.

Now King Solomon to divert our love from the world, and the things of the
world, he uses none other argument thorowout this whole book, but only this
one, to tell us they be Vanity: neither could he indeed have used any reason
more forcible to bring them into extreme contempt with us, then by calling
them Vanity: for no word in the world does more fully express the vile, and
the thriftlesse and unprofitable nature of these earthly things, then Vanity
does.

And therefore seeing that King Solomon so constantly uses the name of Vanity
thorowout his whole book, whenever he speaks of any worldly glory; calling
them still Vanity, and Vanity of Vanities, and nothing but Vanity; it shall not
be amiss to enter a serious and diligent inquisition, what should be here
intended by this name of Vanity. For we must not think that the holy Ghost
does iterate so often and beat upon one word, either rashly, or idly, or
casually, or unadvisedly, but for this special purpose; that we seeing this
one word to be so often inculked, and so constantly used in every place, might
take the greater heed unto it, and search with greater diligence into the
hidden and inward meaning of it.

Neither shall it be a vain or a needles labor thus to hunt out this Vanity,
but both profitable and necessary unto our present purpose. Profitable, because
if we know not what vanity means, we shall never reap any profit by this
admonition of King Solomon, in telling us so often that All is vanity: for in
the perfect knowledge of this one word, Vanity, consists the perfect knowledge,
not only of this particular text, of which I now preach, but also of all this
whole book of the Preacher: which is nothing else in effect, but as it were a
comment upon this word, Vanity, as Saint Augustine observes. And necessary it
will be, because the true knowledge of this word, Aug. lib 20. De ciuit. Dei,
cap* 3.
Vanity, is a matter of greater difficulty, and more laborious inquisition,
then any man would at the first imagine, as evidently appears out of A.
Gellius: who makes report of a notable conflict between two great and
professed Grammarians, A. Gel. lib. 18. cap. 4.
about this word Vanity, what it properly should signify. Their controversy
being grounded upon a place of Salust, where he censureth Cn. Lentulus to be
such a one, as it was uncertain whether he were, Vanior, or Stolidior; a more
vain or a more foolish kind of man: the one of them maintayning, that both
these two words did note but one vice, and that Vanity is nothing else but
Folly: The other, that either of them deciphered a several kind of vice, and
that Folly is one thing, and Vanity another; as he there most plainly proves.

But howsoever these two Grammarians dissent, as concerning the particular vice
designed in this word, yet they both consent in this, that it is a name of
vice: and that it implies, that all those things unto which it is rightly
applied, are of a reproueable and vicious nature. So thas (as I said before)
this Preacher could not possibly have used any word which more fully lays out
and exposes to our eyes the base and contemptible, the bad and unprofitable
nature of all earthly glories, then Vanity does.

Saint Paul speaking of them, he uses a very homely and dishonorable name to
express their comtemptible nature by: he calls them (...) that is, dung, or
dross, both of them, Phil. 3 8.
vile and base: but yet neither of them so vile as Vanity is. For both dung and
dross may have profitable uses, but that which is vain, that has no use at
all, it is utterly unprofitable; it is like unto salt, when it has lost his
saltnes, which is good for just nothing, as our Savior Christ teaches us.
Matt. 5.13.
So that this Vanity is of a more vile and abject nature then the vilest
excrements of the most abject creature: for there is none of all them, that is
clearly without all use, as Vanity is, in what significations soever you take
it; as (if you will but look into the diverse significations of this word
Vanity, delivered unto us by Heathen writers, and confirmed out of the holy
scriptures) you may plainly see.

For I find this word Vanity, to have six significations, and yet not one good
one amongst them all, not one that implies the least fruit or profit to be
implied in it. To begin with that first, which I named last.

The first signification of this word Vanity, is al one with Inutile, that is
to say, a thing without al use, or profit, for so it follows immediately after
this text: Eccles. 1.3.
Quid emolumenti? What profit has a man of all his labors wherein he has
travailed under the sun? He proves al our labors about these earthly matters
to be therefore Vanity, because there comes no profit of them: for this is one
essential note of Vanity, to be fruitless and unprofitable: And therefore as
God here reasons against the world, that it is vanity because it is
unprofitable; so worldlings else where do reason against God, that his service
is likewise Vanity, because it is unprofitable: Ye have said, it is in vain
that we have served God, and what profit is it that we have kept his
commandments? Mal. 3.14.
They conclude it to be vain, because it is unprofitable. And the consequent
is good if the antecedent were true. So that King Salomons first meaning in
calling these earthly matters Vanity, is to insinuate thus much; that they be
altogether fruitless and barraine of all good, and that there is no profit at
all to be found in them. Saint Paul appealeth unto the Romans own judgment,
what profit these earthly things have brought them; What profit (says he) had
ye then in those things, Romans 6.21.
whereof ye are now ashamed? And Solomon brings worldlings complaning, in
this manner, of their unprofitable labor about earthly things: What has pride
now profited us, Wisd. 5.8.
or what has the pomp of riches brought us? So that when it pleases God to
open a man's eyes, to see the true vanity of all earthly glories, in their own
proper colors, as he did the Romans eyes, by the preaching of Saint Paul,
then do they see most clearly, that there is no profit in them, but rather
that they be such vain and foolish things, as that they ought to be even
ashamed of them, as the Apostle Paul implies in the forealleged place. And
surely, the true reason, why men are not ashamed, so foolishlie to bestow their
unprofitable pains about these transitory earthly things, is, because God as
yet has not opened their eyes, to see the fruitless vanity of them, and how
grossly they be deceived in them, their sight being blinded by the god of this
world, 1. Cor. 4.4.
as the Apostle Paul observes.

To give you an instance or two to this purpose: The thief when he goes about
to steal, he hunteth after profit, and thinks it better to reach out a
little, then to live in want, because the god of this world has blinded his
eyes: but when his punishment comes, then he sees his own error, and then
he is ashamed of it, and then he finds by experience, that his stealing has
brought no profit to him, but incomparable loss. The licentious worldling
likewise, when he hunteth after pleasure, he seeks after that which seems
good unto him, because the god of this world has blinded his eyes: but when
his punishment comes, then he changes his mind, and then he sees his
folly, Wis. 5.7.8.
and then he is ashamed of it. That he has so wearied himself, in the ways
of wickedness, and yet has got no profit by it, as is notably declared, in
the book of Wisdom.

And even so is it likewise in all other sins: though the sinner do always
propound unto himself, (at the least in his conceit) a kind of profit in them,
whereunto they seem to answer, with appearing shows of goodness, yet he still
finds in the end, when he has made his trial of them, that they be indeed
no better, but (as the Apostle truly calls them) Unprofitable works of
darkness: Ephesians. 5.11.
and therefore such as (of right) we ought to be even ashamed of.

But here we must take heed, that we measure not our profit by wordly gain and
commodity: For, that oftentimes is loss, as our Savior Christ teaches us in
the Gospel; though a man should gain the whole world, yet if he lose his own
soul* that gain is but Vanity, because there is no profit in it. For so it
follows in that very place: What shall it profit thee to wine the whole
world, Mat. 16.26.
if thou lose thine own soul? Therefore, we must measure our profit, not by
gain, but by godliness: for, that is the greatest gain: and that (as Saint
Paul teaches us) is profitable to all things, 1. Tim. 6 6.4.8.
having promise both of this life, and of the life to come. That which a man
gains with godliness, that is great gain, and great profit, though it be but
a little: but that which he gains without godliness, that is Vanity and
disprofit, though it were the whole world: because he pays his soul for it,
which is more precious then the world, as it follows in the forecited place.
And therefore this our Preacher, who (in the beginning of this book) tells
us, that all is Vanity: yet (in the end of it) he excepteth godliness, that it
is not Vanity: Let us hear the sum of all (says he) fear God, Eccles. 12.13
and keep his commandments, for this is the complete duty of man. This
godliness is not vanity, because it is full of profit: it has a great reward
(as our Savior Christ teaches us in the Gospel) Great is your reward in
heaven. Matt. 5:12:
The reward of godliness, though it be but small in earth, yet is it great in
heaven; yea as great as heaven, for it is heaven it self: but the reward of
earthly profit when we seek it without godliness, is the loss of heaven: and
therefore al such gain is merely Vanity, Vanity in this first sense, that is,
merely unprofitable and damageable Vanity.

The second signification of this word Vanity, is all one with Vacuity; Vanum,
tanquam vacuum: that is, a thing that has a show, but yet takes the true
substance of that it represents: and so indeed is nothing else but only an
empty semblance.

In which sense I find this word applied three several ways: First, Vanum, I
find opposed to Plenum: and so it signifies a thing void and empty.
Secondly, I find it opposed to Grave: and so it signifies a thing light and
windy. Thirdly, I find it opposed to Verum: and so it signifies a thing false
and crafty.

For the first of these three senses, to wit, Vanum inane, That is, Cic. orat.
pro. Cn. Plancio.
empty Vanity: In this sense does Tully use that word in his oration pro
Plancio, where he calls those promises that be not kept, Vana and inania,
vain and empty promises: as (contrariwise) the keeping of promises both in our
English and in the Latin tongue, is commonly called a fulfilling of them;
Implere promissa. Promises if they be not fulfilled in their keeping, they be
but vain and empty in their making. In this sense does Virgil likewise use
that word in the first of his Georgiks, Virg. lib. 1. Geor.
he calls the empty ears of corn which have nothing but a husk, Vanas
aristas, vain ears: Expectata seges, vanis elusit aristis. He calls such
ears vain, because they be empty. And in this same sense does likewise the
Scriptures themselves use that word. Job calls the days of this mortal life,
Job 7.3.
Menses vacuos months of Vanity, that is, void and empty months, empty of all
stayed and solid comfort, few and evil, as Jacob complayneth of his life. Genesis
47.9.
So likewise the Prophet David in the second Psalm, he uses the same word,
in the very same sense: Psalm. 2.1.
Why did the heathen rage, and the people imagine a vain thing? He speaks in
that place of the attempts of the heathen against Christ and his kingdom.
Which place of the Psalm, Saint Hierome translating, he puts for Vana,
Inania: Inania meditati sunt, They imagined vain things, says David; that is,
void and empty things, says Hierom, things void of reason and void of
success. For though they might seem to have gotten a full conquest over our
Savior Christ, when they once had killed him, Plut. in vita Bruti.
because (as Theodotus Chius once said of Pompey) Mortui non mordent, A dead
dog biteth not: yet even then did their fulness prove to be mere emptines,
and even then did Christ begin his conquest over them. He, whom (whilst he
lived) they counted little better then a dead dog, 1. Sam. 16.9. Eccles. 9.4.
Apoc. 5.5.
as it is in the proverb, after he was dead did prove a living Lion, a
victorious Lion of the tribe of Judah, and conquered the whole world, according
to that prophecy which he had given of himself, that If he once were lifted
up, John 12.32.
he then would draw all men unto him. So that all their attempts against our
Savior Christ, did prove, right indeed as the Prophet David calls them, but
vain and empty imaginations: as likewise do the attempts of like wicked
persecutors against his members the Christians, Psalm. 2.1.
they commonly prove vain and empty.

For when they seek to conquer them by cruelty and persecution, they themselves
are thereby conquered; and the Christians by their torments become more then
conquerours, as the Apostle Paul teaches us: Romans 8.37.
Though for thy sake we be killed all the day long, yet are we in all those
things made more then conquerours. Thus (as Iustine Martyr has very well
observed) Tormenta paganismi, Just. Mart. lib. quaest.
quibus ipse se defendit, paganismum tollunt, Christianismum firmant: The
torments of the Pagans are the nourishments of the Christians: for this sect of
Christianity (as Tertullian truly notes) Tunc magis ^dificatur, cum caedi
videtur: Tertul. ad Scapulam.
The more that it is killed, the more it is increased: the blood of the
Christians, as the same writer notes (in an other place) being the very seed
of the Church: Idem. Apolo. cap. 50.
So that all the attempts of such wicked persons do prove merely Vain; that
is, void and empty, as well against the Church as against Christ himself. And
therefore the Prophet Isay speaking of the Vanity of those ungodly men, Isay
29.8.
which seek to devour and swallow up the Church; he compares their attempts
(and that very fitly) unto a hungry man's dream, who imagines that he is
filling himself at a banquet, but yet when he awaketh, his soul within him is
empty and faint; and so are their hopes too, which desire to feast themselves
of the spoils of the Church, they do vanish as a dream, and their souls be
found empty; as (God be praised) we have had great and gracious experience, and
that very lately. And even so is it likewise in all other earthly things, all
the comfort which they yield us, is but a false joy, as it were in a dream;
but he that is the fullest of them here in this world, when he awaketh and
rises up unto the resurrection, shall find himself emptied of them all: Luke
1.53.
When the hungry shall be filled with good things, but the rich shall be sent
empty away, as it is in the Gospel: Phil. 2.7.
For as Christ when he came to us in mercy, did empty himself quite of all his
heavenly glory: so we, when we go unto Christ in judgment, shall likewise be
emptied of all our earthly glory; we shall appear before him naked, being
stripped of all those gay and goodly trappings, which now so much glorify, and
vanifie foolish worldlings, as even Plato himself notes. Plato, in Gorgia.
And then (as I noted before out of the book of Wisdom) we shall truly see
the Vanity of all these earthly glories, when we see how bare, and how naked,
and how empty they have left us. This briefly for Vanity, as it is Inanity,
that is, void and empty of all those good things, whereof it seems to have
store and plenty.

The second branch of Vanity, in this second signification, is Vanum, opposed
unto Grave, or Ponderosum: and so Vanity signifies a thing light and windy: so
that Vanitas and Leuitas be in this sense Synonyma. In this sense does Salust
use the name of Vanity, as Nonnius cites him: Maurivanum genus. He calls the
Morians a vain nation: that is, Light and unconstant; Ingenio mobili; as he
notes them in an other place. Salust. b^l. Iugurth. C^c lib. 1. de Diuinat.
So likewise does Tully use this word Vanity in his book of Divination, where
he complains, that the notable Art of Divination is brought into comtempt,
Leuitate, and Vanitate hominum, By the leuity and Vanity of men. For, as the
excellent Art of Music is grown into contempt through the baseness and
lightness of certain vagrant musicians, which prostistute their coming at
every drunken feast: so likewise that renouned Art of Divination, grew into
great comtempt, through the vileness of certain roguing mountbanks, and
cosoning fortunetellers, which out of men's forheads, and faces, and hands,
would take upon them to divine, and to read hidden destinies: and thereupon it
was, that Tully so complained, that the dignity of so noble an Art, had
suffered such a prejudice, through the leuity and Vanity, of certain her
professors. Using Leuity and Vanity, Promiscue, for one thing. And in the same
sense, do likewise the Scriptures use the name of Vanity, for lightness, and
that which has no weight or worth in it. The Prophet Moses calls Idols
Vanity: and the Prophet Isay calls them Wind: Deuteronomy. 32.21. Isay, 41.29.
both words noting out their lightness unto us; they are as light as wind, which
is the lightest of all things; yea as light as nothing, as it follows in that
place: 1. Cor. 8.4.
for an Idol is nothing, as is noted in an other place. The Prophet David
likewise discoursing of the vain condition of man, he uses the same word,
Psalm. 62.9.
in the very same sense: for he says, that Man is deceitful upon the waights:
Yea, and altogether lighter then Vanity it self: Lighter th^n Vanity. Which
must needs imply, that Vanity is a very light and windy matter, when as it is
put for a principal instance and example of lightness, as there you see it is.

The third branch of Vanity in this second signification, is Vanum, opposed
unto Verum, and so Vanity signifies a thing false and crafty: so that Vanitas,
and Falsitas, be (in this sense) Synonyma. In this sense does Plautus use the
name of Vanity, Most. act. 4. S^e. 2.
in his Mostellaria, Vera cantas, Vana vellem; You speak the Verity, I would
it were Vanity, opposing Vanum, unto that which is Verum. In this sense does
Terence also use the name of Vanity, in his Eunuchus, Si falsum, aut Vanum,
Enuch. Act. 1. Scen* ^.
aut fictum, continuo palam est: he calls that a Vain thing, which is a
false and a fained thing: expressing Vanum, by his Synonymon, as Plautus did by
his Oppositum.

And in this sense I find the name of Vanity applied most commonly unto three
several things: First (in spiritual matters) I find Idolatry to be called by
the name of Vanity, because it is but a false religion; it is Falsum, and
therefore Vanum, as you heard before out of Terence. It has a show of godliness
(as the Apostle Paul speaks) but yet it lacks the power of it. 2. Tim. 3.5.
In this sense does Moses use the name of Vanity, in the book of Deuteronomie,
where complaning of the Jews in the person of God, he says, that, Deuteronomy.
32.21. Ier. 8.19.
They moved him to jealousy with that which is not God, they provoked him to
anger, with their Vanities. As Idols are false gods, so idolatry is false
worship: and both these called Vanity, because they be false. Hence likewise
the Prophet David calls such heathen worship Superstitious Vanity:
Superstitious, because idolatrous, and Vanity, because false. Psalm. 31.6.
Secondly (in common life) I find Lying to be called by the Vanity, because it
is a false speech: it is Falsum, and therefore Vanum, as before I noted. In
this sense does Tully use the name of Vanity, in the first of his Offices, Cic.
lib. 1. Offices.
where speaking of the falsehood of tradesmen in their arts, he says, that
Nihil profic^unt, nisi admo^um mentiantur, nec quicquaem est turpius Vanitate.
He says their chiefest profit arises from their lying, rather then from their
buying. which he calls a dishonest kind of Vanity. A good item for such men.
Virg. lib. 2. Aene^d.
So likewise does Virgil use the name of Vanity, for lying and faining. -- Nec
si miserum fortuna Sinonem
Finxit, vanum etiam, m^ndacemque improba finget. Where (as you plainly see)
he uses Vanus and Mendax, a Vain man, and a Lying man, as two words of one
sense. So likewise, that Apoliinaris in Gellius, of whom I spoke before, he
defines Vanos, A. Gel. lib. 18. cap. 4.
to be properly Mendaces et Infidos, that is, Liers and Unfaithful men. And in
this same sense do likewise the Scriptures use the name of Vanity: O ye
sons of men, Psalm. 4.2.
(says the Prophet David) how long will ye love vanity, and seek after lies?
Where the latter word expounds what is meant by the former, to wit, that by
Vanity, he understands Lying. Psalm. 12.2.
So likewise in an other place, Vanitatem loquuntur, quisque cum proximo suo:
They speak Vanity every man with his neighbor: that is, they speak
deceitfully, and tell lies. Thirdly (in friendship) I find Flattery to be
called by the name of Vanity, because it is but a false and a counterfeit love.
It likewise is Falsum, and therefore Vanum. In this sense, does Tully use the
name of Vanity, in his book De Amicitia: Cic. lib. de Amicit.
Assentatio ea est molestissima (says he) cum ad vanitatem accedit authoritas:
He says, that Flattery is then a most dangerous quality, when as men of
authority do abject themselves, to so vile a Vanity. In this sense does Accius
use the name of Vanity also: putting Vanans for Fallens, as Nonnius observes;
and he cites this place out of his Alcmena, which notably expresses the whole
nature of Vanity, in this present sense, as it is taken for Falsity. Tanta
frustrando lactans, et vanans protrahit. So that Vanum is that which does
Protrahere, and Frustrando lactare: A vain thing is that which leads on our
desire, and as it were suckleth it with a false and flattering hope, and yet
utterly frustrates and deceives it in the end.

So that (to gather all the branches of this second signification of Vanity
into one bundle, and to apply them unto our present purpose) King Solomon in
calling these earthly matters Vanity, (if Vanity be taken in this second
signification) insinuates thus much; that there is nothing in all the greatest
glories of this present world, but mere deceit and falsehood: they being
empty of all those things whereof they seem to be full, light in all those
things wherein they seem to be weighty, and treacherous in all those things,
wherein they seem to be friendly; so that they do nothing but delude and
abuse our weaker senses, with false and flattering shows, of a certain
painted goodness, that which indeed is not in them; and therefore those men which
set their hearts upon them, and place their whole felicity in them, are as vain
and as foolish, as if they should make their felicity of an empty bladder,
which is Vanum Vacuum; or of a light feather, which is Vanum ventosum; or of a
lying picture, which is Vanum falsum; all which were great points of ridiculous
folly.

The third signification of this word Vanity is all one with Frustra Vanum,
quasi frustraneum, which signifies a thing that attaineth not his end. Donat.
in Eunuchum.
Hence some of the ancient and learned Grammarians define Vanum to be, Quod
fieri non potest: they call that a vain thing, which cannot be compassed; as
if a man should endeavor with Danaus his daughters, to fill a sieue with water:
or with the foolish Romans, to reach up unto the heavens with their finger; it
were a vain attempt, because he cannot attain his end. In this sense does
Virgil use the name of Vanity, in the first of his Aeneids: Virg. lib. 1.
Aeneid.
Nifrustra auguriu^ vani docuere parents. Where he expounds Vanum (as you
see) by Frustra. In this sense does Accius likewise take the name of Vanity in
the place that I cited before unto you. Tanta frustrando lactans, and vanans,
protrahit vanans frustrando In this sense also the Scriptures themselves use
the name of Vanity: Cla^is scriptura^
for that which does frustrate and disappoint us of our end. Eve hoped when she
had brought forth her first borne son Cain^, that he had been that promised
seed which should break the serpents head: but afterward perceiving by his
wicked life that he could not possibly be the man; she seeing her self
deceived in her first son, she called her next son Abel, that is to say,
Vanity: because her hope in his brother had not attained his end. The Prophet
David likewise in one of the Psalms, uses the name of Vanity three times
together in this third signification: Except the Lord build the house, Psalm.
127.1, 2.
the builder builds but in Vain. Except the Lord keep the city, the
watchman watches but in Vain. Except the Lord give his blessing, the plowmans
toyling is in Vain; that is, without the grace and blessing of God, neither the
Carpenter in his building, nor the Watchman in his watching, nor the Plowman in
his toyling, can possibly attain unto his end: and therefore he calls their
endeavors Vain. So again in another place: Psalm 33.17.
A horse is but a Vain help to save a man. And why is he but Vain? the
reason follows in the very same place, because he cannot deliver any man by all his great strength. That is, he cannot attain his end in saving of a man,
and therefore he is said to be but a Vain help. So again in another place:
Psalm. 60.11.
Help Lord, for Vain is the help of man. That is, man's help attaineth not
his end, but is like unto the rotten reed of Egypt, which pearceth the hand
that leans upon it, 2. Kin. 18.21.
if ( help Lord) be not joined with it. So likewise Saint Paul, If Christ be
not risen, then is our preaching in Vain, 1. Cor. 15.14.
and your faith, that is likewise in Vain. That is, they cannot attain their
end.

So that if Vanity be taken in this third signification, then the end of King
Solomon in calling all things Vanity, is to insinuate thus much; that no
earthly thing can attain unto his end; but that when a man has even tired
himself and wasted out his strength in hunting and pursuing after them, yet
shall he never find that end, nor that glorious good which he seeks for in
them, but shall (in the end) be driven to complain, that he has wasted and
wearied himself in Vain; as he himself professes in the book of Wisdom.
Wisd. 5.6, 7.
Take himself for an example, how greatly he abounded with all the greatest
glories that the earth could yield, Wisdom, Honor, Riches, Pleasure, and
whatsoever worldly good the heart could desire: all which when he had so fully
attained, that he was even glutted with them, yet could he no where find that
end which he sought for ^n them, to wit, any settled contentment and comfort.
and therefore first he was driven to shift and change his desire from one thing
unto another, being still wearied, but not satisfied nor contented with the
fruition of them. And after, he finding them every one to be alike deceitful,
he generally pronounces of them al, without exception, that they have nothing
in them but Vanity and Vexation; as is largely declared in the second chapter
of this book.

The fourth signification of this word Vanity, is all one with Fragile or
Mutabile; that is, A thing frail and weak, and of no firmness nor
continuance, and so Vanum is opposed to Firmum or Constans.

In this sense does Tully use the name of Vanity in his second book De natura
Deorum, Cic. lib. 2. de not. deor.
Nulla in caelo Vanitas inest, sed contra summa ratio atque constantia. He
says that there is no Vanity in the heavens, but contrariwise, all firmness
and constancy. So that he makes Vanity and constancy to be opposite and
contrary. Hence the Latins use Vanesc^re, and Euanescere, for a thing that
quickly changes, and cannot continue in his state. In tenuem e^anuit auram,
says Virgil. Virgil. lib. 4. Aeneid.
When a thing is easily dissipated (as smoke is into air) then does it
Euanescere, that is, turn into Vanity, in the Latin tongue, to wit, into this
frail and fleeting Vanity. And in the same sense do we use the word Vanish in
our English tongue likewise when a thing is quickly dissipated, and passes out
of sight, then is it said to Vanish away; Job 27.12.
that is, to be turned into this fading Vanity. In this sense does Job use this
word in his book, where he says of his fickle and deceitful friends, that
They Vanish into Vanity; noting thereby, their inconstancy, and referring the
word Vanish unto his true original, from whence it is descended: to wit, only
from this Vanity. The Prophet David likewise uses the very same word, in the
very same sense: for he says, that Man is like to Vanity, because his days
Vanish like a shadow. Psalm. 144.4.
And all the old Translations (as Saint Ierom observes) except only The
Septuagint (to illustrate this Vanity by a lively example, and to set the true
nature of it, as it were before our eyes) in stead of, All is Vanity, they
translate, Hier. in Eccle.
All is smoke, because nothing vanishes so quickly as smoke: it rises up very
stately, as it were a tower, and it mounteth up aloft, as if it would reach
unto the very heavens, and yet every little blast of wind disperseth and
drives it away. This is the unstable and frail nature of Vanity, it is as
weak as smoke: and therefore the Apostle James compares the life of man, Iam.
4 14.
for the Vanity and the weakness of it, unto a Vapor or Smoke, which suddenly
appears, but presently vanishes. And the Prophet David (as you heard before)
compares it unto a Shadow, Psalm. 144.4.
which is less then Smoke: so that nature it self can hardly fit any pattern,
or find any comparison, to express unto the life, the frail and fleeting
nature of this unstable Vanity.

Now Vanity (in this fourth sense) has two branches, or degrees, the one of
them a step unto the other: the first of them is Vanitas mutationis: The
Vanity of alteration: The second, is Vanitas corruptionis, The Vanity of
corruption, or dissolution. Of the first of those Vanities, to wit, the Vanity
of alteration, Job. 6.16, 17, 18.
Job speaks in his book, where he compares the friendship of this present
world, unto ice and snow, which with the least heat of the sun, vanishes
away: that is, alters and changes into an other nature. Of the second degree
or branch of this Vanity, to wit, Romans 8.20, 21.
the Vanity of corruption, the Apostle Paul speaks in the Epistle to the
Romans, where he pronounces of all Gods visible creatures, that They be
subject unto Vanity, that is, the Vanity of corruption, as he himself
expounds it, in plain and express words, Primas. in cap. 8. Romans
for Quicquid finem habet, Vanum est: as Primasius glosseth upon that place.

So that if Vanity be taken in this fourth signification, (as S. Jerome thinks
it is, who says, upon these words, that Caducum quidda^ in hoc verbo
Vanitatis oftenditur, that Vanity implies a weakness and fragilitie) then King
Salomons meaning is, that all these earthly things are so frail and so
momentary, that they be as wavering as the wind: having no constancy, no
firmness, no stabilitie in them, but are changed in a trice, as easily as
smoke. And it is most true indeed, as we may evidently see in every one of
them, if particularly we do look into them. For what other thing is honor,
but only a light blast of the peoples breath, which vanishes in a moment,
Pro. 31.30. Isa. 28.4.
as the sound of a tinckling Cymball in the air? What other thing is beauty,
but the weak paint of a false color, Pro. 23.5.
which with one shake of an ague is blasted, and so fades? What other thing
are riches, but a heap of shining dust, Isai. 40.6.
which with every blast of wind is puffed away and perishes? Finally, what
thing is all living flesh but only grass? (as the Prophet Isai teaches,) and
what all the glory of it, but the flower of the field? the grass withers,
and the flower fades, if the breath of the Lord do but blow upon it, as it
follows in that place. So that no globe of smoke is more quickly dissipated,
no blast of wind more quickly changed, then the weak unstable nature of all
earthly matters is.

Yea, and though they had some stability in themselves, yet have we no whit of
stability in our selves, but every day and hour are subject unto Vanity, not
only to the Vanity of mutation, but also to the Vanity of corruption. So that
though they could not be taken away from us, yet may we in a moment be taken
away from them, as Belshazzar was from the midst of his pleasure, even
whilst he was floting in his greatest iollity: Dan. 5.4, 5.
and Herod likewise in the midst of his honor, even whilst he was extolled
with his greatest glory: Act. 12.22, 23
and the rich man likewise from the midst of his treasure, Luke 12.20.
even whilst he was saying, Anima quiesce. So that both in respect of their
frailty and of ours, neither has the rich man any cause to rejoice in his
riches, Ier. 9.23, 24.
nor the strong man in his strength, nor the wise man in his wisdom, nor any
man in any thing, but only in the Lord. For Mundus transit, 1. John 2.17.
The world vanishes away as it were a little smoke, with all the concupiscences
of it: but God is always, I am, he is ever the same, and in him is no change,
as the Prophet Malachi notes: Mal. 3.6. Iam. 1* 17.
no, not so much as a shadow of change, as the Apostle James adds.

The consideration of this transitory Vanity of these earthly things, ought to
work in our hearts those same two good effects, which I mentioned in the
beginning of this speech: f^irst to loosen our affections from the world: And
secondly, to knit them unto God. The first of these two uses Saint Hierom
makes of it in his comment upon this place: Hier. in Eccle.
Aspiciens elementa (says he) and reru^ multiplice^ varietatem, admiror quidem
operum magnitudinem: s^d recogitan^ omnia haec transire, solumque Deum idem
semper esse, cogor, non semel, sed bis exclamare, Vanitas Vanitatum! When I
consider (says he) the heavens and the elements, and the wonderful variety of
creatures in them both; I stand almost astonished at the wonderful majesty and
greatness of the work: but when I consider again, that all these things are
but transitory, and that only God himself has stable perpetuity, then am I
forced again, (in as great a contempt of them) to cry out, not once but twice,
O Vanity of vanities. He calls them Vanity, because they be transitory, and
therefore of our love thinks them utterly unworthy. The second of those uses
does the Apostle Peter make in his second Epistle: Seeing then (says he) that
all these things shall be dissolved, 2 Pet. 3.11, 12.
what manner of persons ought we to be in godliness and holy conversation of
life, looking for, and hastening the day of Gods coming? The consideration of
the frailty and Vanity of all earthly things ought to make our affections to
mount up into heaven, and to setle themselves there upon stable and eternal
things: to wit, on God himself, in whom is no change, as you heard before.
This is the right use which we ought to make of considering the frailty of our
earthly state.

The fifth signification of this word Vanity is all one with Iniquity; so that
Vanum and Iniquum be (in this sense) Synonyma: a Vain thing is nothing but a
lewd and a wicked thing. In this sense does Pacuui^s use the name of Vanity, as
Nonnius observes: Ne tu turpassis Vanitudine aetatem tuam. Turpassis
Vanitudine: See that thou defile not thy youth with Vanity: that is, with
Wickedness, as with lust and filthiness, and such like vices; which (our
Savior Christ tells us) do defile the man. Mat. 5.19, 20.
In this sense do also the Scriptures use the name of Vanity, as well as in
the former: The Prophet David desires the Lord to turn away his eyes that
they behold not Vanity; Psalm. 119.37.
that is, Wickedness. And King Abiam calls Ieroboams followers Vain and
wicked men. 2. Chro. 13.7.
Vain and wicked, expounding by the latter word what he meant by the former.
And the holy Ghost calls the sins of the Gentiles, 2. Kin. 17.15.
the Vanity of the Gentiles. And again, God knows the thoughts of men, that
they be but Vain: that is, Psalm. 94.11.
Wicked. For so it is expressly affirmed in the book of Genesis: All the
imaginations of the thoughts of man's heart are only evil continually. Genesis
6.5.


So that if Vanity be taken in this fifth signification, King Salomons meaning
is, that all earthly things be not only Vain in all the forenamed kinds of
Vanity, but also in this too (which is worse then all the rest) that they be
occasions and inducements unto wicked Vanity. They draw on iniquity with the
cart-ropes of their Vanity, as the Prophet Isai teaches us. Is^i. 5.18.
Hence riches are called wicked Mammon, because they be occasions of
wickedness unto us. Luke 1^.9. 1. Tim. 6.10.
They be the root of all evil, as the Apostle Paul teaches us. And the like
may be said both of honor, of knowledge, of pleasure, and of all other worldly
goods whatsoever. There is as it were a secret hook conveyed closely into
every one of them; Quo homines Capiantur, tanquam hamo pisces, as Tully
observes out of Plato: Cic. lib. de Senec.
whereby those men which chop greedily at the bait, are by and by taken with
the hook, and so drawn on by the cords of their Vanity, first unto sin, and
then unto misery: and therefore Saint Augustine in one of his Sermons, having
entered the consideration of the dangerous and insidious nature of these earthly
goods, he cries out twenty times in detestation of them, Aug. Sermon. 31. ad
fratres in eremo.
O munde immunde, fallax and proditor, qui homines illaqueare non desinis,
quiescere non permittis: O the Vanity and villainy of this present evil world,
which with one and the same breath, both flattereth and betraieth us, neither
suffering us to sit still, with out her allurements, nor yet to escape the
snares of her punishments. So that (to gather all these significations of
Vanity together) you now may see how vile the nature of it is. It is Inutile;
it is Fucatum; it is Inane; it is Falsum; it is Leave; it is Simulatum; it is
Mendax; it is Frustraneum; it is Inconstans; it is Caducum; it is Iniquum; and
it is Stultum. These be the material parts of Vanity. Wherein you may plainly
see, what King Salomons true censure is of all these worldly things, which
seeine so specious unto men: first, that they be altogether without all fruit
and profit; which is the proper adiunct, or rather indeed the essential form
of Vanity. Secondly, that whereas they have a show of profit, yet is that
nothing but even a show indeed; yea and that an empty show, a flatering show,
a lying show. Thirdly, that if they could have any profit in them, yet were it
but a light profit, not worth the accounting of, because it never attaineth
that end which it makes show of. Fourthly, that though all those things should
attain their end, yet could they not possibly retain their end, they being so
frail and so brittle, that they be more easily broken then a bubble. Fifthly,
that they do not only disappoint and defeat us of their hoped end; but also
they mislead us to a wrong and a worse end: namely, to sin and iniquity, the
end of which is death and utter misery. And thus all the greatest glories and
good things of this world, be not only fallacia, quia dubia: but also
insidiosa, quia dulcia, as Lactantius truly notes: Lactant. lib. de opific.
dei. cap. 1.
They be not only deceitful, because doubtful, but also dangerfull, because
delightful.

Now all these worldly things being thus many ways Vanity, it follows by a
consequent of unavoidable necessity, that if man do still set his heart upon
them, he himself should be Vanity in the sixth and last sense, that is, blind
and foolish Vanity.

For in that sense sometimes do I find this word Vanity to be taken. Salust.
lib. de bello Iugurt.
In this sense does Salust use the name of Vanity in his Iugurthine War,
expounding Vanitas to be imperitia: that is, Unskillfulness and Ignorance. In
this sense also did that Grammarian take it, who contended with Apollinaris
about it, as I noted before out of A. Gellius. He confidently maintained that
Vanus and Stolidus were all one: that is, that a Vain man is nothing but a
foolish man. In this sense do likewise the Scriptures themselves use the name
of Vanity. Job 11.12.
Vain man (says Job) would feign seem to be wise: that is, Foolish men do
affect an opinion of wisdom. So likewise does Solomon use the same word: Pro.
12.11.
He that follows the Vain, is void of understanding. And so likewise does
Saint Paul use it, Ephesians. 4.17, 18.
interpreting Vanity to be nothing but the darkness of understanding. So that
man if he set his heart upon these Vain and foolish things, which be
inthralled and subject unto so many Vanities, then must needs he himself be
Vainer and foolisher then they: and so be altogether lighter then Vanity it
self, Psalm. 62.9.
as the Psalmist speaks.

Thus have I largely showed what Vanity is, and what parts it has: and that
though it be a word of many significations, yet that there is not one good one
amongst them all, as before I noted: but all of them implying, that that which
is a Vain thing, must needs be a vile thing: a false and a flattering, a
frail and a fleeting thing, and such a thing as has no kind of good thing in
it.

Let us now see in a word (for the conclusion of this Sermon) why King Solomon
having thus brought all earthly things into extreme contempt with us, by
calling them not Vain, but even Vanity, in abstracto, is not yet content with
that, but calls them still further, The Vanity of Vanities. For we must not
think that even this is done in Vain. Of which point I find three differing
opinions, which I will dispatch in three words.

The first is S. Hieroms, that this Vanity of Vanities is spoken only per
exaggerationem, by way of amplification, to note out the greatness and the
excellency of their Vanity. For the Hebrews, because they lack the highest
and superlatiue degree of comparison, they do usually express it by
ingemination and doubling of the positive: as Dominus Dominantium, The Lord of
Lords, for the greatest Lord: Canticum Canticorum, The song of songs for the
excellentest song: Seculum seculorum, The world of worlds, for the world
Eternal. And so Vanitas vanitatum, for the greatest and excellentest Vanity of
all other. So that Vanitas Vanitatum goes as far beyond common Vanity, as
Canticum beyond Verbum, and Verbum beyond Silentium: or Seculum beyond
Momentum, Hugo. de S. Victor. in Eccles.
and Momentum beyond Nihilum: as a learned Father notes. Then the meaning of
King Solomon in calling these earthly matters the Vanity of Vanity, is nothing
else, (in S. Hieroms opinion) but to note out unto us, Hier. in Ecclen.
Magnitudinem Vanitatis, the greatness of their Vanity: and that they be of all
other things the most excellent Vanity. For as the blackenes of black is the
most excellent black, and the whiteness of white is the most excellent white:
so the Vanity of Vanities is the most excellent Vanity, as it were the
sublimation and quintessence of Vanity; as if all the Vanities of the world
should lay their heads together, to make but one peereles and excellent Vanity,
that should be this Vanitas Vanitatum; and yet even that could not be Vainer
then these earthly things be, as I have formerly showed. This is the first
opinion.

The second opinion is Hugoes de Victore, who thinks, that this Vanity of
Vanities, Hugo. de S. victor. in Ecclen.
is rather spoken per inculcationem, that is by way of repetition, to note unto
us, not the magnitude, but the multitude of those deceitful Vanities, which
every where lie hid in these earthly things. For in all these earthly glories
which we think so goodly of, if we thoroughly would search and look into them,
we assuredly should find a whole nest of Vanities, (as it were of serpents) to
lie lurking in them which lead us, like brute beasts, from one Vanity to
another: first drawing us to iniquity with the cart-ropes of their Vanity, and
then unto misery, with the cart-ropes of their iniquity, as before I noted. So
that this Vanitas Vanitatum (in Hugoes opinion) does Omnem Vanitatem contiuere,
quasi genus ^mnium generum. This Vanity of Vanities is rather referred to the
number and variety, then to the greatness and quantity of these earthly
Vanities.

The third opinion is grounded upon both the former; which I find in Hugo too:
to wit, that this patheticall ingemination of Vanity of Vanities, is yet rather
spoken Per admirationem, by a way of wonder and admiration: that King Solomon
considering, in the deepnes of his wisdom, both the magnitude and the
multitude of these earthly Vanities, and yet, how greedily Vain men pursue and
follow after them: Admirans and stupen: ait, Vanitas Vanitatum. He cries out
as even astonished with admiration, O Vanity of Vanities: that ever any man
should be so grossly blinded, as to be deceived by them. For this repetition and
doubling of the word, as he notes in that place, Et re^ magniudinem, et
admirationis significat nouitatem. It notes out unto us, both the wonderful
greatness, and the marvelous strangenes of that we wonder at. And surely though
the proverb be, that Sapiens nihil admiratur: that he which is a wise man will
wonder at nothing; yet in this case, of the wonderful Vanity of the world, the
wisest man is always the greatest wonderer; when he considers, Psalm. 39 6.
How vain men walk in a Vain shadow (as the Psalmist speaks) striving with
infinite labor, vexation, and trouble, to get unto themselves, a thing of
nothing: which first they are uncertain whether they can obtain; and yet, by
and by, most certain that they can not long retain, for the unstable
condition, both of it and of them selves So that, though all other worldly
things be no better then mere Vanity, yet man himself (of all other things)
is the greatest Vanity. He is a world of Vanities, yea a world of wicked
Vanities, Who drinks up iniquity, as a beast drinks water, as Job notes in
his book: yea he is indeed, Job 15.16.
this Vanitas Vanitatum: he is (...) this Vanity of Vanities, which the
Preacher here speaks of: not one single Vanity (as other things be) but an
vpheaped mass of many Vanities together: His cogitations, consultations, and
contemplations, Vanity: his proiects, actions, and endeavors Vanity, his life
Vanity, his death Vanity, nay Vanity of Vanities, as Hierom collecteth; Si
viuus homo Vanitas est, certe mortuus homo, Vanitas Vanitatum est. Finally,
Hier. in Ecclens.
all the creatures of God (for his sake) be Vanity: and he (amongst the
creatures) is the greatest Vanity; whose beginning was with the Vanity of
Mutability, Genesis 3.6. Job 15.16.
in desiring to change and to alter his estate: whose continuing is in the
Vanity of Iniquity, which (as you heard even now) he drinks in like water;
Romans 6.23.
and, whose ending will be with the Vanity of Mortality. For, the certain
wages of his sin shall be death. Isa. 5.18.
Thus draw we (like to beasts) in the cords of many Vanities, from our birth
unto our death. So that man (as I said) is not only Vanity, but also Vanity of
Vanities: that is, Psalm. 38.5.
vniuersa Vanitaes, as the Psalmist calls him: Vniuersa vanitas omnis homo,
Man is an universal Vanity, and as it were a Compendium of all the Vanities of
the world together: of the Vanity of Mortality in his body; of the Vanity of
Iniquity, in his soul: and of the Vanity of Mutability in them both. Yea and
further to express the inexpressible Vanity of man every way, he says (in an
other place) that, Man is altogether lighter then Vanity it self: Psalm. 62.9.
so that no Vanity can compare with the Vanity of Man; no lightness with his
lightness. If it should be demanded, what is lighter then wind, we might
answer, that Vanity is: for so the Prophet Isai affirms in his prophecy.
Isa. 41.29.
If it should be demanded, what is lighter the^ Vanity, we might answer, that
Man is: for so the prophet David affirms in the Psalm. But if it should be
demanded, what is lighter then Man; we must answer that Nothing is. Isa. 40.17.
For so the prophet Isai affirms in an other place, where he says of Man,
that he is less then Nothing; nay, Nothing is not lighter the^ Man, but Man is
lighter then Nothing. For, he is not only Vanity, which is as little as
Nothing, but he is Vanity of Vanities, which is less then nothing. Genesis 18.27.
Thus pleases it the holy spirit of God, to humble the haughty and proud
spirit of man, by making him the meanest and vilest of al creatures: yea, as
vile as dust, or ashes, as Abraham acknowledges: that so, he finding nothing
of worth in himself, nor in any of those earthly things whereunto he addicts
himself, he might be led by the hand, from all liking of himself, and of the
things of this world, to bestow his love on God, where it ought to be placed:
for this is the true end, Aug. lib. 20. de ciuit. dei. cap. 3.
whereunto this whole book drives, and this so often repetition of Vanity of
Vanities, as S. Augustine truly notes: Non vtique ob al^ud, nisi vt eam vitam
desiderunt, qua Vanitatem non habet sub hoc sole, sed veritatem sub illo qui
fecit hunc solemn. Which the Lord grant unto us, for his dear Son our
Saviors sake, to whom with the Father and the holy Spirit, be all honor and
glory both now and for ever. Amen.

The second Sermon, at Canterbury, at the Lord Archbishops visitation.
ECCLES. 1. VER. 2. Vanity of Vaniities, says the Preacher, Vanity of
Vanities, all is Vanity.


I Have (partly here, and partly elsewhere) unfolded the whole substance of this
present Scripture; yea, and that in many Sermons, as you may remember,
delivering in all of them such profitable doctrines, as I thought best befitted
the nature of the hearers: which I purpose not at this time to rehearse again
unto you, but only to offer unto your considerations, a modest defense of some
special doctrines, which have been much traduced, as false and erroneous:
that so, those questions which arise in the Church may peaceably be, both heard
and determined, not in any blind and obscure conuention (as some of them have
been) but, in a learned and a lawful congregation.

For our fitter ingresse into which discourse, let me only repeat thus much:
That, the general parts which I considered in this Scripture, were in number
two: The Author, and the Matter: or his Doctor, and this Doctrine. The Author
is here called by the name of a Preacher; Says the Preacher: The Matter is
delivered in the form of a censure; defininitiuely pronouncing of all earthly
glory, that it is indeed nothing but Vanity of Vanity.

In the Author of this doctrine I made this observation: that he calls not
only himself A Preacher, who spoke this Sermon with his lively voice as
Athanasius affirms; Athanas in Svnop. Psalm 19.3.
but he calls this book A Preacher too, though it have neither voice nor
language, as the Psalmist speaks. From whence I then collected these three
positions, for the clearing of certain truths, which have been greatly
obscured, Atramento Sepiarum, as the Orator speaks: by the writings of
certain troublers and disturbers of our peace. Cic. lib. 2. de Not. deor.


First, that all the books of the Scriptures are Preachers unto us, which
teach us most plainly the way of Salvation; not only when they be expounded,
but also when they are humbly and faithfully read. This position I then proved:
first, by the authority of king Solomon in this place, who calls this book
(as you see) A Preacher; which had been an unfit, and a misapplied title if
the books themselves did not preach unto us.

Secondly, I proved it by the authority of S. James in the Acts of the
Apostles, Act. 5.21.
who calls Reading expressly by the name of Preaching. Moses (says he) has
them that Preach him in every city, seeing he is read every sabbath day. He
says that he is preached, because he is read: Because: for even Beza himself
in his translation expresses that place by this causal, conjunction Quum,
Because. So that he which denies the reading of the Scripture to be a
preaching to us, he denies the authority both of the old and new Testaments.
For Solomon affirms it in the old, and James affirms it in the new: yea,
and (as Eusebius notes of the Metaphrasis of Talianus) he puts the holy
Ghost himself to school, Eusebius. lib. 4. Eccles. hist. cap. 27.
and will teach him how to speak more fitly and exactly, though Sus. Mineruam.
Cic. lib. 1. Acad.
For the holy Ghost, as you see, calls a book a Preacher: and he calls
Reading Preaching, which certain men amongst us count an absurd kind of
speaking: nay, a false and an erroneous doctrine, blaspheming therein even the
Spirit of truth himself.

The second position which I deduced out of the former observation, in his
calling a book by the name of a Preacher, was this: that this Reading is not a
faint or a feeble kind of Preaching (as some men affirm of it, who call bare
reading but bare feeding) but it is a mighty and a powerful kind of preaching;
both sufficient, and efficient to beget in our hearts both faith and all other
spiritual virtues: if we rightly come prepared unto the reading of them, and
if God vouchsafe his blessing unto our labors in them; two necessary
conditions unto our profitable ^eading: the first of them given by S.
Augustine; the second by S. Chrysostom; Aug. lib. de vtilit. credend. cap. 6.
Chrysostom. hom. 21. in Genesis
yea, and both of them no less necessary in preaching, then in reading:
without which it is no more in the Preachers power then it is in the Readers,
to beget any good in the hearts of the hearers. But these two being granted,
even bare reading (as some scornful spirits do in derision term it) may be
as active a kind of preaching, and as operative of all true Christian virtues,
as their most adorned or impassioned Sermons. This position I proved: first by
the authority of the Prophet Moses, who ordained in the book of Deuteronomie,
Deuteronomy. 31.11, 12.
that the book of the Law should be read unto the people: yea, and that unto
them all, men, women, and children: yea, and that every time that they appeared
before the Lord. Now to what end must all this reading be? yea, and reading so
often of one and the same thing? He tells us in that place, that these three
effects shall ensue and follow of it: the knowledge of God, the fear of God,
and the faithful keeping of the commandments of God. All which notable
effects (as there he notes) the bare reading of the word shall effect and bring
forth; yea, and that not only in men of understanding, but also even in women
and children: yea, and that not only in the Israelites, but also in the
Heathen and stranger that should hear it. Which point I pray you diligently to
note: that even bare reading is able of it self, not only to nourish faith in
the heart of the faithful, but also to beget faith in the heart of the
infidel, and such as before did neither know God nor his word.

Secondly, I proved the same position by the authority of Ezra, Nehem. 8.9.
who found by his experience, the former prediction of Moses to be true: for
when as he had but only read the book of the Law unto the people, it was of
so mighty and powerful an operation, that it cast them all into mourning and
weeping: yea, and that so excessive, that he himself was constrained by a
public edict and commandment to restrain it. Now though in that place there
be some mention made of exposition, and giving the sense; yet note, I pray you,
that this notable effect of their mourning is not there ascribed unto the
exposition, but only to the reading; for it is said that it was the words of
the Law which wrought this vehement passion, and not any gloss which was made
upon them.

A like effect also did the bare reading of the Law produce in King Josias: 2.
King. 22.11, 19.
it had so powerful an operation in him, that it caused him to rend his
clothes off from his back, and his heart to melt away within him: and yet was
there here no exposition, but only bare reading. The same points I yet
further backed by the testimonies both of Jeremy and Baruck: The first of whom
foretold as much as Moses: Ier. 36.6, 7.
and the second sound performed as much as Ezra in the bare reading of the
word: Baruck. 1.5, 6
for it made the people both to fast, and to pray, and to weep, and to give
alms unto their needy brethren. Now what or whose preaching could have wrought
more worthy and noble effects then this bare reading did?

Thirdly, I proved the same position by the testimony of S. John, who ascribes
even faith it self (which is the chief point in question) unto this action of
reading. John 20.31.
These things (says he) are written, that ye should believe. Now, that which
is written cannot make us believe, but only by reading. Finally, I confirmed
it by the testimony of our Savior, in bidding us Search the Scriptures, that
is, to read it, and adding, John 5.39.
that so we should find eternal life in it. So that, by the forecited
Scriptures you see, that both The knowledge of God, and The faith of God, and
The fear of God, and The obedience of God, and Eternal life with God, (which
is the highest reward of all virtues) is expressly ascribed unto the bare
reading of the word. And therefore those men which deny reading to be an
effectual kind of preaching, and disable it, from begetting either faith, or
any other spiritual virtue in us, they make Moses and Jeremy two false
prophets: Nehemiah and Baruck, two false historians: S. John a false Apostle:
and our Savior, a false Christ; for all these affirm it.

The third position which I gathered from the former observation, in calling a
book by the name of a Preacher, was this: That Preaching is not always more
effectual then reading. This position I then proved by two special instances:
The first of them out of Tully; Cic. lib. 2 ad Attic. Epist. 12.
who found his understanding (the first part of his mind) a great deal more
instructed by reading a short letter, sent unto him from Atticus, then it had
been by hearing a long discourse of Curioes, upon the self same points:
whereupon he cried out, vbi sunt, qu^, (...)? where be they now (says he) who
say the word spoken has greater power in it, then has the word written? He
there confuteth that opinion, by his own experience: Quanto ^agis vidi ex tuis
literis, quam ex illius sermon^, quid ageretur? The second instance was out of
S. Paul: whose adversary found his affection, 2. Cor. 10.10.
(the other part of the mind) a great deal more touched, by the bare reading
of his letters (which he plainly confessed, to be strong and mighty) then ever
it had been, by the hearing of his Sermons, which he despised, as light, and
things of no value. His letters indeed (says he) are sore and strong, but his
bodily presence is weak, and his speech of no value. This is truly and
ingeniously the sum of that doctrine, which heretofore I have delivered as
concerning the comparison of Reading and Preaching.

In all which, what was spoken, that could give the least offense, unto any
well meaning, or but indifferent mind? What that any way offended, either
against any article of our Christian faith, or any duty of godly life: or,
against any other point of sound and wholesome doctrine? Nay, what but
justified by the authority, both of the old and new Testament, and ratified by
the testimony of the holy ghost himself. Nay, yet further, what, but avouched
for a sealed truth, by all true Protestants, against the Papists? who teach us,
that the Scripture is dark and obscure, and such as cannot preach unto us.
With whom I did never look that any of our men (professing themselves, to be
such reformed and reforming Protestants) would ever have joined hands as we
evidently see (by the writings of some and the speeches of others) they
apparently do. For, those three forenamed positions of mine, which (I am sure)
would greatly have offended the Papists, if they had bin my hearers, and been
censured of them as heretical doctrines, have likewise displeased some, that
call themselves Protestants. Who have (in their ignorance) traduced all those
three former positions, both far and near, and howted them up and down, not
only as three false and erroneous doctrines: but also, as doctrines dangerous,
and such as tend directly unto the disgrace of preaching, and making it of none
effect: though no word were spoken unto any such purpose, no, nor yet, that
could be forced unto any so badde a sense, unless it were this one (which
must be done with a wrinch too) that they which prefer any preachers Sermon,
either in excellency, or in effecacie before the holy Scriptures, they
prefer this word of a man, before the word of God: which I take to be no
heresy, but an impregnable verity, and so I hope to make it to appear most
plainly to you.

And therefore, I must crave your Christian patience, that I may clear the
former doctrines, from the two former imputations; especially, from that
imputation of falsehood: which is the greatest infamy, if it be true, and the
greatest injury, if it be false, that can possibly be cast upon a Preacher:
yea a far greater injury, then to call him either a murderer, a theife, or a
traitor. For to be a false teacher, is to be all these together; it is to be
both a murdererer of men's souls; a thief, unto Christ's fold: and a trator to
Gods honor. And therefore, Saint Hierom says, that Neminem decet in
suspicione baereseos esse patientem. Hier. Epist. ad Pammach.
That no man ought to be patient, when his doctrine is impeached. And Ruffine
though his adversary in some other matters, yet in this agrees with him; That
he which can endure the suspicion of an heretic, it is impossible for him to
be a true Catholic. And therefore, I must pray your license, that by a modest
and a Christian Apology, I may vindicate these doctrines into their native
verity: and not suffer such tried and approved truths, to run up and down,
so branded for errors, but freely and sincerely to discharge that duty, which I
owe both unto God, and to his truth, and to the Church, and to my self. All
whom I should betray into the hands of the wicked, if I should permit such
innocent truths to be any longer so scourged and whipped, as they have lately
been, and not do my best endeavor to rescue and deliver them.

First therefore, as concerning those three positions which have bin so
mightily resisted, you are to know thus much: (which I doubt not, but the
greatest part of this grave and learned auditore, being the flower of our
Clergy, does sufficiently understand) that there is none of them all which is
any nouelty of mine own invention, but are all of them maine and beaten
grounds of religion, expressly and positiuely set down, by all our learned
Protestants, in their disputations (upon these points) against the Papists.
Breut. pricope tertia.
Of which I wonder, that some of the reprouers of those doctrines, should be so
unlearned, as to be ignorant.

For first, whereas the Papists teach us, that the Scriptures of themselves,
are dark and obscure, and such as cannot teach us, much less preach unto us,
because they lack a voice; whereupon they call the Scripture, in a kind of
derision, but Mutum magistrum, that i, sa dumb Teacher: we positiuely set
down both the contraries against them. First, for their position, That the
Scriptures in themselves are but dark and obscure, and such as cannot teach
us: we set down this (...) against them, 2. Pet. 1.19.
that The Scripture is as clear, and as bright as a light, which shines in
darkness, as the Apostle Peter teaches us: Chriso. hom. 1. in Johan.
nay, as bright as the sun beams, as Saint Chrysostom avouches; they being
in themselves so facile and evident, that they are able to instruct even the
simple and idiot, in all doctrine necessary unto their salvation: Hom. 21. in
Genesis
Adeo vt diuina scriptura opus non habeat humana sapientia, vt intelligatur: as
he writes in an other place. So that (as the Apostle Paul affirms) If the
doctrine of the Gospel be hid unto any, 2. Cor. 4.3.
it is but only unto such as perish. And this truth we prove against the
Papists by many great and strong arguments, grounded partly upon the authority
of the holy Scriptures; partly upon the concludencie of necessary reasons: and
partly upon the testimony of the ancient Fathers, Whitak. cont. Bellarm.
quaest 4. de Script. cap. 4.
being twenty six in number, as I find them collected by a learned Writer: and
all of them most excellent, answering fully all objections which are usually
brought, either by Papists or Schismatikes against those positions. Which
because they are all of them most worthy your hearing, and yet the time will
not now allow me their speaking, I refer those that be learned unto our men's
disputation against Bellarmines fourth question upon the Scriptures: where they
shall evidently see, that there is no point of doctrine necessary to
salvation, but that it is most plainly and familiarly delivered in the
Scripture, even to the capacity of every simple Reader, yea even the simplest
of all: Etiam Publicanis, Piscatoribus, Fabris Pastoribus, Illiteratis, Chris
hom. 3. de Lazaro.
and Idi^tir, as Saint Chrysostom notes. Unto which his induction, Saint
Agustine adds his general conclusion, Aug. lib. de Vtili creden. cap. 6.
Nec in caeteris contrarium est videri; though in somewhat other words, Vt nemo
sit (says he) quii^de haurire non possit, quod sibisatis sit. That for their
false position.

Now for their frivolous reason, why the Scriptures cannot teach us because
they lack a voice, we set down this position: That the Scriptures have not
only a lively voice in them, as birds and beasts have, but also a speaking
voice too, as men and Angels have, whereby they do both teach us, and preach
unto us. And this we prove by many sound reasons: whereof I will give you a
taste but only of some one or two, because the Arguments be long and the time
is short.

Our first argument is this: which (because I am now as it were in the Schole,
and as in a Colonie of both the Universities) I will conclude in Scholasticall
form. It is in effect thus much.

If the Scrptures instruct us with a speaking voice, then do they likewise
preach unto us: For what other thing is preaching but instructing with the
voice? But the Scriptures instruct us with a speaking voice: Ergo, They preach
unto us.

The Assumption we prove by manifold texts of Scripture, where the Scripture is
expressly affirmed to speak unto us. As namely in that place unto the Romans:
Whatsoever the law speaks, Romans 3.19.
it speaks unto them that are under the Law: where the Law is said to speak
unto us. So likewise in another place unto the Hebrews: Have ye forgotten the
consolation which speaks unto you as unto children? Heb. 12.5.
where the Proverbs of Solomon are said to speak unto us. For from thence is
that testimony fetched. So likewise in another place unto the Romans: What
says the Scripture? where the Scripture in general is said to speak unto us.
Romans 4.3.
And diverse other such like places there be, alleged by our men against the
Papists in discussing the fifth question upon the Scriptures. Wherein we labor
to prove it as a ground of our religion, against the Papists heretical
doctrine, that the Scriptures in themselves do both speak and preach unto us.

Our second argument is this: That if the Scriptures do expound the Scriptures
unto us, then do they also preach unto us. For what other thing is preaching,
but expounding of the Scriptures? But the Scriptures expound the Scriptures
unto us; Ergo, They preach unto us.

The assumption of this argument we prove by many arguments, every one having
the strength of a firm demonstration, and containing sufficient matter to
furnish a whole Sermon: being all of them deduced, either from express
Scriptures, or from necessary reasons; or from the concurring judgments of
the ancient fathers. Yea, and (that you may perceive how far a learned
judgment does differ from an ignorant) that man of worthy memory M. D.
Whitaker (whom for his godly labors against the Papists all posterity will
reverence) he delivers his judgment upon this question in these words:
Whitak. in Bellarm. quaest. 5. de Scrip. cap. 8.
which I pray you to mark diligently.

First he affirms, that God speaks unto us as plainly in his word as ever
he spoke unto Moses in the cloud when he talked there with him face to face.
Secondly, he affirms that the Scriptures do preach so plainly and so
excellently unto us, that if God should speak unto us from heaven in his own
lively voice, he neither would deliver any other matter, nor yet dispose it in
any other form then he has already delivered in the Scripture. Thirdly he
affirms of the contrary opinion, that it is and falsum, and impium: That is,
not only an erroneous but also an impious kind of doctrine. And fourthly, he
affirms of the defenders of it, that they be and inepti and audaces, that is,
not only an ignorant, but also an impudent kind of persons. This is his
judgment of the reprouers of my doctrine.

So that, for the first of my three positions: That the Scriptures in
themselves do preach unto us; you see that it is no such strange and uncouth
monster, as some men (in the deepenes of their ignorance) have imagined it to
be, preparing themselves with no less folly to fight against it, then the
soldiers in Pacu^ius did against a Snaile, which they thought to be some
Monstrum borrendu^, inform, ingens, as the Poet speaks; Virg. lib. 3. Aeneid.
that is, some fierce and terrible monster, when they heard it thus described;
Animal terrigenum, tardigradum, Cic. lib. 2. de Divine.
Domiportum, sanguine cassum. Thus ignorance and blindenes, there faineth many
monsters, where true and solid knowledge finds none at all.

But let us now proceed unto our second position: that Reading is an
effectual and a powerful kind of Preaching. For which point; whereas the
Papists teach us that the Scriptures as they be dark, and cannot teach us, so
they be weak and cannot move us; whereupon they call the Scripture but literam
frigidam, and egenum elementum; that is, a weak and beggarly rudiment: we
positiuely set down these Theses to the contrary: First, for the plainenes and
perspicuity of the Scripture: that Deus nobis in Scripturis planissime
loquitur: that God speaks unto us most plainly in the Scripture; which is
Jewels position in his Apology. Secondly, for the power and efficacy of the
Scripture, that Sacra scriptura, vel cum ligitur, vel cum auditur, est
ordinarium organon, quo spiritus sanctus mentes lectorum and auditorum
regenerat illustrat, viuificat, and caelestibus virtutibus ornat. What can
there be more plain, or more full, or more direct unto our purpose? And this
is the categoricall position of Brentius in his learned disputation (upon this
point) against Sotus: he expressly affirms, that the very Scriptures, not
only when they be Preached unto us, but also when they be but only Read by us
are an ordinary means to regenerate men's souls, to inlighten them, to
quicken them, and to beget all heavenly virtues in them; and all this it
effects, Ve^ cum ligitur, when it is but only Read. Words of great force
and great power, and such as prove the Scriptures to be neither dumb, nor yet
dull teachers, but indeed most powerful, and moving Preachers.

For proof whereof (amongst other arguments) we use these Scriptures
following. First, that place of the Psalm, where the Prophet David ascribes
unto the word of God, not only to be able to inlighten the mind and
understanding, but also to work upon the heart and affection. He says that it
is able, Psalm. 19.7, 8.
both to give light unto the eyes, and wisdom to the simple: yea and further
to comfort the heart, yea and even to convert the soul. What can there be more,
either performed by the Preacher, or desired by the hearer, then here you see
most plainly ascribed to the Scripture?

Secondly, we allege that place of the prophet Jeremy, where he compares the
word of God unto a fire and a hammer, Ier. 23.29.
which is able to break even the strong rocks a sunder, and (as John the
Baptist speaks) even out of very stones to raise up children unto Abraham.
Mat. 3.9.
I trow, it must have no small strength and power in it, that is able to cleave
and to break a stony rock.

Thirdly, we allege that place of the Epistle unto the Hebrews: Heb. 4.12.
The word of God is lively and powerful in operation* and sharper then any two
edged sword, that it pierces even to the dividing of the soul and the spirit,
the joints and the marrow, and is able to discern, even the very inward
thoughts and intentions of the heart. A notable place indeed, and which
evidently proves, that the Scripture is not either a dumb teacher, nor yet a
dull worker, but a mighty and a potent preacher, even to the very hearts of men.

Neither be these places to be understood of the word Preached only, (the
only evasion of our ignorant adversaries) but of the word Read also. For to
that only end they be alleged by us Protestants against the Papists, and
otherwise they should be alleged beside the purpose. The question being
between us, not of the Preaching of the Scripture, but of the Reading of them:
of the native and inherent perspicuity of the Scripture, and not of that
accidental light, which is brought unto them by our expositions: as they that
be learned and conversant in the controversies, do right well understand.

Let us therefore now proceed unto our third positio^ which was thought the
greatest monster: that Preaching is not always more powerful then Reading. For
that point, let me give you but only this one watch word: that it is known to
be a notable Art and cunning of the Papists, to join unto their former
disgraces of Reading, an excessive and hyperbolical commendation of Preaching:
that so, they having weaned the people from the reading of the Scripture,
whereby their errors might be discovered, and brought them on wholly to
depend upon their Sermons, and as it were to hang upon their lips, that their
Ipse dixit might pass for demonstrations, they might so lead them more easily
(as it were hooded and blindfold) into all kind of errors. I pray God it be
not also the drift of some others, that would seem to be far unlike unto the
Papists. But to return unto our question.

Whereas Petrus a S^^o, a notable Papist, sets down the whole sum of
papistical doctrine, as concerning the comparison of Reading and Preaching, in
this short position: that Praedicatio viua, long superat scripturam mortuam,
that, Lively ^reaching is far more excellent, then is dead Reading: that
position does Brentius, a very learned Protestant, confute and refell, as a
popish error, in his Defense of the Confession of Christopher, Duke of
Wittenberge, where he handles this point both fully and substantially, both
largly and learnedly censuring this forenamed position of Sotus, to be a
contumely and reproach, not only against the holy Scriptures, but also against
our Savior Christ himself. Again, whereas Hossius an other papist affirms
unto the same effect, that the Scriptures are but bare and naked elements, but
Preaching is indeed the lively word of God: that position does Jewel (the
jewel of our Church) most earnestly confute in his learned Apology; affirming
it to be a speech (in effect) as blasphemous, as the horrible heresy of
Montanus, who presumptuously vaunted of himself, that he could speak better
then the holy ghost himself: which is indeed both a true and a wise censure of
it. For what is it else, to prefer our Sermons before the holy Scriptures, but
to prefer men's speeches before the holy ghost? Therefore, this doctrine of the
Papist, the Protestants confute, by many strong reasons: which prove unto us
plainly, that the Scriptures of themselves are both in Teaching and in
Meaning, of far greater power, then any man's expositions, how artificial
soever. I will give you but a taste of some one or two of our men's reasons, and
so pass on to the second of their scruples.

First therefore, for the first point, that the Scriptures have in themselves,
a greater power to teach and instruct us, then any preachers Sermons, Luther
proves it by this reason. Because all Preachers and expounders of the
Scriptures do prove their expositions to be true by Scriptures. But every
proof must be a Notiori, as those that be learned know. Ergo, the Scriptures
be Notiores, that is to say, More known and more plain, then any Preachers
expositions. This is Luthers opinion, confirmed with his reason, which the
learnedest on our side have allowed for a good one: yea, and do use the same
themselves against the Papists.

Now secondly, for the second point, that The Scriptures have also greater
power to move us, then any Preacher Sermons: that most grave and learned
father Brentius, (for so it pleases Bishop Jewel to honor him, Defes. Apol.
p. 520.
yea and very worthily too, for his great learning and wisdom) he, not only
affirms it, as his opinion, but also confirms it by good and sound reason:
and he cites for this purpose, that saying of our Savior; Luke 16.31.
He that will not harken unto Moses and the Prophets, he will never be
persuaded, though a man should be raised from the dead to speak unto him.
Which is a notable place indeed, for the power and efficacy of the written
word, and such, as evidently proves, that he which will not be moved with the
reading of the Scriptures, he will never be reclamed by hearing any Sermons, be
they never so patheticall, never so effectual. Which our Savior Christ
himself does likewise acknowledge in plain and express words: John 5.47.
If you believe not Moses writings (says he) how will ye believe my words? So
that even he himself ascribes greater power of working faith in our hearts
unto the written Scriptures, then unto his own most lively and excellent
Sermons: John 7.46.
though it be affirmed of him, that never did any man speak as he spoke.

Thus as concerning those three forenamed positions, which were thought by some
to be such great novelties, you se that there is nothing in the at all
contained, but that which is both said and proved by us Protestants, and
gainsaid by none, but either Papists, or Schi^matikes: and therefore I having
now obtained a fit opportunity (which hitherto I lacked) for the deciding of
these questions before competent Judges, I thought good to permit them unto
your grave and learned censures; and so in peace to dismiss their reprouers:
For whom I doubt not, but I may truly pray, as our Savior Christ does for his
persecutours. O father forgive them, for they know not what they do: they all
of them being no better then ignorant and blind guides, Luke 23.34
which lead you after them like blind followers into the very ditch: I speak
of the lay part of this auditory. For as once the prophet Elizeus, when he saw
that the Aramites were smitten with blindness, came unto them and told them that
they were out of the way, and so made them follow him out of the way indeed, 2.
King. 6.19.
until he had brought them into the midst of their enemies: so certain of
your false and seduced prophets, perceiving your blindness in such questi^ons as
these, have likewise told you, that you are out of the way, and so enticed you
to follow them, until (as you now see) they have at last brought you into the
tents of the Papists, and there they leave you: which may be a good caveat for
you to take heed what manner of men you follow as your guides hereafter, lest,
whilst you think they lead you into the gates of Sion, they lead you indeed
(through their ignorance and blindness) into the gates of Babylon, as you see
that these have done.

But let us now proceed unto the second of their scruples: That this doctrine
tends greatly unto disgrace of Preaching, and making it of none effect:
because I prefer reading, in calling it the word of God, and make preaching
to be but the word of man. For so it has pleased some men to collect, though
without all due consequent. For if any man do construe my commendation of
Reading to be a disgrace of Preaching, he may by the same reason (or rather
lack of reason) condemn of the same fault, even the Apostles themselves. The
Apostle Paul compares Faith and Hope, 1. Cor. 13.13.
and Charity together, and he prefers Charity before both the other: shall
we therefore affirm, that he disgraceth both Faith and Hope? or that he makes
either of them unnecessary for a Christian? God forbid. To come a little
nearer unto our own question: The Apostle James bids us, that If any man
lack wisdom, he shll ask it of God. Whereby he implies that spiritual
wisdom may be attained by prayings. Iam. 1.5.
Shall we therefore say that S. James disableth Preaching, and makes it
unnecessary to the attaining of wisdom? Nay, (to come home unto the very point
of our question) the Apostle John tells us that were need not that any man
should teach us any thing, 1. John 2.27
because the holy ghost himself does teach us all things. This comes very
near unto that which they reprove. And yet (as I think) there is no man so
graceless, as from hence to collect, that S. John disgraceth Preaching, or
makes it vnneedful unto our salvation: yet may that be wrested out of the
words of S. John with a great deal less violence then it could be out of
mine. Chrysostom. hom. 3. in 2. These.
S. Chrysostom has a notable place to this purpose, wherein he perstringeth
the folly of those fantastical persons, which will never come to the Church,
but only to hear Sermons, telling them plainly, that if they would be such
Readers as they ought, they should not stand in need of any Preachers at
all. I will set down his words, because they be most pregnant, and deliver
most plainly his resolute judgment. Ad quid, inquis, ingredior (says he in
the person of those conceited auditors) nisi aliquem Sermocinantem an^iero?
What should I do at Church (say they) if there be no man there to preach?
There is their objection. Now hear his answer to them. Istud omnia perdidit
and corrupit: This is that (says he) which has marred and spoiled all. Quid
enim opusest co^cionatore? Per nostram negligentia^ necessitas ista facta est:
[Haue ye not need of a reader says he] for of reading he speaks in that
place. Nay, there is indeed no true need of a Preacher, It is but only our
negligence in reading, which makes us so much to stand in need of Preaching.
Why so? He adds in that place: Omnia clara sunt and plana ex Scripturis.
Quacunque necessaria sunt, manifesta sunt. Sedquia delicatuli estis auditores,
delectationem audiendo venantes, propterea and ista quaeritis. All things
(says he) are open and easy in the Scripture, and whatsoever is necessary
unto salvation, the same is evident and plain. But because we are wanton and
delicate hearers, hunting only after pleasure and delight in our hearing, that
is it which makes us run so fast after Preaching. Here is Chrysostomes
judgment as concerning Reading and Preaching, wherein he goes very far in
advancing of Reading, and yet has no purpose to depresse or disgrace
preaching, which no man used more diligently.

These things have I noted to rectify the error of such malignant
interpreters, and to exemplify unto the simpler hearted hearers, that
spiritual things may be compapared together, without any wrong or disgrace
unto either, yea, Tertul. lib. 1. cont. Marci. cap. 29.
even then when as one is preferred before another. Because (as Tertullian very
aptly distinguishes unto our present purpose) Non praeferrimus vt malo bonum,
sed vt bono melius. We do not prefer them as a good thing before an evil,
but as a better thing before a good. And it is a rule of Rhetorike (yea and of
reason too) as concerning such comparisons, Cic. lib. 2. ad Heren.
that Non necesse est, in rebus comparandis, vt alteram vituperes, si alteram
lauds: and therefore as S. Hierom reasons against Iouiniam: Hier. lib. 1.
cont. Iouin.
Nunquid argentum non erit argentum, siaurum argento pretiosius dicatur? Is
therefore silver made no silver, if a man chance to say that gold is better? So
may I likewise reason in this our present question: Is therefore Preaching made
no preaching, if in some points it be surpassed by Reading? Or must Preaching
of necessity be disgraced, if Reading in any respect be preferred? He must
needs be a man of a deplored blindness, unto whom things so distant do seem
to have coherence.

Then why should my commendation of eading, which I gave, both according to the
holy Scriptures, and to the ancient fathers, and to the professed doctrine of
all true Protestants, be rather accounted a disgrace of Preaching, then their
excessive commendation of Preaching be accounted for a disgrace unto reading?
or unto praying, both which they have iustled out of the Church by their
Preaching, to use Cartwrights own words. This forsooth is the matter: that in
comparing a Sermon with the Scripture, I called Preaching but, The word of a
man; which they confidently hold to be truly and properly the very word of
God: and resolutely affirm that it ought to find the same credit and authority
with all men. A very untrue and an unsound position, that I say no more of it.

And therefore I pray so much equity of you that be unlearned (which I doubt
not to obtain of those that be learned) that that which shall be spoken
against this false opinion, may not be so perverted as if it were spoken simply
against all Preaching: which every good Christian must of necessity confess to
be a necessary duty in the Church of God, and a powerful instrument to draw
men's souls unto him. But yet for all that, as Preaching may be too much
depressed, so may it be likewise too much advanced, even to the dishonor of
God himself, whose own work it is. For as Job notes in his book; that a
man may speak wickedly even in defense of God, Job 13 7.
so may a man speak wickedly even in defense of Preaching. Which surely is
then done, when we make our own sermons (which are but men's inventions) to
equal in authority Gods divine and holy Scripture.

And therefore that you may the better perceive the monstrous absurdities of
this foolish opinion, give me leave I pray you (in a word or two) to set before
your eyes that strange kind of doctrine, which these men have delivered, as
concerning Preaching: for so you shall a great deal more easily discern
whether such kind of Preaching be the word of God or no.

First, they openly deny that the Reading of Gods word is a Preaching of it:
because this lacks exposition. And yet S. James tells us, Act. 15.21.
that Moses is Preached, whenever he is Read; even without exposition. In
which only instance of Reading the Scripture, Preaching may truly and
properly by called The word of God. But yet this Reading though it be of all
other (in this one respect) the most divine and authentical kind of Preaching,
because it delivers the word of God, most simply and sincerely in his own
proper form; without either any mixture of humane invention* or any tainture
of humane corruption: yet this do they first of all, and most of all cast away
from being Preaching, and call this no better then playing upon a Stage. D.
Whitgift. P. 579.
They be the very words of some of our chief reformers; though I know there be
many which will hardly believe that so leaud and profane a comparison, should
ever proceed out of the mouth of a Christian, especially of so purified and
refined Christians as they would seem to be.

Secondly, they exclude from Preaching, all those discourses which are made by
any other persons then only by our selves. Whether it be by way of explication
of a text, as the Comments and Sermons of diverse great Divines, both ancient
and recent: or by way of Common place, without any certain text: as the
Homilies of our Church, which be indeed most learned and most godly Sermons,
howsoever disgraced by those scornful spirits, which spare not (as you see)
the word of God it self, but blasphemously compare the Reading of it, unto the
playing upon a Stage. But yet neither of these kinds do they allow for
Preaching, because they be not of our own, but of another man's making. Ier.
36.7, 8.
And yet Baruk was commanded by the Prophet Jeremy to Read his prophecy unto
the people; that is, to Read a Sermon of another man's making: and was told that
it should work an excellent effect in them, as it did in very deed, Aug. lib.
4. de doct. Christ. cap. 29.
as before I have showed. But yet this will not those men allow for Preaching,
though Saint Augustine does, yea and shows great use of it in the Church of
God. Whereupon there does follow this evident absurditi^e, which I pray you
well to mark: That if a simple and unlearned Minister shall happily meet with
a most learned Sermon of another man's (namely Caluines or Bezaes) and so shall
rehearse it unto the people, that must not be counted Preaching, because it is
not his own; but his own is Preaching, because it is his own; be it never so
unlearned, never so confused.

Thirdly, they reject from Preaching, even these Sermons that be our own,
under two conditions: First, if they be read out of a paper, as the weakness of
some men's memories compels them to do, who yet may be profitable members in
the Church of God. But this (with them) is no preaching, though it be our own
invention: and yet Baruk did read, Ier. 36.8. Baruk 1.5.
not only the Prophet Ieremies, but also his own Sermon too, Out of a paper,
unto the people, as he professes of himself: yea, and he found that his
Reading to be an effectual kind of Preaching, though it were, Out of a paper.
2. Kings 22.11, 19.
For it caused both Prince and People, both to fast, and to pray, and to weep
before the Lord. As likewise did the reading of the law (even Out of a paper)
unto King I^sias, as you heard before.

Again, even our own proper Sermons they reject from being Preachings, if
ever they have been Preached before, though in an other place, and to an other
audience. And yet Saint Paul confesses unto the Philippians, that He was not
ashamed to speak the same things diverse times unto them; Philip. 3.1.
adding, that for them it was a sound way of instruction Thus you see how great
a chain of errors this one opinion has linked together: and all of them, Ex
diametro, opposed to the Scripture. Reading of the Scripture is no Preaching,
because it lacks exposition: Expositions of either the ancent fathers, or
modern writers they be not Preaching, because they be not of our own making:
Our own Sermons be no Preachings, if we speak them not by heart: Nay, though
we so rehearse them, yet be they no Preachings if ever they have been Preached
before.

So that now you see what manner of Preaching that is, which must be counted
equal unto the word of God, and may not, without blasphemic be called The word
of man. It must only be our own, be we never so ignorant: it must be none
other man's, be he never so learned: and it must be our own, not by ordinary
course of reading attained, either from old or new writers; neither yet, by
often iteration decocted; but (in a sort) after the Anabaptistical manner, both
suddenly infused, and effused. This is, (with those men) that noble and that
worthy kind of Preaching, which must, in credit and authority, equal the holy
Scriptures, in power and perspicuity far excel them. A very blind and a bad
kind of doctrine.

For these great inconveniences must needs ensue of it: First, if our Sermons
be truly and properly the word of God (as they commonly affirm) it will from
thence follow, that the Preacher in his Sermons cannot err. For, The word of
God can not err. And so, we who have taught all this while, that the Fathers
can err, the Pope can err, the Councils can err, shall now teach, with the
self same mouth that We our selves cannot err. Which were both an impudent
and an impious assertion. For what is that which can privilege us from error
in our Preaching? The Chair of Moses could not privilege the Pharisees from
error: the Chair of Peter cannot privilege the Pope from error: the earthly
Paradise could not priuiledg the first man from error: nay Heaven it self
could not privilege the Angels from error; and can only the Pulpit
privilege us from error? Is not Papistry Preached? is not Heresy Preached?
is not Schism, and contention, and all error Preached? do not all these find
Pulpits, to vent themselves out of? Why then it is apparent, that a Sermon may
not only be the word of a man, but also sometimes the word of a wicked and
ungodly man; the word of a Schismatike, the word of a Papist, Greg. hom. 9. in
Ezech.
the word of an Heretic. For as Gregory truly teaches us: Si desit spiritus,
nihil adiuuat locus: It is not the place can help us, if the spirit be not
with us.

Secondly, if Preaching be truly and properly the word of God, as they
affirm, it will from thence follow, that all our glosses must needs be
canonical Scriptures. For the word of God is canonical Scripture: and so we
who have taught, all the expositions of the Fathers, to be but the bare
opinions of men, shall foolishly now teach of our own expositions, that they
be the very word of God: which is to set the Preacher not up in Moses chair,
but to pluck down God himself, and to set him up in Gods chair.

Thirdly, if Preaching be truly the word of God, as they affirm, then if I
expound the Scripture one way, and another man an other way, both these must
be taken for canonical senses, and both be true meanings of the word of God:
though the one of them should be clean contrary unto the other, as they be but
too too often. And so, even we our selves should make the holy Scriptures, to
be indeed no better then a very nose of wax, to be bowed every way, though we
bitterly and worthily reprove it in the Papists.

Fourthly, if Preaching be the very word of God, and the sole ordinary means
to beget a true faith in us, as they affirm; then will it from thence follow,
that the Scriptures of themselves, are not sufficient to salvation; but as the
Papists add unto them their apocryphal and unwritten traditions; so we must
add unto them our vocal and speaking expositions, to make them perfect. These
and diverse such like false and dangerous consequents must necessarily follow
that fantastical doctrine, that Preaching is properly the very word of God:
Aug. lib. 4. cont. Julian. Pelag. cap. 3.
of which I may truly say (with S. Augustine) Piget meta^ dicere, quam muita
eos v^sana sequantur, talia sentientes, talia dicentes. A new and a strange
opinion, which only does proceed from human pride and ignorance, and from an
arrogant conceit, of men which dote upon their own gifts.

Why? is not all this enough which we ascribe unto Sermons, when we acknowledge
them to be Gods own holy institutions: to be necessary means of our
instruction; and powerful means of our conversion: to be truths, which ought
of all men to be accepted and honored: when they consent and agree with the
holy word of God? Is not all this (I say) enough, which we lawfully may, and
willingly do ascribe to Sermons, but that we must needs make them the very word
of God it self? The Apostle S. Paul, though he spoke all by Gods own holy
inspiration, yet does he twice profess in one and the same Chapter, that This
he speaks, 1. Cor. 7.12, 25.
and not the Lord. He is very well content (though he were an Apostle) that
where he lack the warrant of the express word of God, that part of his
writing should be held and esteemed but as the word of a man. But some men now
adays, are so far inamored of themselves, and so vainly conceited of their
own gift in Preaching, as to obtrude all the idle fancies of their own addle
heads, under none other title, but the very word of God: Purum putum, flat
contrary to the doctrine of S. Paul in an other place, 1. Cor. 3.12.
who tells us expressly, that a Preacher may take for the foundation of his
Sermon, The very word of God: and yet, build upon it, as well Clay and Stubble,
as Gold and Silver. But these men do tell us (if we will believe them) that
they do build nothing but only pure gold. Belike they would feign have us to
take all for gold that glitters.

Beloved, though we ought (in all true sincerity) to give all due honor and
reverence unto Sermons, when they be truly made according to Gods word, yet
must we always put this difference between Sermons and Scriptures; The
Scriptures we must know, 2. Tim. 3.16. Psalm. 12.6. 2. Pet. 1.21.
to be Gods own divine and holy word, containing nothing but pure and tried
truths, being all of them writ and penned by Gods holy spirit: and by him so
commended unto his holy Church: and therefore of all the true members of the
Church, to be reverently accepted, without all exception. But for Sermons, we
have an other rule and direction: we must in them, both examine the spirit of
every speaker, 1. John. 4.1.
and exact the matter of every speech unto the strict rule of the scripture: as
the Bereans dealt even with the Apostle Paul himself. Act. 17.11.
So that Sermons ought to have no greater credit with us, then they can gain
unto themselves by their agreement with the Scriptures: if they dissent from
them, no pulpit can sanctify them, no spirit can make them to be the word of
God: Gal. 1.8.
if they consent with them, yet (the Canon of the Scripture being now sealed
up) the Truth of God, or the Doctrine of God, they may be called: but The word
of God they cannot, but only by some Metonymie, or Synecdoche, or some other
such improper and figurative speech.

Therefore, it is as true a position, to say, that a Sermon is the word of a
man, as it is to say, that a House is the work of a man. For as in building,
though both timber, and stone, and iron, and lome, and all other the materials
be the works of God, yet the house it self (in respect of the form) may both
truly and fitly be called The work of a man: 1. Cor. 3 10.
so is it also even in Preaching too (which the Apostle Paul calls a
Spiritual kind of building) though both the Sentences and Testimonies, and
Similies, and Examples, yea and Positions too, be the very word of God; yet the
positure and placing of those things so together, and the disposing of them in
this and that order, and so consequently the whole frame and structure of that
speech which we call a Sermon, that is truly and properly the work of a man.
The Invention is man's; the Disposition man's; the Elocution man's; the Action
man's; the Application, and Allusion man's: and the joining of all those things
together, in one artificial body (which gives to the whole speech the name of
a Sermon) that likewise is man's. Chrysostom. hom. 7. in 2. Cor.
And therefore as Chrysostom affirms of Reading, that Lectio est legentis
actio: so may we likewise affirm of Preaching, that Praedicatio est
Pradicantis actio: as Reading is the action and work of the Reader, though the
thing which is Read be the word of God: so Preaching is the action and work of
the Preacher, though the thing which is Preached be the truth of God.

Which argument howsoever it may distaste the ears of some ignorants which are
without judgment, yet must it needs seem very mild and gentle, even to the
reprouers, if it be compared with some of those speeches which have been
delivered by some of their own chiefest authors. For Cartwright in his answer
unto the preface of the Rhemists, he calls the very translation of the
Testament but the word of a man: as though all the Scriptures which continue
not in their original languages, did presently cease to be the word of God,
and immediately become but the word of a man. This is harsh indeed, to call the
Gospel it self but the word of a man, when it is translated. We go not so
far by many degrees (and God forbid we should) we call but those glosses and
expositions which are made upon it, The word of a man, which is a far more
tempered and qualified speech.

Which censure notwithstanding, lest any wicked hearer should wrest and pervert
unto the despising of Preaching, as some have done the like unto the despising
of Reading; let him understand thus much: that when we call a Sermon the word
of a man, we take not the word of a man in the worst sense: as S. Bernard does;
who writes thus of it: Res vi^is and volatilis est verbum hominis, nullius
ponderis, nullius pretij, Bern. sermon. 2. in Solen. Pet. and Paul.
nullius soliditatis: The word of a man is a thing vile and wavering, of no
weight, of no worth, of no estimation. In this sense we take not the word of a
man, for so it is in a kind of contrariety unto the word of God, as appears
by those titles which the Prophet David gives it in the nineteenth Psalm. But
when we call a Sermon the word of a man, we take it not by way of opposition to
the word of God: but by way of distinction from the word of God. A Sermon is
the word of a man, not opposed, but supposed unto the word of God.

Which distinction I pray you diligently to mark: for in that only consists
the whole resolution of this knotty question: That a Sermon rightly made is the
word of a man, not opposed unto the word of God, but distinguished from the
word of God. A Sermon is not so the word of God as the text it self is, but a
discourse framed upon it by the wit of man.

Which action notwithstanding, (lest any wicked spirit should draw it into
contempt) we acknowledge it (as I said before) to be Gods own holy
institution, and one principal means of procuring man's salvation; as likewise
is Reading, Meditation, and Praying, which are no less to be practiced,
though in many places they be too much neglected. We further confess, that
though in outward form it differ from Gods word, yet in substance of matter it
agrees with it, if it be rightly made, and that therefore though it be not
(in propriety of speech) the word of God it self: yet because it is a truth
agreeing with Gods word, there can no man despise it, but he despises God that
sent it. For as if a faithful messenger deliver the true sum and substance of
his Masters mind, though he use not precisely all his Masters own words, yet
is it to be taken for his Masters message; and he that despises him in that
message, despises not the messenger, but the Master. So is it likewise in our
Preaching: though the form of our message be of our own making (as it
commonly falls out in an Ambassadors Oration) yet because the matter is of
our Masters sending, you cannot despise us, but you despise him that sent us,
as our Master himself testifies: He that hears you, Luke. 10.16.
he hears me, and he that despises you, despises me, and he that despises
me, despises him that sent me.

And thus much I thought good to speak at this time, in justification of my
former doctrine: That a Sermon may be the word of a man, and yet the truth of
God. And that this neither was intended by the speaker, nor yet ought to be
extended by the hearer, as implying the least disgrace unto Preaching, as
certain malignant and captious hearers snatching at my words, and affixing
their own senses, have endeavored to enforce; to whom I wish a better mind,
and a more Christian disposition in the hearing of a Sermon.

The third Sermon, at Paul's Cross, Nouemb. 5. Anno 1607. upon the day of our
deliverance, from the gun powder treason.
PSALM. 81. VER. 1.2, 3, 4, 5. Ver. 1. Sing ioifully unto God our strength: sing
loud unto the God of Jacob.

Ver. 2. Take the song, and bring forth the timbrell, the pleasant harp, with
the viole.

Ver. 3. Blow the trumpet in the new Moon: even in the time appointed at our
feast day.

Ver. 4. For this is a statute for Israel, and a law of the God of Jacob.

Ver. 5. He set this in Joseph for a testimony: when he came out of the land of
Egypt, where I heard a language, that I understood not.


THe Psalmist well perpending and recounting with himself in a heavenly
meditation, the blessed estate where in he then lived in the land of promise,
and wisely co^paring it with that wretched estate, wherein his forefathers
lived in the land of Egypt, how that he was now blessed, both with wealth and
honor; and (that which is a great deal more precious then they both) with the
free and safe use of Gods holy service, whereas they were vexed, both with want
and labor, yea and (that which is a great deal more grievous then they both)
with a cruel restraint from the service of their God: For (as Moses records
in the book of Exodus) they could neither serve their own God without danger
to their bodies, Exodus 8.26.
because they must offer unto him the abomination of Egypt; nor yet see them
serve their gods, without grief unto their souls, because they offered unto
idols, the abomination of Israel. This Psalmist therefore, ballancing those
two estates together, and finding how graciously God had dealt in his time, by
multiplying and vpheaping all his mercies on his Church, more then he had done
in the time of old, he was so ravished and transported with that heavenly
contemplation, that he does, as it were, Excessum pati; he is carried, as it
were, clean out of himself, as S. Paul was in his spiritual exstasie, who,
whether he were in the body, 2. Cor. 12.2.
or out of the body, he himself could not tell: calling here upon the whole
Church, in a vehement passion, to come and assist this his godly affection, and
to help him, with all sorts of musical instruments (as though humane voices
were too weak for his purpose) to sound out the praises of so gracious a God:
as well for their exemption from that grievous captivity, as for their adoption
into so glorious a liberty: wishing, that the day of that blessed redemption
might annually and eternally be observed in the Church, with all kind of
religious and festiual solemnity, as if it were enacted by a statute and a law,
In perpetuam rei memoriam, that so the remembrance of it might never fade or
perish.

Hence breaks out that vehement and patheticall Exordium of this Psalm, To
sing, and sing again: to sing ioifully, and cheerfully: to bring out their
timbrels, their harpes, and their viols; and to blow up their trumpets, as in
the new Moon. Whereby it appears, that the whole scope and purpose of this
religious Psalmist, in this his so passionate exhortation, was indeed nothing
else, but only to rowse up the drowsy spirits of the people, by the help and
assistance of these musical instruments, and to waken them to a holy and
religious alacrity, that so they altogether (like so many several pipes in an
organe) might sound out with full noise the praises of God, as being the
chiefest end for which they were created.

For a man (as Clemens Alexandrinus notes) is not only Templum, Clem. Alex.
in Protrept.
but also Tibia Spiritus Sancti: He is not only a Temple, wherein the holy
ghost dwells, but he is also a timbrel, whereupon he plays the praises of
God. Which comparison of his has much fit matter in it, whether we respect
the disposition of man's soul: or, the composition of his body: or the native
or destinate end of them both.

First, for the Soul; we see by daily experience that the mind of a man, if
it be indeed a man's mind, if it be not a brutish and an inhumane mind, not the
mind of a beast in the body of a man, it has such a Sympathy and coaffection
with the music which it hears, that (like Hippocrates his Twins) they do
always either mourn or rejoice together: embracing still the same passion, as
though they both were ruled by one heavenly constellation, and had but one
spirit divided between them. In so much that (as Aristotle reports in his
Politikes) there were diverse of the ancient and learned Philosophers, Arist.
lib. 8. Pol. cap. 5. Item Cic. lib. 1. Tusc.
who being even astonished at this admirable Symphonie and Concent of the Mind
and Music; and not finding any good and sufficient reason for it, they have
thereupon concluded, That the very soul it self could not possibly be any
other thing else, but only a kind of Harmony and Music. And indeed there is
so near a kindred and affinity between these two things, between Anima, and
Musica, that always, for the most part, that proves evidently true, which is
usually current in our prouerbialll speech, that Vt modus citharae, sic motus
animae: As the Harp is tuned, so the heart is moved: it gives over it self,
even into captivity and bondage unto Music, to be swayed and ouerrated to what
affection it is pleased. Two notable examples and experiments whereof, the
Scriptures themselves offer us, to let pass all profane stories, which be of
infinite variety. 1. Sam. 16.23
The first is of King Saul: in whom the rauing of a wicked spirit, was by the
force of Music allayed and calmed. The second is of the Prophet Elizeus, in
whom the drooping of a good spirit, was by the force of Music excited and
quickened. 2. Kings 3.15.
Two contrary effects, and yet both of them wrought by the power of this one
cause. Whereby it appears, that all the powers of man's soul, yea and all in
his soul, are subject to the power and command of Music. Cic. lib. 2. de orat.
So that the title of Flexanima, which is given unto Rhetorike, may by far
better right be ascribed unto Music: so sovereign an empire has it over the
soul, as Tully observes out of Plato.

Philo. lib. de Sacerdot. honor.
Now for the body: Philo Indaens compares the body of a man unto a Musical
instrument: and the resemblance holds well in very many strains: especially
in these compounded instruments which are now so much in use, wherein there is
both Pulsus and Flatus joined together. Theodorit: Sermon. 3. de prouiden.
For first, the strings be the Heart Strings: the bellows, be the lungs: the
windpipe, the throat: the sound-bord, the palate: the keys, the teeth: the
Plectrum that strikes them, the tongue: Cic. lib. 2. de not. deor.
as Tully fitly calls it: Quo percutiente omnia voci^ instrumenta consonant,
as Philo writes in the fore-alleadged place. Thus the whole structure of man's
body is framed in such sort, as though he were made unto none other end, but
only to be (...), Athenag. orat. pro Christian Item Aug. tract. 9. in Epist.
Johan.
as Athenagoras calls him, that is, a wind instrument, for that (...), the
holy Ghost, to breath into, and so to sound out the praises of God.

Yea, and this is indeed his very natural end: the very end of man's creation,
both in body and soul, is, in truth, nothing else but to sing and ^ound out
the praises of God: in this life with the Saints, as the Prophet David teaches
us: Psalm. 30.4. Psalm. 132.9.
and in the life to come, with the holy Angels, as the Apostle John teaches
us: where it shall be his everlasting, and neuer-ending work, to Sing, as is
expressly declared in the book of the Apocalypse. Apoc. 5.9. Apoc. 15.3.
So that this holy Psalmist exhorting us here with such a (...), to power out
by singing all the powers of our souls in the praise of God; he therein
exhorts us unto none other work, then that which is the principal end of
our making.

Thus you see what the occasion was of the making of this Psalm: and withal,
what the sum is of all those five first verses, which I now have read unto
you. Whereof I do not purpose to deliver at this time any curious analysis:
nor yet precisely to stand upon the exact distinction of those several
Musikes, whereunto the Psalmist here so vehemently exhorts us: but only to
point down upon one especial point, more eminent then the rest, which will
occupy the whole time.

Only here let me give you this one general note, to make the way more plain
unto that particular subject, whereupon I purpose somewhat longer to insist:
that whereas there be but three kinds or forms of Musikes, Isidor. lib. 3.
orig. cap. 18.
as Isidore observes; the first, Harmonicall, which is expressed by Voices and
Singing: the second Rhythmical, which is expressed by Strings and Strikings:
the third Organicall, which is expressed by Pipes and Blowing: Aug. in Psalm.
149.
Or, (as S. Augustine distinguishes them, in somewhat other words, but to the
same effect) Cantus, Flatus, Pulsus: Cantus, iu choro: Flatus, in tuba: Pulsus,
in cithara: the Psalmist here calls for every one of them, and will have
none left out, as S. Augustine there observes. He calls for joyful Singing,
and loud Singing, which is Harmonicall Music: He calls for Timbrell, Harp,
and Viol^, which is Rhythmicall Music: and he calls for Trumpets, which be
Organicall Music. All these he here calls for, unto none other end, but
only that (as the book of the Psalms is concluded) every thing which has
breath might praise the Lord. Psalm. 150.6. Iansen in Psalm. 150.


For the first of those three Musickes, to wit, Harmonicall music, he names
in the first verse two several kinds of it. The first is Joyful singing,
which is called Exultation, and respects the springing and motion of the
heart: The second is Loud singing, which is called Iubilation, and respects
the tuning and modulation of the voice. But yet so that neither Exultation is
without the voice of the body; nor yet Iubilation, without the joy of the
soul: but be only so denominated from that which is predominant, being
otherwise in use, almost never asunder; and therefore in this place they be
joined both together: Exultate Deo adiutorinostro: Iubilate Deo Jacob:
exultate, iubilate. As likewise again in the ninety five Psalm: Exultemus
Domino, iubilemus Deo: and in diverse other places.

Of the first of these two singings, to wit, of Exultation, I have already
spoken in another place, upon the like occasion which is offered at this time:
and therefore, without either any repetition, or further circuition, I will now
come to the second, to wit, to Iubilation, and show you what that is. Which
point I am induced the rather to discuss, yea and that somewhat largely,
because I find it so often, even incullced unto us, throughout the whole tract
of this book of Psalms: Psalm. 95.1.
Rejoice, and iubilate, in one place: Psalm. 81.1.
Sing and iubilate, in another: Play and iubilate, in another. Psalm. 150.5.
And so ever (for the most part) when there is any exhortation unto spiritual
rejoicing, 2. Sam. 6.15.
there still is joined with it, this Iubilation, as though our inward joy could
not be rightly tempered, unless this Iubilation were therewith intermixed. Let
us therefore now consider what this Iubilation is, whereunto the holy
Scriptures do so often times inuit us.

Iubilation (as some think) is an Hebrew word, indenised and made free amongst
the Latins, as diverse other strange words be: because otherwise they could not
(without long circumlocution) express the full power and signification of it:
a word more familiar amongst Divines, then amongst secular writers, it being
commonly applied unto the expressing, of a spiritual and heavenly rejoicing.

In which word, there be diverse of the ancient Fathers, which think there
lies hidden some Divine and Heavenly mysteries: and therefore it is a matter
that is worthy the noting, to see what strange speculations they have devised
in it, and how greatly they have labored and toyled themselves to give us the
full signification of it. Origin, Orig. hom. 7. in Joshua.
when he comes to expound this word Iubolare, professes, that he feels
himself to be inwardly touched, he knows not by what secret and
extraordinary motion, to search into the secret meaning of it: hoping verily
there to find, Thesaurum magnum in parua dictione, as Saint Chrysostom writes
in another like case; Chrysostom. hom. 15. in Genesis
that is, Some great treasure couched in this little word. And the rather is he
so conceited of this word, because he finds a place in the Psalms, Psalm.
8.8.15.
where it is thus written, Beatus populus, qui intelligit Iubilationem: Blessed
is the people which understands that rejoicing, which is called Iubilation:
and therefore he says, that he cannot but search out, quid istud tantum operis
sit, quod populum possit beatum facere: What great and hidden mystery (or
rather indeed, what treasury) this Iubilation is, which is able to make
blessed, not only the practisers but also the very understanders of it. Saint
Augustine in like sort, whether it were, that he had read this place of Origin,
and so, by imitation, borrowed his conceit from him; or whether, by the light
of his own understanding, he light into the same conceit with him, I know not;
but he also handles this same word Iubilare after the selfsame manner. Aug.
in Psalm. 99.
For when he comes unto the exposition of it, he likewise professes, that he
cannot, by any means, ouerpasse it: finding himself instiged by an inward
inspiration, to search into the inward and hidden meaning of it. And he
alleges for his reason that same place of the Psalm, Beatus qui int^lligit
Iubilationem: Adding further, (as Origin did before him) that it needs must be
some great and weighty thing, and very worthy to be searched, whose bare
knowledge is able to make all his knowers blessed, as it is said of this word:
concluding with this prayer, to attain unto the right understanding of it, Det
mihi Deus noster intelligere, quod dicam; Det vobis intelligere, quod audiatis:
God give me understanding to know what I speak, and God give you knowledge to
understand what you hear. Unto both parts of which prayer I do heartily say,
Amen; as handling now that sublime and difficult argument, which he then so
greatly feared. Let us therefore now approach unto the secrets and mysteries of
this Iubilation, unto which we have made so great a preparation.

Hill. in Psalm. 65.
Hilarie says, that this Iubilare is, vox agrestis and pastoralis, a word that
is borrowed out of the country: but how, or by what reason, he expresses not.
Only thus much he seems (by the forenamed titles) obscurely to insinuate,
That Iubilation is a voice which represents that joy, which Shepherds use to
make when as they sheare their sheep; Psalm 4.7.
or, husbandmen, when as they inn their fruit; which commonly they do with
great gladness and rejoicing: as the prophet David notes in one of the Psalms,
where he compares his own joy, for the fulness of it, unto the husbandmans
joy, when his corn, and wine, and oil increases, which he insinuates to be
great. Isay. 24.13, 14.
The prophet Isai likewise uses that same comparison, to express that great
joy wherewith God would recompense the sorrow of his people: he says, that
there shall be such a joy, and such a shouting in the land, a^ is commonly used
at the shaking of the olives, and the gathering of the grapes, when the vintage
is ended. Whereby it is evident, that that work was always done with great
mirth and iollity. Of which kind of rejoicing, the eight Psalm may serve us
for a pregnant illustration, as appears by that Inscription which is prefixed
unto it; where it is entitled, Psalmus Calcantium in torculari, A song of the
treaders in the winepresse: the very title of this Psalm too, Theod. in Psalm.
80.
as Theodoret notes out of the Septuagnit. And this country singing (as
Hilarie thinks) is indeed the true and the right Iubilation. Of which
opinion also is that learned Roman Varro, Var. lib. 5.
that great master of words, who thus distinguishes of this word Iubilare;
that Quiritare, is Vrbanorum: but, Iubilare, Rusticorum. Saint Augustine gives
some light unto this forenamed opinion, Aug. in Psalm. 99.
by adding a familiar example to illustrate it; but yet he goes far more
cunningly about it. As country men (says he) when they gather in their
fruits, do use to sing for joy, and in their song, which consists of words,
do intermixe certain other voices, which he indeed no words, but notes and
interiections of their inward affections; These voices (says he) do properly
express that inward passion, which we commonly do call, by the name of
Iubilation. Such voices were those medleys, which the Athenians used in their
solemn sacrifices called Ostophoria, Plut. in vit. Thesei.
wherein they were wont to add unto their songs, as the foot and keeping of
them, Eleleu, Iu, Iu: which words have no certain and fixed signification but
only be notes of their inward passion, as Plutarch notes in them. The first,
being the Iubilus of their Peans and mirth-songs; the latter, the Iubilus of
their Threni and mourning songs. For, Iubilus serves for this use also, as well
as for the former. The voice of Iubilation, is sometimes the voice of
tribulation, yea and of Iugulation too, as evidently appears in the prophecy
of Amos, Amos 2.2.
where he threatens the Moabites, that they shall die with the voice of
shouting and Iubilation. So that this Iubilation has not only his Canorum,
and Blandulum, but also his Tremulum, and Querulum too, not only his
Hypertidion, but also his Hypodorion too, as Isidore teaches: Isid lib. 2*
orig. cap. 19.
that is, not only his light and glad music, but also his heavy and sad
music too; though the use thereof most frequently be in the former sense.
Such voices likewise be those Ioes, which the Romans were accustomed to mingle
with their songs. Io paean: Io triumph: Io Hymen, and such like. And (to
illustrate it by a domestical and familiar example, because Iubilus is a
domestical and familiar country-song) such voices be those Faiaes, which are
oftentimes used and intermixed with our songs: words of no proper and
determinate signification, but only intimations of our inward affection, which
they argue to be full. Whereunto even the Greek word which is used for
Iubilation, does seem to have a kind of allusion: for it is (...), as it were
a composition of Fa, la, la, nomine fictitio; by a word which is made to the
similitude of the sound: as Balatus ouium, for the bleating of sheep: hinnitus
Equorum, for the neying of horses, and such like. The license is well known
unto such as be learned, yea even unto every mean Grammarian, under the
figure (...). These musical interiections be (as they think) this Iubilation,
in the first signification.

Now other of the Fathers do take this word otherwise: affirming it to be, not
Agrestis, but Militaris vox; Not a voice which is borrowed out of the field
from Farmers, but a voice which is borrowed out of the camp from soldiers:
this Iubilus being drawn from that Hebrew Iobel, Lyra in cap. 25. Leuit.
which signifies (as is noted) A Trumpet, or a Cornet, a warlike and a
soldiers instrument.

But yet the opinions of those Fathers, do even in this same point, not a
little dissent. Origin says of this Iubilation, that it is Clamor exercitus,
Orig. hom. 7. in Ios.
vnanimiter se ad pugnam cohortantis: Iubilation (says he) is the voice of an
army, wherein every man exhorts and hearteth on his fellow to march
valiantly forward, and to set upon the enemy. With whom likewise agrees
Hilarie in the forealleadged place; taking now this Iubilare, by a second
cogitation, in a new signification.

Plut. in vit. Marij.
Such a Iubilus was that, which the Germans used when they set upon the Romans
in Marius his army, crying one unto another, Ambrones, Ambrones; having that
then for their Watchword, as we commonly at the charge, use to cry out, S
George; and the French men, S. Dionysse; and so every other nation on that
Saint which is their patron: auspicating the beginning of the fight with his
name, as it were with an Omen, and so encouraging, yea and after a sort, even
inraging themselves with that military Iubilation. Such a Iubilus was that
likewise which the Romans themselves used, Plut. in vit. Romul.
when they set upon the Latins, ad caprae paludem: wherein every one
encouraged his fellow by his name, On Marcus, on Quintus, on Decius, and so
forth, every man bidding his brother be strong, Isay 41.6.
as the Prophet Isai speaks, and to make all speed possible to assail them
on the sudden. And therefore after their solemn sacrifice in nonis
capratinis, which was purposely instituted in remembrance of that victory, the
people were enjoined to use this Rite and Ceremony, to run from the place
where their sacrifice was made, as fast as they could: and in their running, to
call out, Marcus, Quintus, Decius, and diverse such like names: which they did
to this purpose: First to admonish them, how notable a victory they had once
obtained, by using that military iubilation: and secondly, to premonish them,
how notable victories they may afterward obtain, if they remember but to use
the like imbulation again. A memorable example, 1. Sam. 4.9.
both of which Iubilation, and also of this notable effect that it wrought,
there is set down upon record in the first book of Samuel, when the Ark of God was brought into the host of Israel; the Philistims then hearing that
joyful (...), which the Israelites then made for the coming of it, when they
shouted so for joy, they were suddenly so terrified and appalled at the
matter, that they were brought to the point almost to fly for fear: but yet
(only by the strength and power of this military iubilation) they gathered up
their spirits, and stood manfully unto it: as appears in the story; where
the very words of their incitement and military cohortation be purposely
registered, that so they may the better be both observed, and remembered. Be
strong, O ye Philistims, and play the men (say they) jest ye become slaves unto
the Hebrews now, as heretofore they have been to you. Be valiant therefore,
and fight it out. By which only encouragement and exhortation, they then got
the day of them: and won that same famous and renowned victory, wherein God
himself (as they thought) was led into captivity, being taken a prisoner in
the field. This military cohortation is Iubilation in the second signification.

Basil. in Psalm. 94.
Now Basil, though he agree with Origin, that this Iubilation is a military
word; yet does he disagree in this, that he says it is a voice, not of
Exhortation, but of Gratulation: it is vox vincentium, not praeliantium, as he
writes in that place. It is not the voice which soldiers do use, to exhort
one another when they go to fighting, but rather such a voice as they do
express, when the victory is gotten, and they have done fighting. With whom
likewise consent, both Nys. orat. profe^to paschae.
Nyssen, Theod. in Psalm. 94.
Theodorite, and Euthym. in Psalm. 94 1. Sam. 4.5. 1. Sam. 4.3.
Euthymius, who al of them affirm that Iubilation is a voice of a triumphant
rejoicing, which presupposes a victory. Such a Iubilus was that which the
Israelites made, when the Arc was brought into their camp, as you heard
before, it is said that they shouted with a mighty shout, so that the earth
rang again, imagining that then they had gotten the victory into their own
hands, as is noted in that place: and therefore it was that they shouted so for
joy, Plato in Lyside.
triumphum canentes ante victoriam, as it is in the proverb. This shouting and
this triumphant rejoicing, is Iubilation, in the third signification.

Isai. 9.3.
The Prophet Isai in his Prophecy, seeemeth wholly to allow both the former
significations of this word Iubilation, as indifferently representing the true
nature of it. For then he compares the joy of the Jews, which they shall have
by the coming of their great Messiah, to the rejoicing of farmers, when they
gather in their fruits, and to the triumphing of soldiers, when they divide
their spoils: therein plainly alluding unto both the forenamed significations
of this word, that it is both Agr^stis and Militaris vox. But the Prophet Moses
seems partly to reject them both, as somewhat defective, and not sufficiently
expressing the whole nature of it. Exodus 32.17.18.
For he, describing the Iubilation of the children of Israel, when they sang
their joyful Pean unto the molten Calfe, when as Joshua told him that it was
the sound of war, There is a sound of war in the host: no, no (says
Moses to him) this noise is neither the voice of them that fly, nor yet the
voice of them that follow, nor of any such tumultuous and military velitation,
but it is the voice of Singing and Iubilation. Whereby he insinuates, that
there is a Iubilation, which is not like any noise that is used in war:
neither the voice of a fight, nor the voice of a flight (though both these may
be called Iubilations too, as you heard before) but there is a Iubilation of a
more divine and heavenly nature, like that religious and holy singing, which is
used by the Church in the service of God, and in setting out of his praise,
either by the Saints here in earth, or by the Angels in heaven, when they sing
their Allelu-iah, unto the Lord their God.

In the former of which senses, for the Singing of Saints in the Church of
God, is this word Iubilare used in the ninth Psalm, Venite exultemus Domino,
iubilemus Deo salutari nostro. O come let us Sing unto the Lord, and let us
Iubilate unto the rock of our salvation. The first word expounding what is
meant by the latter: the (...) (as it oftentimes falls out) being placed in
the former place. And where must this Iubilation be used? It follows in the
next words, Let us come before his presence, that is, into his Church, by the
consent of expositors. In the second of these senses, for the singing of
Angels, is this word iubilare used, Job 38.7.
in the book of Job: Where wast thou (says God unto him) when the stars of
the morning all together did praise me, and when the sons of God did Iubilat
unto me? Cum Iubilarent omnes fuij Dei. Meaning here by them, the Angels: as
S. Hierom expounds it. Hier. in cap. 38. Job.
And this religious Melody and holy Singing is Iubilation in the fourth
signification.

Now, if a man desire to understand more particularly what the nature of this
kind of Iubilation is, because the singing and rejoicing of Angels is a thing
unknown unto us; S. Augustine gives us this adumbration of it. Iubilare,
says he, Aug. in Psalm 94.
Est gaudium verbis non posse explicare, sed tamen* voce testari. He says,
that Iubilation is a kind of inexpressible joy, which may, in some sort, be
uttered by the voice, but yet cannot be expressed by any words. With whom
likewise Saint Gregory consents most fully, Greg. lib. 28. Moral. cap. 14.
defining Iubilation to be nothing else, but Cordis laetitia, quae oris
efficacia non expletur vt cum gaudium quis nec dicere potest, nec tacere: This
Iubilation (says he) is such a flood of joy, as a man can neither let out by
utterance, nor yet keep in by silence, lest he be overwhelmed with it: A. Gel.
lib. 1. cap. 15.
but he is brought to such a pass, that (as Epicharmus speaks) he is
(...): He is made by it, altogether unfit to speak, yet altogether unable to
hold his peace. Anonymus, in Psalm. 46.
He can neither Reticere, nor yet Recitare gaudia mentis* as another Father
writes: He has neither in himself a possibility to utter, nor yet a power to
smother that joy which is within him. And therefore Saint Augustine says in
another place, that in this iubilation our heart does Parturire, quod non potest
parer^: Aug. in Psalm. 32.
Our heart (says he) in the tr^^ passion of Iubilation is so passingly
surprised and ouerchargd with joy, that it laboreth no less then a woman in
her travel, and yet cannot be delivered of that which it conceived. Whereupon
he infers: Et quem decet ista iubilatio, nisi ineffabilem Deum. Then to whom
can belong this unspeakable rejoicing, but only unto God, who is himself
unspeakable? And he thereupon concludes, Quod si illum fari non potes, and
tacere non debe^, quid restat tandem nisi vt iubiles? If then thou neither
can express him, nor ought to suppress him, what other thing remains,
but to iubilate unto him? Which is (as you have heard) a mean course between
both. It is a kind of speech, because it is a voice: and it is a kind of
silence, because it is an insignificant voice. And therefore, he says in
another place, Aug. in Psalm. 101.
that Iubilare, est ructare Deo laetitias nostras: To Iubilate, is not to
speak out, but to belch out our joy unto God; as it were from a full stomach:
and in another place, Quod poteritis explicare, Aug. in Psalm. 80.
clamate: quod non poteritis, Iubilate. So that this Iubilation, is a far
more Divine and Heavenly rejoicing, though it be but only in our heart
conceived, then any that can by our words be expressed: and therefore of God is
much better accepted, as Saint Bernard teaches us: Bern. Sermon. super Salve.
regina.
Plus valet Iubilus cordis, quam strepitus oris: motus gaudiorum, quam sonus
labiorum, consonantia voluntatum, magis quam vocum. Thus you see, both how
manifold, and how profound a sense, there lies hidden in the name of
Iubilation: which I have insisted the longer upon, because I observed, so many
fathers, and so ancient, so wise, and so learned, to be brought by this one
word, into so great a muse, and almost into a maze. And therefore I judged that
not unworthy your hearing, which so many grave fathers and of so great
learning, have judged to be worthy their inquisition and searching, yea and
that with such infinite and vnexhausted pains and diligence, as this treatise
must needs represent, and subject unto the eyes of all men, that are of any
judgment.

Now the end of all this long amplification, is no more but only that one
short lesson, which the Apostle John gives us, 1. John 1.4.
in the first of his Epistles, to wit, that in this our rejoicing unto God, our
joy must be full, Full, not faint, not formal, not hypocritical; but true,
sincere, effectual: that it may be indeed, as it is in name, a Iubilation:
that is, a full and hearty rejoicing. Then to come now somewhat lower from this
seraphicall discourse, wherein I have spoken but only to a few; and to descend
unto more familiar and popular matter, and to apply all this treatise unto our
present purpose.

In vain do we now celebrate this feast of mirth and joy, if we have no joy
of it: and if we have joy, we have it in the heart, and not in the lips only.
For Joy, (as the Stoiks note, who are the most accurate definers of passions)
is indeed nothing else, Cic. lib 4. Tusc. quaest.
but Cordis dilatatio, that is, an enlarging and spreading out of the heart; as
Sorrow is nothing else, but only a contracting, and a pressing it together. And
surely the Lord, in this point, has done graciously his part, that our joy may
be full. For he has even dilated and enlarged our heart, as the prophet Isai
speaks, Isai. 60.5.
that we may largely rejoice: yea and further, he has also enlarged the matter
and subject of our joy, and made it proportionable unto our heart, that our joy
on all sides, may even ouerflow: and that our rejoicing (as here he requires)
may be indeed a right Iubilation. For in what sense soever we take this
Iubilation, the Lord has given us as great occasion to use it, as ever he did
the Jews, who be here called to it.

For first, if Iubilation be taken for the country man's singing, occasioned by
the plentiful increase of their fruits, (as it is in the first sense) then
never had any country men in the world, Psalm. 4.7.
greater cause of Iubilation and hearty rejoicing, when their corn and wine and
oil increased, then our whole country has, by those many, both peaceable and
plentiful years, which God (of his goodness) has now a long time given us:
wherein we have attained that happy conjunction, which David prayed for unto
his beloved Jerusalem, Psalm. 122.7.
that there is amongst us, both peace within our walls, and plenteousnes
within our palaces; yea, and within our cottages too: yea and that both these
so great, as the world has no where seen, in this our present age.

For first, as concerning the Peace we have inioyed, it may truly be called
The peace of God which passes all understanding. Phil. 4.7.
For it passes indeed all humane understanding, that so many plots being daily
devised, so many snares being secretly laid, and so many engines being cunningly
applied, by our restles and erreconcileable enemies, for the breaking of our
peace, and the utter rooting out of Gods religion from amongst us: yet that
(maugre all the malice of all the limbs of satan) our Church should still
continue in a sweet and constant peace, and that all the gates of hell should
not prevail against it: but that, (notwithstanding all their wicked
machinations) our Church should not only enjoy peace in it self, Mat. 16.18.
but also should give peace unto all her bordering neighbors: being erected as
a Sanctuary for all the afflicted members of all other Churches, to fly unto,
as birds unto their hill, as the Psalmist speaks, there to shroud themselves
amongst her green and dourishing branches, Psalm. 11.1.
from all those grievous tempests which at home in their own countries have
fiercely beaten upon them, and forced them to take their flight away from them,
finding here that blessed peace and tranquillity in our Church, which in
their own they have sought for, with the spending of their dearest blood, and
yet could never get. So that for this our Peace we must needs conclude with
the poet, that Deus vobis haec otia fecit: It is only God himself, Virg.
Eclog. 1.
yea even the God of peace, that has made this peace amongst us. Our peace is
the Lords doing, and it i^ wonderful in our eyes, considering the opposition:
2. Cor 13.11. Psalm. 118.23.
It is (as ^ said before) The peace of God which passes all understanding And
therefore unto him, for this his gracious favor, we ought to offer up our
hearty Iubilation.

Now for our Plenty, which is Gods second blessing upon this our nation, and
the second argument to excite us unto this country-iubilation; that has been
so wondrous great amongst us, as though God himself had made windows in
heaven, 2. King 7.2.
to rain it down unto us. For what one is there of al our neighbor nations,
whose indigencie and want has not been supplied by our Plenty and abundace?
France, Spain, Germany, yea, and Italy it self, though it stand so distant
from us. So that the title which Cato gives unto Sicilie, Cic. orat 4. in
Verrem.
to be the chi^fest barn, nay the very nurse of Italy, that calla penaria,
and nutrix Italiae, that may in some degree be applied unto our land, as well as
to that Island: who have from hence nourished some of the very chiefest
Principalities of Italy, even then, when the breasts failed of their ancient
nurse Sic^ie, and were utterly dried up. So that as once the la^d of Egypt in
the time of Joseph was a common storehouse unto all her neighbors, to relieve
them with her Plenty in their great necessity: so has our land often times
been, through Gods mercy and goodness; with which even Egypt it self cannot
compare in fruitfulnes: Genesis 47.19, 20.
for Egypt has suffered many famines, yea and those great ones too: so that
her inhabitants have been forced, both to sell themselves, and their wives, and
their children, and all that ever they had, to buy themselves bread, and so of
subjects to become slaves and servants, and that only for the necessity of
their famished belly: but our land has never sustained any famine in any man's
memory; the hardest that it has at any time endured, is but Annonae Caritas,
it is not Fames; it cannot be called Famine, but only a little Dearth: yea
and even that Dearth also, Stow. Annal. p. 1147.
rather growing (often times) from those cormorants our Cornemongers, then from
the fault of our earth. Which Dearths of ours, notwithstanding when they be
even at the dearest, yet may be counted Plenties, if they be but compared with
the ordinary harvest of other countries. It is noted amongst us as a very
great Dearth, and is put into our Chronicles amongst our rarest accidents,
Stow, ibid. p. 423, 622, 865.
if wheat be but brought unto some forty shillings or four marks a seame;
and that not often neither: which in diverse other countries, is very far
beneath the ordinary prices, as our Merchants daily find by their own
experience.

So that all the world may bear us witness, that as once the dew of heaven
fell only down upon Gedeons fleece, Iud. 6.37.
when as all the earth beside was hard and dry about it; so the dew of Gods
blessing has only fallen one our land, when all our neighbor countries have
been destitute of it, lying dry and unfruitful, and being utterly untilled
by the hand of the farmer, but yet every where harrowed by the hand of the
Soldier, and rent almost in sunder, with all those great calamities, which
fire and cruel sword could bring upon them, and that for many years together:
whilst we, in the mean season, have sit quietly at home, Every man under his
vine and under his figtree, Micah. 4.4.
as the Prophet Micah speaks, without all manner of fear; having our sons
and our daughters like the polished corners of the Temple: Psalm. 144.12, 13, 14.
our Oxen strong to labor: Our Sheep bringing forth thousands and ten
thousands of increase: Our garners stuffed full with all manner of store:
having no invasion, nor leading into captivity, nor no complaining in our
streets. So that all the world may justly say of us, ver. 15.
O happy are the people that be in such a case: and we may as justly sing
again unto them, Yea, happy are the people that have the Lord for their God:
for that is indeed the true cause of all our happiness, if we truly look
into it. And therefore unto him for this his great mercy, we ought heartily to
Iubilate. But surely our unthankfulness in this point has been exceeding
great: we have not offered unto God this Iubilation of thankefulnes in any mean
proportion, as his goodness deserves: but abusing those forenamed great
blessings of God, both of Peace and Penty, unto our own lusts, we grow wild
and wanton by them, like untamed heifers: and so run on directly into the
sins of the Sodomites, Ier. 31.18.
into Pride, Lust, and Idleness, and fulness of bread: these be the true effects,
which (in stead of true thankfulness) our Peace and Plenty have produced in us:
Eze. 16 49, 50.
We call for the timbrell, the harp, and the viole (as the Prophet Isai notes
in the Jews) and for all those other istruments, Isa. 5.12.
which here you see consecrated unto holy Iubilations, and these we daily
abuse in our unholy feasts and bankets, where we Iubilate unto our bellies, as
though we made them our Gods, forgetting God himself, who is the fountain of
all mercy: and therefore (says the Prophet) my people are le^ into
captivity. Therefore: that is, for their unthankfulness in forgetting of God,
the giver of all goodness: a great, and a just cause: Which judgment I pray God
to turn away from us, and to forget all our unthankfulness; who surely have
matched them in their sin, yea and outmatched them too; and therefore have
great and just cause to fear, lest we be matched with them in the punishment
of their sin. For what means this hanging and this lingering plague, which
houereth so long (like a sad and threatening cloud) over the heads of us all, in
all the corners of this land? Somewhere rayning down sadly, somewhere drizling
but softly, the drops of Gods displeasure: what means it I say, but that
seeing God perceives how negligent we have been to Iubilate in our Hymns the
tunes of thanksgiving for his benefits received, he will now make a trial
whether we will be more diligent to iubilate in our Threnes the tears of
repenting for his judgments threatened.

If by neither of these two means we can be won unto God, but that, like
those perverse and froward children, of whom our Savior Christ complains in
the Gospel* we will neither be brought to dance when God pipeth unto us nor yet
to lament, Luke 7.32.
when he mourns unto us, there is doubtless yet behind, in the belly of
this black and slow-mouing cloud, that fierce and grievous tempest to be
rained down^ upon us, whereof the prophet David speaks in the Psalm, that God
will rain down upon the heads of the wicked, both snares, Psalm. 11.6.
and fire, and brimstone, and plagues, and storms, an^ tempests, this shall be
the portion of their cup. For it is a sure rule and of unchangeable verity,
which S. Augustine gives v^ that Si non reddis Deo faciendo quod debes, reddes
ei patiendo qu^^ debes. Aug. lib. 3. de libero arbit. cap. 15.
He that pays not God his right, in doing that he ought: Go^ will pay him his
right, in suffering that he ought. But to proceed^ to the next point.

If Iubilation be taken for a military cohortation, exciting and stirring up
one another to alacrity (as it is in the second sense) then have we both great
and just cause, to use even this kind of Iubilation too. Who, though we have
now made a new, and a true peace (as we are persuaded) with those old
adversaries of ours, with whom we have had a long and a strong jar, (a jar
indeed more truly then a war) though (I say) at this present, we count all to
be sure, and sing nothing but Peace, Peace, as it is in the Prophet: Ier. 6.14.
yet ought we not in reason to be so lulled asleep, and as it were bewitched
with the sweet and charming name of Peace, as utterly to forget the time of
war. It is no ill policy, whilst the weather is calm, to provide for a
storm. For though the tempest of all their old displeasure be now for the
present well blown over: yet have we not a Rainbow, to give us full assurance,
that the like storm shall never arise again from that quarter. And therefore,
though we have great cause of rejoicing in this our present peace, and just
cause to iubilate unto God for the same, as before I noted: yet ought we not so
securely to be reposed in it, as to think, that this our state, cannot be
changed from it: lest if we be too supine and too careless, as the men of
Laish were, we be also taken tardie, as they were. The story is well known.
It is a good rule which the Apostle Paul gives us, Judge. 18.7.27. 1. Cor.
10.12.
not only in sprituall matters, but also in civil too: That he which now
stands, should take heed lest he fall. And it is no evil rule which
Epicharmus gives us, (...): that, Cic. lib. 1. ad Attic. epist. 14.
watchfulnes, and distrustfulnes, be the very sinews of wisdom and prudence.
Which I speak not, to buz into the heads of the people any unnecessary
jealousy and suspicion, which were contrary unto charity: but to rowze and
stir them up unto necessary vigilancie and circumspection, that they sleep
not in security: that they be not too forward, (as the most men are now adays)
in cashiering of their armor, and in Breaking their swords into sithes, Micah.
4.3.
and their spears into spades, as the Prophet Michae speaks; lest the time
do suddenly fall upon them, (yea and that ere they be provided for it) when
they would wish them brought back into their old forms again, Joel 3.10.
as the Prophet Joel notes. I will not Male ominari, because I see no just
cause: but yet thus far I hope I may safely go with Saint Augustine, Aug.
Epist. ad Macedon.
as to give you this one watchword, for your better caution, and to shake off
too much presumption: that Nemo potest veraciter amicus esse ^ominis, nisi
ipsius fuerit primitus veritatis: that Those men can haerdly be truly friends
to any, Hier. Epist. ad Paulin.
that be not truly friends unto the truth it self. For (as Saint Hierom well
observes unto the same purpose) it cannot be Vera amicitia, if it be not
Christi glutino copulata; There cannot be possibly any true and sound
friendship, whereas both parties be not glued together by Christ. Those civil
and politic respects, whereby nations are commonly cemented together, they be
but Cementum male temperatum, Eze. 13.10, 11.
as the prophet speaks, they be but a kind of ill-temperd mortar, Arena sine
calce, as it were sand without lime, if that Gluten Christi, the truth of
Christ religion, be not mixed with them. And they be commonly no better then a
dawbing over of a matter, as it were the parieting of an old rotten wall,
whose swelling breaks suddenly, Isai 30.13. Hier Epist. ad Demetriad.
when as no man looks for it, as the Prophet Isai notes. But a word of this
point (I hope) will be sufficient. For (as Saint Hierom apologiseth in a like
slippery argument) Haec dicta sint non infausto contra vos vaticinio, sed
pauidi cautique monitoris officio, vel ea fortasse, quae tuta sunt formidantis:
Let these things be interpreted, not as ominously fore speaking that which
certainly will be: but, as carefully forecasting, that which possible may be:
The tenderness of my love being happily, there afraid where, it may be, there is
indeed no true cause of fear. But yet stirring you up unto a careful
circumspection, which (I am sure) can do no harm.

For be it, that we lacked the fear of all foreign enemies, yet lack we not
the danger of domestical and intestine, which are more to be feared: yea and
so much the rather too, because they can so cunningly disguise and mask
themselves, and seem to give so little an outward cause of fear. For how many
be there now amongst us, not only of our secret Papists, but also of our open
Recusants too, which do seem to rejoice and to iubilate with us, in the
commemoration of this happy day, and to celebrate the festival solemnity of
it with as great a zeal, as the best of us all, giving place unto no man, in
ringing, singing, feasting, bonefiring, and in all other complements of outward
rejoicing? but yet for all this, they have inwardly great grief, to see the
remembrance of this joyful day so honored: their joy is nothing else but
Ementita frontis serenitas, The false glimpse of a lying countenance; they
rejoice in the face, 2. Cor. 5.12.
but not in the heart, as the Apostle Paul speaks. For surely, if they have
any joy at all in their hearts, Genesis 27.41.
it is none other, but only that cruel joy which wicked Esau had, that (yet
for all this) they hope, that The time of mourning will one day fall upon us,
Hab. 2.1.
and then will they kill their brother Iaacob. And therefore great cause have
we to Iubilare, yea and to Vigilare too, to stand upon our watch, as the
Prophet Habakuk speaks: yea, and upon our guard too and to cheer up one
another to watchfulnes and circum^spection, that we be not taken sleeping by
our waking enemies, who are like to God in this, Psalm. 121.4.
that they neither slumber nor sleep: but like the devil in this, that they
apply all their watching, not unto good, but evil. They watch not, as the
keeper of Israel watches, John 10.10.
who neither slumbreth not sleeps* to preserve and maintain us; but they
watch as the thief watches, to spoil and to destroy us, as our Savior
Christ teaches us. And therefore good is that counsel which in an other place
he gives us, that seeing we know not certainly when the thief will come, Mat
24.42, 43, 44.
that therefore we should constantly watch for his coming.

To show you the necessity of this good advice, To watch, in that one example,
whose memorial we now celebrate: you may call to your remembrance (and you
ought never to forget it) how near we were al of us almost overtaken, for
lack of this watching: nay, utterly overthrown by our deep security, in that
damnable plot of the gunpowder conspiracy: how the plot was contrived, the
matter congested, the work finished, and that there lacked nothing unto the
very perfecting of our destruction, but only the giving of fire unto the
engine. So that as the prophet David speaks) there was but one step
between us and death: 1. Sam. 20.3.
but only that one; which also might have been as easily finished, as it was
so far ripened, if our gracious protector, The keeper of Israel, had not
watched a great deal more carefully for us, then we did for our selves: but
that neuer-sleeping eye of Gods merciful providence (of whose unspeakable
goodness we have had so great experience) that waked, when we slept, and beheld
all the working of those hellish pioners, yea and laughed even to skorne all
their wicked endeavors. For when they themselves thought all to be cocksure,
and were even putting of the fire unto their infernal powder, he utterly
defeated all their purpose and endeavor; by snatching us as a firebrand out of
the fire, Zach 3.2.
and causing the flames thereof (as the flames of Sidrachs fire) to issue out
upon themselves, and to devour those that sought to devour us. Dan. 3.22.
So that we have as great a cause to Iubilate unto God, as ever those three
children had, when they sung their renowned Psalm in the fiery oven. For
surely, their deliverance was never more miraculous, then was that of ours: who
were both designed to as cruel a flame, and as strangely delivered from the
same, even by the immediate hand of God, he being, as it were, in the midst
of the flame with us, as he was with them.

For in that miraculous deliverance of ours, there be two points most
remarkable: in both which the hand of God may be sensibly felt, yea and his
pre^ence (in a sor^) may be visibly seen, there shined so great an evidence of
Gods providence in them.

The first of them is this, Terent. Eunuch Act. 5. See. 6.
that he made their own tongue the instrument to bewray them: that so they
should, Suo indicio, quasi sorex, perire: as the Comike speaks; that they
should perish, as the rat does, by bewraying of themselves: and that so their
own tongue should fall upon them, Psalm. 64.8.
as it is in the Psalm. For the same tongue which could contriue the treason,
could not conceal the treason; but though it enjoined dumb silence unto
others, yea even unto their own pestiferous confederates, yea and that under
the sacrament, or rather indeed under the excrement, of an oath (to use S.
Augustines Paranomasie) yet could it not perform the same silence it self*
Aug. lib. de haere s^b. Sec. 46.
but as though there had been Flamma, ore in ardent^ as Ennius speaks* as
though the traitors mouth had been burnt with his own flames, Cic. lib. 2. de
Orat.
or his tongue had been big with the scorching coals of Juniper, so labored
it of that mischief which it had conceived, and could find no rest, nor no
ease, until it was delivered, and had brought forth that same damnable birth
into the open world. Psalm. 118.3.
This was the Lords doing, and it is m^rueilous in our eyes.

It has often times occasioned me to meditate very seriously upon that place
of King Solomon: Eccle. 10.20.
Curse not the King no not in thy thought: for the fowls of the air shall
carry the voice and that which has wings shall declare the matter. Pl^ut. lib.
de Garrulitate.
Which point we see verified in the discovery of this matter, That which had
wings bewrayed it. Plaut. in Amphit. Act. 1. Scen. 1.
Not Ibici grues, nor Bessi hirundines, though both these have been
discouerers of very heinous treacheries; but volucris vox, as the Comike
speaks, certain winged words: certain words which came out of the wing of a
bird: the quill of a gooses wing, bewrayed this whole treason. So that, as once
the Roman geese preserved their capitol from surprising; so now again one of
the same kind, has likewise preserved our Capitol from burning, yea and our
Capita too, the chiefest heads of al our nation That which had wings bewrayed
the treason: which one would little have dreamed to have been ordained to so
great a good. This is the former point of Gods merciful pouidence, and in a
sort of his presence in discovering this treason, and delivering us from that
great destruction; that he brought the matter so about, that Their own tongues
bewrayed them.

The second is this: that though they speak their mind as it were in a strange
language, and delivered their meaning but only in parables; yet that God so
enlightened the royal heart of our King, with a bright shining beam of his
heavenly wisdom, that notwithstanding all their obscuring of their inward
meaning, yet he should point down directly upon the very mystery of their
iniquity, and present- (like an Oedipus) dissolve all their Sphingas: or rather
indeed (like a Solomon) find out all their riddles. This has likewise
occasioned me, 1. King. 10.3.
to ruminate very often upon an other place of King Solomon: that surely there
is a sentence of divination in the lips of a King: Pro. 16.10. 1. Sam. 10.9.
and that his heart is not as another man's heart is: but indeed a most rich
treasury of profound and hidden wisdom: God himself by imparting of that
divine and heavenly blessing, seeking to honor himself (in their person)
amongst men. But to proceed. If Iubilation be taken for the triumphing voice
of soldiers, having utterly defeated and vanquished their enemies (as it is in
the third sense: then have we (even in this respect) as great a cause to use
this Iubilation, as ever yet had any people or nation, since the world first
began: who (by the assistance of Gods merciful providence) have so often times
defeated so many plottes and engines, devised by our enemies for our utter
subversion: wherein always their snares have fallen upon their own heads, and
wrought their own confusion; giving us a far greater and iuster occasion to
sing up and down all the streets of our cities, as once the Romans did: A.
Gel. lib. 4. cap. 5.
that Malum consilium, est consultori pessimum: as the detectation of so many
and so notable treasons, complotted by our enemies, both against our late dread
sovereign Queen, and against our most gracious King, and (in them both)
against all us, has notably declared to the wonderment of the world. Wherein
still those our enemies did fall into that pit, which they dug for us, and we
were saved from it, as it were on Eagles wings, as the Prophet Moses speaks.
Exodus 19.4.
And yet have we been forced to pass both throrow fire and water unto our
deliverance, as the Psalmist affirms of the Israelites: Psalm. 66.12.
by both which our enemies have endeavored to entrap us; and yet in both our
God has most graciously delivered us. His name be praised for it.

For the first, to wit, our deliverance in the waters, in the time of our late
Queen: let us but call to our remembrance that same wonderful deliverance
which from heaven was sent unto us, in that wonderful year of Anno. 1588.
when all our seas were ouer-spread with the sails of our enemies, and all our
waters covered with the ensigns of those that came to fight against us. A
benefit whose memory ought never to die amongst us, never to decay. For though
we now be at one with that nation, which at that time most earnestly
endeavored our destruction; it follows not, that because they be now (as we
hope) our friends, that therefore it should not be lawful for us, to remember
the great mercy and goodness of God toward us, when as we are sure, that they
were our enemies.

Let us therefore (I say) but call unto our mind with what a strong desire and
mighty preparation they came as then against us, and how great a perturbation
their coming then wrought in us, terore, not panico, but Hispanico; and we
shall find that we had as great a cause to use that fearful lubilation, which
is recorded in the Psalm, as ever the Jews had in their like trepidation:
Psalm. 124.1.
If the Lord himself had not been on our side, if the God of heaven had not
been on our side, they had swallowed us up quick, when they came against us,
they were so wrathfully displeased with us. The floods had surely drowned us,
and the waters had passed even over our souls. But the Lord strong in battle
was our refuge, the God of I^akob was our defense. Yea, and he armed forth all
his creatures in the day of our battle, to fight for our defense, and our
enemies offense, that we might be delivered, and they destroyed. The winds
fought against them, and against their ships, as they did against the ships
of A hasia. 2. Chron. 20.37.
The sea fought against them and against their host, as it did against the
power and host of Pharao. The stars fought against them, and against their
horses, Exodus 14.27.
as they did against the horses and chariots of Sisera. Judge. 5.20.
All the elements in their courses fought every one against them, as they did
against the Canaanites, until they had brought them unto utter confusion. Now
(as it is in the book of wisdom) By all the same mean* Wisd. 11.5.
whereby our enemies were destroyed, were we (through Gods goodness) miraculously
delivered. So that it might fitly be said unto us, which the Poet says unto
the Roman Emperor: O nimium dil^cte Deo. -- Cui militat ether,
Claud. de tertio consulatu Honorij.
Et coniurati veniunt ad classica venti.


And therefore we have great cause to Iubilate unto God, and to sing out unto
him, that same Io triumph, which the Israelites did in their like deliverance
out of the waters. The Lord has triumphed gloriously over his enemies: Exodus
15.1, 5.
the horse and his rider [the ship and his sailer] has he overthrown in the
midst of the sea. The waters have covered them, the floods have overwhelmed
them, they sanke unto the bottom as a stone. Therefore blessed be the Lord for
thus auenging of Israel. Judge. 5.2.
This cause have we to Iubilate unto the Lord our God, if we remember his great
mercies in that memorable year, and the wonderful deliverance which he then
brought unto us out of those great waters, which had almost overwhelmed us.

Yea and never a white less have we (nay ten thousand times greater, if we
call unto our mind, our miraculous deliverance from that raging fire, which was
provided to devour us: (the second of our instances) wherein we might truly
have said, Isa. 1.9.
with the Prophet Isai, that, If the great mercy of the Lord of hosts had not
been, we should surely have been made, even like unto Sodom, and to
Gomorrah. Like unto them indeed, yea and not only like unto them, in the
general state of our destruction, Plaut. Rud. Act. 3. Sce. 6.
being utterly destroyed as they were; Cum ramento and puluisculo, as it is in
the proverb: but also, like unto them, in the particular mean of our
destruction, being destroyed by fire, as they were. Our Towers, our Princes,
our Churches, our Priests, our Cities, our Houses; of all which we might have
said, if their plot had prevailed: Haec omnia vidi inflammari, Cic. lib. 3.
Tusc.

Priamo vi vitam euitari,
Iouis aram sanguine turpari:
and all reduced to the true face of Sodom. But yet here is one difference,
wherein the malice of our enemies did as it were erect it self, that they had
provided for our destruction, a far more base and unworthy fire, then that
wherewith the Sodomites themselves were destroyed. For their fire was the fire
of God, Job 1.16.
as it is expressly called in the book of Job: but our fire should have been
the fire of of the devil. Their fire came down from the bosom of Heaven: but
our fire should have come up from the bowels of hell. So that, by this
difference, their fire was far more noble then ours. But yet, there is
another difference, wherein (maugre all the malice of our hellish enemies) yet
our fire had been more noble then theirs: that their fire, descending down
from Heaven, and tending toward hell, did certainly beat down with it, those
cursed bodies thither: but our fire, ascending up from hell, and tending
toward Heaven, had (doubtless) carried up those blessed souls thither; whom
our enemies had appointed as sheep unto the slaughter, and intended to have
sacrificed, as a burnt offering upon an altar. A burnt offering indeed, burnt
even to coals and ashes: but yet for all that, a sacrifice, which (no doubt)
but God would graciously have accepted, in respect of the innocence of those
lambs which were offered; though utterly detested and abhor^ed, in respect of
their cruelty by whom they were slaughtered: as he did the sacrifice of Abels
holy blood, though offered by the unholy hands of his cruel brother Caine. But
yet for all that, Psalm. 124 6. Plaut. capt. Act. 3. See. 4. Genesis 22.10, 12
thrice blessed be the name of the Lord our God, Who did not give us over as a
pray into their teeth, but miraculously delivered us, even inter sacrum and
saxum, as he once delivered Izaack, even as the stroke was in striking. So
that, we have great cause to iubilate unto God, and to sing that joyful melos
which the Isralites once did, in their like deliverance from their imminent
danger: Our soul is escaped as a bird out of the snare: Psalm. 124.7, 8.
the snare is broken, and we are delivered. Deuteronomy. 33.29.
Our help is only in the name of the Lord. And again, that in another place:
Blessed art thou O Israel, who is like unto thee, O people saved by the Lord?

To conclude: If Iubilation be taken for the Ecclesiastical psalmodie and
music of the church, whether militant, or triumphant, when they make their
holy melody, and praise the name of God, In Hymns, and Psalms, and Spiritual
songs, (as it is in the fourth sense) then even in this respect also, Col. 3.16.
have we great and just cause to iubilate unto God; who has most graciously
delivered this famous church of ours, not only from those our forenamed
enemies, which openly oppugn her, but also from others unnamed too, which
secretly undermine her: indeuoring, by a colorable pretense of reformation, to
bring it unto utter desolation and destruction, and to make it an habitation
for ostriches and dragons, Isa. 13.21, 22.
that Zijm and Iim may dance in our palaces, and the Satyr call out unto his
fellows: that whereas now there is heard the voice of holy singing and
iubilation, there might be nothing seem, but only The abomination of
desolation.

Notwithstanding all whose malice, and secret vnderworking, yet has God here
established a most glorious church amongst us; Apo. 21.11, 19
not unlike unto that New Jerusalem, which came down from heaven, made
altogether of Carbuncles and precious stones, Isa. 54.11.
as the prophet Isai speaks: so that the glorious beauty of our church this
day draws all men's eyes unto it, as it were a blazing star, yea and even
perstringeth and dazeleth them, with the shining brightness of it. Neither is
there any thing (God be praised) in this worthy church of ours, which so
greatly needs to be reformed, as that such unclean and filthy birds be
chased out by whom it is defiled, and by whose iarring sounds, as it were by
the yelling of Mewes, and the scritching of Owls, the holy music of our
church is greatly disturbed. And therefore, that our church may be glorious
within, as well as without (as it is required in the spouse of Christ) we ought
continually to furnish it with the voice of iubilation, Psalm. 45.13.
that the praises of God and of the Lamb, may perpetually sound in it, and
never die.

Th^s in what sense soever we take this Iubilation you see, how great a cause
God has given us all to use it* no sort of us excepted, Courtiers, nor
Carters, Soldiers, nor Citizens lay men, nor Ministers, but that every one of
us in our several callings, have weighty cause to Iubilate upon special
occasions: but all of us in general upon that great occasion whereby we are now
called unto this present Iubilation; because every man has his share in this
cause of our rejoicing. Psalm. 148.12, 13.
And therefore (as the psalmist in this place exhorts us) let us take up the
Psalm bring out the timbrell, the pleasant harp with the vio^e; sound up the
trumpet, as in the new moon* that young men, and maidens, old men and babes,
may Iubi^ate and praise the name of the Lord. Psalm. 118.24.
For this is the day which the Lord has made: therefore let us be glad and
rejoice therein. A day wherein the devil contended with God himself, about
the body of our King; Iud. 9.
and in him about the body of our whole kingdom too: as once he contended with
the Angel Michael about the body of Moses: hoping to have gotten the honor of
this day, and to have glorified himself against God himself by it, in the
overthrow of his Church. But God was too strong for him, and so has gotten the
day from him: making this day for ever, both honorable to himself, and
comfortable unto us, by our preservation, which he thought to have made most
horrible and dismal, by our utter destruction. And therefore, as the Jews,
upon a like occasion, have eternized the memory of their Purim by making it A
statute in Israel, He^^. 9.17, 22.
and a law in Jacob, as the Psalmist speaks in this place: so is it both
wisely and religiously ordained by us, that it should be both a Statute and a
Law in England too, a Statute Law, to nobilitate and eternize the blessed
remembrance of this holy day: which I pray God may for ever be better observed
then many other of our good statutes be, which have formerly bin made. And so
for this time I here conclude.

The fourth Sermon, at the Court. Nouemb. 15. Anno 1607.
2. TIM. 3. VER. 8. As Iannes and Iambres resisted Moses, so do these men
resist also the truth.


Our Savior Christ affirms in the Gospel of S. Luke, Luke 18.8.
that when the Son of man shall come to judge the world, there scarcely shall
be found any faith upon the earth. A heavy censure of these times of ours; but
yet tha^ prophecy of his is notably confirmed by the testimony of his own
disciple in this place. For the Apostl^ foretelling in the beginning of this
chapter, what the state and condition of the world shall be, in this last and
worst age of it; he numbreth up sins and iniquities so fast, and packeth
them so close together, that a man would indeed think it were utterly
impossible, for so excellent a plant as the virtue of faith is, to spring and
grow up in so great a throng of vices, which (like noisome weeds) so thick
shall ouerspread the face of the whole earth, and choke up whatsoever is
wholesome in it.

In which catalogue of the Apostle, you may observe this difference; That all
other sins are but only named by him a word for sin, and so away: as
though he hasted forward unto some greater matter: and so be continues a
short conglobation for the space of four whole verses together, the four
first of this chapter; Men shall be lovers of themselves, covetous, proud,
boasters, heady, haughty, treacherous, and so forth, with as great a
Laconismus, and as perfect a breuity as can possibly be devised: but when he
comes to the sin of Hypocrisy, he does not so slightly pass it over; but
there sets down his foot, and to the full describes it: pai^^ng out all the
guises of these disguised Hypocrites, which in these latter times shall abuse
the world, and seduce the simple people with their fained shows of godliness,
being notwithstanding destitute of all the power thereof as the Apostle expressly
and in plain words affirms.

Ver. 5.
So that he bestows more cost, and more pains, to make us know this one sin
of Hypocrisy alone, then to know all the sins of the whole world beside. For
in them he recites but only their bare names, in a short enumeration, as fast
as one word can follow after another: but in this he represents the whole
and perfect nature, in a long description, continued in five whole verses
together.

The reason of which his paines-taking is this: Because the sin of Hypocrisy
is (in some respects) both more hateful unto God, and more hurtful unto men,
then any other sin in the whole world is. More hateful unto God; because (as
S. Augustine notes) Simulata sanctitas, Aug. in Psalm. 63.
est duplex iniquitas; quia and iniquitas, and Simulatio: Fained holiness, is
double wickedness: because there is both wickedness and a faining joined with
it: Ecclus. 7.8.
two sins bound together, as the wise man speaks More hurtful unto men,
because (as S. Chrysostom notes) Malum. sub specie boni celatum, Chrysostom. in
cap. 7. Matthew.
dum non cognoscitur non cauetur: Whilst wickedness is covered with a fained
show of godliness, because it can not be descried, it cannot be declined. And
such a sin is the sin of Hypocrisy: It is indeed true wickedness, which is
covered over with a false show of godliness: It is sin in a mystery, 2. These.
2.7.
as the Apostle Paul speaks: It is masked ungodliness; and therefore can
hardly be descried.

For which cause the Apostle (to help us in this point) has taken great
pains to describe this sin at large, and to represent unto us (as it were in
an Emblem) the true and perfect nature of those men, which in these latter
days shall be resisters of the truth, disturbers of the Church, seducers of
the people, and opposers of themselves unto the Prince and civil Magistrate,
speaking evil of all those men which are in authority, Jude 8.
as S. Jude notes directly: and yet covering all this foul mass of
corruptions under a most specious visar and show of religion. And this he
performs from the beginning of the fifth verse, unto the end of the ninth, in
five whole verses, as before I noted. Of which, though I purpose to insist but
upon one; yet must I pray your license, to recite them all; that so I may show
you more fully and plainly that whole mystery of iniquity, which the
Scripture notes unto us by the name of Hypocrisy. The Apostle in this chapter
descibeth it in this manner:

They have a show of godliness, Ver. 5.
but have denied the power thereof. Turn away therefore from such. For of this
(...) are they, that creep into houses, 6.
and lead captive simple women, laden with sins, and led with diverse lusts:
Which are ever learning, and yet never able to come unto the knowledge of the
truth. 7.
As Iannes and Iambres resisted Moses, so do these men also resist the truth:
men of corrupt minds, 8.
and reprobate concerning the faith. But they shall prevail no longer: 9.
for their madness shall be evident to all men, as theirs also was. Thus far
extends the Apostles description, most graphicall and lively.

Which discourse of his consists of three parts: The first is A definition
of the nature of an hypocrite, in the fifth verse of this chapter; which may be
thus collected: An hypocrite is a man that has a show of godliness, but yet
denies the power thereof. A definition so exact and so exquisite in all his
parts, that if it were examined by the strictest rules of Logic, I doubt
whether any could be found more perfect.

The second is An admonition to decline and avoid them; given in the person of
Timothy, unto all the godly; in the same verse, Turn away therefore from such.

The third, is A description of a double conflict, which the hypocrite
entertaineth with two sorts of people: the first of them with women, in the
sixth and seventh verses: the second of them with men, in the eighth and ninth.

In both which his conflicts, the Apostle sets down and observes four
things: First, who be the persons, whom the hypocrite singleth out to make his
encounter with: which (if you mark them) be of contrary disposition and
quality.

His first conflict and encounter, is but only with women, yea and those also
such, as for wit, be Simple: for life, Sinful: for capacity Doltish, and
utterly Ind^cible. For all these Epithites, you see in this place to be given
them: Simple women, laden with sins, ever learning, and yet never able to
come unto the knowledge of the truth. This is the Hypocrites beginning,
degenerous, and abject. But his proceedings be of a more elated and lofty
spirit. For his second encounter is with Men; yea and those no common men: but
even with such persons, as for authority be Princes; for understanding,
Prophets; for integrity of life, Gods pincipallest servants. For all this is
implied in the person of Moses, whom, and whose like, those Hypocrites do most
ambitiously affect to resist.

So that you plainly see, how quickly such Hypocrites will take heart and
courage to them: and, if at first they be backed, and but a little fleshed,
though it be but by simple sinful women, they will by and by after not stick
to encounter, even with the greatest men, and of cheifest place, both in the
Church and Commonwealth: yea and that, they count their glory. For (as the
Comicall Poet has very well observed) Est stu^tis thesarus in lingna situs,
Plaut. Paenul. Act. 3. Sce. 3.
^^ quaestui habeant, ma^e loqui melioribus: Such men have a whole treasury of
evil words in their tongues: and they commonly bestow them upon their betters,
thinking, so to improve them to their better advantage. Which quality of
theirs, The Apostle Jude likewise expressly observes in his Epistle, where he
gives this for one note to know these Hypocrites by, Iud. 8.
that they always be evil speakers, against men in authority. Note such,
that you be not deceived by them.

The second thing which the Apostle observes in the Hypocrites conflicts, is
His manner of incountring with both those sorts of people: which is very
differing and unlike unto it self. In this first conflict with women, he
Creeps like a micher: They creep into houses. In his second conflict with
men, he stands up like a Soldier: (...), They stood up against, even Moses
himself. This may seem a strange course, and almost ridiculous, that he
should so stoop to women, that is so stout to men; yea and men of place too.
But yet, even herein the hypocrite declares himself to be very wise, in his
own generation: imitating precisely the ancient policy of his Father the
devil; who, that he might win Adam, Ghrys. hom 2. de lapsa Adae.
he laid his battery unto Eve, as Saint Chrysostom observes, and even so does
likewise the subtle hypocrite, his son: he knows well enough, that in
gaining of the woman, he commonly gains two; he gains the husband also,
especially if he be an vxorious man: and therefore he still seeks to lay the
foundation of his credit in the minds of women, that so he may be sure to have
Patrones satis dicaculos, Plaut. Asim. Act. 3.50.1.
as the Comicke speaks; that is, such patrones as will pratle enough in his
cause, though it be without all reason: which without such submisse and
pleasing behavior, he could never obtain of them. For it is commonly true, in
such friends as women be, that Obsequium amicos, veritas odium parit: Fauning
finds their favor, Terent. Audria. Act. 1.50.1.
but plain dealing their displeasure. Which as it is generally true in their
sex, so is it most specially true in their sect. For it once they do grow to
to be sectaries and humorists, they must then needs be humored, or else all is
marred. Hier. Epist. ad Demetriad
And this is the reason, why he creeps so to women. Serpit in paucis, vt
perueniat ad plurimos, as Saint Hiaerom writes in an other case.

Now on the other side, the reason why he stands up so stoutely against mem,
yea and men of that high rank, is to venditate himself unto his accomplices, by
seeming not to be a regarder of men's persons, be they never so great, but so
far to be possessed with zeal and sincerity, as even to have neglected the
regard of his safety, by hazarding himself too far in speech against them.
For by this kind of rebelling against such great men, he expects to gain no
less reputation, then by pleasing the forme^ simple women: who (as Saint
Hierom writes, against Ruffinus) do Procacitatem, Hier. apol 3. cont. Ruffin.
disertitudinem, and maledicere omnibus, bonae conscientiae signum arbitrari:
They in their sottish simplicity, do verily believe, that such their
procacity, and satyricall uberty in reproving of great persons, must needs be a
sure argument of the sincerity of their consciences. And surely you shall see
diverse of those painted hypocrites, who when they have lauished beyond all
bounds of reason, of sobriety and modesty, against both Moses and Aaron, that
is against both the Civil and Ecclesiastical Magistrate, in public places;
yet can they be content to creep and crouch most basely unto very simple
women, in their private houses: much like unto Hercules, who abroad amongst
men, was very fierce and terrible; but within doors amongst women, he would
permit his mistres to comb his head with her panto^le: Terent. Eunuch. Act. 5.
Scen. 8.
as the Comike speaks; Commitigari sandatio caput.

The third thing that the Apostle observes in the hypocrites conflicts, is the
event and success of his incountering with those persons: which is as diverse
and unlike, as his encounter it self was. For in his first conflict with the
women, he prevailed against them, and led them captive, as the words of the
text show: They lead captive simple women, laden with sin. But in his second
conflict with those men, he is prevailed against, and himself led captive by
the Truth, whilst it gloriously triumphs over his detected falsehood: They
shall prevail no longer, but their madness shall be evident.

The fourth and last thing which the Apostle observes, is the instrument and
means whereby this success is obtained in both conflicts. In his first, he
prevailed against those women, because he was able to lead them captive after
him, with diverse lusts. With diverse: Gloriae pecuniarum, iactantiae,
deliciarum, fortassis, and foediores concupiscentias signat, as S. Chrysostom
numbreth them. Chrysostom hom. 8. in 2. Tim.
In his second, he is prevailed against by those men, because they are able to
lay before him his madness: Their madness shall be evident to all men, as theirs
also was. This is the true coherence of this text with the former Scripture;
and withal, a short Epitome of the general doctrine of it.

The particulars that we have to consider in it, may summarily be comprised in
these two short Aphorisms: First, That the truth shall always be resisted:
And secondly, that it shall in a certain method and order be resisted: namely
after the self same manner, that Moses was resisted by Iannes and Iambres.

For the first of those positions, That the truth shall be resisted; het
Apostle here confirms it by two notable instances: the first of them
Historical, taken from the former times: Moses was resisted by Iannes and
Iambres, two notable inchanters: the second of them Prophetical, given to the
latter times: So shall the truth also be resisted by these men: that is,
enchanting hypocrites. Which two examples the Apostle only names, not for
lack of other store; for the continued succession of Roman Bishops (which is
so much stood upon) has been oftener interrupted, and for longer space, then
the succession of Heretics, and Schismatics, and such like resisters of the
truth has been, as appears by Chronologistes and writers of stories. But he
sets down these two by way of Synecdoche, putting a part for the whole, and
a few examples for a many, to avoid prolixity. In which few notwithstanding, by
this his comparing of the first times with the last, and of that which has
been, with that which shall be, this appears to be an irrefragable Axiom,
that The truth shall always be resisted.

For first, if we take the name of Truth, in his largest and most extended
sense, for the general speaking of the truth, as the Apostle Paul does in his
former unto Timothy, 1. Tim 2.7.
I speak the truth in Christ Jesus, and lie not: the truth in this sense is so
commonly resisted, that it passes in every man's mouth as a common proverb,
that Veritas odium parit: The reward of speaking the truth is only hatred. Of
which unequal measure the Apostle Paul complains unto the Galatians: Am I
therefore (says he) become your enemy, Gal. 4.16.
because I have spoken the truth unto you? And our Savior Christ likewise unto
the Jews: John 8.40.
Ye go about to kill me, a man that have spoken the truth unto you.

Secondly, if we take the name of Truth in a particular and more restrained
sense, for the truth of Gods religion, and the doctrine of his word, as our
Savior Christ does in the Gospel of S John; John. 17.17.
Sanctify them with thy truth; thy word is truth (in which sense I take it to
be taken in this place:) the Truth is in this sense, so naturally resisted, by
all that are not the Truths own natural children, that Tertulian has given
us this general observation: Tertul. Apo. cap. 7.
Simulatque apparuit veritas, inimica esse coepit: The truth (says he) no
sooner peeped out and appeared, but by and by it began to be hated: yea and
that by two contrary sorts of people, as he notes in that place: Extranei, a
quibus quotidie obsidetur: and proprij, a quibus quotidie proditur. The first
sort of those resisters of the truth, are strangers and aliens from the common
wealth of Israel: such as openly profess, not only the resisting, but also the
utter subuerting of it; such as were Nabuch^donoser, and Antiochus in the time
of the law; the persecuting Emperors in the time of the Gospel; and the Turk
in our time; professed and sworn enemies, not only of the faith, but also of
the very name of Christians. The second sort of those resisters of the truth
(and they much more dangerous) are dissembling Hypocrites, of whom this text
more poperly speaks: such as pretend to assist the truth, but intend to
resist it; by secretly supplanting it, and planting manifold errors under the
name of it. Act. 20.30.
Of which sort of persons, the Apostle Paul foretells us, that even of our
selves, there shall such men arise, speaking perverse things, to draw
disciples after them. Such as do veritatem, non veritate docere, Aug. lib 4.
de doct. Christ. cap. 27.
as S. Augustine speaks: They sometimes speak the truth, but seldom truly:
which is a perverse thing: for as Tertullian notes in the forealleadged place;
Ne tunc quidem cum aliquid very afferunt, sine mendacij vitio sunt: They seek
to deceive, even whilst they speak the truth; because they speak the truth
but with a lying heart, as they did in S. Paul's time, Philip. 1.16.
who preached the truth but only for contention; and a many like in our time,
who oftentimes abus^ the speaking of the truth, but only to the venting of
some private affection: which preuaricating kind of speaking of the truth, is
indeed nothing else but a resisting of the truth: it is nothing else but only
ars fallendi, vt per bona, facilius per suadere possint mala, Vincent. cap. 17.
as Vincentius Lirinensis notes: that is, an Art of deceiving, that so under
the countenance of a few smaller trueths, they may bring the better credit to a
many greater errors.

Of which hypocritical resisters of the truth, there be two diverse kinds. The
first of them are such as hold the truth in small things, but resist it in
greater matters, as even now I noted: such as were false Prophets in the the
time of the law, and deceitful heretics, in the time of the Gospel: both
which the Apostle Peter yoaketh together in one sentence: As there were false
Prophets amongst the people, so shall there be also false teachers amongst you,
1. Pet. 2.1.
which privily shall bring in damnable heresies.

The second sort of hypocritical resisters of the truth, do seem to be
clean contrary unto the former: for they hold the truth in greater matters,
but resist it in smaller: about which (notwithstanding) they stir up no small
stirs. 1. Cor. ^^.10. 1. Cor. 11.18.
Such as the Chuch calls Schismatikes, who contend for trifles, as it were
for life and lims, making a great conscience where they should not, but none at
al where they should: as diverse men amongst us do; who for Cappes, and
Surplices, Holy days, and Crosses, and such like smaller matters, belonging
only unto order, and external regiment, have made in our Church a dangerous
faction and rent: making head against their heads, and crying out like unto
Libertines, (or rather indeed like seditious Tribunes) that all our Christian
liberty is utterly betrayed, because in these matters the private fancy of
every idle head may not countermaund the authority of a public law: and yet
covering all this their gross disobedience under an outward cloak of religion
and conscience.

But howsoever those men may seem to please and applaud themselves, in making
a conscience to resist the Magistrate, Romans 13.5.
whom the Apostle Paul commands them even for Conscience, to obey: yet sure I
am of this, that Saint Augustine is so far from allowing of this their
disobedience to be conscience, that he openly pronounces it to be indeed
nothing else, but only a true resisting of the truth: Cui nisi ipsi veritati
resistitur (says he) cum regi, Aug. li. 3. cont. Epist. Parmenian.
ex veritate iubenti, resistitur: What do men resist, but only the very
truth, when they resist the lawful commandment of their Prince? A wise and a
true censure.

Thus you see that the truth shall surely be resisted, both by many men, and by
many means. And therefore, no man ought to be so weak minded, as to call the
truth of the truth in question, because he sees it to be resisted, or hears
it to be boldly contradicted. Hier. in cap. 4. ad Galat.
For (as S. Hierom truly notes) Haec est conditio veritatis, vt eam semper
inimicitiae per sequantur: This is the state, yea, and the fate, of the truth,
that it always shall be persecuted by the tongues of his enemies. And this
contradiction against it, is one special note to know it. And therefore the
speaking against the truth, (though with never such confidence and undertaking)
yet ought not either to scandalize or discourage any man, which truly and
sincerely seeks after the truth. Because if you examine the reasons of such
contradictors, (as every wise Christian ought to do) you shall find them Most
deceitful upon the waightes, 1. John 4.1. Psalm. 62.9.
yea and altogether lighter then vanity it self. As notably appeared in that
renowned Conference, which was held for the reducing of our resisters of the
truth: wherein all the great chalenges of their greatest undertakers, were found
to be just nothing, Persius. Satyr. 4.
but swollen and windy bladders; Builatae nugae, as the Poet speaks. This
briefly for the first position, That the truth shall always be resisted.

Let us now come to the second: How the truth shall be resisted: which (as you
see) must be done, by a kind of pattern; As Moses was resisted by Iannes and
Iambres.

Let us therefore now examine, who this Iannes and Iambres were, and after what
manner they resisted Moses: for it is not thoroughly agreed upon by all
expositors.

Some take this Iannes and Iambres, to be Corah and his consorts, Aret. in 2.
Tim. 3.
who resisted the authority of Moses in the wilderness. Now the manner after
which they resisted him, was this: they being high minded and ambitious
persons, and even burnt up with envy of other men's honors and preferments,
which they themselves affected, and thought themselves more worthy of, if they
might be their own Judges, they made a great Schism, and a dangerous
commotion about the rule and authority of Moses and Aron: and so gathering a
great company of their own condition and quality, they intended flat
rebellion, if God himself had not stayed them: Number. 16 3.
telling Moses and Aaron, that they took too much upon them, in making
themselves Lords over the rest of their brethren. And adding this, for a
reason; that the whole congregation, was as holy as they, and that God was with
one man, as well as with an other. Yea and one of their grand exceptions was
this (as Josephus reports) that they did, Joseph lib. 4. Anti quit. cap. 2.
Sacerdotium absque Populi suff^agio gerere: That they were not elected to
their places by the people: though they could not be ignorant, but that they
both had been elected by God himself before. So that the maine ends which
especially they aimed at, were principally two, Parity, and Popularity: the two
deadly banes of all good order, and of civil policy, and the beaten paths to
confusion and Anarchie.

In which their commotion, this is worthy the noting: that those great
reformers, which sought thus to pull down both Moses and Aaron, as two
usurpers, sought to set up themselves into the self same places, as Moses
directly obiecteth unto them: Seems it a small thing (says he unto Corah)
that God has severed thee from the multitude of Israel, Ver. 8, 9.
and all thy brethren, the sons of Leui with thee; and do ye also seek the
office of the priest? Mark, the Levites cry out against pride and ambition of
Priests; as certain male contented Ministers do likewise against Bishops,
whom God has made their rulers: but what is the drift and end of such their
declamations? only that which was theirs: that these being displaced, they
might creep into their rooms. So that it is not humility, but it is another
pride, which drives such men, so hotly to declame against pride. And this was
the resisting of Iannes and Iambres, in the former times, if by them be meant
Corah, and his mutinous companions.

Let us now look down into those latter times, and see whether the truth has
not been resisted, after the self same manner with us here at home, that it
was then with him. Have there not stood up amongst us, certain ambitious and
seditious Corahs, of the tribe of Leui, who bursting with envy at the honor
and preferment of the reverend Fathers and Governors of our Church, who sit in
Moses chair, have both by word and writing indeauoured to resist them, and
thereby to extenuate, or rather indeed exterminate all their lawful authority
and jurisdiction, under the pretense of a new reformation? Have they not told
them plainly, that they take too much upon them, in setting up themselves
above their fellow Ministers, who ought to be al equalles? 2. Have they not
brought for themselves the same allegation that those seditious persons did,
that all the people of God are holy, and that every Minister is as good as a
Bishop, and ought to have as great authority as he? Is it not one of their
chiefest greeuances, that the election of Ministers is not subjected unto the
peoples suffrages, who are their great masters, and whom they seruilely observe
with all addicted obsequiousnes? Have they not made as great and as dangerous a
schism in this own Church, about these matters, as ever the other did in the
Church of the Jews? And (that which is the prime point of all the rest) do
not their own writings declare, that all that rule and authority which they
would take away from our reverend prelacie, they would assume again, and
cunningly convey unto themselves, under the name of the Presbytery? All this
is more then manifest, unto men of any reach if they have but with half an eye
looked into the peremptory dealing and practice of their presumptuous
Consistory, and of that enormous and unlimited claim, which it lays unto
all authority, both Ecclesiastical and Civil.

But the same God which denied success unto that Schism, has also restrained
the proceedings of this: (his name be praised for it:) for the very ground and
foundation whereupon these men builded their imaginary Babel and towers in the
air, has begun long ago, to sink under their feet, as it did wiih those
mutiners: so that a great part of them are swallowed up by it; and the rest are
fast following unto the center of Shisme: only the cry of a few of the
hindmost may still be heard amongst us, as they are in sinking down: which can
not much longer be irksome and tedious because they be in the way to silence.
And thus much for the former application of this story, if by Iannes and
Iambres be understood Corah and his seditious company.

Now other expositors (and those the greater number) do expound this
otherwise: affirming this Iannes and Iambres, to be those two Egyptian
sorcerers which resisted Moses in the presence of King Pharao. Now the manner
after which they resisted him, was this: When as Moses and Aaron were sent into
Egypt to deliver the Israelites from their slavery and bondage, they avouched
to King Pharao, that The Lord God of Israel had sent them on that message; and
for the proof of their assertion, they confirmed their Embassage by diverse
signs and strange wonders, which could not be wrought, but by the finger of
God. Against whom there stood up this Iannes and Iambres: two brethren against
two: and they undertook that all their signs and wonders were but merely
sophistical, and that themselves (by enchantments) could do as great things
as any they had done.

In which their encounter, they seemed (in three miracles) to have gotten a
kind of conquest and victory over them: In turning their rods into serpents;
in bringing in of frogs; and in changing their water into blood: all which
those inchanters did, as well as the Prophets.

Hugo Cardinalis.
Upon which accident, a learned Father has allegorized in this manner: This
threefold attempt of these sorcerers against Moses shadoweth out a threefold
engine, whereby the truth shall be resisted in these latter days. First, by
the subtilty of serpents: Secondly, by the garrulity of frogges^ and thirdly,
by the cruelty of blood. By all which means indeed the truth has been
resisted, even in these our days, as well as in his: as if we shall but call
to mind the proceedings of those Hypocrites, which have resisted our Moses we
may well perceive.

For first, as concerning the subtilty of Serpents. The Serpents policy is
this: when he seeks to creep and wind himself into any place, he will
first begin to try whether he can wrest in his head: which if he can effect,
he will by and by draw his whole body in after it: and even so those subtle
and those venomous Serpents, which have of late so stung this worthy Church of
England, and like a cruel generation of Vipers, have gnawne even in sunder the
bowels of their mother, they began their pretended reformation at the first but
with a few smaller matters.

All was well a great while, but the cap and the surplice: whilst the Serpent
had thrust and wrung in his head; but when he saw that this was hearkened to a
while, then drew he in a greater part of his body: then was our whole
Leitourgie nothing but a mass of corruption; and our Communion book nothing
but a Compendium of the Mass book. When this was listened to a little, then
must the whole form of our Church government be changed: for our Clergy were
nothing but an Antichristian hierarchy. Here the Serpent had wrested in
almost all his whole body. When this a while had been admitted, then by and by
after was our Church counted no Church, but a company of reprobates, and a
very den of thieves. No Church, no Word, no Sacraments amongst us, as there
ought to be. Our Priests, they were counted but for idle Priests, and our
people, they not counted as a flock of Christ's sheep, but as a herd of
silthie swine; for even unto this height and extremity of madness have some of
our reformers grown, upon the same grounds and principles that the first
reformers laid down, as their own maine foundations.

And this is the bringing in of the Serpents very tail. For the tail does not
follow the head more naturally then this conclusion follows upon their
premises, if they once be admitted: as they that be learned do right well
understand.

And now I permit it unto your own judgment and wisdom, to consider,
whether these be not the men of whom this Apostle speaks in the chapter next
before; that their words shall spread and frette like a canker: 2. Tim. 2.17.
which eats further and further, until it have eaten and consumed the whole
body, as ths doctrine of these men has the body of our Church, until at last
they have brought it (as you see) to be no Church.

And surely these men be indeed the very Gangrens and Cankers of our Church,
which will never leave fretting until they be cut off (the proper cure of that
evil) though never so many medicines be applied unto them, as we see by
experience. And therefore that those fiery Serpents may be rightly charmed, it
is almost necessary, that (as the Prophet Isai speaks) both head and tail
of them be cut off: Isai. 9.14.
and that the rod of Aaron, that is, of the Magistrate should even eat them
up, as it did the Serpents of Iannes and Iambres; otherwise they will never
leave both hissing and stinging.

I speak not this to exasperate authority against such as be cureable, nor to
stir up against them any cruel persecution; of which they still complain:
though indeed they themselves be the true persecuting Isma^ls: who (for lack
of greater power) do still infest their brethren with all the several kinds
of verbal persecution, Slandering, Scoffing, Threatening, Dangerous positions.
lib. ^. cap. 11.12, 13.
Railing, Libelling, and what not? But yet for all that, I wish that this
cutting-off might be such (if it may be) as our Savior Christ himself
exhorts us unto, when he wills us to cut off our hands and our feet, that
is, so to sever the vice or the error, that we may save the member. But if
this fretting canker have so far possessed them, that they be grown
incurable, Mark 9.43, 45.
then is it neither against Policy, nor yet against Charity, for the safety of
the whole, to cut off such festered and infected parts: but rather, it is
great cruelty not to do it. As notably appears, even in the Apostle Paul
himself; Romans 9 3.
whose Charity, though it were so exceedingly abounding, or rather indeed
ouerflowing, that he wished even himself to be cut off, Gal. 5.12.
for the found parts of the Church: yet for those cancred and infected parts,
which tended unto the destruction of the whole, (being in very deed, Cic. lib.
Epist. ad Brutum. Epist. ^.
rather Vlcera, then membra) he wishes, on the other side, Vtinam
abscindantur, qui vos inquietant: Would God they were even cut off, who seek
to disquiet you. Whose godly example, is patronage enough: it making both a
wise and a necessary distinction between true Christian charity and vain:
foolish pity, of which the Orator truly writes, that Salutaris seueritas
vincit inanem speciem clementiae: Wise and wholesome severity, is far more
profitable, then that vain and foolish pity. And this breefly for the first
engine of those enchanting hypocrites, whereby they have endeavored to resist
the truth: which is, The subtlety of serpents.

The second, is the croking and garrulity of frogs, as that Father terms
it, by which means they have likewise attempted to resist it. Apo. 12.8, 9.
For when that old serpent, the deadly enemy of the Church, found that by open
oppugning it he could not prevail against it, he spued out of his mouth, a
swarm of frogs, as that other serpent did, which we read of in the
Apocalpys: Apo. 16.13.
that is, a fry of young Schismatikes; who being as bold as the frogs of
Egypt have not only infested the whole land with their croking, but have also
climed up into the chamber of the King, as impudently as they did: yea they
have crauled upon his sacred person with their dirty feet, and have crept up
into his very crown, where they have blotted out the fairest of all his
titles, I mean the title of his supremacy, and ascribed the same unto their
Presbytery, as their writings show most plainly.

Yea and being yet more mad, and swelling (like Aesops frogge) with greater
pride of themselves, even to the cracking of their skins, they have
challenged to the combat, even Moses and Aaron, to dispute the case before the
King himself, and all the Princes of the land as Iannes and Iambres did. But
being undertaken, they have been found, upon the trial, to be as blind as
bold: and all that they could say to be indeed nothing else, but a (...), as
Aristophanes speaks, Aristoph in Ranis. Act. 1. Scen 5.
that is, A hoarse and harsh croking of unreasonable frogs. Who though they
were at that time, as soundly charmed, by some of our most reverend and learned
Bishops, as certain frogs in France were once by Bishop Regulus, Marul. lib
3. cap. 4.
which have continued dumb and silent ever since, like Seriphian frogs; yet,
our frogs (less modest) continue still to trouble the whole land with their
croking: Suidas.
as though nothing had ever been spoken against them. Notwithstanding, that
action was both begun and proceeded in, with as great a solemnity and
preparation, as ever was any since the time of great Constantine: our
Constantine himself, in his own royal person, vouchsafing to sustain the
greatest part of the burden; and with admirable dexterity to confound their
garrulity.

The third and last mean, whereby the truth shall be resisted by this brood of
hypocrisy is, The cruelty of blood. Of which although it may truly be said
(Gods name be praised for it) that As yet we have not resisted unto blood, Heb.
12.4.
as it is in the Epistle unto the Hebrews: yet that must be ascribed, rather
unto Gods most merciful dispensation, then unto their merciful disposition. For
that they intended blood, yea and blood upon blood, Daug. posit P. 144.145,
147, 170.
their diuulged libels show, threatening Fistes, and Clubbes, and Bickerings,
that shall make all our hearts ache, yea and Blood spilt by butchers. They be
their own words, and I gather no more then their own pens have skattered:
and that they were not in jest when they threatened these things, their own
ouert actitions commenting upon their inward intentions, have notably declared.
Their strength was suruayed, their army mustred, Ibid. p. 141.
and found to be an hundred thousand hands strong, as they themselves have
boasted, if happily their muster-maister was not deceived. Nay the sword was
almost drawn, to have struck a deadly stroke, yea and that even at our
sovereign head. The sign was given by them, and the trumpeters themselves
were mounted up aloft, but it was but in a cart (a worthy chariot for such
worthless persons) but yet even there they sounded unto the battle,
proscribing by name diverse honorable Counselors, and intending, by a more
effectual Metamorphosis then ever Iannes and Iambres did, to have turned the
water of our rivers into blood. All this is well known unto those that do
remember the furious commotion of Haccket and Copinger; which (as all men know)
was not done in a corner, but proclaimed in the open streets of our chiefest
city, and all this for the furthering of the new pretended Discipline. But it
pleased the Lord in mercy, to confound their conspiracy, and by the blood of
a few to spare the blood of many in pouring that blood which they thought to
have shed, by his merciful providence, upon their own head. And so be it unto
all that seek the trouble of Israel. Whereunto let every true heart say, Amen.

FINIS.
An answer unto certain objections, of one unresolved, as concerning the use
of the Cross in Baptism.
Vestra solum legitis, vestra amatis, caeteros, causa incognita, condemnatis.

Cic. lib. 2. de Not. Deor. Peccat, qui damnat quasi peccata, quae nulla sunt.

Aug. lib. 3. de libero arbitr. cap. 15. Primus felicitatis gradus est, non
delinquere: secundus, delicta cognoscere.

Cyprian, Cornelio.
The Obiectors praeface.
FIrst, I humbly desire, that this may be interpreted, as not done of me, in
derogation of the book of Common Prayer, which I have ever used with reverence
and respect: nor, of contradiction to the Estate, or opposition to authority,
to which I have ever submitted my self. Secondly, in all the time of my
forbearance, I would have it known and considered, that I never inueighed
against it, or condemned others that did use it, or dissuaded any from doing
it: and carried my forbearance so, as none (or few) espied what I did; upon
care not to be offensive by mine example. My conformity in other things
shows, that this is omitted, neither contentiously, nor contemptiously.

Answer.
FOr the protestation used in this Praeface, I rest charitably persuaded,
because it is made, both by one who best knows what has been done in that
matter; and by one, who (as I trust) for the fear of God, would not make any
protestation, contrary to his practice.

I likewise desire, that, what I shall write in answer of these objections,
may be held and esteemed, as mine own free judgment: begotten in me, only by
an indifferent inquisition into these causes, and not imposed upon me, by an
ouer-weening opinion of any men's persons, that have waded before me in the
search of these questions: whose reasons, in many points, I may happily follow,
but, their authority without reason, in none at all.

The first objection.
First, by forbearing it I was sure I did not sin: by using it, I doubted
least I should have sinned, seeing it has neither word of Christ, nor example
of the Apostles to warrant it: And whatsoever is done doubtfully, is sin to
him that does it.

Answer.
As concerning both your positions, delivered in the ingresse of this first
objection, my judgment is opposed ex diametro, unto yours. That if you had
used the sign of the cross (it being so enjoined you, by a Christian law) you
might have been sure that you had not sinned: but having forborne it, you
could not but know, that therein you greatly sinned. My reason is this,
because, Sin is nothing else but a transgressing of the law, either Divine,
or Human, where divine does not resist it. 1. John 3.4. 1. Pet. 2.13.
And therefore your yielding obedience unto such a law, must needs yield you
assurance, that therein you sinned not. On the other side, your detracting of
obedience from such a law, must needs resolve you as fully, that therein you
sinned, as you knew assuredly, the law was by you transgressed: both these
consequents be grounded upon the Apostles own definition of sin, of which
you could not be ignorant.

Ob. But happily, you will say, that sin is but only a transgression of the
law of God, and not of the law of man: Such as the cross is.

Resp. I answer, that whosoever disobeyeth the law of man, commanding in
things of indifferent nature, he therein transgresses the law of God, and
consequently commits sin. 1. Pet. 2.13.
For, the Apostle Peter commands us to submit our selves, not only unto the
law of God, but also unto the ordinances of man, and that, for the Lords sake.
Which place of Saint Peter, either gives the Magistrate commission to command,
and inioyneth the subject submission to obey, in matters of indifferencies, or
else is he clean stripped of all power and authority.

Ob. But you say: that though you knew it were commanded by law, yet, you
doubting still of the lawfulness of it, and taking it rather to be legitimum,
then licitum, this doubting, had turned your obedience into sin.

Resp. It is very true indeed: and therefore, I doubt not, but that your very
doubting in this case, was your sin: nay, many sins bound together: it
being both the effect, and the cause, and the body of sin in you: The effect,
because it proceeded, from ignorance of the truth. And again, because (as a
learned Divine notes) Conscientia nimis scrupulosa, Aspilcuet.
nascitur ex vitio, vel naturali, vel acquisito: the cause of sin, because it
produced disobedience in you, and that unto a most ancient, and a most general
Christian law: and the body of sin, Alter. staig Lex. Theo.
because it kept you from assenting unto the truth: for, in doubting there can
be no determination, and therefore no assenting, be the thing whereof we
doubt, never so true and certain. Which suspense and vncertain^^ in matter of
duty, even the Heathens define to be a great sin. Qui deliberant vtru^ id
sequantur quod honestu^ esse videant aut se scientes scelere contaminent, ^ic.
lib. 3. offic.
in ipsa dubitatione inest facinus*

So that, your doubting, was not only a sin, but also a sin out of measure
sinful, corrupting your best actions, and intangling your conscience, with a
most vn-auoidable necessity of sinning. If you obey, you sin against your
own persuasion: if you disobey, you sin against the law, which you ought to
obey, Romans 13.5.
even for conscience sake: an indissoluble knot. Whereby even your future
obedience, (if you shall return ad meliorem mentem) yet will carry this evil
with it, as to accuse and condemn your former disobedience. For (as Tertullian
reasons in an other like matter) Qui hodie non deliquit suscepta corona,
deliquit aliquando recusata. Tertul. lib. de Coron. cap. 2.
If you do not then offend when you observe the cross, you must needs have
offended, when you refused it. This is the fair fruit of your needless
scrupulosity, that it makes one part of your life, to give in evidence against
an other.

Note this.
Now, if your doubting (as you say) do corrupt your obedience, and turn that
into sin: do you think that it acquiteth your disobedience from sin? Or
can you think that it is no sin, to go against a grounded law, when you
think it so great a sin, Cic lib 5. Tusc. Tom. 4
to go against an ungrounded opinion? I doubt not, but, if these two sins
were put into Critolaus his balance together, your sin against the law,
would appear much the heavier For (as Tertullian notes, in the forecited
place) Nec nullum, nec incertum videri potest delictum quod committitur, in
obseruationem satis auctoratam, such as the cross is. 1. Sam. 15, 22 23.
And, as the Prophet Samuel teaches us Disobedience, is as the sin of
witchcraft, which must needs make your sin against the law (being the
sin of disobedience) to be much more grievous, then the sin against your
persuasion, it being but erroneous.

Ob. But you will say, that that disobedience which is there so condemned, was
disobedience unto the commandment of God.

Resp. And I say, that it is the commandment of God, that we should obey the
magistrate. Let every soul be subject to the higher powers. Romans 13, 1, 2.
For there is no power but of God.

Whosoever therefore resists power, resists the ordinance of God. Neither
ought we only to obey the magistrate in those things which God himself
commands but also, even in those which only man ordains, 1 Pet. 2.13.
as the Apostle Peeter expressly teaches us. Submit your selves unto all manner
ordinance of man, for the Lords sake. Mark, unto all ordinances of man, not
being opposed to the ordinances of God, as the cross is not. Yea, and these we
must obey, even for conscience sake, Romans 13.5
as the Apostle Paul teaches us, in the forecited place. We must be subject
(says he) not only for wrath but also for conscience sake: which sentence has
oftentimes made me to wonder, at the strange misshapen conscience of many men
in our days; who make a great conscience of not observing the cross, and
other like ceremonies of the Church, where they have no scripture to guide
their conscience: and yet make no conscience of breaking Godly laws which the
scriptures command them, for conscience sake to observe.

Ob. But you say, that this sign of the cross, having neither any word of
Christ, nor example of Apostles to confirm and approve it, your conscience
would not suffer you, to yield obedience unto it.

Resp. I answer, that it having again, neither any word of Christ, nor
Apostles example to infirm and reprove it, this proves it to be in his own
nature indifferent: and so, to be put in the power of the magistrate, to
command or forbid, as occasions may induce it. And therefore, it being (out of
doubt) by the magistrate commanded, no man ought to make a doubt whether it
should be obeyed. Eusebius. lib. 12. de praeparat. Euangel. cap. 1
For (as Eusebius observes out of Plato) they which be private persons, must
neither disputare, nor dubitare de legibus, but simpliciter parere. Which
branch of Platoes law, he ce^sureth to be consonant to the heavenly law of God.
With who^, in this point of simple obedience consents Tertullian, allowing
much better of our simple obeying then of our subtle inquiring into things of
this nature. Tertul. lib de coron. cap. 2
Lando fidem (says he) quae ante credit obseruandum esse, quam didicit.

The equity of which rule, even you your self, and diverse other, by your
practice do confess, in yielding your obedience to the cap and surplice, and
many other ceremonies of our English Church. And therefore I desire but to know
some good reason, why you do not the like, to the cross in baptism. What
commandment of Christ, or what example of Apostles have you for the surplice?
or what special warrant and rule for your conscience, save only this general
rule of obedience? And therefore you must show by the commandment of Christ,
or example of the Apostles, either that the surplice is more allowed then the
cross, or that the cross is more condemned then the surplice, or else, you
must follow that rule of obedience, as well in the one, as you do in the other,
otherwise you shall plainly declare unto the world, that you play but fast and
loose with the name of your conscience: which when you will, is bound, and when
you will, is free: having so none other rule for it, but only your own will,
which is a crooked rule.

Again, if your conscience were so scrupulized by your doubting, it must
needs be, because you knew no light of scripture to give you resolution, Sum.
aurea.
either on the one side, or on the other. For, Dubitatio, is, in neutram partem
consensio. Now, you being thus uncertainly poised, why did you rather propend
unto that side, which led you unto disobedience, then unto the other, which led
you unto dutiful and Christian obedience? That way which you went, you had
nothing to carry you, but only the blast of a windy opinion: yea and not that
neither, for your opinion was not settled: that other way which you left, you
had two great waightes so sway you: viz. the authority of the law, both
spiritual, and temporal, and the practice of the Church, both ancient, and
modern: a very heavy counterpoise, and therefore I wonder, how you could set
them so light, especially you having no such weighty authority to uncertain
you, Tertul. lib. de coron. cap. 4.
as the Churches example might have bin to resolve you; which eue^ in this
particular case of the cross, has both traditione^ auctricem, and
consuetudinem confirmatricem: and therefore ough^ to have, fidem obseruatricem,
as Tertullian in the forecited book observes. So that, surely you strained
at a gnat, and swallowed up a Camel, when you were so superstitious in not
offending against your own private opinion, and so little religious in
offending against the Churches public direction.

Ob. But perhaps you will say, that you will not be led by the examples of men,
nor pin your conscience upon other men's sleeves.

Resp. I answer, first for the examples of men, that though they be not
always to be generally followed, without all exception: nor rashly, without
due examination; yet, in scruple of conscience, when we lack the direction of
the word of God, I do not think that the breach of law, and contempt of the
churches example, is the safest way to keep a good conscience. S. Augustine
had so high an estimation of the Churches example, Look: Calvin. lib. 4. Inst
cap. 1. Sec. 10. Aug. lib. cont. Epist. fundam. cap. 5.
that, in the maine foundation of all religion, that which led him especially
unto a resolution, was the example and authority of the Church Ego vero (says
he) Euangelio non crederem, nisi me caetholicae ecclesiae co^moueret
authoritas. This great opinion had he of the Churches example, that in a matter
of greatest weight, it prevailed more with him to gain his assent, then any
other reason, or argument could do. And therefore, in such intricate and
doubtful suspension, he gives us this good rule for our direction. Quae vera
perspexeris tene: Aug. lib. de vera relig. cap. 10.
quae falsa, respue: quae dubia creed: donec aut respuenda esse, aut se^per
creden^a, vel ratio doceat, vel authoritas pracipiat. A very sound rule, and
fit to be observed in every Church, by all the particular members of it: wherein
he prescribes no more unto us, the^ he had subscribed unto himself, as
evidently appears out of the former place: whose judgment and practice
concurring both togi^her, ought not be so lightly esteemed of us, especially, we
having, in this case of the cross (beside his authority, and the example of
the Church) both rationem docentem and authoritatem praecipientem, either of
which (in his judgment) were sufficient arguments to lead us to obedience.

Ob. But you say, you will not pin your conscience upon other men's sleeves.

Resp. I answer, that in matters of faith, where you may have the light of the
holy Scripture for your full instruction, it is not simply good to pin your
conscience upon the sleeves of men, though how far Saint Augustine did yield,
even in this case, I have before declared. But, in matters of order and
obedience (such as the observation of the cross is) the scriptures themselves
do pin your conscience unto other men's sleeves. For, in things in different
commanded for orders sake (where the authority of the Magistrate goes before)
there the conscience of the subject ought to lead him after, as if it were
pinned unto the Magistrates sleeue, by the concurring judgments of the two
chief Apostles, 1. Pet. 2.13. Romans 13.5.
Peter and Paul, of whom, the one commands us, to submit our selves to all
ordinances of men, for the Lords sake: the other, to obey them, even for
conscience sake. Therefore (to shut up this first objection) I conclude with
Plato: Si positioni non credis, Plato in Theatet.
reprobare debes: Si reprobare non potes, positioni credes. Either prove you
that the cross is a thing against conscience, or else, yield obedience unto
it, for conscience sake.

The second objection.
Whereas, order, and comeliness, are the grounds of such things as the Church
may add; I have doubted that this sign exceeds both these, because there is
given it a spiritual signification, of our valor in confessing Christ boldly.

Answer.
The sign of the cross, as we now use it, is neither against comeliness, nor
against good order, but very consonant unto both; Instit. lib. 4. cap 10. Sect.
28.29.
even by Caluines own description of comeliness and order: and therefore (by
your own rule grounded upon Saint Paul) may lawfully be added and used by our
church. Now, if (besides these two forenamed commodities) it have also a third,
Tertul. lib. de Coron. cap. 3.
to wit, a spiritual signification, yea and that such a one, as has not only
been allowed, but also affected in the primitive church, this ought not to
debar the use of it amongst us, but rather, to infer, that it ought to be
in use. For the very same Apostle which prescribes the two former rules, 1.
Cor. 14.26.40.
of order and comeliness, in the very same chapter prescribes a third, of
greater importance then they both, to wit, that they tend unto edification. And
except our ceremonies be thus conditioned, they ought not in any Christian
church to be used: Calvin. lib. 4. Instit. cap. 10. sect 32.
as Calvin himself notes: Totum obseruationum vsum and finem, ad ecclesiae
aedificationem referamus, says he: referring not only their intended end, but
also their daily use, unto the edification of the church.

Ob. But you say, that to have a spiritual signification, is to exceed the
nature of a ceremony, and to draw it unto a higher quality: Whitgift* p. 190.
Perhaps you mean, unto the nature of a sacrament. For that is T. C. conceit,
from whom (I guess) you borrowed it.

Resp. But therein you greatly mistake the matter. For, not only Sacraments,
but also ceremonies too, ought to have their spiritual signification, of which
if they be destitute, they utterly degenerate into vain and idle
gesticulations: neither is there any reason, why such should have any place in
the Church. Col. 2.17. Heb. 8.5. and 10.1. Hier. in Galat.
The Apostle says of ceremonies, that they be shadows of things to come; of
good things; and of heavenly things. Saint Hierom says, that they be not only
shadows, but also eminencies too: he calls them, imagines and exemplaria
futurorum; which ought no less to be observed in our Christian ceremonies,
then it was in the Jewish. For as Saint Augustine observes) Whosoever
observes any ceremony or sign, Aug. lib. 3. cap. 9. de doct. Christiana.
and not understands what thing it does signify, he does seruire sub signo,
he is a slave and a servant unto the outward sign: but he that observes it,
knowing the signification of it he serves not the sign, but the thing
whereunto it is referred. Yea and Calvin allowing ceremonies in all christian
Churches, Call: lib: 4. Instit cap: 10. sect: 14.
requires these three conditions in them: that they have, In numero
paucitatem: In obseruatione facilitatem; and in significati^ne dignitatem. So
that both Augustine and Calvin do make this spiritual signification, (of which
you do seem to be so greatly afraid) to be in all ceremonies a necessary
condition And therefore Calvin reproves the ceremonies of the Papists, Ibid:
not for having a signification, but for the darkness and obscurity of their
signification, comparing them, in that place, ad scenam histrionicam, and, ad
magicam incantationem, for this only reason, because they be, Cerimoniae non
intellectae. And, in the conclusion, gives this general censure of them.
Illas omnes caeremonias corruptas esse, et noxias, per quas homines ad Christum
non diriguntur, so that he makes Christ to be the body of our ceremonies, as
well as of the Jewish, and not only allows, but also exacteth a
signification of them. The like does also Peter Martyr, in his epistle to
Bishop Hooper, Pet: Mart Epist ad Hooperum.
being troubled (as it seems) with this selfsame scruple, that you are.
Quomodo (says he) priuabimus eccle^^am hac liberate, vt non possit suis
ritibus aliquid signisicare? And, he brings in the same place, a most
pregnant example, out of the Apostle Paul, 1. Cor: 11.5.7.10. Ephesians. 5.22.
which confirms his judgment For he not only commands wives to be subject
to their husbands, by direct precept, but he also ordains, that by this
significa^t ceremony they should express it, to come always to the Church
with their heads covered ^n which ceremony, as you see, beside comel^nes and
order, he has a respect, to a Godly signification: finally, the most Divines
that I have read (beside comelines and order) require in all ceremonies, that
they tend directlly unto edification. Now edify they can not, unless both they
have a signification, and that signification be likewise understood. Unknown
ceremonies (as unknown tongues) cannot possibly edify, if by interpretation
they be not made known. Yea even the Reformers themselves require this
properly in all their ceremonies. Call: lib. 4. Instit cap: 10. Sect: 29.
Calvin says, that Ceremoniae must be pietatis excercitia, quae ad Christum
eecte nos deducant. Goulartius, in his Annotations upon the 74. Epistle of
Saint Cyprian, Ciprian. Pompeio.
to Pompeius says, that Rites and cermonies must always have regard, not
only of order, but also of edification too. Yea and even T. C. himself
(forgetting the danger, Page: 8.
which (before) he fained, of making ceremonies, sacraments, if they had any
signification) yet elsewhere yields that they ought to have it. For in one
place he affirms, tha^ (beside the ends by you named, of comelines and order)
they ought to be done unto edification, Whitgift P. 86.
making this a distinct head from those two forementioned. Whereby it is
evident, that he intends that ceremonies should otherwise edify, then only
by their comelines and order. Which they cannot do without a signification. 278.
In an other place he affirms, that Ceremonies ought to be helpers, to
promote the Doctrine of the Church, which how they should do I know not, 599.
if they signify not* and therefore the Authors of the admonition doubt not,
to add to their ceremonies a signification. For they would abolish kneeling
for popery, and establish sitting at the communion, adding this for a reason:
because sitting does better express the mystery of Christ's holy supper.
Because, by sitting, we signify rest, and a full finishing of all legal
ceremonies in Jesus Christ. So that they never doubted that the adding of a
signification unto a ceremony, would be the institution of a new sacrament:
belike this conceit of yours was not the^ hatched. How these men agree with
Cartwright, or he with Calvin, yea or with himself, I leave for those men to
reconcile who^ it most concerns, and who have found in their consciences the
inconvenience, of following his vngrou^ded fantasies: but if our reformers do
not corrupt the supper of Christ by adding a significa^t ceremony unto it; why
should we be thought to corrupt the baptism of Christ, by adding a like
significant sign unto it. Therefore by all the forecited both reasons and
authorities it appears, that it is no sin in a ceremony, to have a
signification, but rather, a folly, if it lack one, as Saint Augustine truly
teaches us: Who makes it a sufficient reason, Aug. epist. ad Ianuar* 119.
cap. 19.
why the Church should reject them, when they see no sufficient reason, why it
did accept them: as they cannot in those ceremonies, that be brutish and
insignificant, what reason can be alleged, why any such should be accepted?

The third objection.
Seeing our church, according to the Scriptures, has abandoned all monuments
of superstition: and the sign of the cross in baptism, Monume^tum, quasi
monens mentem.
is apt to breed a present remembrance of that horrible idolatry committed by
it, in the synagogue of Rome: I have doubted how we can retain it, for peril
of falling into idolatry.

Answer.
For the preamble of this third objection, That our church has abandoned all
monuments of superstition, it is a very true position: and therefore that the
cross (as our church uses it) should be a monument of superstition, implies
a contradiction.

The rest of this objection is so loose and untrussed, that I see not how it
should be to your purpose ad-apted. But (if you will admit of my divination) I
guess that this must be your reason.

Whatsoever is dangerous to lead us to idolatry, that ought to be avoided in
the service of God: But the sign of the cross in Baptism, is such, Ergo. The
proposition of which argument you taking for granted, bestow your whole proof
upon the Assumption, which you strengthen by this reason.

Whatsoever is apt to breed a remembrance of the horrible idolatry committed by
it in the Synagogue of Rome, that is dangerous to lead us unto idolatry. But
the sign of the cross in baptism is such, ergo. This whole objection is more
fully answered. page ^^.


In these two Syllogismes (as I conceive it) is the whole strength and force of
this objection contained: let us therefore examine the several parts, as well
of your Protosyllogisme, as of your Prosyllogisme.

First therefore, for the proposition of your former Syllogism; that,
whatsoever is dangerous to lead us to idolatry, that ought to be avoided in
the service of God. This word [Dangerous] is a word of ambiguous signification,
importing either that, which naturally and necessarily carries danger with it:
or, that which only casually, and accidentally may give some occasion of
danger by it. In both which senses this word Dangerous is used in one sentence,
in the scripture: Act. 19, 27.
where, Demetrius speaking against the doctrine of Saint Paul, he says, that
it is Dangerous, not only to bring the state into reproof, but also to bring
the temple of their goddess into contempt. To the latter of these purposes the
doctrine of S. Paul was naturally dangerous, yea, and necessarily too, viz: to
the bringing of their temple into contempt, because he taught, that they were
no gods which were made with hands: but, to the other purpose, of reproving the
state, or, of taking away the gain of their art, it was but only accidentally
dangerous. Lib. 3. did. 39 quaest. 1. ^ex. Theol.
So that periculosum (as Bonauentura teaches) may either be taken as Causa
periculi, or else, but only, as Occasio periculi. Now, to apply this
distinction unto our purpose.

If you take Dangerous here in the former sense, for that which is properly
and per se, as cause of danger; then yield I your proposition to be true, that
whatsoever (in that sense) is dangerous unto idolatry, it ought to be avoided
in the service of God. But if you take this word Dangerous in the latter sense,
for that which casually and per accidens, may be an occasion of idolatry; then
I deny your proposition, as utterly false. What greater show of danger could
there be in any thing, then to place the image of an Ox, in the temple of
GOD? Elian lib 10. de animal. cap. 28.
especially amongst that people who had both seen an Ox worshippied for the
greatest GOD of Egypt, under the name of Apis: and, who themselves had
worshipped the image of an Ox for their own proper God. Psalm. 106 20.
But yet, because the image of an Ox was not naturally or necessarily
dangerous unto idolatry (that old corruption being so long forgotten) but only
casually and per accidens, if any man (by his own corruption) should renew it
unto himself: therefore Solomon did not think himself tied by such an
accidental danger, but that he might lawfully set the image of twelve Oxen in
the very temple. Neither do we read (notwithstanding that probable fear
which those images might have ministered unto scrupulous consciences) yet that
any man abused them unto idolatry, 1. Kings. 7.25.
as no man has likewise the sign of the cross, howsoever that be feared,
where there is as little cause. Therefore, to the proposition of your former
syllogism, I answer with Aquinas in an other like case. Quando periculum
nascitur ex ipso facto, tum factum illud non est expediens. Sed si periculum
immineat a nostro defectu, non desinet propter hoc esse expediens. Sicut
expediens est ascendere equu^, Aquin. 22. q. 88.4.2.
quamuis periculum immineat cadenti de ^quo: alioquin, oporteret cessare ab
omnibus bonis, quae etiam (per accidens, ex aliquo euentu) possunt esse
periculosa. In which sentence of Aquinas, I pray you mark these two things.
First, that by such casual danger no action is made so much as inexpedient,
much less unlawful. And secondly, that if we should give place to such
accidental dangers, we could not freely use the best and most holy actions,
which are not to be intermitted, for such fantastical fears.

Now for the assumptio^ of your former syllogism; that the sign of the cross
(as our church of England uses it) is dangerous to lead us unto idolatry, that
I simply deny. It is neither naturally and per se, nor yet casually and per
accidens, in it self any whit dangerous, to lead us to idolatry, but only, in
defectu nostro, as Aquinas distinguishes, after which manner there is nothing
but it may ^e dangerous, be it n^uer so good. 2 ^et. 3.16.
There is nothing so good, but it is subject to the abuse of evil and wicked
men, no not the scriptures themselves, which is no sufficient reason, why they
may not be well used, of good and Godly men.

Ob. But you prove, that the cross is dangerous to lead us to idolatry, by
this reason following.

Whatsoever is apt to breed a remembrance of that horrible idolatry committed
by it in the Synagogue of Rome that is dangerous to lead us unto idolatry. But
the sign of the cross is such. Ergo.

Resp. In this argument, both the parts are false. First, for the proposition,
there is no coherence between the anteceding and the succeeding part of it.
Does every thing that breeds a remembrance of any thing abused unto idolatry,
endanger us to fall into the same idolatry? then were it dangerous to read in
the scriptures the several idolatries of the Jews, least by remembering them,
we might be endangered, imitate and follow them.

Ob. But you will say, Ioh. 5.39.
that these be not pictures, but scriptures, which, our Savior Christ himself
commands us to read.

Resp. I answer, that this makes nothing against our purpose but, rather much
for it. For, in that our Savior commands us to read them, his meaning is,
that we should remember them, which remembrance he would never have commended
unto us, if he had judged it to be so dangerous for imitation as you affirm it
is. But, to come to your exception against that kind of remembrance, which is
procured by images or pictures. Numb. 33.
The image of that golden calfe which the Israelites worshipped, set forth in
our Geneua Bibles, cannot but breed a remembrance of that horrible idolatry,
which was committed with it, in the wilderness, (this, you see, is a picture,
and not a scripture) and yet, those reverend and worthy men, who are the
authors of that learned translation, of purpose set out that picture in their
edition, thereby to imprint the remembrance of their sin more firmly in our
minds, never doubting, that the remembrance of their idolatry would stir up
our desire unto like impiety. Neither yet (as I think) has any man been
found, who either by view of that picture, or remembrance of their practice,
has been led to imitate them in that vice. So that, remembrance does not
always breed a liking of the thing so remembered, but, oftentimes, a lothing.

Cic. Epist. 15. Bruto.
There be monumenta odij, as well as Amoris. To go no further for instance, but
to the sign of the cross: do we not see by experience, that our remembering
how the Papists have abused it, has stirred up in many men detestation of it?
whereby, the hatred up of their abuse has so blinded their reason, as to
breed an abhorring even of the lawful use of it. Which evidently shows, the
notable incohaerence of your Mayor proposition, and that we may well remember
idolatry, without any danger of falling into it.

Now, for your assumption: That the sign of the cross is apt to breed a
remembrance of the horrible idolatry, which was committed by it, in the
Synagogue of Rome. If that we freely granted, yet were not the cause
prejudiced: your Mayor being so weakly founded.

For, what if it gave us occasion to remember that ancient idolatry, which by
remembering, we abhor: does this make it unlawful? or does it not rather
make it good, and profitable? But I see no cause at all why we should yield
you so much. For, I pray you, why should our cross be thought to be more apt,
to breed a remembrance of Popish idolatry, then our Communion-bread is, to
breed a remembrance of Popish Artolatrie? Or, why should it be thought more
powerful to lead us unto the one, then this is, to lead us unto the other?
Especially, the bread being a material and a sensible body, and remaining (for
some good space) an object to the eye, whereby it may more easily suggest unto
the mind how it has in the Romish Church been abused: whereas the cross,
being an immateriall and a vanishing sign, in one and the same moment being
both bred, and dead, is neither so fit to instruct, not so strong to incite us
as the bread is. And yet I do not know, nor ever have heard, that any man (not
being before a Papist) has by the sight of our bread, been induced to desire
to return unto Popery. So little color of probability is there, that every
one which sees a cross made in our baptism, should by and by remember that
former idolatry, which (happily) he never saw; yea and not only remember it
but also desire to return unto it; Psalm. 14.5. Aug: Epist. 118. ad Ianuar.
cap. 2.
there is no likelihood in this fancy. But it is indeed a fear, whereas no
fear is, as the Psalmist speaks. Yea it is superstitiosa timiditas, as Saint
Augustine truly censureth it: it is indeed to fear superstition, with a
superstitious fear. Now if our cross be no more apt to revive the remembrance
of idolatry, then our bread is, I would know by what rule, the one being
received, the other should be rejected.

OB. Perhaps you will say, that Bread in the supper is Christ's own ordinance,
but the cross is not so,

Resp. The brazen serpent was Gods own ordinance, and yet it being abused to
idolatry, was justly abolished. So that if your urging of this instance be fit,
Page 40.
which else where you stand so much upon, the bread can have no protection by
being Christ's ordinance, because it has also been abused to idolatry.

OB. That bread which we use, was never so abused,

Resp. No more was that cross which we use, ever so abused. But yet if your
reason be good, that what-souer renueth the remembrance of the old idolatry, is
dangerous to occasion a relapse unto it, and therefore to be removed from the
service of God; it holds against bread, as well as against the cross. For
that is as dangerous to renew the remembrance of former idolatry, as the cross
is. But indeed this is but a needless fear, that there should be any such
danger in it. For first, why should the seeing of a cross made, rather move
us to idolatry, then the hearing of an idol named? may not the reading of the
Lords prayer, or of the angelical salutation, put men in mind as well of their
Pater noster, and their Aue Maria, and of that old superstition which they used
in both these, as the cross can of that which they used in it? yet, I think,
you will not think it unlawful (for this supposed danger) either to read the
one, or to say the other: neither do I think it so, to use the third. For,
secondly I demand, who those persons be, unto whom this pretended danger can
be intended? are they Protestants? or, be they Papists? The greatest part of
Protestants are such, as (for their age) could never see or know how the cross
was abused amongst the Papists, yea and of those there is a great part, so
fair from danger of Popery, by the use of this ceremony, that they are in
great danger of an other extremity, condemning the lawful use, for the
unlawful abuse, so that none of them is so slenderly grounded, as by such a
weak means to be removed. The other sort of Protestants, which are more
ancient, and so by their age might happily remember it, yet having been weaned
this forty six years from it, and so long trained up in an other use of it,
there is no show of likelihood, that such men should (now on the sudaine) be
so offended at it, as to quit and abandon their religion for it.

Now for the Papists, they be such as seldom do come unto prayers, never to
our Sacraments, by their own goodwil: so that, there is small danger of doing
them any harm. But if any of them should happen to be present at our
baptism, they may plainly see our cross, both by the simple use of the
sign, and by the words added for exposition of the sign, to be so
vindicated and cleared from their superstition, as there is far greater
danger to harden them in their opinion by our so distant a difference from
them, then by our so near conjunction with them. Finally, the folly and vanity
of this needelesse fear appears in this point, that in all the space of this
six and forty years, wherein the cross has been used amongst us, there can
not be given so much as one instance, of either any Papist to have been
confirmed in his Popery, or of any Protestant to have been converted unto
Popery, by seeing the sign of the cross, as we use it. Some examples may be
given of the contemners of the cross, whom God has permitted to fall from
that error in horrible heresies, as into Donatisme and Brownisme, but none at
all of the obseruers of the cross, that thereby have been brought to fall
into Papisme. And indeed the ^eare is altogether as absurb; that the seeing of
a cross made should move us unto Popery, as that the seeing of a wafer-cake
should move us to idolatry.

The fourth objection.
Seeing we are forbidden, not only idolatry, but also idols. 1. John 5.21.
And the sign of the cross to this day is an idol. For first, they think it
a special defense against the devil, and evils: per crucis hoc signum
fugiat. etc. Secondly, they bless themselves, who sign themselves with it:
Thirdly, they call men in their congregation to adore it: saying, Ecce signum
crucis, venite adoremus, therefore I doubt, how it, (being but an humane
invention) may be used in the place of Gods worship, and in his holy service.

Answer.
This fourth objection consists of two arguments, whereby you would disable
the use of the cross. The former being grounded upon this position, that no
idol may be used in the service of God. The second upon this; that no
invention of man, having once been abused unto idolatry, may ever after be
used in the actions of piety. The first of these two arguments may be cast into
this sylogisme. No idol may be used in the service of God. But the cross is
such, therefore it may not be used in the service of God, Let us severally
examine the parts of this argument.

First therefore as concerning your proposition, I answer. That no idol,
continuing in the nature of an idol, may lawfully be used in the service of
God: but if that condition and nature be altered (as it is in our cross) then
may it lawfully enough be used, yea though it were the same indiuiduum which
before was abused. Josh. 6.19.
Example whereof of we have in the metalls of Hierico, which were wholely
reserved for the use of the tabernacle, notwithstanding their abuse in that
idolatrous city: wherein it is more then probable, that no little part of them
was molten into idols. An other like example we have in Gedions Ox: Iud. 6.26.
where the very same individual Ox which first was consecrated unto Baal, was
afterward sacrificed unto God. Aug. Epist. 154.
Saint Augustine in his Epistle unto Publicola, expresses his resolute
judgment in this point, not Obiter, but ex instituto, taking upon him there to
decide this very question, and therefore his judgment ought to have the greater
estimation. There he expressly affirms that it is a thing as lawful, to
convert an abused idol unto the service of God as it is to convert a ^^duced
man, so that order be taken that it be not worshipped: Whitgift. page 273.
yea and even T. C. himself (for all his detestation of idols) yet is not so
blindly carried with hatred against them, but that he can see well enough the
gold and silver to be Gods creatures in them: of which his conscience can give
him good leave to make a private use, notwithstanding the tragical
exclamations of the admonition, Whitgift page 26^.282.283.
and the direct judgment of Saint Augustine, unto the contrary yea and of
Calvin too. Nay, he goes yet further and allows the cappe and s^rplice,
(which the admonition condemns for idols garments) and he himself, Calvin.
in Isai. cap. 3. Whitg. page 290.
calls a wouen image, not only a private, but a public and common use,
which, how it will stand with his other doctrines, it concerns this disciples
to consider.

So that, as concerning your proposition. That no idol may be used in the
service of God, you see in what sort it must be qualified, or else that you
have both Scriptures, and Fathers, and Reformers against you.

Ob. But, you prove your proposition, by that place of Saint John. Babes keep
your selves from idols, which (as you say) forbids not only idolatry, but
also idols too.

Resp. I answer, that this place of Saint John to keep our selves from idols,
is a Metonimie of that subject, and implies no more, but to keep us from
idolatry, with out which, an idol (in it self) is nothing, as the Apostle
Paul teaches us. To this exposition I am induced by these reasons.

First, because I take it to be the peculier opinion of the Mahometanes to
condemn all used of images simply, as you seem to do by pressing this place.
In which opinion I think none other sort of men concurreth with them, neither
Christians, Jews, nor Pagans. Secondly, because I find Didimus Alexandrinus
amongst the Ancients, Bib. pat Tom. 6. page 671.
and Marlorate, and Aretius amongst the Moderns to expound this place directly
of idolatry, and not of idols. Thirdly, because Tertullian, Tertul. lib. de
coron. cap. 10.
who in his book de corona seems to condemn not only the action of
idolatry, but also the very idols themselves, yet in the very same place
confesses that those very idols be Substantiae mundae ut dei res: et hac sua
condition communes vsus. And in his second book against Marcion, (expounding
the second commandment) he says, that the true cause why God forbids
images, Lib. 2 cont. Marcion. cap 22.
is only this, that so he might Cohibere substantiam idololatriae. Which two
places of Tertullian I pray you to mark: the first, showing that idols, may
have a lawful use, and therefore be not simply forbidden: the second, that they
only be forbidden in respect of idolatry. Calvin in cap: 5. Epist: 1. John.
Colloquum Montp. 400. and 415.
Fourthly, because both Calvin and Beza which extend this place to the
abolishing of idols, yet do it only in this respect, because they may be
occasions unto idolatry. Fifthly, because both the aforesaid authors do allow
some use of images: which shows that they think them not (by this place of
S. John) to be simply condemned. Sixthly, because I find even the scriptures
themselves to forbid images, only in respect of adoration and worship, ye
shall make you none idols or graven image, to bow down to them, Leuit. 26.1.
for I am the Lord thy God. So that this place of S. John in forbidding idols,
forbids not simply all kind of use of them, but only that religious use,
when we adore and worship them. For this place of S. John, is paralleled by an
other in the book of Exodus: Exodus 23.13.
where we are forbidden, so much as to name or to mention other Gods. Which
place must needs be restrained with this exposition, that it forbids us but
only, Honoris causa nominare: or else the very scriptures should be contrary
to themselves. For they not only name, but also preserve and keep in record
the names of diverse heathen gods. Astaroth and Milcom are named in the book of
kings: 1. Kings. 11.5. Job. 38.31.32 Acts. 28.11.
Arcturus and Orion in the book of Job: Castor and Pollux in the Acts of the
Apostles, and Act: 14.12. Jupiter and Mercury. Therefore as here is no more
meant, but that in naming we should not honor them, so in that place of John
there is no more meant, but that in keeping our selves from them, we should not
worship them. Which it is known we do not unto the cross. So that if it
were granted that the cross were an idol, yet (as long as we do not worship
it) it is not by that place of Saint John condemned.

But to come now to the Assumption of your argument: you say in it that our
cross is an Idol: and you prove it by three instances. First that the Papists
do think it a defense against the diu^ll: Second that they think it to
sanctify the users of it: and, Third that they do adore and worship it.

Of which three proofs, because the last does indeed prove it to be (in some
sense) an idol; I will take none exception against the two first though they
be insufficient, Page 66.
but will grant that (to the Papists) it is no better then an idol. But yet, I
pray you note, how ill these points hang together. The Papists adore and
worship their cross. ergo our cross is a^ idol. How incohaerent is this? Can
their worship of their cross make our cross an idol, which is not worshipped?
How then could our consciences be assured of the lawful use of any thing which
we use, when as we are not sure, whether the same thing, in some other place,
be not made an idol? Suppose that at our communion there should come in some
temporizing Papist, who seeing the communion bread upon the table, would
inwardly adore it, afte the idolatrous manner of the Romish church, does his
making of that bread an idol, pollute the use of it unto the Godly receivers?
if yea, then can we never be assured, whither that which we receive be Christ's
body, or an idol: because, there may be always some such disguised Papists
amongst us, if no: why should their adoration of an other cross corrupt ours,
which is not the same, when as his adoration of the bread, which is none other
but the same that we receive, corrupts it not? that cross which they adore,
is not the same which we make in our baptism: and that cross which we make,
is not the same, that they adore: and therefore I do not see, by what rule,
either of true religion, or, of common reason, the one should be condemned for
the other.

Ob. But yet seeing they make though not the same individual cross (which we
use) yet the same species of crossing an idol, we ought to forbear the use of
a thing so much abused, especially it being none ordinance of God, but only a
mere invention of man.

Resp. The same particular cross which we make, the Papists neither do, nor
can abuse: and much less can they the whole Species of crossing, whereof a
part remains with us, as well as with them: if we should grant, that our
cross were of the same Species with theirs, which I think it is not. But if
that were granted; Page. 63.
then all which the Papists can possibly abuse, is only so much of the Species
of crossing, as they have in their own possession. Now, for the abuse which is
offered unto some Indiuidua of any Species, why the other indiuidua of the same
species (though not so abused) should be condemned, there is neither right nor
reason: no more then if we should condemn the whole action of kneeling,
because idolaters do use to kneel unto their idols.

I confess that the scripture commands to destroy, not only the idols
themselves, Deu^ 7.5.
but also even their altars too. But this must be only understood of the same
Indiuidua which have been abused, not that the whole Species for their sake is
condemned. Josh. 22.16.
The Isralites did not think themselves bound by this commandment, to
overthrow the Rubenites altar, though it were erected without any warant; and
in show had some repugnancie with gods own commandment. Nay, Colloquum
Montpelg: P. 410.424. etc.
Beza yealdeth not thus much: for he thinks it not necessary that the same
altar which has been abused unto popish idolatry, should of necessity be
altered, but that it may serve (as well as a table) for the use of the
sacrament. So that he is so far from thinking that the abuse of one Indiuiduum
corrupts the whole Species, that he thinks not the same Indiuiduum it self
to remain corrupted, when the abuse thereof is removed, as it is in our
cross; which yet is not the same with the Papists cross, neither numero, nor
Specie, Page. 62.63.
as we shall see hereafter.

With Beza concurreth Calvin, in the thesis, that the abuse of one particular
corrupts not the whole Species. For then, the idolatrous abuse of some
images, should make all images unlawful. But Calvin himself allowe^h
Historical images, Instit: lib: 1. cap: 11. Sec. 12.
as helps unto memory, and says that they have a profitable use, not only In
monendo, but also In docendo. Beza goes yet further: allowing not only
Historical images, Colloquum Mont part: 2. P. 32. exeditione Bezae. Ex
editione Iacobi Andreae. P. 421.
but also even Symbolical too. For he allows the painting not only of holy
histones, but also of holy visions too, Verbi causa. That of Isai. cap. 6.1.2.
etc. and that of Daniell. cap: 7.9.10.13.14. wherein God himself must needs
be represented. And he thinks that by the help of such images, the text it
self may be illustrated and better understood. The translators of our Geneua
bible go yet further, for they in the 33. cap: of Numbers in one page set
down, the image not only of the brazen serpent, (now after it has been
abused) but also of the Isralites golden calfe which was never well used. Which
they would never have done, if they had been persuaded that the abuse which
was offered to one of these images, had so infected and tainted the whole
Species, that none other of them, could for ever after have any lawful use.
Yea and all those images they place even in the Bible, whereby they must needs
intend to have some use of them in the service of God. Let these examples be
well considered and then give us a reason, how they may lawfully set down an
image of that same idol which has been abused, and not we as lawfully use
that sign of the cross which has never been abused.

Ob. Now for your second reason in this fourth objection, to wit, that the
sign of the cross is but an invention of man, and that therefore (it having
been abused unto idolatry) may not be used in the service of God, that is a
reason compacted of many errors.

For first (as concerning your Antecedent) I think that we may upon better
ground affirm, that the use of the cross is as an Apostolical tradition,
the^n you, that is but merely an humain invention. For first, diverse of the
fathers expressly affirm so of it: as namely Tertullian. Lib: de corona. cap:
4. whereas he says of the cross, that though it have not Legem scripturarum,
Page: 180.
yet it has both Traditionem auctricem, and consuetudinem confirmatricem. So
likewise Basil lib. de spiritu sancto. cap. 27. Tom. ^. p. 20
He ascribes as great authority to the Apostolical traditions, as he does
unto the Apostolical writings, and reckons for the chiefest of them, the
sign of the cross. Page 324.
So likewise Damascene lib. 4. de orthodoxa fide. cap. 17.

Secondly, the practice of the whole Catholic church (which has ever from the
time of the very Apostles had this ceremony in use) does give great strength
unto the judgment of the forenamed Fathers. August. Epist 118. ad Ianu.
Saint Augustine says, that whatsoever is generally observed of all churches
(as the use of the cross has been) that assuredly is either an Apostolical
tradition, or at the least, the Canon of some general counsel. And
Tertullian, Tertul. lib. de coron. cap. 4.
from the general observation proves, that it is an Apostolical tradition.
Idonea testis probatae traditionis, est perseuerantia obseruationis: for
otherwise it is not likely, that all churches would so generally have consented
in this, more then in any other ceremony, as it appears they did by Saint
Basils testimony, Ibid.
who calls this signing with the cross, both primam and vulgatissimam
traditionum. Thirdly, that great reverence, and high estimation, which all the
Fathers, from the first to the last, have had of this ceremony (though all of
them do not expressly call it an Apostolical tradition) must needs argue that
they thought it to have a better institution, then to be merely and simply an
human invention. Finally, if it be but an human invention, let us know (I
pray you) the first inuenter of it, and when it was first decreed, and how it
came so soon to be so generally observed. Which if you cannot show us, I
think that we may with greater probability, esteem it to be an Apostolical
tradition (the fore-alledged reasons giving strength to our conjecture) then
you can (without the like) call it a man's invention.

Now for your consequent, (if your antecedent were granted) yet might that with
great reason be denied. For first, admit that this signing with the cross were
indeed no better then a mere human invention: does therefore the abuse of it
in one place, take away all use of it, in any other? or the abuse of it at one
time, destroy the good use of it for ever after? Loo^e p. 54.
by what reason say you this? you your selves allow that the creatures of God,
though they have been abused, yea and worshipped for idols in the highest
degree, (as all Sheep and Oxen were by the Agyptians) yet that in the same
singular identity, Cic. lib. 3. de not. deor.
they may afterward be used in the service of God, as Gedions Ox was, which
being consecrated as a sacrifice for Baal, Iud. 6.25.26.
yet afterward was offered up unto God: and why may not in like sort, the
decent and orderly ceremonies of the Church, though abused in one place, yet in
an other be restored unto their right use? especially the abuse which is
offered in ceremonies, being but only secunda idolatria, Tertul. lib. de coron.
cap. 10
as Tertullian notes, but a second and inferior degree of idolatry: whereas
that which is offered in the creatures, is oftentimes the principal: they
being honored for very Gods. Where find you Gods creatures (in this case of
idolatry) to have any greater privilege then the Churches ceremonies: If they,
after they have been made idols in the highest degree, may yet have their use
in the service of God, why may not the other too, which can be made idols but
in an inferior degree? If the idolatry with creatures, do not destroy the use
of the same indiuidua* why should the idolatry of ceremonies (which is a less
abuse) destroy the use of all the whole species? the translators of our Geneua
Bible, in setting out the picture of the golden Calfe, insinuate these two
things. First, that the abuse offered to one idol of that kind (though it were
idolatry in the highest degree) yet has not so corrupted the whole species of
it, but that other may both lawfully and profitably be used. Secondly, that
though that idols were but a man's invention, and had bin so notably abused unto
idolatry, yet, that it is not debarred, from helping us even in the service of
God: for that must needs be the end of their figuring it in that book. Beza
(as you heard before) goes further: Page 20.
for he allows the very same alter, which has been the instrument of an
idolatrous sacrifice, to be used as an instrument of our christian Sacrament.
In which judgment, diverse martyrs in Queen Mary's time concurred, who were
content to use the same Surplices and Chalices, Fox. p. 1843.
which had been abused in adolatrous masses. Sozomen. hist. lib. 7. cap. 15.
The like did the christians in the primitive church: they converted the same
temples into the houses of God, which had been consecrated to the service of
abominable idols; yet are both idolatrous Temples and Alters man's own mere
inventions, and not Gods either creatures or ordinances. So that, though our
cross were the same which was abused, and but a man's invention, yet might it
by these examples be defended.

But secondly, I answer unto your consequent; That if it were granted, that
the sign of the cross were but a man's invention; yet can it not be granted
with any truth, that the protestants cross is the same, which the Papists have
abused; ours differing from theirs, both in the Agents and in the ends of the
action: two very great and material differences. Thirdly I demand, page 63.
how those men which condemn all human inventions which have idolatrously
been abused, do ag^ee with them selves, when they condemn kneeling and
commend sitting at the holy communion? making this to be a significant sign
of our eternal rest, Whitg. page 599.
which is both merely an human invention, and has notably been abused unto
idolatry.

Ob. Perhaps you will say, that sitting is agreeable to Christ's own
institution, and that he himself sat at his last Supper.

Resp. But that is not so: he used an other site of his body, as distant from
sitting, John. 13.23.
as kneeling is. He leaned, and so did the rest of his Disciples, according to
the custom and fashion of those times. Look Clauis Scripturae in voce sinus.
Stuckius de ritibus conuiuialibus. lib. 2. cap. 34.

Ob. But happily you think, that sitting has not been so wickedly abused
unto idolatry, as kneeling has.

Resp. Nay much more and to more horrible idolatry too. For in the kingdoms of
Calecute and Narsi^ga, and in diverse other provinces of the East and West
India, where they worship the diuill in a most deformed image they represent
him always sitting: and they worship him, not kneeling, but prostrate. So that
they which reject kneeling and retain sitting, whilst they avoid the iesture
of Christian idolaters, they im^tate the iesture of Heathen idols. Therefore,
where sitting is allowed, I know not, why either kneeling, or crossing, should
be abolished.

Then, to recapitulate the sum of this long answer. If neit^er we our
selves, nor the papits our aduersa^ies do think our cross available to the
driving away of diuils, nor to the sanctifying of our selves, nor yet do adore
it with divine or holy worship; then is not our cross made an idol, either by
our own practice, or by their opinion: and therefore not to be debarred from
the service of God, by force of your first argument.

Again, if our cross be either no human invention, but rather an
Apostolical tradition: or, being an human invention, yet has never been
abused unto idolatry, then is it not excluded from the service of God, by
virtue of your second argument.

But the first of these is true, as I have showed in the body of this answer:
Ergo, the second also.

The fifth objection.
For as much as our profession of Christ, is a part of the covenant, Romans
10.8.9. I have doubted, how man may appoint the sign of the cross, as a token
of our profession. This being Gods own prerogative, as to ordain the
covenant, so to ordain meet signs for it. Genesis 17.7.11.

Answer.
This fifth objection is very intricate, but I guess, that ^t may be explicated
thus.

No man may add signs to the covenant of God. Genesis 17.7.11. But our
profession of Christ is the covenant of God. Romans 10.8.9. Ergo no man may add
signs to our profession of Christ. And by consequent, the sign of the cross
may not be added, to our profession in baptism.

In which argument, the Mayor must be answered by distinction. That the outward
signs of our profession, or covenant with God, be of two diverse natures; for
either they be sacramental, or ceremonial signs. For sacramental signs,
we plainly confess, that they must needs be of Gods own institution, and
have his own promise annexed unto them; and therefore no man has any power to
ordain them, but this (as you truly say) is Gods sole prerogative. But, ^or
rituall and ceremonial signs, made either for the ordering of the Church
within it self, or for the distinguishing of it from other assemblies, the
case is far otherwise; such things may be made by the Churches
constitution, without any incroching upon Gods prerogative, by the judgment
of the most Divines, both old and new. I reffere you for breuities sake unto
the ninety five page of Bishop Whitgifts book continuing unto page 128. In
which long and learned discourse he cites many testimonies of the ancient
fathers, declaring many rites ceremonies to have been ordained in the
primitive Church by her own authority, without any express warrant of the
word for them, saving only that general warrantize of Saint Paul. 1. Cor:
14.40.
Omnia decenter et ordine fiant. In which rule he naming not the several
particulars, but leaving them to the Churches discretion he gives it power to
ordain laws and ceremonies, so that these conditions be not transgressed.
Whitg. page 111. lib. 4. Instit: cap. 10. Sec: 27. Sec: 31.
He brings also the judgment of diverse new writers which confirm the same.
Calvin (who with them is Instar omnium) says that a set form of rites and
ceremonies be the nerves and sinews of the Church, without which it needs
must be disolued. And those constitutions which are made by the Church, he
binds all the members thereof to observe: condemning not only such as
contemn and reject them, but also such, as pretermit and neglect them: adding
this for a reason of our uniform obedience in such outward matters, Quantarum
ricarum semen futura est earum rerum confusio, si pro vt cuique libitum sit,
mutare liceat que ad comunem statum pertinent. Quando nunquam futuram sit vt
idem omnibus placeat, sires, velut in medio positae, singulorum arbitrio
relictae fuerint. so that he affirms, that whereas there is not uniformity
in ceremonies, there can never be unity in affections, but must needs be
iarres and great contentions. Whitgift. page 106.124.
Yea even T.C. himself expressly affirms, that the Church has power to make
orders in these things which are not specified and precisely determined in the
word. And he adds, that if they be profitable for the Church, and be not
repugnant to the word, they are to be received as being grounded upon the
word, and as things, which God himself, by his Church, has commanded. Mark
I pray you what power, even this adversary of ceremonies ascribes to the
Church: enough to authorize both the cross, and surplice, and all the other
ceremonies which he himself impugneth: none of which are repugnant unto the
word of God, but all of them profitable for the Church, as the Church it self
in ordaining them determines; and therefore, by his own rule, be grounded
upon the word; and so ought to be received as Gods own commandments,
ordained by the Church. Further the practice of all Christian Churches in the
world does manyfestly show, that the Church has power to ordain Rites and
ceremonies, though not expressly prescribed in the word, for, there is no Church
in Christendom without such, as namely, orders for sitting, kneeling,
standing: place, for reader, preacher, and administer for the sacraments, time
for prayers, sermons, sacraments, and such like.

Ob. But though the Church have power to ordain orders, for conueniency and
comeliness, yet has it no power to ordain any signs with their
significations: neither can there any such example be produced.

Resp. If the Church have power to ordain vnsignificant ceremonies, then much
more such as are significant, for, vnsignificant ceremonies can not edify,
Page 8.9.
as I have formerly showed, but significant may, if their signification be
expressed, as it is in our cross, where these words be added, I sign him with
the sign of the cross, in token that hereafter he shall not be ashamed to
confess the faith of Christ crucified, and manfully to fight under his banner
etc. what can be more plain, or more profitable, not only to express the
duty of the child, (then presently received into the Church by baptism) but
also, to admonish every one in the Church what profession they themselves did
make, at their baptism? Now, that the Church has power to ordain such
ceremonies, having so good and profitable significations (to let Tertullians
judgment pass, who says, that licet vnicuique fideli concipere et
constituere, Tertul. lib de coron. cap. 4.
quod deo congruat, quod disciplinae conducat, and quod saluti proficiat) even
T. C. his former rule does sufficiently prove, for he says, that those things
which are not against the word, and profitable for the Church, ought to be
received as things which GOD by his Church does command, and as grounded upon
the word of God. But, it is more profitable for the church to have significant
then vnsignificant ceremonies, and these be no more against the word, then they
are, and therefore by T. C. his rule, such ceremonies ought to be received, as
Gods own commandments, sent unto us by his Church.

Now for examples, 1. Cor. 11.5.7.
that the Church has ordained many such, it is great ignorance in Story if a
man do doubt it. To begin with Saint Paul likewise he ordained that women
should come veiled or covered to the Church, The Rubenites altar was not for
sacrafice, but, to signify, that they belonged to the Church. Which
significant ceremony, was allowed by all Israel. Josh: 22.26.27.30. Pet: Mart:
Epist. ad Hooperum.
by that ceremony to signify their subjection to their husbands. Which
example Peter Martyr does peremptorily allege as a proof, that our ceremonies
ought to have their significations. Let us descend lower unto the primative
Church. In it these significant ceremonies were generally observed. First, in
baptism they were dipped three times into the water. Secondly, they were
anointed with oil. Thirdly, they were signed with the sign of the cross. And
fourthly, they were clothed with white garments. All these ceremonies are
recorded by Dionisius Areopagita in his book of Ecclesiastical hierarchy.
The significations of all which ceremonies he afterward expounds, Dyonis:
lib: de eccles: hierarch: cap. 3.
in the Contemplation annexed unto that chapter. Yea and diverse other fathers,
both of diverse Churches, and of differing ages, in their writings declare, that
not only these ceremonies were until their times continued, but also their
significations received. First for that threefold dipping into the water, S.
Hierom says that it was done to signify, Hier: lib: 2. in Ephesians:
that the sacrament was ministered in the name of the whole trinity. Secondly,
for that anointing with oil, Aug: Tract: 3. in 1. Epist: John.
Saint Augustine says, that it was done to signify, the inward anointing of
the holy Ghost. 3. for that signing the forehead with the sign of the cross
S. Augustine again says, Aug: Sermon. 8. de verb. Apost.
that it was done, that we should not be ashamed of the cross of Christ.
Fourthly for that change of their apparel and putting on white raiments,
Ambr: lib. de ^jis qui imtiantur misterjis cap: 7.
S. Ambrose says, that this was done, to signify, that we had now put off [
the old man] 1. the couerings of sin and put on the garments of chastity and
innocence. Unto these I might add many other Christian ceremonies, Basil: lib:
de spir: sa^ct. cap. 27.
recorded by Basil in his book de spiritu sancto: as namely, that they prayed
toward the east to signify that they sought that paradise by praying, which
they lost by sinning. That they prayed standing, upon the Sunday, to signify,
that as that day was the day of Christ's resurrection, so they were risen again
with Christ, and now sought those things which are above: with diverse other
like; reckoned up in that place, which he affirms to be apostolical
traditions.

All which examples do evidently declare the judgment of the primitive
Church; that both it had power to ordain ceremonies, and also to give them
their significations: and consequently, the want of judgment in those men,
which affirm, that neither the Church has any such power, nor histories
afford any such example. Hereunto I may add the opinion of the very Reformers
themselves, who prefer sitting before kneeling at the communion, because
sitting betokens rest, Whitgift. page 599.
and an end of all legal ceremonies in Jesus Christ: which reason they would
never have alleged, if they had thought that the Church had had no power to
ordain significant ceremonies and rites. Therefore the Church does not
tyrannize over men's consciences, in ordaining significant rites and ceremonies;
but these men would tyrannize over the Church, who would spoil her of that her
lawful authority; especially they not being able to produce any Scripture,
whereby she is abridged of that power.

Ob. But though the Church should have power to ordain rites and ceremonies
for private order in it self; yet has it no power to appoint any out-ward
sign, to be a note of our general profession, but that is GODS own peculiar
prerogative. Gen 17 7.11.

Resp. That the Church has authority in greater matters, then either in adding
significations to ceremonies, or outward notes to our profession, very many
instances do notably declare. First, that whereas Christ instituted his supper
at the time of supper, it has changed that time from the evening to the
morning, which is an altering (in circumstance) of Christ's own institution.
Secondly, whereas the Apostles decreed in a general council, that Christians
should abstain from blood and from stranglers, that has it likewise altered,
and so cancelled an Apostolical constitution. The like authority they showed
in altering the ancient day of the Sabbath, and administering Baptism unto
children: in this, they wanting the commandment of Christ; in that, they
changing the commandment of God. From which instances we may argue, as from
the greater to the less, That if they erred not in those forenamed
ordinances, much less have they erred in adding significations unto their
ceremonies: and by the same reason, why has not the church as great a power to
add outward signs unto our profession, as to ordain other ceremonies,
concerning our Ecclesiastical administration? Is the sign the less lawful,
because it is a sign of our profession? Why then is none at all lawful: for
not only this sign of the cross, Aquin. 1.2. Quaest. 103. Art. 4 c.
but also all other Ecclesiastical ceremonies (as Aquinas teaches us) are
signs of our profession. He says, that Omnes ceremoniae be protestationes
quaedam fidei. Tertullian, being newly converted unto Christianity, T. C.
says, that all the Christians of his t^me did the like, for the cleerer and
more open profession of heir faith. Whitgift. p. 268.
forsook his old habit, which was a gown, and betook him to a new, which was
a Cloak, that so with the change of his garment he might notify to the
world, the change of his profession: which certainly he would never have done,
if he had been persuaded, that the adding of such a sign unto his profession
had been an incroching upon GODS own prerogative and peculiar jurisdiction.
The Christians likewise in the primitive Church, ever from the time of the very
Apostles, have used this same ceremony of the cross which is now in question,
as a mark and a sign of their profession, and yet did never either they
themselves think it, or the greatest adversaries that they had, impute it, as
a presumption and incroching against Gods own prerogative, Basil lib. de
Spiritu sanct. cap. 27.
as Saint Basil observes* Nec his quisquam contradicit (says he, speaking of
the traditions and ceremonies of the Church) Quisquis sane vel tenuiter
expertus est, quae sint iura ecclesiastica. So that this objection of yours (if
it be good) condemns not only our use of the cross now after it has been
abused by the Papists, but even the use of it in the primative Church, before
it was abused. Or (if it be weak) it is weak against us, as well as against
them. For the use of it now, is no more an incrochment upon Gods own
prerogative, then it was in that time.

Ob. But you prove by that place Gen: 17.7.11. that God only has power to
add signs unto his covenant: and by consequent, that they which add any such
signs, presume to enter upon Gods own prerogative.

Resp. But this proof which you allege, has two great faults in it First,
that it is not ad idem: and secondly, that it is not concludent in the cause:
not ad idem, thus. To prove that the Church may not add any ceremonial sign
unto our profession, you produce a place of scripture, which speaks only of
sacramental signs. It is circumcision (which was a sacramental sign) that
God in that place did add unto his covenant. Such signs I do yeald that God
only may institute. But as for the cross, we make it not a sacrament, but
only a ceremony. And we may truly say of it, Aug: 119. ad Ianuar:
as Saint Augustine does of the birth day of Christ, Non in sacramento
celebratur, sed tantum in memoriam reuocatur.

Secondly, if your proof were ad idem, and proper to the purpose, yet is it
inconcludent. For, by what rule of reason can this consequent follow, God added
a sacramental sign unto his covenant. Ergo, man may not add a ceremonial
sign? if God added signs unto his covenant to assure us of his faithful
performance of his part, why may not we add signs unto our covenant, to
assure him of our faithful performance of our part? Tertul. lib. de coron.
cap. 4.
Tertullian says, that Licet omni fideli constituere quod deo congruat, quod
disciplina conducat, and quod saluti proficiat. Dicente domino, cur autem, non
et a vobis ipsis quod iustum est iudicatis? mark, et a vobis ipsis? Joshua,
Josh. 24.21.22.
when he had heard the people make an earnest profession* that they would serve
the Lord, and not any other God; he rested not in their bare profession, ver.
27.
but sealed it by this ceremony by pitching up a great stone, under an oak,
which he said should witness against them, Gene. 31.45 46.
if they brake their covenant: as Jacob before, by the like ceremony had
sealed the covenant between him and Laban: So that, we are not debarred by
that place of Genesis, but that we may add signs (if not seals) unto Gods
covenant: if Gods covenant and our profession be Synonima, as you seem to make
them in your Mayor proposition.

Now, for your Minor: That our profession of Christ is the covenant of God: it
may (in some sense) be allowed to be true, although (as you know) the
covenant between God and man does pass in somewhat an other form. Ier. 11.4.
viz. That he should be our God, and we should be his people, where the Prophet
expounds our part of the covenant, to be the faithful obeying of him, and
not the outward professing of him. As for faith and confession, which you
allege out of the Romans cap. 10.9. to be the whole sum of our profession, and
of our part of the covenant with God, that is not true; they be parts indeed
of our covenant with God, but our whole part they be not; unless you take both
faith and confession in a very large signification; faith not only for
believing with the heart, but also for working with the hand; And confession,
not only for the speeches of the tongue, but also for the gestures and
behauiours of the body. By which means (though not there nominatim expressed)
yet our God ought to be served, and the truth both of our faith and confession
to be testified. 1. Cor. 6.20. Iam. 2.18.
So that, unto those two points of believing and confessing, we not only may,
but also must add a further testification. For our love, and our zeal in the
service of God (which is our part of the covenant) can never be testified over
much, nor never enough, when we have done all we can: and therefore, if unto
our faith in believing, and to our words in confessing, we add other outward
signs and gestures, to express the fullness of our inward affection, as
namely, sometimes kneeling and casting down our bodies, sometimes lifting up
our eyes and hands, sometimes sights and groans, and beating of our breasts: all
these significant signs (being nothing else but a more full testification of
the faithful performance of our part of the covenant) are so far from being
a thing unlawful, that I doubt not, but, unto God they be highly acceptable:
unto whom our dumb gestures do oftentimes more effectually speak, then our
babbling tongues, as the scriptures plainly teach us, in the examples of Anna,
and of Mary Magdeline. 1. Sam. 1.13. luke. 7.44. etc.
Of this kind we reckon the sign of the cross: which is nothing else, but an
outward testification of our faith in Christ crucified, and of our readiness to
obey him as our God, that is, to perform our covenant toward him. And
therefore, why this sign may not be used, as well as any other, to this
forenamed end, I do yet conceive no sufficient reason: unless some better
then this be brought, which (as the most of the other) is grounded only upon a
groundless fear.

The sixth objection.
I pray to have it cleared, that the use of this sign for witnessing our
selves Christians, does take nothing from baptism, which, does richly and
sufficiently testify the same.

Answer.
How the use of the cross, serving only as a memorial of Christ's passion for
us, and of our reciprocal obedience unto him, should take any thing from
baptism (which intimates the same things) I can not conceive. The multitude
of witnesses makes every thing more certain. And, in this so necessary a duty
of professing our religion, we need not to fear that we can bring too many.
Nay rather, there be many expected of us, yea and not only words, but also
signs and gestures too, as I have formerly showed, in answer unto the fifth
objection. page 3^.
Simon the Pharesie, when he called Christ to dinner, had sufficiently by
words declared his affection; but yet, because he added not a further testimony
by gestures in offering Christ a kiss, at his first entertainment, his duty is
censured as defective and imperfect. luke. 7.45.
On the contrary side: Mary Magdelines affection was esteemed more full and
perfect, for that multitude of outward signs whereby she expressed it, in
washing, wyping, kissing, weeping, and in anointing of Christ's feet with oil.
As therefore a careful servant, who has had his duty sufficiently told him by
word of mouth, yet is not to be blamed, if (for greater assurance) he will
write it in a paper, or (for memory sake) but score it upon a stick. So,
though the sacrament of baptism, do both fully and richly declare our duty,
yet is not our religious diligence to be condemned, if (for our better
remembrance) this ceremony be super-added.

Ob. But you seem to insinuate, that the sacrament of baptism does testify
sufficiently that we be Christians, and that therefore this other
testification by the cross is superfluous: and being added, does seem to
import some defect in baptism to that purpose.

I answer, first, for the clearing of our action. That we add not the sign
of the cross unto baptism, as though the sacrament were either imperfect or
insufficient without it, to our regeneration, in Jesus Christ: but we annex it
as only a significant sign, to testify, what new profession (by our
baptism) we are entered. So that, we make not our cross either a part of
the sacrament, or any necessary supplement unto it, to give it any strength
which it has not of it self: but we add it, as only a circumstantiall
complement, for illustration sake, to notify unto the world, that we honor
our new profession of Christianity by that very sign, which al^ (that be not
Christians) think the great dishonor of it.

Secondly I answer, that our adding of this sign unto baptism, does neither
argue it to be sufficient, nor is argued by it to be superfluous. God added
the new testament unto the old, for our more plain instruction: (the matter of
both the testaments is the same) does either this argue that to be imperfect,
Psalm. 19.7.
or that argue this to be superfluous? Our Savior Christ having instituted
holy baptism, contented not himself to have given this one sacrament unto
this Church, but added afterward an other, to wit his Supper (the matter of
both these two sacraments is the same) does this addition argue, that either
the one of these is imperfect, or else that the other of them is superfluous?
The writings of Moses did sufficiently and richly declare unto the Israelites,
the benefit which they received by the brazen serpent: yet did not they think
it to be any derogation from the sufficiency of his book, to help their own
remembrance therein, by preserving the visible Symbol of it. Which monument
they kept without any divine warrant, and yet were never condemned for it, as
detracting from the sufficiency of the scripture by it. Numb. 33.
The same we see practiced* even in our Geneua Bible, where though the text do
sufficiently express the whole history, yet do not the Translators think it
a thing unlawful to make a visible representation thereof, for the helping of
our memory. Whereby it appears, that one and the same thing may by diverse
signs be signified, one giving light unto an other (as the death of Christ
was, by diverse sacrifices in the law) and yet none of them be rejected, as
either imperfect, or as superfluous. Therefore, as the passage of Israel over
Jorden, is sufficiently testified in the book of Joshua, Josh 4.5.6.7.
and yet Joshua himself (to have a visible sign and monument of that action)
caused twelve stones to be pitched up, as a further testimony of it, not
hindering thereby, but rather helping the testimony of the scripture: so may we
use the cross, for the very same end, which is signified in baptism, and yet
nothing derogate from the sufficiency of it, as the ancient Christians did by
the changing of their garments; Whitg. p. 268
which as T. C. says, did serve for the cleerer profession of their faith, and
as Christian soldiars at this day use to do: who (of what nation soever they
be) do still bear, in their ensigns, the sign of the cross, proclaming
themselves by that sign to be Christians, and not doubting thereby, to
disable that profession which they made in baptism.

The seventh objection.
And if this be true, then should it seem that this ceremony of the cross is
idle. And I am doubtful whether it be not a taking of the name of God in
vain, to have any thing idle or superfluous in the service of God.

Answer.
And if this be true, you say: but that it is not true, I have formerly showed:
And therefore this objection, being but a consequent grounded upon the former,
need not to be confuted, it falling of it self, as Abiram did, when his
ground sunk underneath him: I have formerly showed that it is not true, that
the use of the cross in witnessing us Christians, does any thing detract from
the sacrament of baptism, but rather, adds thereunto a more plain
explication. For, the sign of the cross marked in our foreheads (in the
nature of the sign) does more directly witness, and more properly express,
that we are not ashamed to be counted his servants that died upon the cross,
then the sprinkling of water upon the forehead does. And therefore in respect
of this fit and oposite spiritual signification, conspiring so fully with the
sigfication of baptism, and expressing it so lively, that ceremony can not so
justly be counted idle as your insignificant ceremonies may. Whereupon, no man
can have any just cause to doubt, whether such a religious use of the cross,
should be a taking of Gods name in vain. But rather it may very truly be
said that such vain conceits fathered upon Gods name, and such violent
detorting and wresting of Gods commandments from their purposes unto ours, is
indeed a taking of Gods name in vain.

The eight objection.
Albeit the use of this sign be ancient, and (from things of common life)
were brought into the sacrament before Popery came in: yet (since consignatio
crucis quae autiquitus sine, superstitione fuit, et tollerari tunc potuit,
patefecit aditum abominandae superstitioni, et hyperduliae crucis
horribilissimae) my scruple is, how that which was at first, not euilly taken
up, may now be well continued. Especially, seeing the Cannon-law it self
says, Distinct: 63. (as it is cited by D. Reinolds against Heart) if our
predecessors have done some things which at that time when they were first done
were without fault, and afterward be turned into error and superstition, we
are taught by Ezechias his breaking of the brazen serpent, that posterity may
destroy them without delay, and with great authority. Thus far the Canonists.

Answer.
The use of the cross in the primitive Church, though sometimes before
washings, feastings, walkings, and other such like actions of common life, yet
was always used with a kind of religion, as it were to sanctify such common
actions, by a religious ingresse: but that, not ex opere operato, but, Perkins.
prob. page 84.
ex opere operantis, the sign of the cross being, tacita invocatio meritorum
Christi, and so used by antiquity.

The abuse which afterward grew from thence (if it grew from thence) was rather
an offense springing from man's natural corruption prone unto sin, then any
necessary consequent of such a religious custom, Beza. Epist. 8.
as Beza (whose words you cite) would seem to make it, using therein a manifest
Elench, A non causa pro causa. For with as great reason may he make the
communion-bread to be the cause of Popish artolatry, as the cross to be the
cause of their idolatry; for, the bread has been as grossly abused by them, as
the cross has. And you may say as truly of the bread, that patefecit aditum
abominaendae superstitioni, as you can of the cross.

Your granting that this sign at the first was not euilly taken up, is a
justifying of our use of it, who reduce it now again unto the primitive use,
which was not evil.

Your reason why it ought to be abolished, because it since has been abused,
is falty many ways, and therefore would further be examined. It may (as I take
it) be reduced to this Syllogism.

Whatsoever has been abused to idolatry and superstition, that ought to be
destroyed. But the sign of the cross has been so abused. ergo.

Your Mayor you prove, by a sentence out of the Cannon-law. Your Minor, by a
sentence out of Bezaes Epistles. Let us therefore now examine, as well your
positions, as your proofs.

First therefore as concerning your Mayor proposition. That whatsoever has
been abused unto idolatry ought to be destroyed, it is utterly false. For,
if all things that have been so abused should be presently abolished, we should
leave our selves nothing, that might be rightly used. So general or rather
indeed so transcendent, has this sin of idolatry bin. For, there is none of
all Gods works, nay there is none of man's works, but it has in some place or
other, been some way or other abused to idolatry. So that, if for other men's
abuses, we should be forced to renounce the things so abused, we should
deprive our selves, of the principal helps and muniments of our life. The
Caldeans did worship the fire for their God: the Aethiopians, the water. Shall
therefore we Christians be aqua and igni interdicti? or, because the Papists
have worshipped their bread, may not Protestants use bread? you see what gross
consequents will necessarily follow upon your antecedent. Therefore, though your
proposition (in ^ome sense) may have some truth in it; yet is it not to be
admitted, in such a generallity, as by you it is propounded. That whatsoever
has unto idolatry been abused, should by and by (without further examination)
be destroyed. But unto the abolishing of things so perverted, (if by the law
they be established) we must proceed with many cautions. lib. 4. Instit. cap.
10. Sect. 30.
First Calvin tells us, that we must neither Temere, nor Subinde, nor
leuibus de causis ad nouationem decurrere, but in changing of things
established we must use great aduisement. Secondly, we must with indifferency
consider, whether their commodities or discommodities be the greater, if the
commodities, then that sentence of the Comike is a rule of right reason. That
Cuius multa commoda sunt, illius quo incommoda far decet. If the evil be
greater then the good, then must we consider, whether it be seperable, or
inseparable. If seperable, then is that a good rule which the orator gives us,
Cic. lib. 2. Epi. ab Attic. Epi. 1
non minus probandam esse medicinam, quae sanat vitiosas parts, quam quae
exsecat. If inseparable, then yield we that counsel of the Poet to be
necessary, that immedicabile vulnus ense recidendum est, ne pars syncera
tra^atur. So that this abolishing of things of good use, for some abuse that
has grown unto them, is then only allowable, when their evil is greater then
their good, or, when it is incureable. Both which points are far otherwise in
the sign of the cross, as we see by experience. And therefore no cause, why
for that abuse of it which has been in an other Church, and is long ago
reformed in our Church, so ancient a ceremony should now be abolished.

Ob. But you strengthen your proposition with two fortifications. The one is a
sentence of the Cannon law, which commends unto us the abolitions of things
abused unto superstition. The other is an example of Canonical scripture,
which commends Ezechias, for putting the same in practice.

Resp. First, for that judgment of the Canon law, if we were of some men's
disposition, we might allow it for a good reason, that the rule could not be
good, because it is fetched out of the Canon Law, and was no better but a
Popes-decree. But we will not use such peevishness, but leave that to our
adversaries. Distinct. 63. cap. 28. Quia. sancta.
Let us hear what the law says, and how far it makes for you. Per hoc
magna authoritas est habenda in ecclesia, vt si nonnulli ex praedecessoribus et
maioribus nostris fecerint aliqua, quae illo tempore potuerunt esse sine culpa,
et postea ver^untur in errorem et superstitionem, sine tarditate aliqua, et cum
magna authoritate a posteris destruantur.

In which sentence there be two things to be considered of us. The first is the
quality of the persons of who^ he speaks: the second, his qualified manner of
speaking. For the persons here meant by the name of Posterity, it must needs be
understood of men in authority, and not of any private persons. The words of
the decree are most plain and pregnant. These ought to be of great authority
in the church. Why? that, if things well begun do degenerate into evil, by that
great authority they may be destroyed, whereby he implies, that he which
will do the work of Ezechias, in destroying things abused, he ought to have
the authority of Ezechias. Otherwise, if therbe a disparity in the agents,
there will certainly follow a disparity in the actions. For, if that clause in
the latter end of the decree cum magna authoritate a posteris destruantur, be
so construed (as some men have wrested it) that the very example of Ezechias in
destroying the brazen serpent) (which before he had alleged) does give great
authority unto every other man, to do the like; it is not only a manifest
perverting of the Gramatical co^struction, but would also prove the subuerting
of all civil constitutions. For what authority does the example of
magistrates, (which orderly repeal inconvenient laws), give unto private men,
disorderly to break them, whilst they stand in force? Or how does the action
of the Magistrate, who has his authority invested in himself, as a public
person authorize private men to do the same work, by their voluntary
immitation? If this license were granted, it would prove, not the taking away
of abuses, but the sowing of ten thousand abuses, August. lib 10 cap: 8 de
ciuit: dei.
for one. Saint Augustine, speaking of this fact of Ezechias, says that he
destroyed this serpent by his public authority, and not by any private
fantasy. He did religiosa potestate deo seruire. Calvin upon the second
commandment, expounding that place of Deuteronomie, ye shall destroy all the
places wherein those nations served their Gods, ye shall overthrow their
altars, Deuteronomy: 12.2.3
and break down their pillars and burn their groves with fire etc. He cites
the judgment of S. Augustine, who says, that this commandment was not given
unto private men, Call. in Exodus page. 286.
but to the public Magistrate. And he commends his judgment to be very
sound, Io. Wolph. in lib. 2. Regum. cap. 18.
and wise, Wolphius likewise, who handles this question ex professo; Whether
private men may destroy the monuments of idolatry, He pere^ptorily denies it.
Priuatis hominibus vt haec agant* pius ac sapiens author est nemo. Speaking
even of this very fact of Ezechias, in destroying the brazen serpent. And he
strenghneth his judgment by the example of Gedion, who all the while that he
was a private man, he endured the Alter and the grove of Baal, and laid no hand
to pull down that idolatry, but when he once was called unto the magistracy,
and furnished thereby with lawful authority, then he did the deed, Judge:
6.25.26.
and he did it thoroughly. So that the magistrate being the person, whom the
decree understands by the name of posterity, his example can be no warrant
for any man to do the like, if he lack the like authority. Now for the
qualification of the speech, which was the 2. thing to be considered in the
law: the form of speech which it uses, is but only permissiue, granting a
liberty, and not preceptiue, imposing a necessity, leaving place for the
Magistrate, with aduisement to consider, whether the abuse be such, as does
necessarily require such an utter destruction. The law says, That posterity
may destroy them. You say that posterity must destroy them. From May, to Must,
is no good consequence. That Logike rule (as you know) is grown almost into a
proverb. A posse ad esse non valet argumentum: we yield that posterity may
destroy them, if the abuse can hardly be reformed: and that it must destroy
them, if it can not be reformed at all. But neither of these can be said of
the cross, whose abuses we have reformed with very great facility, and yet
not destroyed the right and true use of it, as experience shows plainly. And
therefore those men, which match our cross with the brazen serpent and think
it as necessary to be destroyed as that, they truly fall into that censure of
Calvin, Call. in Exodus page: 2^6.
that praecise vrgendo quod per se medium est, sunt nimio rigore superstitiosi.

Ob. But happily you will say, that if this sentence of the Canon law, do not
enforce the abolishing of the cross, yet the example of good King Ezechias
does. For, if he destroyed the brazen serpent, being GODS own ordinance,
because it was idolatrously abused: then much more ought we to abolish the
cross, which is but man's invention, it having been likewise idolatrously
abused.

Resp. This example of Ezechias is very much stood upon, and therefore it would
be the more narrowly examined, Your argument is enforced A maiori ad Minus and
it may be framed thus. Ezechias spared not the ordinance of GOD, but destroyed
it, because it had been abused. Ergo, much less ought we to spare the
ordinance of man but destroy it, if it have been likewise abused.

I answer, that your Antecedent, which is the ground of your argument, is not
true. Ezechias in destroying the brazen serpent, did not therein destroy the
ordinance of GOD. For, Numb: 21.8.
in the brazen serpent there be things to be considered: Viz: the first
erection, for the healing of the people: and the preservation, for the
remembrance of that benifit. The first erection was indeed the ordinance and
iniunction of GOD himself: but the preservation was the mere invention of
man, It issuing from the good intent of the people, without any warrant or
commandment from GOD. Now, that work being finished in the wilderness; for
which GOD erected it; that which Ezechias destroyed, was but only man's
invention, to wit the preservation of it. So that if the cross be but only
an humane invention, and not Apostolical tradition, yet even so, that thing in
the serpent which Ezechias destroyed, was no better. And therefore the ground
of your argument A maiori fails, it being rather a false presumption, then a
true position.

Ob. But happily you will say, that the brazen serpent had yet a further use
ordained by GOD: namely, to be a figure of our savior CHRIST; And so ought to
have continued unto his coming, if for that abuse it had not justly been cut
off.

2. King: 18.4.
The brazen serpent was a figure of CHRIST, not as it was preserved in the
Temple, where it was indeed Nehushtan, a piece of dead brass without all power
and virtue: but as it was erected in the wilderness, where it gave health unto
the people. John. 3 14.
The text is plain, As Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, so must
the son of man be lifted up. etc. So that with the use of it in the wilderness,
the figure also ceased; and therefore for that cause it need not be preserved.
Now, that because it was a figure of CHRIST, it should therefore continue
until the coming of CHRIST, that has no necessary consequence. For the clowd
which accompanied the Israelites, in the wilderness, was a figure of CHRIST, 1.
Cor: 10.2. John. 6.49.50.58. Josh. 5.12.
yet did it not continue unto the coming of CHRIST. So likewise the Manna was
a figure of CHRIST; yet did it not last unto his coming. Some indeed was
reserved, as a monument in the Arc: but that was by virtue of a special
commandment, Exodus 16.32.
not by virtue of being a figure of CHRIST.

Ob. Well be it, that this brazen serpent were not preserved by any special
warrant; yet Ezechias destroying it because it was abused, and being by the
holy Ghost for so doing, commended: though the argument follow not A maiori,
yet it follows A Pari, that the cross ought likewise to be abolished*

Resp. This Par is Dispar, in many respects: and being grounded upon a
comparison of equallity, yet has great inequallity in every part of it. For, I
note between that Idol which Ezechias destroyed, and this cross which you
would have abolished, seven material differences, which every one make a
disparity in your comparison, and consequently, Non sequitur, in your argument.

The first of them is taken from the object of the abuse: Ezechias took away
none other idol, but only that same Indiuiduum which was abused: but you
would take away the whole species of crossing, because some Indiuidua of that
species have been abused amongst the Papists, though many, amongst us
Protestants, be very rightly used. The second difference is taken, from the
Subject of the abuse. He took away none other idol, but that which had been
abused amongst his own people: but you would take away that cross which
amongst our own people is rightly used; only because, amongst an other people
(with whom we have no communion) it is abused.

The third difference is taken, from the nature and quality of the abuse. He
took away that idol, which was abused, contrary unto law; you would take away
that cross which is rightly used, and the use thereof established by law.

The fourth difference is taken, from the degree and quality of the abuse. He
took away that idol which was abused in the highest degree, being
idolatrously worshipped for a false God. For that same people refused to burn
their incense unto God, [2. Chron. 29.7.] which notwithstanding offered it most
profusely unto that idol. 2. King. 18.4. But you would take away that cross,
which was never yet worshipped as a false God by any, but has been used in
all Christian Churches, as a lawful and lawdable ceremony, in the worship of
the true God.

The fifth difference is taken from the continuance of the abuse: He took away
that idol whose abuse still remained; but you would take away that cross,
whose abuse has long ago bin removed, and whose right use is now again
restored.

The sixth difference is taken from the certainty of the abuse: He took away
that idol, which upon certain knowledge, he saw to be idolatrously abused:
but you would take away that cross, which (only upon an uncertain surmise)
you do imagine may possibly be abused, Scilicet, if some Papist should chance
to come in amongst us in the very nick, whilst it is in using.

The seventh difference is taken from the difficulty of removing the former
abuse. He took away that idol, whose idolatry could hardly be reformed, so
long as the sensible object of their abuse remained: but you would take away
that cross, which can hardly be abused; the object of abuse is so presently
vanished: as even Calvin himself notes in an other like instance. lib. 1.
Instit. cap. 11. sect. 3.
He disputes, that the sudden appearing of the Holy Ghost in the form of a
Dove could not minister just matter of adoring that resemblance, because it was
of so short continuance, being but vnius momenti Symbolum, which may much more
truly be said of the cross, that it is indeed but vnius momenti symbolum, it
appearing and perishing in one and the same moment. And therefore if his
appearing in the shape and form of a living body, was so free from danger,
because it was so short: then much more is the cross, whose form is less
dangerous, vanishing more sudden, and appearing of less continuance.

Therefore the cross and the brazen serpent being equal in this point, that
both of them are but human inventions, but unequal in so many other points
of far greater moment: in the object, in the subject, in the quality, in the
quantity, in the continuance, and in the certainty of the abuse: and again, in
the difficulty of reforming the same; that these two things, whose offense is
so unequal, should admit an equality of punishment, is against all rules, both
of equity and judgment.

Now for your Minor proposition, which you strengthen by a sentence out of
Bezaes Epistle, who affirms that the idolatrous adoration of the cross,
sprung only from the use of the sign of the cross: he affirming this upon
his own bare word, without any testimony or proof from antiquity, I will
answer him with that of the Orator; Cic. orat. pro Sexto. Rosc.
De hoc, quia verbo arguit, verbo satis est negare.

The ninth objection.
Seeing the sign of the cross is left out of our communion, because of the
superstition and idolatry: me think by the same reason, it should be left out
of the Sacrament of Baptism.

Answer.
If the cross was superstiously abused in the mass, and therefore is left out
of our communion, where it has not so fit an use as it has in Baptism, our
church has therein used a religious caution. But if having removed the
forenamed corruption, and restored the cross to his first institution, she
has retained the same in the sacrament of Baptism (symbolizing therein, not
with the Papisticall, but with the primitive church) she has done in that, no
more then she might, having full jurisdiction, to ordain lawful ceremonies
at her own discretion. Look page 26.

The tenth objection.
Seeing the second commandment (as I conceive the meaning) forbids all
religious images, mental or corporal, permanent or transiant; I desire to
have it showed, how the likeness of the cross, being for religious use, to
be a token of our religion, is not against the second commandment.

Answer.
This tenth objection may be thus collected: All religious images are forbidden
unto us in the second commandment. But the sign of the cross is a religious
image: Ergo; It is forbidden in the second commandment. For your Mayor
proposition: if by religious images you had understood only such as are made
to be religiously adored, we should quickly have agreed: but you taking the
name of [ Religious] in a sense of such enormous largeness, viz. for any
thing, that any way, may help us in religion, as appears in the exposition
of your Minor; I must needs require some better reason then your own
coniecturall conceit, that all such images are in that commandment forbidden:
Otherwise, your proposition I deny as false; and that for these reasons: First,
because I dare not condemn, all those famous and renowned churches, which even
from Christ's time unto ours, have used the cross, to have been idolatrous;
nor those ancient, learned, and godly Fathers, which have thought and taught so
reverently of it, to have been idolaters: which absurdity must needs follow,
if either this objection, or your fourth, have any weight in them. Secondly,
because I find the whole stream of expositors to be against you: amongst
whom I have given instance both in Calvin and Beza, and of our own
translators of the Geneua Bible. page 21. Whose instances I wish you more
deeply to consider of, and how far their judgment differs from your
proposition. Thirdly I find the practice of God himself to be against you in
commanding the Cherubines to be placed in the Tabernacle; which (as Bishop
Babbington truly collecteth) must needs make GOD contrary unto himself,
Babbing* upon the second comman.
if all religious images were so simply forbidden in the second commandment,
as you affirm in your proposition. Fourthly (to come to our own particular
instance) if the sign of the cross were simply forbidden in the second
commandment, then were not only Gods practice contrary to his precept, but
also one precept were contrary to another. For he commands expressly in the
prophecy of Ezechiel, Ezech. 9.4.
to mark certain men in the forehead with the sign of the cross, which
there he calls Signum Tau; which being by Character expressed (as there it is
commanded) has none other form then the sign of the cross, Hier. in Ezec.
as S, Hierom expressly expounds that place: Thau litera, crucis haebet
similitudinem, quae in Christianorum frontibus pingitur. Therefore this second
commandment, does neither particularly forbid the sign of the cross, nor
generally all kinds of religious images, but only, in ordinatione ad cultum:
to which purpose the cross is not used in our Church, where (as you know) it
is not worshipped.

Now for your Minor, that our cross is a religious image: that is more false
then the former was. An image, our cross cannot be called, but in a very
constrained sense: seeing that, in making it, we do not intend, either to
express, or to honor that material cross, whereupon our Savior suffered
(whose image you would insinuate that sign to be) but only to testify by
that outward sign, that we are not ashamed of the sufferings of Christ. As for
the outward scheme and representation of the cross, it more properly may be
called a character, then an image, as I showed you before in the letter Tau,
whose character is the perfect form of the cross, as is likewise the Roman
T. as Tertullian observes; Tertul. lib. 3. cont. Marcion. cap. 22.
seeing that we refer it, not eiconically to represent the cross of Christ,
but Symbolically to represent his passion, by that character. Now, that
characters and images be of two diverse natures, the Turks plainly show us,
who are most superstitious in avoiding of images, and yet they do willingly
admit of characters, as appears in their coins. So that the cross can no
more propperly be called an image, then the letter T. can. Yea even the Papists
themselves deny it to be an image, as appears by their distinguishing of
imago crucis, Bellarm. de imagine lib. 2. cap. 28.29.
from signum crucis, which is much more true in us, whose sign of the cross,
is made rather to represent the sufferings of Christ, then the cross whereon
he suffered. But, if our sign were a perfect resemblance of that cross, yet,
as long as we use it not, in any such sense, it ought not, as an image to be
objected unto us. The Hieroglyphiks of the Egyptians, were (in their shape and
proportion) the images of birds, and beasts, and other creatures, amongst which
was also the cross, as Ruffin reports, under which they signified the life
to come: Ruffin. lib. 2. eccles. hist. cap. 29. page 7.
but yet because they used those figures but only as Characters, they are there
to be reputed, not as images, but as letters. And therefore the signification
of images is stretched and strained very far when such a poor character,
(clean contrary to the use of it) yet is fetched within the compass of them.

I have been the more careful to vindicate the cross from this opinion of
being an image, not that it would hurt or prejudice the cause any whit if it
were granted to be one, but because I do see, that T.C. and his followers have
such an notable art in making of images and idols, that if they happen to
myslike any thing whatsoever, they can presently transform the same into an
idol, and make it as contrary unto Gods commandment, as it is unto their own
private fantasy and conceit. In this place you make the cross an image; and,
in your 4. objection, Whitg. page 290.723.
you make it an idol; So likewse T.C in one place makes the surplice an idol,
calling it a wouen image: in an other place, he calls a Bride an idol because
her husband says, with my body I thee worship. And thus every thing which they
misconceipt, is by and by mishaped into an idol. Whereas it is most true, that
they make an idol of their own idle fancy, and private conceit, for the honor
of which babble, they despise magistrates, violate laws, and force the very
scriptures themselves. But, to return. You call the cross, not only an image,
but also a religious image, and yet (as you know) we do not worship it: nor
place any holiness or religion in it, more then in other ceremonies: neither
make we it a substancial part of Gods service, but only circumstantiall:
using, it only as an ecclesiastical ceremony, appointed in our church by
human authority, and not enjoined by God, upon mere necessity. Call lib. 4.
Instit. cap. 1.
And therefore whenever our church (whom we ought dutifully to obey in all
things, as our mother) shall cease to command us the use of that ceremony, we
may then cease it lawfully, neither ever will call for it as a matter of
necessity: but will truly profess with Minutius Felix, Sec. 10. In octauio.
nos crucem neque adoramus, neque optamus. In the mean season, if we use it
whilst it is commanded, we do not offend against the second commandment:
but, they which refuse it, offend against the fifth, of not honoring, with
obedience, their lawful magistrates.

The eleauenth objection.
I desire to have it opened unto me, by the word of God, how this sign can
be affirmed to be an honorable badge, whereby to dedicate us unto him that
died upon the cross. This (as I understand) is propper to the two Sacraments,
to be the badges of our profession.

Answer.
This scruple here propounded, is nothing at all to the sum of this question*
whether there cross may be lawfully used, or no. For, what if some men had
applied the name of a badge, not altogether properly unto the cross, does it
therefore follow, that to use it, is altogether unlawful? Surely those men will
take any occasion to refuse it, that will take so light an occasion to condemn
it. For what is it (I pray you) that in this name offends you? is it the
title of Honorable? or the title of a Badge? For the first, that ought not: for
I know none but infidels that do hold the cross a dishonor unto Christians.
And I know again, that the ancient Christians did purposely use this sign
before the face of infidels, to show them, that that which they counted their
shame, they themselves esteemed to be their glory: so honorable a badge did
they take the sign of the c^osse to be. Is it the name of a Badge, which so
much offends you? why? that is but only a metaphorical appellation, to
signify that it is a note or a cognisanse, whereby Christians may be known.
What is there in this name, that can offend any wise man? The name of a badge
is so far from being appropriated to the sacraments in the scripture, that it
is not so much as once given them there, so far as I remember. Only, by
analogy, it may be applied unto them: and so may it likewise unto ceremonies
too, Page 3^.
which (as I cited before out of Aquinas) be nothing else, but Protestationes
quaedam fidei, that is, badges and testimonies of our faith and profession.

Ob. But you reason against that title in this manner.

There be no more badges of our profession but two: viz. the two Sacraments.
But, the sign of the cross is neither of them. ergo. No badge of our
profession.

Resp. For your proposition, I take it to be utterly false: and to be your own
sole and singular opinion, wherein (so far as my reading stretches) I find
not one fellow to keep you company. No Divine that I know, does make the two
Sacraments the sole badges of the Church. Calvin, unto the Sacraments adds
the preaching of the word, Call. Instit. lib. 4. cap. 1. Sec. 9
as an other note of the Church. Luther, not only adds it unto them, but
also prefers it before them; making, the Preaching of the word an essential
note, Luther. lib. de concilijs et Ecclesia.
as being of the very Esse of the Church. The Sacraments he makes but only
accidental, as belonging but only to the Been esse. Whit. cont: Bellar:
quaest: 5. de Ecles. Beza: lib. confess cap: 5. Sect. 7:
With whom likewise consents that worthy Doctor Whitaker, a man (as all men
know) not otherwise Lutheranizing. Beza, unto the word and Sacraments adds
also Discipline, as yet an other note of the Church. Luther again in the
forecited place, adds ^euer other badges unto his forenamed. viz: The power
of the keys. The ordination of ministers. Prayer in public assemblies. and
the cross of persecutions. By which it appears that though all Divines do
make the sacraments the badges of the Church, yet that none of them do make
them the only badges, as you expressly do.

Ob But you desire to have it proved by scripture, that the sign of the cross
is a badge of the Church.

Resp. Let me answer you as CHRIST once answered the Pharisees. Math. 21.24.
I will also propound a like condition unto you. Prove you by the scripture,
that the cross can not be a badge of the Church: or that the sacraments are
the only badges of it. Either is this condition which I propound, equal, or
else that which you propound, must needs be unequal. For (as Tertullian
notes, Tertul. lib. de Coron. cap: 2.
to this very purpose) expostulantes scripturae patrocinium in part diuersa,
praeiudicant, suae quoque parti scripturae patrocinium adesse debere. If we
must bring scripture who have the law for our doings: then much more should you
do so, who have the law against your doings But, that you can bring none, we
are verily persuaded: and yet I will show you that we can bring some. In the
old testament, Number: 15.38.
GOD himself who appointed circumcision for a badge of their profession, g^ue
them also (for an other badge) their Fringes and Phylactiries. In the new
testament, our Savior CHRIST, who gave us his sacraments for badges of our
profession, yet (besides these two) he tells us of an other, John. 13.35.
and a surer. By this shall all men know that you are my disciples if you love
one an other: making Christian charity the cognisans of Christians. In the
primitive Church the first believers, not contenting themselves with the
sacraments for badges, took unto themselves a new one, to wit, Acts. 11.26.
The name of Christians. So that if a badge be nothing else, but a cognisa^s or
note whereby a thing may be known, you see it now proved by the very
scriptures, that not only sacraments be badges of our profession, but also
outward garments inward virtues, yea and significant names too: which (indeed)
are nothing else, but Notae rerum, the marks, and badges, and as it were the
Cognisances whereby things be known. These instances out of the Scripture show
that the sign of the cross, though it be not a sacrament of CHRIST'S own
institution, yet that it may be a badge of our profession: as it was amongst
the Christians in the primitive Church, who took it up in use, for this
special purpose, to testify unto the world, that they were Christians, and
not Pagans.

If for this special ceremony of the cross, you still do require more
particular testomony out of the scripture, I answer with Peter Martyr, Martyr:
Epist. ad Hooperum.
in a like case: Non necessario requiritur, vt in sacris literis expressam
mentionem exhibeamus, singularum rerum quas vsurp^mus. It is enough that we
have not the Scripture against it, if we have the law for it.

The twelfth objection.
Lastly, because conscientia must be regulata: and regula conscientiae is only
vox and verbum Dei, who alone is lord of the conscience: I humbly crave, that
my scruples may be satisfied by the word.

Answer.
For the rule of our conscience, you rightly define it to be the word of GOD.
And therefore, seeing this ceremony of the cross has no particular
testimony, either Pro or contra, in the word of God; that general rule of the
Apostle Peter, to submit our selves unto all ordinances of man for the Lords
sake, 1. Pet: 2.13.
ought to be the rule of all our consciences. Which is a more plain and
direct testimony of the word of GOD to guide our conscience unto obedience,
then ever I could as yet see brought, so much as to color your disobedience.
which has caused me often times to muse, with what face men could make such a
pretense of conscience, not to yeald their obedience in these indifferent
matters, when as their conscience therein is without his rule: And therefore
must needs be either an equivocal conscience, that is (in truth) no conscience
at all: or else (at the least) an unruled conscience, yea and an unruly too, in
keeping such a rule for indifferent things, of which they have no rule in the
scripture, but only that forenamed rule of S. Peter, which most apparently
they transgress.

The obiectors conclusion.
I do earnestly crave, to have the answers of my doubts set down, that I may
the better ponder them: and that I may have leave, if (after answer) any
scruple remain, modestly to propound it.

Answer.
I wish, that other men, which dissent in opinion as concerning these matters,
would take this wise and godly course (which your self have done) for their
satisfaction: to show the grounds of their scruples distinctly and plainly:
and to propound unto themselves not victory, but verity, without altercation or
obstinacy. Surely, if this course had been taken from the beginning, many
fruitles contentio^s had received an end: the consciences of many men had been
less offended: the lives of all men better reformed: the calling of the
ministry more regarded, their preaching more obayed, and the Church in
general better edified, which now by our contention is greatly damnified.

I have therefore (for your particular satisfaction) set down (as you desire)
mine answers in writing. If any scruple as yet remain unresolved it shall,
with no less modesty by me be answered, then it is unto me by your self
propounded.

God give us all his grace, to keep the unity of the spirit, in the bond of
peace. Amen.

The same party (being fully resolved for ten of his objections; but as yet
unsatisfied, as concerning two of them, viz. the third, and the tenth) brought
these objections after, to receive a further answer.
A reply to fortify the third objection.
My third reason (me think) has not yet received his full satisfaction:
which for the more evidence, I thus frame and fortify.

All relics and monuments of idolatry (being no creatures nor ordinances of
God) used in Gods service, are unlawful.

But, the sign of the cross is such. It is a monument of idolatry, and used
in Gods service; Ergo, it is unlawful.

The proposition is thus backed.
First, a monument being nothing but that which admonishes our mind of any
thing, it must needs be, that being abused to idolatry (being no way of Gods
creation nor ordinance) and remaining to posterity immediately after the abuse,
are relics and monuments of idolatry. Concerning which, Deuteronomy. 12.3.
God has plainly declared his will, where he commands to cut down the
groves, and to burn them, to ouer-throw the altars, to break the images in
pieces, etc. And thou shall not do so to the Lord thy GOD. Isai. 30.22.
Also thou shall pollute the covering of the Images of Silver, and the rich
ornaments of the Images of gold, and cast them away as a menstruous cloth.
Where necessarily in clear reason, we must understand, that GOD will have
done away all of this kind, as well as these particulers here named: yea, all
that has any neerenesse or affinity with idolatry, and which may be as
inticements to turn us from God and his pure worship, from which we are so apt
to decline, if we have the least occasion. Such is man's extreme propension
unto superstition: as the example of the Jews euidenceth. Upon these grounds
our church worthily (in a religious care of preserving us sincere in Gods
service) has abandoned rood-lofts, wax-candles, and other infinite relics
and monuments of idolatry.

For the Assumption: The sign of the cross to be none of Gods creatures or
ordinances, but the invention of men, it is clear. Also, that it was
idolatrously abused of the Papists, by whom it is immediately left unto us. And
it has a certain fitness to bring their idolatry to mind, as often as it
is used in divine service: therefore a monument of idolatry, howsoever used by
us unto another end, which might have kept in all other monuments of
superstition whatsoever, even Heathenish idols; for it is an easy thing to
devise a different end and use of them, from that whereunto they were applied
by idolaters. Now, if things abused unto idolatry be unlawful, then the sign
of the cross, being more then that, even made an Idol, as having divine
adoration, holiness and ve^tue given to it, much more (in that respect) should
be reckoned unlawful.

Answer.
As concerning your Mayor proposition, That all monuments and relics of
idolatry are unlawful, it must first be examined and distinguished, before it
be either admitted or denied.

First therefore as concerning these two words, of [ Relique] and [ Monument
what your meaning should be in them, it is not plain and apparent. A Relic
in his original sense, is properly nothing else, but the remainder of some
body, Orig. hom. 5. in Psalm. 36.
which is for the greatest part consumed, as Origin notes. Quae superest pars
corporis, reliquiae nominatur. A monument, is some new work, erected and
instituted for the remembrance of that old body, which before was decayed. Both
these words, by the common and ordinary Ecclesiastical use of them, imply,
that both a relic and a monument are purposely destinated, to preserve the
remembrance of that subject, Festus in voce, Monimentu^.
of which it is either a relic or a monument: as Festus notes.

Now if you take a relic or a monument of Idolatry in this sense, for either
a remainder of that old idolatry which is now decayed, or a sign newly erected
of purpose, to preserve the remembrance of it, for the love and reverence which
we bear unto it: then I yield your proposition to be very true, that all
such relics and monuments of idolatry, ought to be rooted out, and none of
them used in the service of God. For that were to mingle light with darkness,
Christ with Beliall, 2. Cor* 6.16.
and the Temple of God with Idols, as the Apostle Paul speaks.

But, if you take the name of a relic of idolatry, for any thing which has
in idolatry been used, though the abuse thereof be now reformed, and the
nature thereof (by an other use) clean changed, as it is in our sign of the
cross: Or, if you take the name of a Monument, for any thing what-so-euer may
bring into our minds the remembrance of idolatry, though not ex instituto, but
ex accidente, then do I utterly deny your proposition, as false. And that for
these reasons.

First, because your self, even in that proposition where you would eradicate
all monuments of idolatry, yet do it with this reservation, If they be not
either the creatures or ordinances of God. So that you seem to grant a
special dispensation, unto certain monuments of idolatry, to be admitted
again into Gods service, Look p. 22.23.
namely if they be either Gods creatures or ordinances. Which (for ought that I
know) have by the word of God no greater immunities or exemptions, then have
man's ordinances and inventions: as evidently appears by Agags sheep, which
were Gods creatures: and the brazen serpent, which was GODS ordinance: both
which were destroyed, not-with-standing that indulgence which you seem to give
them. So that the creatures of GOD have no greater privilege, being monuments
of idolatry, then other things have. And I desire to know, either the place
where, or the case when, or the cause why, such privilege is granted them? For
I suppose that this clause of exemption, is but cunningly inserted into the
proposition, only to avoid the force of those evident examples which may be
brought of GODS creatures and ordinances abused to idolatry, which yet have
been restored unto their uses of piety: and to tie us only unto the
inventions of man, wherein you suppose we can bring you none instance.

So that, from this clause of your exemption, I thus argue.

The creatures of GOD have no greater privilege then the ordinances of the
Church: But the creatures of GOD (by your own confession) are privileged from
destruction, though they have been abused unto idolatry. Ergo. The ordinances
of the Church are likewise privileged: and consequently the cross.

So that either you must show by the testimony of Scripture, where that
special privilege is granted unto Gods creatures, or else will we plead it
as a common law for ceremonies, and for man's inventions, as it pleases you to
call all ecclesiastical constitutions, though T.C. have an other opinion of
them, as you heard before page 16.

The second reason which moves me to deny your proposition, is the judgment
and practice of the primitive church against it, who have admitted of diverse
inventions of men in the service of God, which had formerly been abused unto
idolatry, even with devils. To give you one instance, above all exceptions.

The Christians in the primitive church, converted those same temples into the
houses of God, which had before bin consecrated unto heathen idols. These
idolatrous temples are man's mere inventions, erected not only without any
warrant, but also directly against Gods commandment: and yet you see, that the
primitive and purest church made no scruple at all of using those temples,
though they were the same indiuidua that had been abused, Deuteronomy. 12.2.
and have an express commandment to be destroyed. Whose example (contrary to
your position) all the reformed churches of Christendom do imitate, in using
without scruple, those very same churches, which have manifestly and manifoldly
been polluted with popish idols: which practice even Calvin himself allows,
Neque nobis hodie religio est, Call. Exposi. in Exodus
says he, templa retinere quae polluta fuerunt idolis, et accommodare in vsum
meliorem. Now, what can be the reason, why both the primitive church and ours
should so fully conspire in using the same temples which have been abused,
(contrary unto the express and particular commandment of God as you imagine)
but only this, that they thought not themselves there bound to use destruction,
where the things abused would admit a reformation, as it has apparently done,
no less in our crosses, then in our churches.

If you call those temples, the creatures of God, because the wood and stone,
and other materials whereof they were made, are the creatures of GOD, you
apply that name improperly, and very abusiuely: and, by the sam^ proportion, I
may likewise call the sign of the cross, the creature of God, Act. 17 28.
John. 2.^. Romans 11.36.
because, In him we live and move, and have our being: and without him is
nothing made that is made: and, of him, and through him, and for him are all
things.

If you grant these temples to be man's inventions (as they can not be denied
to be the works of men's hands, no nor of their heads neither) then must you
either deny, that they were lawfully converted unto the service of GOD,
cont^ary to the running firea^^e of all Divines* Or else you must cancel that,
which before you auerred, That it is unlawful to use the inventions of man in
the service of GOD, if once they have been abused unto idolatry.

My third reas^n of denying your proposition, is, that I do find you to be
singular in it, Pet Mart. Epist ad Hooper^m.
and all Divines (beside your self) against it. Peter Martyr, in an Epistle
which he writ to B^shoppe Hooper upon this very question, gives these pregnant
instances against your proposition. That not only the temples of heathen idols
were converted into the houses of GOD: but also their idolatrous revenues,
dedicated to their plays to their Vestalls, nay, to their devils, yet were
converted to the maintenance of Christian Ministers. He adds in that place
many other instances, and he delivers his judgment in this memorable
sentence, Non mihi persuadeo papatus impietatem esse ^antam, vt quicquid atting
t^omnino reddat contaminatum, quo, bonis et sanctis, vsus pio, non possit
concedi. Mark vsus pio. With him likewise consent* both ^ucer, Gua^ter and
Bullenger, whose sentences being long to write here, and yet very worthy the
reading you may find in Bishop Whi^gyfts book. page: 276.277. yea and even
T. C. himself (contrary to his own Doctrine) ye^ is forced, Whitg. page 284.
by the evidence of the truth to yield thu^ much, That things abused to
i^olatr^ may lawfully ^^e used, in the Church, so that first they be purified
from their abuse. Yea and in an other place, he yields that even monuments
of idolatry (note your own word) may be used in the Church, 256.
so that there come manifest profit of them. Neither speaks he there of
either the creatures, or ordinances of God, but of the Cappe and Surplice which
are man's inue^tions, both which, though he affirms to be momuments of
idolatry, yet he grants that they might be used in the church, but that they
be altogether with out any profit.

And again he professes of them, in that place that they neither have any
pollution in themselves, Tertul lib. de Coron cap. 8.
nor transfuse any pollution unto their wearers, but that he rejects them
for lack of profit in them, and not only because the Papists have abused
them. Unto these I might ad Tertullians judgment, who gives many instances, of
heathen men's inue^tions which have notably bin abused unto idolatry, and yet
had good use in Christianity amongst which, these be some; that letters were
first invented by the heathen god Mercury and Physic, by the heathen god
Aesculapius and yet the first of these he grants to be necessary, non solum
commercij rebus sed et nostris erga deum studijs: the second, though it were
the inventions of a heathen, Isai. 38.21. 1. Tim. 5.23.
yet was used both by the prophet Isay toward king Ezechias, in prescribing
him his plaster: and by the Apostle Pa^l toward his scholar Timothy in
prescribing him wine, in steed of water. Yea, and he further affirms, that
our Savior Christ himself, when he girded him with linen to wash his
disciples feet, did therein use the proper habit of the heathen god Osyris. And
he determines this question, with this conclusion, that al those inventions of
heathen gods, may be used in the service of Christ and the true God, which do
either bring to men, a manifest profit [as Mercury his letters do] or, a
necessary help [as Ezechias his plaster did ^or, an honest comfort [as
Timothies wine did, the rest, which have none of these uses, he condemns.

My fourth reason why I deny your proposition, is, because even you your
selves, by your practice, confute it, in admitting and wearing the cappe and
the surplice, which are neither the creatures nor ordinances of God, but mere
inventions of men, honored by the Papists with an opinion of holiness, and
abused by them, in their idolatrous service; and immediately from the Papists
themselves, left unto us, and censured by the reformers, Whitg. page
^82.261.283.
to be the Prea^hing signs of Popish priesthood, Antichristian apparel,
and garments of idols. Which (as your self out of the prophecy of Isay
allege) ought to be destroyed: Notwithstanding, all which, you are content to
use them. Now I would gladly know a reason, why these things may be used, and
the cross (being of the same nature, if not of a better) should be so
obstinately refused. For ever these forenamed instances (to let the cross
pass) are a practical confutation of your theoricall opinion, that no
monuments of idolatry may be used in the church, unless they be either the
creatures, or ordinances of God. This position you your selves do manifestly
confute, in using the surplice: which (peradventure) is the same indiuiduum
which has bin abused, whereas the cross (without peradventure) is not the
same. I write not this, as misliking your conformity and obedience in those
things, but as wishing it in the rest; wherein I see no greater cause of
dissenting, then there is in this, notwithstanding a^l those tragical
exclamations that the reformers use to agrauate the matter: Wherein they do
nothing else; but according to the proverb* tragedias agere in nugis, whose
vehement exaggerations, as you hau^ neglected in the use of the surplice, so
have you as great reason, to do the same, in the use of the cross: which you
can not condemn as a monument of idolatry (being so simply used as it is in
ou^ church) but you ^herein must condemn the whole world of Christianity, with
who^ it has (from the beginning) bin in use.

Ob. But you bring, for the strengthening of your proposition, three several
kinds of proofs. ^he first from the notation of the name of Monument. The
second, from the testimony of the scriptures. The third, from the practice of
reformed churches: wherein you give instance in our own.

Your first proof, That all monuments of idolatry are to be abolished is
this: because they be ordained to prese^ue and continue the remembrance of it,
Page ^0.
which you show by this Notation of the name, that Monimentum, is quasi monens
mentem. Whereby it appears, that you take the name of monument, not for that
which casually* but for that which purposely admonishes the mind: that so, by
moving a remembrance of it, it may stir up our desire and affection toward
it. For otherwise, it may mouere, but it does not promouere: it moves our
remembrance to no purpose, if it draw not our affection to that purpose. So
that you make a monument of idolatry, to be (in effect) a muniment of idolatry.

Resp. I will take none exception at your notation, because I find it backed
both by Festus and Nonnius; though that termination [ mentum] does not always
imply mentem, as appears in many words; Condimentum, Pigmentum, etc. But if
you take the name of monimentum, in this sense, for that which purposely
preserves the memory of any thing, either for love or honor sake; I have
yielded before, your proposition to be true; page 53.
that no such monument of idolatry is lawful to be used in the service of God:
But then with what conscience can any man affirm, that our cross in Baptism
is such a monument of idolatry? which all men know to be instituted for a
far other end, then to preserve the remembrance of Popery amongst us, or to
stir up any man's affection toward it.

If you take the name of monument in a larger sense, for any thing whatsoever,
which may bring it unto our remembrance, either casus, or consilio* then I say
it is a false and a dangerous position, to hold that al such monuments of
superstition ought to be destroyed, page 11.12.53. etc W^itgift. page 277.
as I have formerly declared. For then (as Gualter truly notes) We should pull
down our Churches, and renounce our livings, nay we should abandon not only
our ceremonies, but also our Creed, our Sacraments, and prayers, all which may
casually bring to our remembrance that idolatry of the Papists, wherein they
have been abused. Besides, this absurdity would follow of it; If all such
casual admonitions should be condemned; that the same cross, at the same
time, admonishing the Papist of his popish ad^ration, and the protestant of
Christ's death and passion, should at one and the same instant, be both a
monument of idolatry and of true p^ety, and so should be lawful and unlawful,
both at once. And therefore, it were a miserable extending of the name of
monument, to stretch it unto all such casual admonishments, and to condemn
them as unlawful.

Ob. But you have a second and a better proof, taken out of the Scriptures,
where you allege two places: the one Deuteronomy. 12.2.3. where the Temples, the
altars, the groves, the pillars of Idols are commanded to be destroyed, as well
as themselves. The other place is, Isai. 30.22. where further even the garments
and ornaments of idols are commanded to be abolished. And your gloss goes
yet further; that not only the particulers in those places named, but also all
that has any neerenesse or affinity with idolatry ought to be destroyed,
without any limitation of uses, or mitigation of this rigor, how profitably
soever they may be employed.

Resp. Whitgift. page 273.
Wherein I see, that you dissent as far from T. C. (who is not so
straight-laced in this point of idolatry, but he thinks it very lawful to
use the gold and silver of idols garments) as he dissents from Calvin, Call. in
Isai. cap 30.
who thinks it utterly unlawful. Therefore S. Augustines judgment is worthy
the hearing, Aug. epist. 154.
who in his Epistle unto Publicola, does fully and soundly decide this
question, and for these places alleged brings a very good exposition;
namely, that GOD has commanded such things to be destroyed, no^ as being
simply unlawful to all uses, but to restrain men's greedy and covetous desires,
in converting them unto their private uses; vt appareat, ^os pietate ista
destruere, non auaritia. In which Epistle he most plainly determines of this
whole question: the sum of whose determination may be digested into these few
aphorisms. 1. that the temples, and groves, and other such monuments of
idolatry, may be destroyed by those men that have lawful authority. 2. that
being so destroyed there ought nothing of the^ unto our own private use to be
reserved. 3. that yet notwithstanding, unto publik use, they may be employed,
yea, and not only to common uses, but also unto religious uses too, in honorem
dei, as he proves by two instances, viz: the metals of Hierico laid up, for
Gods tabernacle, and the grove of Baall, Josh. 6.19. Judge. 6.25.2^
cut down, for Gods sacrifice. 4. that the reducing of such abused crea^ures
unto a better use, is all one (in effect) with the reducing of a wicked man,
unto a better life. 5 that yet this prouiso must be used that provision be
made, Note this.
that they be not still honored. This is the whole sum of S. Augustines
decision; agreeing in many points with Peter Martirs judgment upon the same
question; Epistolaad Hooperum. Both which learned Epistles are very worthy the
reading, of all men which are perplexed with such intricate doubting, where
they may find great stay and comfort for their conscience, if in truth and
sincerity they do seek for resolution, and not in pride and singularity for
alteration.

Ob. The third proof of your proposition, is drawn from the example of our
own reformed church, whose practice shows his judgment. She, in abandoning
rood-loftes, crucifixes, wax-candles, and other like relikes and monuments of
idolatry, shows in these particulers, that general position to be true in
her judgment, that, No relic or monument of idolatry ought to have any use
in the service of God.

Resp. That a^l monuments of idolatry are to be abolished I have formerly
yielded, taking those that be truly monuments indeed, that is, for such
idolatrous things as are purposely reserved, to preserve the remembrance of
idolatry amongst us, that so we may not be weaned from it. As for incense,
wafers, wax-candles, and such like things, which have been misapplied amongst
the Papists, and w^ung to a wrong use, they cannot be called the monuments of
idolatry, but in a very forced and equivocal sense, if our church should
retain them in an other use.

The Godly care of our church, in abandoning all true monuments of
superstition, does not infer that the cross is one: but rather prove that it
is none, because our church has not abandoned it.

Ob. But you seem to insinuate that our church has therein erred, having as
great a reason to abolish the cross as either Rood-lofts, or crucifixes, or
wax-candles, or any other like monuments of idolatry which she has rejected.

Resp. Whether our whole church or you, are more likely to err, in truly
judging and esteeming the monuments of idolatry, let wise men judge. That which
our church has done in abolishing such things, does sufficiently defend that
which she has not done: unless we should imagine al those churches which have
received the cross, from the time of the Apostles, to be less wise, or less
religious, in matter of idolatry, then a few private persons, sprung only up
in our times, Nimirum (as Tertullian says of Marcion) liberanda veritas
expectauit Cartwrightum. All the world had surely died in idolatry, if T.C. had
not helped to pluck it out.

But as concerning that discretion which our church has made, in the
abolishing of some things, and retaining of others, you are to understand, that
all the things she has abolished be not of one nature; nor for one cause
rejected. Some things she has abolished of mere necessity, because they were
simply unlawful, as the image of the crucifix, set up upon the Alter, of
purpose to be worshipped, and so known to be notoriously abused. Other things
she has abolished, only upon conueniency, because they were less
profitable, as Salt, Oil, Wax-candles and such like. These things she has
abolished, not as monuments of idolatry, and things simply unlawful, but as
needless ceremonies, and things not greatly profitable; with whose
unprofitable number, she would not have her self unnecessarily burdned. Now,
in these of the first sort, in that our Church has abolished all pa^ts and
monuments of idolatry, she has therein discharged her necessary duty In these
of the second sort, in that ^^e has re^used some, and retained others she
has therein used her freedom and liberty, yea even in the things by your
self fore^amed: as she has remembered her du^y, to take away the abuse, ^o
she has not forgot her liberty, to refrain the things abused, the abuse
being severed. Such crucifixes she has removed as were abused unto idolatry,
but yet left such still, as may admonish us, by way of history The roode she
has cast down, but left the loft standing. Wax candles she has ^emoued from
before the dead images, and yet retained them still, for the use of living men,
to see to praise God by. So that GOD is now praised by the same light amongst
us, by which he was dishonored amongst the Papists, as he is likewise by our
cross. And therefore from the practice of our Church in destroying of idolatry
you can gather no more, but that the cross (being not destroyed) is no
monument of idolatry: unless you will assume a deeper judgment to your self,
then you will grant unto our whole Church beside your se^fe. This, for your
proposition, and the proof thereof; that All monuments of idolatry are
unlawful in GODS service.

Ob. Let us now come on unto your Assumption that the sign of the cross is a
monument of idolatry.

Resp. Your proposition I denied but with a distinction: but your Assumption I
do sim^ly and absolutely deny. I deny that our cross is either a relic or a
monument of popish idolatry: and that upon this reason following, which I wish
may be well and thoroughly considered.

First as concerning the word Relic (...) our sign of the cross be a
relic of the Papists cross then must it of necessity be a part of it as I
showed before, page: 53.
out of Origens definition of a Relic. But our sign of the cross is no part
of theirs: and therefore, it cannot be a Relic of it.

That it is no part of theirs, appears by this reason: That every part is
either an integrall part, that is, a member of the same individual body: or
else, an universal part, that is either an Indiuiduum of the same Species, or
else, a Species, of the same Genus. But our cross (as we use it) is none of
all these: it is neither a part of the same Individual action, abused by the
Papists; nor a whole Indiuiduum of the same Species: no, no^ yet a Species of
the same Proximum genus, and therefore it is not a part of theirs, and
consequently no relic.

For the first of these points: That the cross by us used, is not any
integrall part of that cross which the Papists abused, it is clear by this
reason. Because every several cross which any Papist makes, being but a
singular and indiuiuall action, it is so far from being possible to be
parted and divided between two diverse men, that it is utterly impossible to
be iterated or renewed by one and the same man. Heraclitus said, (and he said
truly) that it was impossible for any man, Plut: lib de E.I.
Eundem fluvium vis intrare: taking eundem there, for cundem numero. And so may
I say as truly, that it is impossible for any man, Eandem actionem vis
peragere. For though the priest be the same, and the hand the same, and the
forehead the same, and the end the same, yet the action repeated is not the
same: when he once has made one singular cross, he can never make the same
cross over again. The same opus indiuiduuo he may make again; as a man may
cast the same bullet in the same mold a thousand times over: but the same
Action in indiuiduo ( verbo causa his first casting of it) it is utterly
impossible he should ever do again. For to make a singular action again, all
these singulers must concur: Idem agens, idem patiens, idem agendi modus,
finis, tempus, all which are impossible to concur any ofter then once. So
that our cross is so far from being an integrall part of theirs, that one of
their own crosses is no part of an other. And therefore our cross can no more
properly be called a relic of theirs, then a bone of Saint Paul's body, can a
relic of Judas, of which it is no member.

Let us now see whether our cross be a part of the same totum universal,
seeing it is no part of the same totum integrale. This point I think, if it
^uly be considered, will manifest to all men, that our cross and the Papists,
be not so near of kin, as it has been imagined. Let us therefore divide
the Predicament of Action into his several Species, that we may know how to
give unto every one his right, and not unskillfully to confound those things,
which nature has distinguished.

Actio, alia
Animi gaudere, dolere. Corporis Interna, concoctio, digestio, assimulatio.
Externa. Comunis, Loqui, ambulare. Sacra Genuum fl^ctio* Crucis effictio
Papistarum quae superstitiosa, quia cultui destinata Permanens 1. imago crucis
H^ec. Illa.
Transiens 1. signum crucis Hoc. illud

Protest intiu^, quae religiosa, quia pi etati acco^modata Permanens 1. imago
historica Haec. Illa.
Transiens. Signum crucis Hoc. illud.






By this Series it appears, that our cross is neither an Indiuiduum of the
same Species with the Papists, nor yet a species of the same proximum genus:
but separated from it, by three substantial differences. The first is taken
from the Agents, that theirs is the cross of Papists, ours of Protestants:
which makes that these two actions cannot be indiuidua of the same species.
For a Protestant an^ a Papist are two diverse Species or kinds of worshippers;
and therefore their actions of worship, must by consequent, be as differing in
Species, as be their agents. The second difference between their cross and
ours (which makes them yet more distant) is taken from their differing ends: a
point which alters the very nature of the actions. The Papists make their
cross as it were a kind of Exorcisme, to keep them from evil spirits: but
we do make our cross to no such superstitious end, but only (as by a
significant ceremony to admonish our minds of Christ's meritts toward us and
of our duties toward him. These two differing ends, do yet put a further
difference in the actions. There is yet a third difference, which still
remoueth them further: and that is, that that very remotum genus, of Sacra
actio, under which, both the Papists cross and ours is contained, yet does not
praedicari vni^oce of them both, but of ours only vniuoce: Arist. lib.
Categor. cap. 1.
and of theirs, aequiuoce: as Homo does of pictus and of viuus homo. For their
cross, though it be in name Sacra actio, yet is it in truth and in deed,
profana. So that the Papisticall cross and ours, agree but in two things:
First, in the name, that both are called Crosses: and secondly, in the scheme
and outward form of the action, in that both of them be made of one figure
and fashion. But they differ in three points, of far greater weight.

First in the nature of the actions, in that the one is truly a religious
action; the other aequiuocally religious, truly superstitious. Secondly, in
the nature of the Agents: The one being sincere worshippers of the true GOD,
the other corrupt worshippers of abominable Idols. And thirdly in the end of
the actions; the one being destinated unto true piety, the other likewise
unto impious idolatry.

Thus do our cross and their toto genere differ, so that the corruption of
the one, cannot transfuse infection into the other: but that we may as lawfully
use ours, notwithstanding their unlawful abuse of theirs, as we may breath of
the same air, into which Idolaters have fumed their incense; or drink of the
same waters, Aug. epist. 154 ad Publ. col^m.
in which Idolaters have washed their sacrifice, as Saint Augustine truly
notes. And therefore these actions, being in nature so distant, the one so
innocent and religious, the other so nocent and superstitious; if any man shall
either condemn the one, for the abuses of the other, or condemn them both for
the abuses of the one, it is all one injustice, as if one should condemn an
innocent creature, for the faults and vices of a malefactor; and it falls
directly into that woe of the Prophet: Isai. 5.20.
Woe be unto them that call goo^, evil; and evil, good. And that again of
the Wiseman. Pro. 17:15. lib. 3. cap. 15. de lib. arbitr. Tom. 1. p. 662.
He that justifies the wicked, and he that condemns the just they are both
abomination unto the Lord. For as Saint Augustine truly notes, Peccat, qui
damnat quasi peccatae, qu^c nulla sunt.

Thus our cross (as you see) is no relic of their cross, of which it is
neither a member, nor a part. Now let us see whether it be a Monument of
idolatry, or no: your self do bring this Etymon of that name, Isidor. lib. 14.
Orig. cap. 11.
that Monimentum, is quasi monens mentem, which is Isidores deriuation: which
evidently shows, that the end of all monuments is admonition; and to keep in
our minds, the remembrance of those things, which (otherwise) might happily
decay amongst us. Hence, temples, and Sepulchers, are propperly called their
monuments unto whom they be dedicated. So that a Monument of that, in
remembrance of which it was purposely erected, and not of any other thing,
which by an other man's fantasy is thereby imagined. In this sense, our cross,
may truly be called a monument of Christ our Savior crucified, for whose
remembrance it is purposely intended; but why it should be called a monument of
idolatry, it having no such end or purpose, as to conserve the memory of it, I
can see no reason. A monument (as I said before) can only be called a monument
of that which intentionally it admonishes, and not of any other thing, which
conceit and fancy from the same collecteth. For so we might quickly make
Quidlibet, ex Quolibet, and every thing might be called a monument of all
things: by so far unlike things are we often times put in mind of some other
things. The Israelites by the long use of Manna amongst them, Numb. 11.4.5.6.
were not only put in mind of the fleshpots of Egypt, but also provoked to
lust and desire them. Shall we therefore say, that Manna was a monument of
their idolatrous food in Egypt, because by loathing of the one, they were
admonished to lust after the other? A man often times is admonished to remember
some one thing, by another which is of a contrary nature, (as the prodigal
child was, Luke 15 17.
who by seeing the base estate wherein himself was, remembered the good estate
wherein his fatners servants were) yet cannot the one of these, be called a
monument of the other: because this admonition is merely casual, and not
natural. If then any man be casually admonished to remember the idolatrous
cross of the Papist by seeing of ours, this admonition proceeding, not ab
intention agentis, but a corruptione spectantis, cannot make our cross a
monument of theirs, no more then a Bird flying, or a man swimming, or a plowe
going, or a ship sailing, may be called a monument of the cross, because by
all these figures a man may be put in mind to remember it, as diverse of the
Fathers have observed. Iustine Martyr. orat. ad Antonium Pium. Ambros. Sermon.
56. So that our cross can neither be a relic of theirs of which it is no
part; nor yet a monument, of which it is no sign, and therefore your
assumption (as I hope you see) is false.

Ob. But you confirm the same unto us, by three special proofs which
demonstrate our cross to be a monument of superstition. The first is this:
Because it was by the Papists idolatrously abused, who ascribed unto it, divine
Holiness, Power, and Adoration. The second is, because it is from them left
immediately unto us. The third, because our pretense of a differing end in using
it, is not a sufficient defense for it. Because by that reason, all other
monuments of Idolatry, yea even idols themselves might be brought in again.
This is the sum of that fortification whereby you endeavor to make good your
Assumption, that our cross must needs be a monument of idolatry. Let us
therefore consider of all these things apart.

Resp. For your first Objection: that our cross has been idolatrously
abused, nay made a very idol, you prove it by three instances: whereof the two
first are insufficient. For, what if they thought the sign of the cross to
have either greater holiness, or greater power, the^ indeed it had; must this
needs make it become by and by an idol? Isai. 1.21. Ier: 7.4.
The Jews thought both their holy city Jerusalem, and the temple therein
contained, to be a great deal holier then indeed they were: did this opinion
of theirs therefore make those two things idols? 2 King: 4.29.31.
Elisha in like manner, when he sent his staff to raise the child to life,
did think it to have had a greater power, then it had: yet did not that
opinion make the staff become an idol. So likewise the Papists, in thinking
the cross to have either a kind of holiness to sanctify the users, or a
kind of power to drive away the diuills; in these fancies they declare, rather
the error of their opinion, then the idolatry of their religion.

But your third instance of adoration, (if it be ideed divine which they give
unto it: for all agree not in this point) that is a good demonstration, Bellar.
Tom. 1. cont. 7. lib: 2. cap. 22.24.
that to them it is an idol. But what is that to us? how follows it, that
our cross must needs be a monument of idolatry, because theirs is an idol
any more then our oxen are monuments of idolatry because the Egiptians oxen
were their idols? Whether all oxen are made unlawful for the service of God,
Exodus 8.26.
because some were made idols, that is an other question; but that all oxen
must be monuments of idolatry (if our cross be one) that is out of question.
For, the reason which you make against the cross, does hold as strongly
against the ox; yea even to the banishing him from all use of the tabernacle
(notwithstanding your inserted clause of exemption) if there be any sound
truth in your general proposition.

Ob. For your 2. objection; that the cross is a monument of idolatry because
it is immediately left by the Papists unto us. That is faulty in all parts: for
this must needs be the sum of your argument, if it have any argument.

Whatsoever is left us immediately by the Papists, that is a monument of of
idolatry. But the cross is left us immediately by the Papists. Ergo.

Resp. In which argument, both your Mayor and your Minor be false. First for
your Mai^r: It is not the leaving of any thing unto us by idolaters, which
makes the thing left, a monument of idolatry, unless it be also a part of
their idolatry. For, both the Scriptures and the Sacraments are left unto us
(in your sense) by the Papists, who are known to be notorious idolaters: and
yet neither of these (I hope) will you call, the monuments of idolatry.

Ob. But these (you will say) be the ordinances of God, and so may have use in
the service of God, by that clause of exemption, which you have inserted into
your first proposition, that no monuments of idolatry (being neither the
creatures, nor ordinances of God) can have any use in the service of God.

Resp. Though that clause of exemption admit them into the service of God; yet
does it not exempt them from being monuments of idolatry, if this be a good
reason which you here allege why the cross should be a monument of idolatry,
because it is le^t us immediately by the Papists. For, the cross is left us
none otherwise by the Papists, the^ both Scriptures and Sa^raments are left
unto us by them, yea and their idolatrous Churches too: which may truly and
properly be called Monumenta, the monuments of idolatry. Unto which you are
forced to grant an use in GODS service, notwithstanding they be both the same
indiuidua which have been abused, and are no better but the inventions of men.

Ob. Now, for your Assumption, That the cross is left unto us immediately by
the Papists, that is as false as your proposition was. For that only may
properly be said to be left us, which is de manu in manum delivered unto us, 1.
Cor. 11.23.
as the Apostles did their Traditions unto their successors. In a second and a
more proper sense, that also may be said to be left unto us, which by
immitation we borrow from others as the apostles again did, their law of Blood
and strangled, from their predecessors, in the law. Act: 15.20.
But neither of these ways can the cross be said to be left us by the
Papists. For, first, unto us (whom they count heretics) they could not leave
any thing which they hold so precious: and secondly, from them (whom we count
idolaters) we would not borrow any thing, which we held so superstitious. So
that, neither of these two ways, is it left by them unto us. And much less
the third way, which is, by Desertion, as though we had come unto it, tanquam
in vacuam possessionem, for they still do fight for it, tanquam pro aris et
focis. So that, I cannot see, how the cross can be said to be left unto us,
by them, unless you thereby intend that we have as it were wrung it out of their
hands; and that so they left that to us, which they could not withold from us.

If you take this phrase [ left unto vs] in a sense so prodigally and
prodigiously large, that you count all that to be left unto us, by those men
which have used the same things before us: then may both the sun and the
moon, and all the elements be said to be left unto us by idolaters, and
consequently to be The monuments of idolatry. and so what is there any where,
which (in this so large and so laxe a sense) may not be called A monument of
idolatry?

As for this point, therefore, we truly profess, that we borrow not this
ceremony from the Romish Synagogue (though they have more lately used it) but
from the primitive Church, who first ordained it. So that as it cannot truly
be said, that the Papists have left us either the Lords prayer, or the
Apostles creed, or the holy sacraments, but that we take all these (by our
own right) out of the holy scriptures, Nostrum quippe est, quodcunque de
nostris, sumpsisse et tradidisse contigit illis. Terul. lib. de tes^imonio
animae cap. 5. Senec. Epist. 33.
which are open to us, as well as to them: so can it not truly be said, that
the Papists have left unto us the cross, but that we do borrow it from the
primitive church: whose customs, the Papists have no more authority to
ingrosse unto themselves, then the Protestants have: but may as freely be used
by us, as by them, for, Patet omnibus veritas, nondum est occupata.

But if it were granted, that this ceremony of the cross, though left unto us
by the primitive church, yet were brought unto us by the hands of Papists, does
that presently make it a monument of idolatry? if one should receive a token by
the hand of a Pagan which were sent unto him from a Christian; is it therefore
made a monument of idolatry, because he that brought it was an idolater? Holy
orders were given unto the first Protestants, by the hands of Papists: does
this so defile the orders of our ministry, as to make them presently the
monuments of idolatry? Surely, though the Papists, have very foul hands, yet
do I not take them, to be so ugly foul, as the Harpies feet were, which
defiled all things that they once had touched: non mihi persuadeo (says Peter
Martyr) papatus impietatem esse tantam vt quicquid attingit, Virg. lib. 3.
Aeneid.
contaminatum reddat, quo bonis vsui sancto, concedi non possit. In whose
Christian and charitable judgment I do willingly sit down.

Ob. Now, for your third objection. That the change of our end in the use of
the cross, does not make any change in the nature of the thing.

Resp. I wonder you will affirm a thing, so contrary unto the rules of Logike
and reason. Who knows not, that of all the causes, Aug. Epist. 48. ad Vincent.
it is only The end, which makes all actions to be either good or evil?
especially in things of indifferent nature. Tertullian does give us some
instances to this purpose. Tertul. lib. de Coron. cap. 10
et ego mihi gallinaceum macto, non minus quam Aescul^pio Socrates (says he)
et, si me odor alicuius loci offenderit, Arabiae aliquid incendo. What is the
reason then, that his killing of a cock, and his burning of incence, (being
all one action with that of the idolaters) yet is not idolatry, as their action
was? He answers it himself: quia, vsus ipsius administratio interest. Aug
lib. 4. cont. Julian Pelagian cap. 3.
And again, that he did these things, nec eodem ritu, nec eodem habitu, nec
eodem apparatus, quo agitur apud idola. So that, it was his difference in the
end, which made such a difference in the actions. For (as Saint Augustine to
the same purpose observes) non actibus, Mat. 6.2.5.16
sed finibus pensantur officia, which our Savior also declares, by three
notable instances in the Pharisees, viz, fasting, alms, and praying, al which
good actions were (in them) corrupted, by their evil ends, because, they did
them to be seen of men. So that, the end (as you see) not only exempteth an
action from sin, but also infecteth an action with sin.

Ob. But you say. That then by altering of the end, we may bring back again
even heathen idols too.

Resp. I answer, that the comparison is very unequal. For heathen idols, are
most evidently forbidden and condemned in the scripture, which the cross is
not. And yet that there may be such an alteration in the end, that even
heathen idols may have some use in Gods service, I have showed you before out
of Saint Augustines judgment. Page 59.


A reply to fortify the tenth objection.
Ob. All outward forms and liknesses in Gods worship, ordained by man, and
that, to edify, teach, stir up men's affections toward God: they are
forbidden in the second commandment. This is by the very text necessarily
consequent. Exodus 20 4.

But the sign of the cross is such a likeness. For, Master Hooker, an
authentike expositor of our ceremonies, condemns all as vain, that are not
significant. And your self show that to be your judgment in your answer:
Ergo, etc.

That of Saint Paul, that all ought to be to edifying, I pray to have it
considered, whether it be understood of such spiritual gifts only, as God
gave to his Church, and as be there named. 1. Cor. 14.26.

Answer.
That all outward forms and likenesses ordained by man in the worship of God,
to edify, teach, or stir up our affection toward God, should be forbidden
in the second commandment, I do utterly deny: and I wonder that either your
self, or any other Christian should affirm it; no word of the commandment
making for it, and the mind of the commandment making clean against it. The
judgment both of Calvin and Beza, and of other Divines I have showed against
you, page 21.45. The place which you cite Exodus 20.4. Thou shall make thee no
graven image, etc. if you distract it from his meaning, which follows in the
next words, Thou shall not bow down to them, nor worship them, does make
rather against the making of all images (which error I think you will not
maintain) then against the applying them to so good an end, as you (in this
place) seem to condemn. Ab impossibi.
Should any thing whatsoever be thought unlawful, which instructs our
minds, and sturreth up our affections truly toward GOD? T.C. Whitg. 256.
Surely if you were able to make good, that even Heathen Idols could truly and
properly produce these effects, I would not doubt to affirm, even them to be
lawful. So far am I from thinking that any thing is in this commandment
forbidden, which either inlightneth our understanding, or inflameth our
affection toward God. I rather hold it for a certain truth, that Idols are
here forbidden, upon a contrary supposition, namely, that they blind our
understanding, and auert our affection away from God. And therefore your
proposition wants some better proof, then your bare assertion: for (as I
said) I do simply deny it for false.

For your Assumption, that The cross is an image or^ained by man for our
better instruction and affection toward God: I may simply grant, and yet grant
it not therefore to be forbidden in the second commandment.

This whole objection is fully and suffic^ently satisfied, in my former
answer, both unto your fourth and your tenth objections: but that answer is
not sufficiently taken away by this reply; and therefore thither again I
return you.

That place of Saint Paul, 1. Cor. 14.26. Let all things be done unto
edification, that it is principally intended of gifts, and not of ceremonies,
Whitgift. page 86.
I do not deny: but that it may be extended unto ceremonies, as well as unto
gifts, I hope you will confess, because all Divines do: amongst whom is T. C.
for one, as authentical an expositor of your presbytery, as Master Hooker is
of our ceremonies. That ceremonies ought to be without all signification, I
take it to be your sole and propper opinion, wherein you have no Divine of any
worth to be your rival. And therefore I wonder you should so dote upon it, as
here (in a second place) to obtrude it, it having been before sufficiently
confuted, Page 8.9.

Gloria in excelsis Deo.
Errors committed in the Printing.
In the Epistle, Page 2. line 18. read Author: In the Sermons, Page 1. line ^. r.
prescribe. page 7. line 11. r. lacks. Page 11. line 32. r. by the name of
Vanity. p. 13. line 15. r. which indeed is not: in the same r. and that
therefore. Page 19. in the margent, for Mat. 5. r. Mat. 15 p. 20. line 10. r.
capiuntur p. 28. line 1. r. the doctor and his doctrine. line 34 r. Tatianus*
in the margent, for Act. 5. r. 15. page 31. line 7. r. to read them. line 8. r.
life in them. line 25. r. the mind. Page 33. for this word of a man. r. the word
of a man. Page 37: line 34. r. legitur. so page 38. line 10. Page 40. line 22.
rea. moving. Page 41. line 27. rea. in them. Page 42. line 9. r. seducing. Page
43. line 2. r. praying. page 52. line 5. r. judgment. page 57. line 13. r. and
destinate. line 34. r. giving. page 58. line 1. r. ouer-ruled. page 63. line 18.
r. Oschophoria. line 31. r. Hyperlidion. page 66. in the margent r. defesto. page
67. line 24. r. ninty fifth. page 68. line 4. r. if any man. page 79. line 13 r.
execrament. page 80. line 15. r. presently. page 81. line 2. r: detection. line
4. r. our now most, etc. page 91. in the margent, for Act. 3.50.1. r. Act. 3.
Scen. 1. and for Act. 1 50. 1. r. Act. 1. Scen. 1. P. 92. l. 13. r. reueling.
page 96. in the margent. l. 28. for 1. Cor. 11.10. r. 1. Cor. r. 10. page 98.
line 24. r. against the pride. page 101. line 31 r. idole-priests. page 103. line
28. read spawned.

In the Treatise of the Cross.
Page 3. line 14. read indifferency. page 8. line 19. r. credas. page 11. line
4. r. recta. Page 13. in the margent, for p. 53. r. 60. line 29. r. a cause.
page 15. line 19. r. to imitate. Page 16. line 12. r. a detestation. line 21. r.
were freely granted. line 31. r. why should that be thought. Page 17. in the
margent, r. page 42. Page 21. line 13. r. the subject. line 29. r. communes
vsui. Page 24. in the margent, for page 63. r. 74. and again, for page 62. 63.
r. 73. Page 27. in the margent, for page 54. r. 63. Page 28. in the margent,
for page 20. r. 24. and for page 63. r. page 74. 75. Page 31. line 10. r.
rixarum. Page 32. for, for the Sacraments, r. of the Sacraments. Page 36. line
35. r. disciplinae. Page 39. in the margent, for page 32. r. 37. Page 40. line
7. r. insufficient. Page 42. line 2. read apposite. Page 45. line 8. r.
abolition, line 26. r. there ought, Page 48. line 6. r. there be two things.
Page 49. line 19. r. A non sequitur. Page 51. line the last, r. page 31. Page
55. line 30. r. the cross. Page 56. in the margent. for page 30. r. 35. Page
63. in the margent, for. page 22. 23. r. page 27. Page 64. for page 16. r. 31.
Page 65. line 26. r. vsuj pio. so also in the line following. Page 66. line 19.
r. invention. Page 67. line 12. r. every one of these. Page 68. in the margent,
for page 10. r. page 12. and for page 53. r. 62. and line 30. r. casu. Page 70.
line 21. r. altercation, and line 23. r. her. Page 72. line 9. r. retain. In
the margent, for page 53. r. 62. Page 73. line 21. r. bis: and so line 23. Line
28. r. opus in indiuiduo. L. 30. r. verbi causa. Page 76. line 25. r. a
monument is only a monument of that, Page 80. line 10. r. would. Page 82. in
the margent, for page 59. r. page 69. Page 83. in the margent, for page 21.45.
r. page 24.

FINIS.

