A SHIELD OF DEFENSE AGAINST THE ARROWS OF SCHISM Shot abroad by Iean de
L'escluse in his advertisment against Mr. BRIGHTMAN. Here unto is prefixed a
declaration touching a book entitled, The profane schism of the Brovvnistes.

By John Fovvler. Clement Saunders. Robert Bulvvarde.


Luke 12. verse. 2. For there is nothing covered, that shall not be
Revealed, neither hid, that shall not be known.
Printed at Amsterdam by Henry Laurenson Dwelling upon the water at the sign
of the vvriting book. 1612.

A declaration touching a book lately printed and entitled, The Profane
schesme of the Brovvnistes.
CHristian reader, there was of late a book published in London under this
title, The profane schism of the Brounistes; Such a book indeed we sent by
one of us to be printed there, but in the publishing thereof great injury has
been done unto us, and chiefly three vvayes, by addition, by detraction and by
alteration of the same:

For the first, besides the addition of sundry harsh words and phrases of
heresies, blasphemies, diabolus, horrible crimes and c. in such place where
they were not used by us, which yet according to the doctrine of the
Brovvnistes themselves may justly be applied unto them; besides the addition in
the title of the book which is doubly increased by the publisher thereof;
beside the addition of the other titles of the several chapters with a new
table thereof added in stead of that which we had made; besides sundry other
such additions, there be also added some things directly contrary to our
meaning and such as never came into our heads, as namely those words in the
end of the preface, as also to vvarne all such as have been the occasion of
those heresies and schisms to conform themselves to the church of God, that
these caterpillars may no more rise out of them. And although we be and c. By
those words the reader might conceive as though we affirmed those ministers
which do refuse subscription and conformity unto the prelacy and superstitious
ceremonies used in the church of England, to have been the occasion of
Brovvnisme and guilty of that schism etc. But the truth is otherwise, there
were no such words written in the book which we sent to be printed, but
they are foysted in and obtruded upon us by some falsifyer without our
knowledge or consent, Our judgment is that the tyranny of Lord BBs and their
impositions are a stumbling block unto many that are vveake which do thereby
take occasion to fall from the church and to run into schism. We assure our
selves that if there were in the church of England such a reformation of the
prelacy and ceremonies as is desired by the ministers there and is also
obtained in other reformed churches, there would not the^ be such a defection
unto Brovvnisme as now the re is. We know indeed that the Brounistes do
join with the prelates in vpbrayding the ministers with this thing and
would seem to build their separation upon the testimony of the ministers, as
appears by this book of Delescluse, where he labors to conclude their
separation from certain speeches of Mr. Brightman testifying against the
corruptions of the church of England, but how unjustly and absurdly he has
done the same we hope it vvil evidently appear by this refutation follvving.

Secondly, there is in sum left out the greatest part of the book which we
sent to be printed, yea in exact account there is not a fourth part there of
that is printed: In special there is not a third part of the preface printed
wherein our reasons for the manner of publishing that book are contained;
there is left out a large answer unto a narratio^ vvritte^ by Mr. Johnson
touching an offer of conference that was made unto him; likewise the answer
unto the grounds of scripture alleged by M. Johnson in in defense of
separation is left out; Diverse testimonies of Dutch and french ministers
against the^ be omitted, with other writings of John Johnson and George
Johnson that should have been printed: The greatest part of the vilest slanders
of the Brounistes are left out: The greatest number of the chapters by far is
omitted; that which should have been the tenth chapter is made the first nine
of the first being altogether omitted, besides sundry other in the mids of
the book; and of those chapters that are there, no one of the^ is fully set
down, and in some of the^ more the^ half the matter omitted: Diverse strange
matters are noted in the book, but the occasion there of, the profes thereof
with the answer unto the vain cavilles and shifts of the Brounistes about
the same are omitted, and in respect of these omissio^s diverse things so
abruptly set down may seem more harsh and also more incredible unto the
reader; so that hereby it may easily appear how we are iniuried by
unreasonable omissions as well as by unjust additions.

Thirdly, for the method and order of setting down these things that are
printed, there is great alteration therein also: Things spoken upon one
occasion are related upon an other, and not in their due place; The speeches of
one man are so set down as if they had been spoken by an other; The speeches
of diverse men are peeced togather as if they had been spoken by one and the
same person. In these and such like cha^ges both we and those whose
testimonies are alleged by us have receyved some further iniurye.

Besides these things there be also as it appears many literal faults in
the misprinting of sundry words which do much corrupt the sense of sundry
things in the book.

And though thus many and great injuries be done unto us yet do we not
hitherto fully understand by vvho^ they are done: Only this we understand by
a letter sent from Chr. Lavvne who was e^trusted which this business, that
the according to the order in such like cases seeking unto such as were
appointed for the allovva^ce of books to be printed, and leaving it in the
hands of a certain chaplain of the Archb to get it read over and vievved
u^till he himself might return out of the country into which he was the^
going down before he could come up to London again he found the book
already printed contrary to his expectation, and in the printing thereof so
mangled and defaced as is above specifyed.

And howsoever we do now disclayme this book above mentioned as none of
ours being thus corruptly printed with such additions, omissions and
alterations, yet do we still acknovvledge that all the particular matters of
fact recorded against the the Brvvonistes in that book are such tiges as were
taken out of our vvriting* and for proof thereof we are able and ready to
produce our testimony and witness as occasion shall requi^e; The most of the^
are testified and confessed by themselves and the most heinous things eve^
under their own hand vvriting; and the rest are such things as either we
our selves or others vvil witness. And therefore though we complain
Brovvnistes insult there upon; though we be vvronged, yet are not they cleared
from the matters there noted which are still in force against them.

Our desire and our purpose is hereafter as occasion, opportuinty and means
shall be offered more fully to manifest their Profane schism by the publishing
of those things which formerly have been omitted, and in the mean time we
do here present unto the reader a fevv observations upon the advertisement of
Iean Delescluse which he has written against Mr. Brightman and against the
communion of saints; His perverse collections for separation drawn from Mr.
Brightman his Testimony, we have here shevved to be vain and wicked. The
principles of Brovvnisme which he has briefly alleged are here breefely
ansvverd, yet so as that the vanity and error of their separation may be
easily discerned hereby: This labor we have undertaken cheefely for the
comfort and help of those vveake brethren, who either do not sufficiently
understand the iniquity of this error of the Brounistes or else do not duly
consider the danger of this schism which as it daily breaks it self in
pieces, so would it also break, ruinate and overthrow all the churches that
should admit and receyve the same. when corruptions do increase and are
maynteyned, let the godly witness against the same, but let them not fret
unto separation, and so shall they walk with Christ in white, Reu. 3. 4.

An answer unto the advertisement of Iean Delescluse concerning Mr. Brightman
upon the Apocalypse.
1.
WHereas in his title he pretendes to advertise the godly reader, whom
afterward in his Epistle he calls Gentle reader and Christian reader, mark
how this man does mock his reader; for by his profession of Brownisme he
holds all the members of the church of England to be no visible Christians, to
be without true faith and without godliness, even eve-ry one as they are
public professors of the gospel in that church and yet here in this
flattering title of his English book he dissembles notably as though he would
honor and record their godliness; And thus in the very forehead of his book,
his hypocrisy begins to show it self.

2.
Whereas in his title he takes on him to advertise every godly reader of Mr.
Tho. Brightma^ his book, how absurd and senseless is it? There be many godly
readers of Mr. Brightma^s book which understand no English at al, seeing it is
extant in Latin, and yet he writes in English to advertise every one of them.

3.
IN the same place he alleges against the church of England that saying of
the Prophet 1. Kim 18. 21. How long halt ye between two opinions? If the lord
be God follow him, but if Baal be he then go after him. This is unjustly
applied against them who are assured of their lawful communion with that
church; but this sentence or the like may much more fitly be alleged against
the divided and distracted Brownistes, who halt between two opinions, and
between two communions, some halting after the Franciscane order, sone limping
after the Ainsworthian and popular order, some hanging in doubt betwixt both
opinions, so that they dare not join to either of them, but walk alone.

4.
THe first cause which moved him to put forth this writing in defense of the
separation, he sets down in these words: Epist. to Read. page 3.
First the glory of my God etc. what means he by this speech of his God, in
saying, the glory of my God? Has he and his flock a special God of his own
more then other churches of Christ? It is true indeed that David and other
faithful servants of God do often with the voice of faith use to speak of God
in this manner, my king and my God as Ps. 84. 3. but yet if we look a little
further into the profession of the Brownistes we may easily imagine some other
cause of their speaking on this manner: for whereas R. R. in his prophesying
among the prophets of Mr. Anisworthes company testified against their
separation and justified the church of England to be a true church, being for
this unjustly excommunicate of that company it was as unjustly defended by Mr.
Ainsworth, who laid this ground of his excommunication from Deu. 13. 1. 2. etc.
that he had sought to turn the^ away from the Lord their God and had persuaded
them to go after other Gods and to serve the^, and all this only for
persuading that it was lawful to hear a sermon in the church of Engl. to pray
with the^ etc: In this proceeding they declare that they hold the church of
Engl. to be without the true God in that they condemn those that join with
the same to turn away from the Lord their God and to go after other God^ and
therefore no marvel if according to this opinion they speak of their special
God, intending an other God whom we know not. This may yet further appear in
the speech of Delecluse who being blamed for his schism from the french church
has here upon condemned that reformed church as having Christ to be neither
their King, priest nor Prophet: And if they be without Christ then are they
without true God, Ioh. 2. Epist. verse. 9. and Ioh. 17. 3. According to these
speeches it is not strange nor inconsequent that he should mean his special
God in the forenamed phrase. Iemar the monstro^s Arrian pretending that we err
about the nature of Christ does blasphemously affirm that our God is no
better then the planke under his foot, Delescluse the inordinate Brownist
pretending that Christ is not our king does hereby sacrilegiously both deprive
Christ, of his people and his people of their God, their savior and their
mediator: And thus while he pretendes the glory of his God, he treades under
his feet the glory of that everlasting God, who is the God and king of all the
reformed churches round about.

5.
Again in his declaration of this first moving cause that made him to publish
this treati^e in defense of Brownisme, he alleges diverse scriptures which
teach that the people of God ought to be holy as the Lord is holy, as namely,
Levit. 19. 2. 1. Pet. 1. 5. 16. But what means he by this? Can not the people
of God be holy and sanctified unless they separate from the churches as the
Brownistes do? or can they not give glory unto God without their separation?
we see the contrary throughout the scriptures; the, Ps. 43. 1. 2 3. 4. Esa. 1.
10. Man. 26. ^7 Act. 3. 1.
holy Prophets, the holy Apostles, and Jesus Christ that holy one of God did
keep a holy communion among open obstinate sinners and glorified God thereby
and this also in a church that was far more corrupt than that reformed church
from which this Delescluse has schismed and run away*

6.
Unto his other allegation, that all those that call upon the name of Christ
should depart from iniquitye, 2. Tim. 2. 19. It may also be answered as the
former that the most holy servants of God, most zealous of his glory have kept
communion which open sinners as offensive as (...) the church of England, and
yet departed from iniquity: It is a great (...) in schismatiques that cannot
distinguish betwixt departing from iniquity and departing from a church where
iniquity is tolerated. Christ (...) iniquity of the Pharisees and Sadducees
and and yet departed (...) fellowship of that church, where in they remained.

7.
THe second reason which he alleges for his writing of this treatise is the
fervent desire which (he says) he has of the salvation of men's souls and the
gayning of them unto God, If this be so (as he boasts) we do praise and
commend him for it, but yet if he had been as sober and modest as he is
fervent, he would not have been so forward to praise his own fervency, in that
we commend him not, nor yet in this, that he seems to seek the salvation of
men's souls by leading them into his schism or separation.

8.
IN the declaration of this second reason he tells us that the means of
saying souls is to show unto the their erring from the truth and from going
astray out of the way, Iam. 5. 19. 20.: But how unfit a man is Iean delescluse
for such a purpose? Do not all the Brownistes generally know and consider how
prone this man is to run into error and to go astray out of the way before
many others? Among all their Prophets is there any which in the exercise of
prophecy have so often been corrected for error as this man? His manner is
indeed to be fervent and hot, but in his heat so rash and inconsiderate that
often he vtters erroneous things and often by Mr. Johnson and Daniel studly
has he been reproved and convicted of the same. He that has so often receyved
open shame and rebuke for his error is not so meet a man to become the
censurer of so learned and judicious a writer as Mr. Brightman is generally
acknowledged to be.

9.
THe third reason which he alleges for the publishing of this treatise, is in
respect of him self, having had a hand both in the translating and printing of
Mr. Britghtman his book etc. But of this he may speak with shame enough in
respect of his unfaithful dealing herein: for being appointed by his masters
that set him on work to print this book and that without any leave to comment
upon it or to add his censures, what does this coosening companion but goes
and causes his gloses to be printed in the margent of this book? He there
lets down in opposition unto Mr. Brightman, his contradictions of him, his
interrogations, his exclamations against him O England etc. O Brightman etc.
Yea his citations of him unto indgement, let God and his angels and all the
world indge etc. And thus without the consent or license of those that employed
him in their business, he defaces and disgraceth the work committed unto him,
offends his masters, wrongs the reader, and iniurieth the author of the
books who now sleeps in peace with the Lord: But when this his deceit was
found out, those that were at cost and charges for the printing of this book
did then call him to account for this his bad daaling and in fine compelled him
at his own charges to take the pains to alter and set over again those
sheets of the book which he had corrupted and defaced with his marginall
gloses and then to leave out those gloses which he had before so boldly and
deceitfully inserted in that work: for the evidence and truth of this matter
we have both the testimony of those that set him on work, as also his own
handiwork to reprove him, viz. the misprinted sheets, the tokens of his
deceit, which we keep by us for a monument of his falsehood. The truth is that
Iean Delescluse did fret and chafe when this rebuke was laid upon him, but
howsoever part of his punishment was remitted unto him, yet was there no
remedy, diverse sheets must needs be printed again and he must endure the
pain and labor for the setting of the same: And thus we may see the saying of
the wise man to be verifyed in him, The deceitful man costeth not that which
he took in hunting, Prove. 12. 27. The wages which he got by setting those
sheets deceitfully at first was not so much, but the labor the loss and the
shame withal which he had at the reprinting thereof may well be thought to be
much more.

10.
IN the declaration of this his third reason, he tells us of his full
persuasion that there be errors and abberrations in Mr. Br. his book and
therefore adds further; If I had held my peace and said nothing I could not
have cleared my self from partaking with other men's sins; and so should have
done contrary to that holy commandment of the apostle to Timothy, 1. Tim. 5.
22. According to this profession of conscience, if it be unfeigned in him, it
may be further demanded of him.

1. Why did he not also put forth some short writing against the latin
editio^ of Mr. Br. his book, seeing he the same Iean Delescluse had also a hand
in the printing of it heretofore? That book in latin has been out now these
diverse years; and never till this time has he cleared himself by any writing
against it, so long therefore he may seem to have partaken with an other man's
sin.

2. Whereas Mr. Th. has has had a hand in the printing of Mr. Robinsons
book against Mr. Bernard, and there being in it diverse errors and aberratio^s
from the truth of the living God, and this not only in the judgment of Mr.
Johnson who has openly protested against the manifold errors therein, but
also in the judgment of Mr. Ainsworth himself and his company, how comes it
now to pass that Mr. Th. has not the like care and conscience to put forah
some short writing against that book as well as Delescluse against Mr. Br. his
book? why does not I. Delescluse call upon his fellow in like manner? why does
he suffer Mr. Th. to partake with Mr. Robinsons errors by printing his book?

3. Whereas this Iean Delescluse was heretofore a cardmaker, seeing he has had
a hand in making those cards that are the books of gamesters and idle persons
seeing many persons might be offended and scandalized by the use of those
play-bookes, why has he not had the conscience to put forth some short writing
against those books of vanity? why is he not afraid of partaking with the
sins of those gamesters whose hands have handled the cards that were the
work of his hands? Why did he never yet clear himself of this evil? A good
conscience is without Ps. 119. ^ 128. 1. Tim. 5. ^1.
partiality and seeks to prevent one offense as well as an other. What can he
answer to these things? when he has answered these things, we have sundry
more such like to demand of him.

11.
BEsides his partiality above noted, mark his folly also in this dealing, for
if it were no sin to have a hand in the printing of Mr. Brightmans book, the^
what need he to seek the clearing of himself by writing against the book: if
it were a sin to have a hand in the printing thereof, the^ how foolish is he to
think he could by an after testification clear himself from that sin which
he did first willingly commit? If this were a watrrantable course why might he
not still follow his old trade of cardmaking and then afterward clear
himself by witnessing and writing against them? why might he not also make
idols or images and afterward clear himself from partaking with the sin
of Idolatours by testifying against them? Behold here the extreme absurdity of
the Brownistes who condemn our communion where we duly testify against the
evilles committed by others whiles they think to justify themselves by
testifying against those evilles in the committing whereof they them selves
have a hand.

2. In a due testification against evil, the testimony ought to be as large as
the evil, the plaster ought to be as large as the soar; but Delescluse is
uncertain whether his writing (which he countes a plaster for the errors and
sores in Mr. Br. his book) shall ever spread so far as Mr. Br. his book, and
therefore it must needs be folly and sin in him that shall voluntarily and
wilfully publish such things which he accountes as stumbling blocks laid
before the blind, while he is ignorant whether his labor shall ever come so
far as to help the removal thereof in many places.

12.
IN the subscription of his Epistle he under writes thus Thine as thou art the
Lords Iean Delescluse, that is to say, Thine as thou art a Brewnist and a
separatist, for all the promises of God and of salvation, they do often
appropriate unto those that separate: Those only they declare to be the lords
as touching their visible estate: Therefore howsoever he would seem to profess
friendship, it is but hypocrisy: beware of such f^endes.

13.
LEt us now come from his Epistle to the book it self, where in he takes upon
him to show how corruptly Mr. Brightman has taught that the church of England
is not to be separated from not withstanding all the sins and abominations
that are in the same: This point he sets down both in the title of his book
and in his Epistle again, as the butte or white at which he means to shoot,
against this make he bendes his bow and prepares his arrows upon the stinge:
And for the proof of this point he sets down ten special speeches which Mr.
Brightman has vttred touching the corruptions of the church of England.

The first speech he Advertiseme^t page 5
alleges are these words of Mr. Brightman, I could not but mourn from the
bottom of my heart, when I beheld in her Christ loathing us, and very greatly
provoked against us.

Here upon Iean Deslescluse infers thus: Page 8. 9.
I desire the reader to observe the word which he uses of Christ lothing
them, which word of loathing seems to be taken from the 95. Psalm. verse. 10.
Where the Prophet speaking in the person of the Lord him self, says that
forty years long he had loathed that generation: saying that they are a
people ^rring in their heart and not knowing his ways, wherefore he swear in
his wrath that they should not enter into his rest. So that by Mr. Brightmans
own grant, this church of England is in no better estate then were these
rebels in the wilderness, all which were consumed and entered not into his rest
as he had sworn.

First, Answ. 1.
this inference of Delescluse is utterly false, for though Mr. B. should grant
the same phrase to be used both of England and Israel, yet does it not follow
by this grant, that England is in no better estate then those rebels in the
wilderness; for the holy ghost often uses ore and the same general word or
phrase touching diverse sinners which yet not with standing may not therefore be
all alike so condemned, but that some of them may be in better estate then
others: for example, it is said that the Lord was angry with Israel in the
days of Iehoahaz, 2. kin, 13. 3. It is also said in the like phrase of speech
that the wrath of the Lord was kindled against Israel in the days of David, 2.
Sam. 24. 1. Does it now follow that Israel in the days of David was in no
better estate then in the days of Iehoahaz? The contrary is most evident and
plain, Israel being at one time a true church and at the other a false church
by the R. Clift. answ. to Mr. Sm. 154. 155. H. Ains. counterp. page 7. 8.
confession of the Brownistes themselves:

It is said in one general phrase, I hate all false ways, Ps. 119. 128. Now
it is one false way to be hated or loathed that the high places were retained
in the days of Iehoash and others 2. kin. 12. 3. and 14. 4. It was an other
false way that the golden calves and Baal were worshipped by the kings of
Israel: does it now follow that these people were one of them in no better
estate then the other, because the phrase of hating or loathing might be used
against both of them? Nothing less.

To come nearer unto them; Mr. Robinson accounting it a false way and a
violation of Gods ordinance in Mr. Ainsworthes company that they have no
separation of their aims among them, it follows hereupon that in his account
also the word of loathing or hating may be used against them, seeing every false
way retained is to be loathed; And further Mr. Robinson holds it a false way
and order of government that is practiced in Mr. Iohnsons church, which is
therefore also to be loathed by them: Does it now follow from hence that by this
grant Mr. Ainsworthes company is in no better estate then Mr. Iohnsons,
because of the same word of loathing attributed unto both of them? Nothing
less. The matter being thus made plain unto them, the simplest among them may
see, what a corrupt and blind manner of reasoning is here used by their elder
Delescluse.

Secondly, 2.
suppose it were granted that the church of Tsrael were in no better estate
then Israel in the wilderness, yet what is this to the scope and purpose of his
book? Does this prove that the church of England is therefore to be separated
from? Nay, the contrary appears hence, seeing it is undeniably true that even
Israel in the wilderness notwithstanding all their abominations which the Lord
loathed were yet a true church and communion with them was lawful, as appears
in the example of Moses, Joshua, Aaron and other faithful servants of God
remaining among them; And therefore so might it be with England also though
being in no better estate. And thus the same arrow that he shootes at us
returns upon himself and pearceth the side of his own separation.

14.
IN the next place he procedes and labors to persuade his reader, that the
Lord has more just cause to wath the church of England, then that of the
Israelites in the wilderness: Well, suppose now, that this also were granted
unto him, would this prove that we should then separate from England? In no
sort; for the Lord had more cause to loath the church of Israel in the days of
Christ, then in the wilderness, And yet even then also there was a lawful
communion with that church when the measure of their iniquity was greater, and
when there was a greater then Moses to convince them of that wickedness: And
thus we see how that still he comes short of the mark he shootes at, seeing
greater abominations then those of Israel in the desert are yet no sufficient
ground of separation.

15.
FOr the further declaration of this matter, ^dvertis. ^ig. 9.
let us a little examine his particular instances here alleged by him, first
(says he) that church had a true ministry, and true offices and officers, and
so has not the church of England by Mr. Brightmans own grant.

First, ^nsw.
let it be considered how unworthy a thing it is, that this man which is
himself an usurper and a false officer should thus take upon him to dispute
about the ministry and the offices in the churches of God: for first, when he
was yet with Mr. Johnson, he was then a false officer, that whole company being
in schism and therefore a false church yielding no lawful officers; 2ly,
suppose Mr. Iohnsons company had been a true church, and he a true officer in
it yet seeing he has now schismed from that company, and was also deposed from
his office by Mr. Johnson and his assistants, how can he in this schism be
reputed a true minister? 3ly, when he was yet a member of the french chuch and
did there earnestly seek an office, after trial of his gifts he was repelled
and judged insufficient and unmeet to be a minister: Now then shall he that
was both Kept out from entering into an office as unworthy, and again thrust
out of an office as unworthy after he had entered, and this both by a true
reformed church and by the Brownistes themselves, shall this unworthy person
come now and in the mids of his unworthiness pronounce sentence touching the
truth or falsehood of offices and ministeries in the church?

Secondly, 2.
let it be considred, how he abuses and wrongeth Mr. Brightman in saying that
the church of England has not a true ministry, offices and officers and that
by Mr. Brightmans own grant: for though Mr. Br. do justly complain that the
church of England wants some offices which it should have, and again that it
has some officers which it should not have, yet does he not affirm a true
ministry to be altogather wanting, he does not deny but that there are some
true offices and officers therein.

Thirdly, 3.
though there be that defect in the ministry of the church of Engl. which Mr.
Brighman notes, how does Delescluse prove from thence, that separation must
reeds follow? for this he bringes not so much as any show of proof from the
scriptures to justify such a consequence

16.
THat second particular exception which he brings touching persecution by the
officers in the church of England is again repeated by him in his tenth speech
of Mr. Brightmans which he alleges and is there answered, for which see the
38. section following.

17.
THe third particular difference which he affirms to have been betwixt Israel
and Eng. is, that their government in Israel was not a mixed governeme^t partiy
of the Egiptians, partly of the Moabites and Edomites or Cananeans, but simple
and and pure according to the true pattern showed to Moses in the mount; but
that of England is not so, for Mr. Brightman affirms it to be partly Romish
and partly reformed etc.

First, Answ. 1.
if it be true that Mr. Robinson writes, viz. that the church officers, the
priests and levites in the Jewish church to who^ the charge of the whole
congregation for the service of the tabernackle did appertain, had no
authority by the order of their office to inflict any censure spiritually upon
the people, but only to interpret the law ett. Answ. to Mr. Bern. page 198.
then is all this idle which Delescluse does here speak of their government: If
the ecclesiastical officers did exercise no government at all, then is it in
vain to dispute of the purity of a thing that was nothing.

Secondly, 2.
if that excommunication or dissynagogueing noted Ioh. 9. 22. was but a Jewish
devise and without warrant of the scriptures, as both Answ. to to Mr. Ber. page
187. Parallel. page 61.
Mr. Robinson does write, and Mr. Smith also has written before him, then was
the government of the Jews a devised governeme^t, an Impure and mixed
governeme^t, partly divine and partly humane; and yet not with standing this
mixed government we see there was then a lawful communion; that mixture of
devised governeme^t was no ground of separation, as this Delescluse would
vainly collect against Mr. Britghman and against the church of England.

Thirdly, 3.
if a mixed government be a ground of separation, then is Mr. Ainsworthes
company to be rejected seeing it does exercise a popular confused and mixed
government, consisting partly in the power of the officers, but chiefly in the
power of the people: And thus the collection of Delescluse serves to overthrow
his own government: And the shame of this their mixed governeme^t which Mr.
Johnson has affirmed to be worse then the goverement of the church of England,
does in this respect lie the more heavily on them in that Mr. Johnson has also
in a printed book condemned the same, which book the Ainswort hians have not
yet answered.

18.
THe fourth particular instance which he brings to prove the difference
betwixt Israel and England is this: None of that church (says he) were
admitted unto any office but only such as were lawfully called thereunto as
Aaron was, Answ.
but so it is not in England etc.

First, it is only the bare affirmati of Delescluse that says of the church
of Israel that none were there admitted unto any office but only such as were
lawfully called as Aaronwas; where is his proof from the scriptures where of
he boasted in his Epistle.

Secondly, 2.
it is a false affirmation of Delescluse, for when Annas and Caiaphas did
enterchangeably execute the high priests office, as appears Luke 3. 2. Ioh.
11. 51. it was not possible that both of them could be lawfully admitted unto
the execution of that office which was peculiar unto one man during his life.

Thirdly, seeing Mr. Johnson has offered to prove unto Mr. Ainsworth and his
company that in their popular government they are like* 3.
unto Korah and his company ambitiously usurping an office whereunto they are
not lawfully called and that upon the Korites ground, Numb. 16. 3. it had been
much fitter that Mr. Ainsworth or Delescluse should have defended and cleared
themselves of the evil which they lay upon others by writing against Mr.
johnson about these things while he is yet alive to auswer for himself, rather
then to wri^e against Mr. Bright man that is dead and now rests from his
labors in the Lord, especially seeing Mr. johnson has so often entreated,
provoked and urged Mr. Ainsworth thereunto and that openly in their
congregation, before the rent was made: Yea besides respect of the matter it
self, are they not specially bound for their old covenant sake to show the
Franciscanes their error and that by writing rather then to deal with
strangers.

19.
FRom these instances above mentioned he draws a terrible conclusion on this
manner, Advertis. ^ag. 9.
Therefore it does necessarily follow that the estate of the church of England
is worse then was the estate of those rebels in the wilderness, and that there
is nothing to be expected from Christ, by any member thereof, but a pouring
out of his eternal wrath upon them.

In this peremptory sentence which he denounces against the church of England
he takes on him as if he would seem to be one of those seve^ angels which
having their breasts g^^ded with golden girdles do stand with the vialles of
Gods wrath in their hands to power ^ut ^is vengeance on the wicked, Answ.
but the truth is he is rather in this his doom like one of the angels of
Satan that accuse the brethren condemning those whom God has iusti^yed: By
this sentence he does at once extinguish and quench the whole light and comfort
of the gospel, which teaches that there is no condemnation to those that are
in Christ and believe in his name, Rom 3. 28. and 8. 1. For such believes
there are many in the church of England holding that doctrine of faith and
justification whereby the faithful and the saints in all the reformed churches
do hope to ente^ into life everlasting, and that whereby the Brownistes
themselves must be saved if ever they enter into glory: Now to denounce the
aeternall wrath of Christ to those that have true faith, what is it else but to
abolish the gospel, to destroy faith and to make it of no effect? If an angel
from heaven should come and preach unto us as Delescluse here has done, yet
ought we not to receive him, Gal. 1. 8.

But here the Brownistes object that true faith shows it self by works, Ob.
which (they say) are apparently evil in the church of England.

First, Answ. ^.
their faith shows it self by these fruits, by their joy in the Lord, their
continual study and delight in the word of God their continual invocatio^ of
the name of God every day, their delight in the Sabath, their love of the godly
for the truth sake, their unfeigned sorrow for their sins, their patience for
the testimony of Christ, and sundry other such like fruits which are the
undoubted and certain to kens of true says, Ps. 89. 15. Ps. 1. 2. Joel. 2.
32. Esa. 56. 4. 5. 6. Mat. 10. 41. 42. Mat. 5. 4. 10. 11.

Secondly, 2.
suppose other of their works be evil* suppose also that their refusal of
separation were a sin, yet seeing it cannot be thought other then a sin of
ignorance and that God had not opened their eyes in this matter, what an absurd
and wicked thing is it in this estate to pronounce of them all without
exception, that there is nothing to be expected from Christ by any member
thereof, but a pouring out of his aeternall wrath upon them, for who can
understand his faults and who is it but that he sins of ignorance, and why
not in the mystery of the separation as well as in others, especially it being
such a point as the members of all other true churches can not comprehend the
same? Not with standing such errors the members of the church of England may
be upright with the Lord and accepted of him and made partakers of eternal
salvation, Ps. 19. 13. 1. Cor. 13. 9. with 1. Cor. 1. 30. Ps. 32. 1. 2.

But to salve or mitigate this their unchristian and hard sentence, they tell
us that in such manner of sentences and judgments they speak respectively,
Except. Ans. to Mr. Iac. page 7. 8.
viz. that the faithful in England cannot be accounted true Christians in
respect of their ministry, in respect of their constitution, in respect of
their estate, being so considered etc.

In this exception the Brownistes do show their vanity in seeking out frivolous
pretenses to color their rash judgments; Answ. 1.
for first, when as true and ^ound judgment is to be given touching the estate
of a Christian and an heir of salvation, he is then to be considred not by the
halfes or by some such and such respects only, but wholly and entirely with
all his respects togather. And so a faithful man considered not apart from
his errors and ignorances but considered togather with them and with his faith
is yet to be judged and that absolutely a true Christian and an heir of
salvation, suppose there besome manifest errors and offenses upon him yet his
faith showing it self in other manifest fruits thereof is a visible cover for
all his offenses, seeing the Lord has manifested in his word that faith alone
does justify and lay hold on everlasting righteousness, Gal. 2. 16. and 3. 7.
Ephesians. 2. 8. and therefore such a one in his outward estate and profession is
still a visible Christian notwithstanding any other visible iniquities wherein
he ignorantly continues.

Secondly, 2.
when Christ at his last coming shall pronounce judgment, he will not
consider men apart from their constitution, ministry, government etc. he will
not say in such respect I condemn thee and in such respect I do justify thee
and save thee, but he does absolutely pronounce sentence either of salvation or
condemnation, And this judgment of the Lord is generally manifested in his
word and according to his word will he judge at the last day, Ioh. 12. 48.
Mark. 16. 16. and therefore according to this word of the Lord the estate of of
me^ is absolutely to be declared without such respective considerations and
exceptions. If the question had been only about the reproof of some
particular sin in any person, or about the comparing of one person with an
other the^ might they have judged herein respectively; for the man that is a
true Christian may in some respect be worthily reprehended and may in some
respect be unlike unto others; but when the question is about the judgment of
a true Christian and about his obteyning of salvation, then are such partial
and respective considerations idle and of no use: A man is in such case either
absolutely to be condemned or absolutely to be justified and acquit.

Thirdly, 3.
according to that respective judgment, every church yea every person in the
world should be condemned and stand under the wrath of God, because every
church and every person does err and commit sin and in that respect being
considered apart from Christ is accursed, And according to this respective
iudment of the Brownistes, Delesculse in respect of those eleven corruptions
which they lay upon the reformed churches (supposing they were justly imputed
unto them) might in like manner accordingly have pronounced of them all, that
there is nothing to be expected from Christ, by any member thereof, but a
pouring out of his eternal wrath upon them, seeing no sin is in it self
venial, al sins with out f^^th in him do bring eternal wrath, as well one
as an other. And in like manner Mr. Johnson holding the same corruptions in the
reformed dutch and french churches, Answ. to Mr. Iac. page 7. 8.
might in this respect say of the^ all as he * says of England, that they
stand all subject to wrath, God imputing this their sin unto them. For any
one of the least sins do make men subject to wrath God imputing the same unto
them.

Lastly, 4.
Mr. Johnson (as he tells us himself) whenever he vttred his hard sentence
against the church of England did always speak with caution and added some of
these clauses, being so considred, in that estate, in that (...). But here
Delescluse without any caution or clause of consideration shuts them up all
under eternal wrath, makes his arrows drun^ken with the blood of souls, and
will needs have them all to drinck the cup of indignation from his hand with
no less sin and drunkenness of error then when he had drunken that cup of
magis whereof Jacob Johnson is said to have admonished him, he does in this
place as vainly condemn the faithful for no sheep of Christ, as he did
then commend the same Jacob Johnson to be a fit pastor for his sheep.

20.
THe second speech of Mr. Brightman alleged to show that he does corruptly
teach against the separation is this, Advertis. page 5. and ^
viz. that the most mighty king Henry had expelled the pope, but retained the
popish superstition.

Note here the folly of Delescluse, Answ.
that would prove a separation in one time by the corruptions and superstitions
of an other time: as though he should say: In king Henry's time there were many
superstitions, therefore in Queen Elizabeth's time there ought to be a
separation notwithstanding all the reformation that was procured by her means:
what sober man would so argue?

21.
FVrther, whereas Delescluse says that the pope cannot properly be said to be
expelled when his doctrine and superstition is retepned, it is a vain Cavil,
for first, if he stand so precisely upon propriety of speech, the pope can not
properly be said to be expelled, no not then where his doctrine and
superstition is expelled; It is a figurative speech to note the popish doctrine
and superstition under the name of the pope himself. 2ly, it is yet a true and
a fit speech in Mr. Brightman to say that the pope was expelled when the
jurisdiction of the pope and the supremacy formerly annexed unto his person was
denied and rejected, when he was no longer acknowledged to be the head of that
church, when that which was unjustly arrogated unto the person of the pope was
translated unto the person of the king as it was in King Henry's days: even as
the venetians at this day might very fitly be said to expel the pope, if they
would utterly deny his supremacy both in civil and Ecclesiastcall causes,
howsoever they might reteyne many popish superstitions.

2.
THe third speech of Mr. Bright man which he bringes against him to prove a
separation from the church of England is this, ^^vertis. ^5. and 10.
that there is such a form of church established as is neither cold nor hot,
but set in the mids and made of both, etc.

These words Mr. B. vttred in comparing the church of Laodicea and England
togather, ^^sw.
as the type and antitype unto one an other; That which he says of England he
takes from Laodicea which is also declared to be neither hot nor cold, Rev. 3.
15. 16. so that by this manner of arguing he might as well prove a separation
from the church of Laodicea in respect of the lukewarmnes which the holy ghost
shows to have been found therein. But that it is most erroneous so to reason,
Christ plainly teaches us while he tells us that this church was still a
golden candlestick, that the angel thereof was a star in his right hand, and
that he himself would still sup and communicate with that church; And therefore
so also may the church of England be reputed not with standing the same or the
like luke warmnes.

23.
With this third speech he desires that this which he has set down for the
fifth charge may be joined, where Mr. B. says, that no other cause can be
brought of their lukewarmnes, the popish government mingled with the pure
doctrine, then the love of riches and honors.

And what can he conclude hence? ^nsw.
What though they were covetous and ambitious given to the love of riches and
honors and so became lukewarm? shall this be a just cause of separation from
the church? No; for the scribes and Pharisees were also covetous and ambitious,
Mat. 23. 5. etc. Luke 16. 14. and yet communion with them was lawful.

24.
HE desires further that this complaint of lukewarmnes may be compared with
that praise of reformation which Mr. Br. gives unto the church of England in
the title of his epistle dedicatory: Well, being compared with the same it may
well stand togather with it, for reformed churches may yet have lukewarm
ministers and many other greevous corruptions to be complained of: yea does not
Delescluse condemn himself in this matter? for does not he also in the title
of his book and in his epistle written to the English readers entitle the^
with the name of godly reader and Christian reader? And is there any god ^ine^
without reformation? Is there any Christian that is not reformed? Why then may
not Mr. B. call those holy and reformed whom Delescluse does call godly and
Christian?

25.
HE demandes still in the same place and says; Is it possible that holiness and
vnholynes can reign togather? We answer; Yea, in one and the same church in
the diverse members thereof, as in the church of the jews, holiness raygned in
Christ and his disciples, vnholynes reigned in the scribes and Pharisees etc.

26.
HE yet demandes again and says, Is there any communion between Christ and
Anti-christe? between light and darkness? between Idolles and the true God?
Can any kingdom, any church, any family, any man submit unto the government
of Anti-christe and not be defiled.

We answer, though Christ and Anti-christe be enemies, yet the servants of
Christ may lawfully communicate in that church where many abominations of
Anti-christe are to be seen, sor as francis wingrave a Brownist does truly
acknowledge, Answ. to Mr. Stone, page 2.
Every abomination of Anti-thriste does not make a church to become
Antichristian for the best churches are subject to error and some
abominations of Anti-christe, were crept into Christian churches whiles the
Apostles lived: And yet communion was lawful therein. Even so the children of
light and the children of darkness did communicate togather in Christ's time: As
for Idolles if they be no other then set forms of read prayer and such like,
which the Brownistes call idolles, communion with them is lawful enough: And
for government though Caiaphas was an Antichristian usurper, yet did many
persons lawfully submit unto his power: Thus has God himself and his Prophets,
Christ and his Apostles taught us both by their word and example and therefore
let Delescluse hear the Prophet Esaias which he alleges, turning unto him and
saying unto the maynteyners of schism, woe unto them that call that communion
evil which the Lord has showed to be good and lawful.

27.
FRom a fourth speech of Mr. Br. he reasons thus: Advert^s. page 10.
Moreover in his fourth charge where he makes the state of the poor blind
Papists far better, then the condition of the angel of the church of England,
and that also such as are the angels such becomes the church for the most
part, I do observe that by his own doctrine the estate of the church of
England is worse then Babylon it self, which Babylon is granted by all to be
that Synagogne and church of Anti-christe devoted unto destruction etc.

First, ^^^w. 1
he falsmes Mr. Br. his speech by adding a degree of comparison which Mr.
Bri^ghtm. used not in saing that he makes the estate of the poor blind
papists far better: It had been far better for Delescluse to have to have
omitted that clause, and to have repeated Mr. Brightmans comparison simply and
truly with out such addition; but it seems he he favors his own cause more
the^ true dealing.

Secondely, 2
he corrupts and falsifies Mr. Brightmans speech again by saying that he makes
the estate of the poor blind papists far better, then the condition of the
angel of the church of England as though Mr. Brightman had spoken generally and
without exception touching the whole ministry of the church of England,
whereas even by Delescluses own ^dvertis. ^^g. 5.
former allegation of the words, Mr. Br. speaks of those angels, who
bewitched with ambition and covetousnes do refuse holy reformation, where yet
also he leaves out the word only being a word of restraint used by See
lati^^^e edition ^f Mr. B. ^^n kev. cha (...). verse. 15. ^ag. 106.
Mr. Brightman of purpose to prevent the cavilles of such honest men as this
Delescluse here shows him self, Mr. Brightman says that Christ in this place
prefers the blind papists, only before those angels, who bewitched with
ambition etc. And thus the double falsehood of Delescluse appears not only in
adding but also in omitting that which was most significant and specially to be
considred.

Thirdly, 3.
suppose Mr B. had spoken generally of the whole ministry in England, yet is
the observation of Delescluse most false and vain. It would not follow
thereupon, that the estate of the church of England is worse then Babylon it
self as he gathers; for even touching those angels bewitched with ambition
and covetousnes, refusing holy reformation, Mr B. speaks not simply and
absolutely of the^ that they are worse then the papists, but only in respect
of the greater grace and light which they have receyved for their reformation,
for so he does also explane himself in the same place; Mr B. knew well enough
that the angels or ministers of the church of Room (besides other greater
evilles) are also bewitched with ambition and covetousnes and do therefore
refuse holy reformation etc. only he noted them to be something more excusable
in respect of their ignorance because they knew not their masters will so as
those in England do: we may here fitly tell Delescluse in Mr. Ainsworthes
words; (...)
He may much abuse any man's words if that which is spoken respectively, he will
take and allege as spoken absolutely. What though the Lord do in some respect
p^ef^ree Ch^^tim and Kedar before Israel Ier. 2. 10. 11.? May it be observed
hence that the estate of Israel was simply worse then those heathens, or that
Israel was to be separated from rather then they? The papists are in some
respect worse (...) follows it not hence that they are simply and absolutely
worse. (...) of the Ainsworthians that they are worse then the Fran^^^scanes in
respect of their contention, unquietness and disorder, does it follow hence that
he accountes the Ainsworthia^s to be simply the worse and rather to be
separated from? Nothing less. By these examples let Delescluse learn to see
his solly in ga- thering such observations.

28.
AFter this false recital of Mr. Br. his words togather with his false
observation upon the same he makes this question in the Adverti^^ page 10.
same place. (...) where are then those great praises of all manner of
blessings upon that church rehearsed in the second artickle, but cheefely
these spiritual blessings of the word purely and sincerely taught in it.

First, Answ. 1.
for those earthly blessings whereof Mr. B. spoke, why might they not be found
in that church of England, suppose it had been every way worse then Room? How
blind is Delescluse that makes this question so far from the purpose?

Secondly, 2.
as for the spiritual blessings of the word purely taught, seeing Mr. Br. does
blame but some of the ministers of that church, why may not the word be purely
and sincerely taught by others that are free from the blame there spoken of?

29.
A Seventh speech which Delesc. Adver^^. page 11.
brings from Mr. B. against the church of England is this that naughtines
reigns in it, the hand of God is heavy upon it; and again, that in her the
laws of Christ are not kept. Hence he infers; But what is there then to be
done, even this that every soul who has any care of salvation and of escaping
the eternal flames of everlasting damnation be careful to come out with speed
from Babylon etc.

This conclusion of separation which Delescluse here gathers and denounces
under pain of eternal flames of everlasting damnation is vain, Answ. 1.
for first all that Mr. Br. here says of England might also most truly be
affirmed of that church of the jews where in Christ did communicate for
there, 1. naughtines reigned and prevayled in the Herod's, in the priests,
elders, scribes, Pharisees and Sadducees etc. Mat. 2. 16. and 12. 24. and 14.
9. and 16. 12. 21. 2ly, the hand of God was heavy upon them in their manifold
oppressions and miseries which they endured under the government of the Romans
and their substitutes, Mat. 2. 16. and 3. 10. and 17. 24. etc. Luke 13. 1. and
2. 1. Ioh. 11. 48. 3ly, the laws of Christ were not kept there Mat. 15. 3.
Ioh. 15. 20. 22. And now by the se^te^ce of Delescluse, eternal flames of
evelasting damnation must be the portion of Christ and his Disciples that
communicated with that church, who will not detest such vile co^clusions, which
are like unto arrows shot even against the breaste of Christ Jesus himself?
As he that makes himself mad casts firebrandes, arrows and mortal things
prove. 26. 18. so Delescluse in this place casting abroad his firebrandes of
eternal damnation, shooting his arrows against heaven, and throwing mortal
things even upon the Lord of life what does he else herein but declare himself
to be a mad man? and why might not this his book which he entitles an
Ad-vertisement be much more fitly entitled a Mad-vertisement.

Secondly, all that Mr. Br. affirms in this place touching England has been
affirmed by the Brownistes themselves touching one an other: 2.
so that Delescluse may here see how he has kindled a fire to burn up himself
and his own company: For 1. that naughtines reigns among the Ainsworthians
it may appear by the testimony of Mr. Johnson who has often in public
witnessed of them as of dross or chafe which the Lord with his fan would
purge out from them, under that name of chafe the the holy ghost does declare
vuto us the wicked among whom nanghtines reigns Ps. 1. 4. Mat. 3. 12. As for
the Franciscanes (besides many other greevous things) some of Mr. Ainsworthes
company do testify of them, that probable murder and approved whoredoms are
tolerated or maynteyned among them; Delescluse himself is noted for one of the
witnesses. Expos. of ^^at. 18. ^^pist.
2ly that the hand of God is heavy upon them appears manifestly by the *
notable testimony of Mr. Johnson himself: 3ly that the laws of Christ are not
kept among the^ of Mr. Ainsworthes company Mr. Johnson testifyeth touching
their government, and Mr. Robinson touching the administration of their
deacons in that they have no separation of their alms: Thus Delescluse by his
own manner of reasoning does enwrap himself and his company in the flames of
damnation, yea in eternal flames of everlasting damnation.

30.
FVrther Delescluse to prove a separation from that church where naughtines
reigns does allege that saying of the Apostle, he which coupleth himself
with an harlot, is one body, 1. Cor. 6. 16. But this allegation (though
repeated * again by hiu as a special ground of their separation) is nothing
to the purpose; ^dvertis. ^ag. 14.
the apostle there means that he which coupleth himself with an harlot by
fornication or whoredom, that person defiles himself by his wicked act; for
otherwise it was lawful for a man to couple himself with an harlot by marying
with her, as we see in Salmon and Rahab, Mat. 1. 5. with Josh. 6. 25. The
priests indeed were forbidden, even by marriage to couple them selves with an
harlot, Lev. 21. 7. 14. that others were so forbidden we read not. But as for
joining in communion with a church where naughtines reigned, it was not
forbidden, no not to the priests themselves, from Aaron to Zachary we never
read or any godly priests, that did ever separate upon such a ground a
Delescluse does here pretend.

31.
Whereas again Delescluse notes that as concerning the outward blessings of
peace and prosperity in earthly things, Advertis. page ^1.
by it no church, no man can have any assurance to be in the favor of God etc.
This note is idle, neither has Mr B. alleged outward prosperity as a mark of
of a true church and Delescluse does abuse Mr. B. by insinuating unto the
reader such a matter, for to what end should he else oppose the fame? In this
note Delescluse does so fight as one that beats the air fighting with his
own shadow and so offends against the example of the Apostle, 1. Cor. 9. 26.

32.
IN the next place to confort his reader against the tediousnes of his short
writing he tells us, that he will now begin to draw to an end concerning his
charges etc. and that he will draw the rest into a short sum: But what needed
he to do so, if there had been any soundnes in this his so short a writing?
has he not already hasted and posted so fast on that he has forgot his
reckoning? for whereas in the beginning of his book he has numbered out ten
charges or testimonies of Mr. Brightman touching the corruptions in the church
of England and has also Advert page 3. and (...)
promised to declare his mind concerning them, notwithstanding this,
forgetting his method propounded at the beginning, forgetting his promise made
unto the reader, as though he could not count ten, so has he left out one of
his number and has not showed us his mind touching the sixth testimony of Mr.
B. which he alleged at first: Thus we see he makes more have then good speed:
Could he not run except he skip with all by leaping quite over the matter
which he propounded and promised to handle?

33.
COme we now unto the eighth allegation which he brings from Mr. Br. against
the church of England touching some constitutions and ordinances in the same,
Advertis(...) p. 6. and 1(...)
on this manner; excellent ordinances indeed; for which the reformed churches
may be ashamed.

First of all observe here his ignorance in the mistranslation of these words;
Answ. 1(...)
for as it is signified unto us by sundry that have more learning then our
selves or this Delescluse, these latter words of Mr. B. prae quibus erubescant
reformatae Ecclesiae are not to be translated as here they are set down by
Delescluse but in a quite contrary sense; prae quibus signifying not for whith
but in comparison whereof the reformed churches may be ashamed, And as these
two speeches are quite contrary, if we should first say thus Delescluse has
written such things for which Mr. Ainsworth may be ashamed and then again on
the other side to say, Delescluse has written such things in comparison
whereof Mr. Ainsworth might be ashamed, for the first of chief speeches does
declare how ill he has done to make his fellows ashamed, the second shows
how well he has done to shame his fellows that they can not imitate him, even
such difference is there betwixt the speech of Mr. B. truly translated, and
betwixt the ignorant translation thereof by Delescluse in this place. And
herewithall is to be noted that as there is an jronie or figurative speech in
the first part of Mr. B. his testimony, where he speaks of excellent
ordinances, even so also he speaks by the contrary when he tells us in the
latter part thereof, how the reformed churches may blush thereat, as though
they had not the like ordinances, but in the translation of Delescluse this
jroine is not to be found. He tells us in his Epistle how he has had a hand
both in the translating and printing of Mr. B. his book, that so he might be
found guilty of all manner of falsification, 1. false printing and glosing as
is noted before. sect. 9. 2ly, false allegation as is showed before sect. 27.
3ly false translation as in this place, 4ly, false interpretation and
collections throughout his book.

Secondly, what if the reformed churches may be ashamed of the corruptions and
(...) in the church of England? 2.
will this prove the * special thing intended by Delesculse in his writing
and in his allegation of Mr. Br. his speeches? ^dvertis. ^^pist. p. 3.
will this prove that Mr. Brightman taught corruptly when he said that we ought
not to separate from the church of England? Nothing less, In the time of
Christ the jews had many wicked traditious, ordinances and customs for which
the godly might be ashamed, and yet they might not then separate: The churches
of Ephesus and Smyrna might well be ashamed of the manifold corruptions in
other of their neighbor churches in Asia and yet without separation. We our
selves have often seen such things in the Brownistes for which all that
profess the name of Christ might well be ashamed, we have seen their
contentions, disorders and conf^sions so great, that even the jews, the
professed enemies of Christ being neighbors unto the Brownistes and dwelling
hard by them and perceyving their bitter dissensions and divisions have laughed
them to scorn and poynted at them with the finger: Thus have they been a
scandal and an offense both to th^se with in and without the church: And now
therefore according to the reasoning of Delesclnse they are for this to be
rejected and separated from.

34.
DElescluse in his amplification of this fore said speech makes a large
complaint against the reformed churches, ^dvertis. ^^g. 12.
showing that they may be ashamed because they have not dealt so sincerely and
plainly with the church of England for reproof of corruptions in the same,
etc*

In this complaint observe first, Answ. (...)
how absurdly Delescluse deals that being to reprove the dutch and french
churches writes against them in English which they can not understand; why did
he not also write against the church of England in french or dutch?

Secondly, note here how he breaks his promise: he promised immediately before
to be brief and to bring that which remained into a short sum; (...)
and yet he is now more large and ample in laying out this testimony of Mr. B.
then in any of the former. In this dealing it seems he scarce knew or cared
what he said or did.

Thirdly, let the reader know that the reformed churches have plenteonsly
testified against the corruptions of the church of England contrary to that
which Delescluse does here pretend: 3.
for a taste hereof to omit other things we desire the reader but to look upon
these three books, viz. Abridgement of the book delivered to his majesty by
ministers of lincol. etc. The answer to D. Downehams sermon; the scholasticall
discourse against the sign of the cross, wherein may be seen the pregnant
and abundant testimonies of learned men in the reformed churches both against
the hierarchy or prelacy and also against the superstitious ceremonies
remaining in the church of England, as namely Calvine, Beza, Musculus, Bucer,
Martyr, Bullinger, Aretius, Zanchius, Mornaeus, Iunius, Sadeel, Piscator,
Polanus, Vrsinus, Virel, Viret, Grinaeus, Bucanus, Goulartius, Danaeus,
Olevian, Zepperus, Lubbertus, Bastingius, Snecanus, Keckerman, with a number
more, who as they have testified against the corruptions maynteyned by the
prelates on the one side, so have they testified against the separation and
schism maynteyned by the Brownistes and Anabaptists on the other side: In so
much that both they which plead for the prelacy and they which plead for
separation do in like manner esteem and hold the ministers of the reformed
churches as their parties and adversaries, see D. Down hams defense, lib. 1.
page 197. and H. Ainsw. counterpoy. page 15.

35.
A Ninth speech of Mr. Brightman alleged by Delescluse is touching the names
of the officers of that church, Advertis. p. 7. and 12* 13.
that they were unknown unto the church of Christ, except the bishops etc.
where upon Delescluse infereth in these words: And what is this? shall then
any soul in whom there is but a very small sparkle of the fear of God, be so
bold as to dare submit under the government and guidance of such unlawful
ministers and ministry?

Yea verily, Answ. 1.
we see those souls that had very many and great sparkles of the fear of God
have submitted themselves under the government and guidance of unlawful
ministers, neither has Delescluse here brought any sound reason to show the
contrary: We see that in Christ's time there were diverse officers whose names
had not been heard of in the primitive church of the ^ewes, no^ ever were
instituted by any example of former times in that church, as namely the names
of of lawyers, scribes of the people and according to the writing of of the
Brownistes, the names of Archisynagogues, or rulers of the Synagogues.

Secondly, 2.
it is evident, the godly may lawfully submit themselves unto the government
and guidance of such private brethren, who in respect of their sects, factions
and superstitious observations have had ^uch names as were formerly unknown
unto the church of God, who also in respect of their wickedn^s deserved to have
their names ^lotted o^t of the register of the saints, This we see in the
communion of the godly with the scribes and Pharisees: And therefore if it be
lawful for Christians to submit themselves unto the counsayles, admonitions and
rebukes of those which for their sin ought to be cast out of the church of God
and yet are unjustly retained: If a man may stand under the guidance and
authority of such admonishers, so long as he testifies against their sins,
then may he also stand under the government and guidance of unlawful officers:
If a man may submit himself unto one who is unlawfully a member of the church,
why not also unto him who is unlawfully a minister of the church? If a man may
submit himself in private unto the guidance of an unlawful brother, then why
not also unto the public guidance of an unlawful officer? There is more
proportion betwixt a member and a minister then betwixt a member and an
excommunicate or an heathen, or one that ought to be excommunicate: For
example, Daniel studly and Iean Delesculse being both of them deposed from
their offices for sin imputed unto them by the Franciscane Brownistes, suppose
they were still obstinate in the sins imputed unto them deserving
excommunication, and yet tolerated unlawfully, in this estate being not judged
nor cast out by their church their admonitions for sin either in the first or
second place were not to be rejected: And if their private admonition might be
submitted unto, why not their public also if they had not been deposed? If in
the want of due excommunication the private admonition of an unlawful member
is of force and to be submitted unto, then in the want of just deposition the
public admonition or other works of government exercised by unlawful
ministers is of force and to be submitted unto: This reason is specially to be
considred of those Brownistes that mainteyne the popular government and submit
unto the same.

36.
But Delescluse adds his reason why such unlawful ministers are not to be
submitted unto: Advertis. page 13.
For says he: Are they not all thieves and robbers which enter not in by the
door but climb up an other way? And will any man of wisdom commit unto the
protection and and keeping of thieves the least part of his worldly goods? No,
none wild so unwise for every one ^ndweth that they will but make a pray of
them and spoil and rob them? And shall any then be so careful for things of
so small importance and shall he not care unto whom he does commit the guidance
of that which is the principal, Answ. 1.
namely of his soul?

First, we do directly affirm that which Delescluse does so flatly deny* Many
men of wisdom may and will and ought to commit unto the protection and
keeping of thieves not only the least part but the greatest part of their
worldly goods: For all tyrants a wicked rulers that oppress and spoil their
subjects are thieves and robbers, Prove. 28. 15. Esa. 1. 23. Hos. 5. 1. Mic. 3.
1. 2. etc. Yea these great thieves are in diverse respects more vile then other
outpurses or then th^se that rob by the high way side, Yet unto the protection
and keeping of these tyrants men both of wisdom and godliness may and ought
to commit both their lives and their goods; Those which teach men not to submit
unto such are guilty of rebellion and treason; Though Saul was a tyrant and an
oppressor 1. Sam. 8. 11. etc. Yet was submission unto him lawful and
necessary, men of wisdom did lawfully commit themselves and their goods unto
his protection. Thus the ground of Delescluse his argument is taken away.

Secondly, 2.
men of wisdom may and ought also sometimes to commit the guidance of their
souls unto thieves; for all false stewardes and unfaithful ministers that
teach not the flock of God but keep back his counsel are indeed thieves also
and steal the word of the Lord from their neighbors, Ier. 23. 30. 1. Cor. 4.
1. 2. And such thieves there were many in Israel, such were many of the scribes
and lawyers in Christ's time, Mat. 23. 13. etc. Luke 11. 52. And yet our
savior requires his servants to submit unto such, to hear their doctrine,
though with this caution to beware of their leaven, Mat. 16. 12. Men might
lawfully receive their sound doctrine, while they discerned that which was
erroneous and took heed of the same. The scribes in their corrupt and wicked
administration or execution of their office were notorious thieves; and a
theevish administration is as bad as a thievis^ entrance, and yet we see the
ministry of such might be submitted unto.

Thirdly, 3
if the ministry of thieves and robbers may not be submitted unto, then may
not the ministry of schismatiques be submitted unto, for schismatitiques that
steal away themselves and others from the communion of of the faith full are
in this respect no better then thieves: And therefore by this his own argument
the ministry of Delescluse is not to be submitted unto, because as a
schismatique he has stolen away himself both from the reformed french church
of old and again of late from the Franciscane Brownistes, who being formerly
in his account a true church, how could he so renounce and disclayme their
communion without schism?

37.
YEt further he bringes here a ground of scripture often abused by the Brownistes
to prove their separation in these words: Advertis page 13.
Let them alone therefore for as our savior says / they are blind leaders of
the blind: and both of them shall surely fall into the pit.

The letting alone here spoken of by Christ is to be understood in respect of
the offense which the Pharisees took unjustly at the words of Christ that
the Disciples should not be troubled therewith, ^nsw. 1.
as appears Mat. 15. 12. 14. Our savior by his example did there teach us to
testify against corruptions as he himself there did against the traditions of
the Pharisees, verse. 3. 7. etc. But as for separation from such guides our
savior says nothing, yea that he meant no such thing it appears evidently
by the communion which he and his Apostles did afterward still reteyne in
that church not separating from the same.

And though they were in many things blind leaders, 2.
yet not so far as that simply to hear them was unlawful, but to follow them
blindely with out examining of that which they said by the word of God, such
heedlesse and indiscreet hearing and following is forbidden, to hear them as
the Beraeans heard Paul was not unlawful.

And if blind guides are to be taken heed of, 3.
then we do further appeal unto the conscience of the indifferent reader
whether it were a safer thing to submit unto the teaching of Mr. Brightman or
of Delescluse his censurer, to hear such as M. Perkins, Mr. Greeneham, M.
Phillips and such like teachers or to commit their souls to the instruction of
Thomas Cocky, Ihon Hales, Francis Iesop and such like blind guides as do lead
both Mr. Ainsworth himself and his whole company, Let those that know these two
sorts of guides consider duly of the matter.

38.
THe tenth speech of Mr. Brightman he sets down on this manner, Advertis.
(...). 7. and 13
finally the angel of the Church of England is both a pexsecuter of the
brethren and a deceyver of the prince. Whence he infers with an
exclamation, Marvelous, and is he still for all this the angel of the Church
in Mr. Brightmans judgment? In mine doubtless he is altogather otherwise,
even that angel of the bottomless pit, who is a king over those locustes etc.

The ministers of the Jewish Church in Christ's time were both persecutours of
the brethren and deceyvers of the princes and Governors, ^^sw. 1.
and yet were still the angel of that Church. They persecuted Christ and
sought to murder him, they seduced Pilate and brought him against his own
conscience to condemn Christ, Luke 23. 23. 24. Yet was not separation
required, neither yet did the faithful reject their comunion.

Secondly is not the angel of the separation both a persequ^tour of the
brethren and a deceyver or the prince? 2.
Yes certainly, for the first (...) ^hey persequute one an other both in Word
and deed: Their hard speeches of one other are manifold, they scorn one an
other and laugh at one an other. They do also mutually Judge, condemn, and
excommunicate one an other: for the second point, of deceyving the prince, it
is most evident in special in their apology dedicated unto the kings majesty,
wherein as much as in them lay, they have sought to draw him unto error: This
appears by Mr. Iohnsons own confession and recantation wherein he has
recalled sundry of his errors contained in that book: But the Ainsworthians
do still persist notwithstanding the admonition given by Mr. Johnson: So that
by this reason the separatists themselves are to be separated from; we see
hereby how the piece of ordinance wherewith they shoot at others does recoyle
upon themselves and wound their own communion.

39.
NOw remains the conclusion of this writing to be considred, Advertis. page
13. 14
where after the rehersall of Mr. Brightm. his words declaring their wicked
and blasphemous error, who do so fall away from this church as if Christ were
banished wholly from hence etc* Delescluse does then cry out against him; And
so by this what soever sins, errors, wickednesses, abhominatio^s he has
showed before to be both in the angel and in the church it self, all is now
cured by this salve: (...) most miserable dawbing with untempered mortar.

First, note his false dealing and abuse of Mr. Br. as though he had said or
meant that all the sins, Answ. 1.
errors and corruptions of the church of England had been cured and salved by
this his testimony against the separation; as though he could not have reproved
the schism of the Brownistes from the church of England, except he had allowed
all the corruptions therein; whereas on the contrary we have showed how vainly
and senselessely Delescluse has trifeled to prove a separation from the
allegations and testimonies of Mr Brightman above noted: Yea even in this very
place Mr. Br. tells us in express words that we may neither take* pleasure
in them as some mayntainers of those corrup do, neither may we forsake and
fall from the church as the Brownistes do, he shows in the same place that he
wishes health of mind unto both these sorts that are in a contrary extremity:
And this his wish shows that he thought these co^^uptions still to be uncured,
and therefore is he most injuriously charged with the contrary by Delescluse.

Secondly, 2.
as for his exclamation of most miserable dawbing with vntem^^^ed mortar it is
a notable instance of the impudency of the Brownistes, who in the mids of
their ignorance, do so boldly open a mouth against the learnedest ministers in
the churches of God: And much more justly may it be returned upon Delescluse
his own head, whose consequences and collections for separation from Mr. Br.
his speeches are all of them untempered mortar and all his reasoning a most
mise^^^ dawbing: The iniquity of this his exclamation may easily be seen in
this that he does not refute Mr. Br. his reasons alleged in this place but
passes the^ over in silence: Mr. Br. shows of Laodicea that though the angel
thereof was miserable and poor and blind and naked yet communion was lawful,
Christ still supped with the same, he shows withal that though the like
misery be also found in England, as being the Antitype of Laodicea, yet that
there is a presence of Christ communicating with them, which he proves further
from the experience of the Brownistes themselves compared with the scriptures
Romans 10. 13. etc. Rev. 3. 20. It had been fitter for del. to have given a sound
answer unto these reasons then with a sound of words to have made so loud an
exclamation.

Thirdly, 3.
by the private and public confession and testimony of Delescluse there is a
miserable dawbing with vntempred mortar among the Brownistes themselves, for
this Del. has often avouched and affirmed that there is but one sound warrant
and example in the scriptures to stay men from anabaptisme, namely the example
of the apostate Israelites that were not recircumcised when they joined again
with Judah in the worship of God, were it not for this example, Plea for
^^fa^ts, p. (...) 49. etc. ^^rief treat. ^^^gt anaba. (...). 16. etc.
he says that he himself would be rebaptised: If this be true that he says,
then is both Mr. Clifton and Mr. Johnson a miserable dawber seeing they both
have used many other arguments and a multitude of scriptures against
rebaptisation: If there be but one sound argument, then all the other are
unsound and false, and consequently untempered mortar: Now these other reasons
being used by the Franciscanes while he was yet among them, why did he not
testify against their un sound doctrine and convince them of their error? how
could he endure to see such a number of holy scriptures perverted, falsified
and abused by Mr. Ioh. and Mr. Clift. and yet hold his peace? how could he
suffer them to give so great advantage unto Mr. Smith and other anabaptists by
alleging against them so many colorable pretenses and shadows of reason
wherein he thought there was no substance? What sincerity is there in the
course of these men that see one an others daubing and yet wink at the same?
Why may we not think that Delesc. does now also discern and behold some
dawbing in Mr. Ainsw. Tho. Cocky, Ioh. Hales and that he winkes at it as he did
before in Mr. Ioh. and Mr. Clifton? Thus may we here see touching Delescluse
the only governing elder of the Ainsworthians, that as there is but one step
betwixt him and anabaptisme by his own confession, so is there never a step
betwixt him and the path of hypocrisye; he that sees his fellows dawbing with
untempered mortar and lets them alone in their sin, must needs be a miserable
dawber himself, he that professes himself a separatist from all known
sinners, and yet sees his fellows sinning openly in print, by abusing the
scriptures in great measure and still continuing in this offense and yet
tolerates them herein, how can he be esteemed otherwise then as an apparent
hypocrite?

40.
ONce more he yet renewes his former reasoning and exclaming and says unto us:
Adverti(...). page 1^.
Can any preach in the office of an angel purely and sincerely who is a thief
and a robber? shall any administer purely who is not lawfully called thereunto
as Aaron was? Can any unlawful minister administer lawfully the seals of Gods
covenant unto dogs and swyne purely and sincerely? O cease to do evil,
learn to do good! God who is jealous etc.

For the substance of this objection it is twice answered before, Answ.
section 18. and 36. yet for the further stopping of his wide mouth that
without cause talks so much of thieves, robbers, unlawful ministers, dogs,
swine etc. we do here demand of him, can any preach in the office of an angel
purely, and sincerely who is an apostata and has for saken the most holy faith
as H. A. in the account of all the Brownistes has done? Can any administer
purely who for their schism have been deposed from their ministry continuing
still in their schism as H. A. and this Del. have been? Can the seals of Gods
covenant be administered purely and sincerely unto such as are rejected as
dogs and swine, unto such as William Clerk, Richard Benet, George Parker
etc. who for their sin and wickedness are excommunicated by Mr. Johnson and his
company and consequently esteemed as dogs and swine though yet retained in
communion by Mr. Ainsworthes company which by this means in the judgment of
the Brownists themselves is become a stye of swine and one body with
excommunicates? shall those who by the Franciscanes are accounted unworthy to
gather up the crummes under their table, become stewards of the house to break
the bread unto the children of the Ainsworthians? shall those that are judged
unworthy to hear the word, be allowed for prophets to preach the word? Yet
thus it is in Thomas Cocky and John Hales, who being by Mr. Johnson and his
company delivered unto satan are yet set up for prophets by Mr. Ainsworth and
his company to draw men from those snares of Satan wherein themselves do ly
enwrapped.

41.
AFter this he seeks to lay two great sins upon Mr. Brightman for charging
them with blasphemous error etc. And first, he would show him to be a
persecutour of the brethren and that in these words; Advertis. page 14.
for what greater persecution could he put upon those poor souls which have
separated themselves from those evilles by himself set down, then to accuse or
charge them of blasphemy? Yea it is such a persecution as that it is unto
death, for by the law of God a blasphemer must do.

First, Answ. 1.
it is no sin of persequution to impute blasphemy unto those that justly
deserve the same, for Luke and Paul and James did charge sundry men with
blasphemy and yet were not to be accounted persequutors for the same as may
appear, Act. 18. 6. 1. Tim. 1. 20. Ian. 2. 7. And seeing Delescluse has not
proved Mr. Brightmans accusation to be unjust upon them, he can not justly
charge him with persecution.

Secondly, 2.
suppose Mr. Br. had been a persequutor of the Brownistes in this speech, yet
is he not a persecutour of the brethren so as Delescluse charge him, and so
as Mr. Br. noted the angel of the church of England to be in persequuting
their brethren that do remain in communion with them, because the Brownistes
neither in their own account nor in Mr. Br. account are brethren, but such as
separate from the fellowship of the faithful brethren.

Thirdly, 3.
suppose Mr. B. had been a persecutour of the brethren, yet not unto death as
Delescluse does write, for the law of God does not simply and generally require
that every blasphemer should dye as this ignorant and inconsiderate person does
affirm by his false application of the sentence of the law unto Mr. brightmans
speech: The law requires that he which curses his God and blasphemeth the
name of the Lord shall be put to death Lev. 24. 15. 16. but besides this high
degree of blasphemy, there were many kinds of blasphemy not punishable with
death by the law: Every reproach, slander and evil speech either of a man's
brother, or any part of Gods truth may justly according to the scriptures be
called blasphemy as has been signified and showed unto us from these places,
Mat. 15. 19. Ephesians. 4. 31. Tit. 3. 2. 2. Pet. 2. 12. Jude, 10. And who will say,
that all these sins were to be punished with death by the magistrate?

Fourthly, 4.
suppose Mr. B. had persecuted them to the death, yet might there have been a
greater persecution contrary to that which Delescluse by his question does here
pretend, in saying, what greater persecution could he put upon those poor
fowls etc. for there are diverse kinds of death, some are more painful and
shameful then others and some persons are more to be detested in death then
others; And those that do unjustly lay upon men the vilest death are greater
persequutours then some others that yet put men to death also: And in special
many of the Brownistes are greater persequutours of us then Delescluse dare yet
for shame pretend against Mr. B. for diverse of them blush not to say that we
have sinned against the holy ghost, that no place of repentance is left unto
us and all this for testifying against their schism: Now blasphemy against the
holy ghost being greater then other blasphemy, Matt. 12. 31. Luke 12. 10. It
may hence appear that they are greater persequutours of us, then Mr. Br. is of
them, seeing in their blind and rash mood they charge us with greater
blasphemy, then Mr. Br. does them.

Lalstly, 5.
if imputation of blasphemy be persequution unto death, then are the Brownistes
themselves deadly persequutours of one an other: for to omit manifold other
proofs hereof, they do mutually testify of one an other as of false churches:
Mr. Johnson and his company say of Mr. Ainsworth and his company that they are
a schism and no true church: Again Mr. Ainsw. and his people do reject Mr.
Iohnsons company, yea diverse of the Ainsworthians do affirm of the
Franciscanes, that they are worse then the world: If some other^ should thus
speak of them, they would account them uncircumcised Ph^^^nes, railing on the
host of the living God, See (...) of (...).
* blaspheming the name of the Lord and his tabernackle etc. And thus to bring
the collection of Delescluse upon his own pate, we may say unto him according
to his own reason, who be greater persequutours of the Brownistes then they
themselves are mutually unto one an other? Do they not seek one an others blood
in making one an other blasphemers? The saying of Job. 20. 2^ 25.
Zophar the Naamathite is verifyed upon them: The bow of steel strikes them
through, the arrow is drawn out and comes forth of the body and shines of
their gall: The Gall of their own persecution, the arrow of their own
objection wounds their own sides and is colored with their blood, so that
here we may also apply unto Delesc. that which Mr. Ainsworth once * wrote
against Mr. Smith, Ans. to M^ Sm. pa. 4^
How Delescluse is snared in the work of his own hands and in his own
objections, is worthy to be noted with Higgaion Selah, Psalm. 9. 1^
and meditated to the praise of God.

42.
THe second sin which he lays upon Mr. B. is this to be a deceyver of the
prince, Advertis. page 14.
which he notes in this particular for writing against them: And how he has
also deceyved the princes, he and others of his mind by causing them to banish
and keep in banishment their most loyal and faithful subjects.

For deceyving the prince which he obiecteth, Answ. 1.
let him know that though Mr. Brightman had more particularly pleaded against
them and for their banishment also, 2.
yet had he been no deceyver therein, let Delescluse prove this his consequence.

As touching the causes of their banishment, Rob. Bro^ne. H. Barow. Fran.
Iohnso^ H. Ainsworth John Smith John Robinso^ etc.
it is cheefely to be laid upon those that have been the * he goats of the
separation: These by their deceitful reasons and persuasions have mislead and
seduced many simple persons and have sought out reasons of banishment and
misery unto many by leading them unto schism: Let those that are yet alive
bewail their offense herein.

Thirdly, seeing the Brownistes themselves do now mutually abandon one an others
company why do they blame others for doing such things as themselves do
practice? 3.
Their reiection of one an other is now more grevous then banishment, whiles
they banish one an other from the pledges and seals of Gods covenant* Yea the
church of England shows more favor and kindenes unto the Brownistes the^ the
Francis^anes and the Ainsworthians do unto one an other, whiles they do both
reject those that are present at the worship or ministry of the other, and do
also refuse many of them to eat one with an other: Do they not now by their
own example teach the magistrates and princes under which they live to reject
and banish them also?

Fourthly, 4.
whereas the Francis^anes do now profess that at May next they purpose to
remoove their habitation and to go and dwell at Embden, diverse of the
Ainsworthians do affirm that they have so behaved themselves in the place
where they now dwell that they are ashamed to tarry there any longer, and
therefore that it is time for them to remove and to be gone thence: If these
things be so then is it not the deceit of Mr. Br. and others of his mind to
procure their banishment as Delescluse obiecteth, but it is the shame of their
own wicked conversation that does banish the Brownistes and drive them from
one place to an other.

Fifthly, 5.
to make it plain and evident what mind the Brownistes have to banish one an
other, let us here consider what the Ainsworthians have * written against the
Franciscanes and given unto those arbiters appointed by the magistrates for the
hearing of their strife about their meeting house: ^ee profa^^ eschisme ^f
Brown. ^ag. 81.
A way of peace by these themselves propounded and by the church of Leyden and
us agreed to, these after reversed and stood not unto unless we would go
dwell out of the city: And although in the treaty of the agreement, it was
testified by the elders of that church, that unless it were to the apparent
undoing of us and of our families, we should not be dismissed again to dwell
here: Yet because we would not absolutely promise to leave this city, they
would not stand to the agreement which themselves had made. Besides the
accusation of falsehood, and covenant breaking here noted, observe also the
cruelty of the Franciscanes in seeking to banish the Ainsworthians and to have
them out of the city (as they complain) though it were to the apparent
undoing of them and their families: Is not this a merciless kind of
banishment that is sought by them? do they not herein take one another by the
throat with their vnpitifull hands? May we not here see the truth of the wise
man's saving; Prove. 28. 3
* A poor man if he oppress the poor is like a raging rain that leaves no
food? Yea the raging oppression of the Brownistes tendes to their apparent
overthrow and undoing even by their own confession. And therefore as Delescluse
throughout his advertisement does draw his collections from Mr. Br. his words
against the church of England, even so may we (...) better reason condemn the
Brownistes out of their (...) Thus may we shoot with the Brownistes in thie^
own bow, and wound them with their own arrows.

Lastly, 6.
besides the degrees and kinds of banishment above noted, we do here demand of
the Brownistes both of the Franciscanes and Ainsworthians, what they would do
if they had a magistrate according to their minds, such an one as they have
often wished for; would they not then banish one an other persisting in those
courses which they do now condemn mutually in one an other? (...) them answer
us plainly and sincerly unto this question and then doubt we not, but even
thereby also further to stop the mouth of Delescluse that is here so vn^^^ly
opened with complaint against Mr. Brightman.

43.
HAving thus set down the sins of Mr. B. he comes in the next place to set
down the virtues of his own schismatic flock, Advertis. page 14.
in these words; And indeed although I am but a stranger unto them and one of
an other people, yet the truth caused me to speak thus in their behalf, that I
know not any people at this day under the sun more loyal and faithful unto
their prince and country, and more zealous and religious toward God, then they
are:

First, Answ. 1.
being about to sound the trumpet of their praise, for defense of his modesty
he tells us that he is but a stranger unto them and one of an other people;
but this is not enough to excuse his flattery and boasting, for though he be a
stranger unto the^ as he is a french man, yet as he is a Brownist and a
schismatique he is one of them, and therefore notwithstanding his different
nation may be as partial in praising of them as any other of the^ and above
many of them, in that he is an elder, a governor and a prophet among them: It
had been much more for their credit if some other of their neighbors had
praised them, but this they want being esteemed both of the magistrates and
ministers of the reformed churches to be a contentious sect; And therefore while
Delescluse being incorporate into their schism does thus extol his friends
and brethren, it may justly be said unto him: Pro. 27. 1.
* He that praises his friends with a loud voice rising early in the morning
it shall be counted to him as a curse.

Secondly, 2.
for the length of his comparison, in that he says, he knows no people under
the sun more loyal etc. how vain and foolish is this? Though he know none
in the east or west Indies more loyal then these, this is nothing to their
praise because he knows not those nations at all, nor many other far nearer
which are yet all under the sun: And thus this large comparison is nothing
else but the loud noise of an idle commendation.

Thirdly, 3.
for their commendable loyalty and faithfulness unto their prince and (...), how
does it appear? by what good token or argument can be demonstrate the (...)?
Yea the contrary rather might be showed by diverse instances of sundry of them
who have deceyved and (...) both the prince of (...) own country of his right
and the governors of these countries wherein they now live of their due also,
insomuch that some being taken in their deceit and in their presumptuous
transgression of the laws have smarted for the same: And where then is their
singular loyalty and faithfulness?

Fourthly, 4.
for their zeal of religion where is it? does it not vanish into the smoke of
contention? Yea is it not confessed by many of them, that they neither feel in
themselves nor see in others that zeal and comfort thereof which they felt and
saw before their separation? For this also we could allege sundry witnesses of
themselves besides our own knowledge.

44.
But he proceeds yet further to amplify his commendations and praises of the
zeal and religion in the Brownistes which as he says are seen in them and
among them both privately and publicly: ^^vertis. 14.
Yea in such measure as that I am fully persuaded that they are and shall be if
they continue faithful unto the end, that people by which chiefly Antichriste
the man of sin shall be rooted out.

Behold here the proud conceit that the Brownistes have of themselves without
all reason, ^^sw. 1.
it is much that such fantasies should enter into the head of Delescluse, it is
more that they should be rooted therein with such full persuasion as he speaks
of, it is yet more that he should not be ashamed to utter, yea and in print to
publish this his arrogant opinion, but most of all that his fellows and his
brethren should allow or tolerate in him this strange dream or vision of
vanitye: for whereas the Lord in his holy word has noted unto us those
honorable instruments by whom cheefely Antichriste is to be overthrown, we
desire Delescluse to show unto us where the Brownistes are numbered among them:
We see in the book of the revelation that as the Lord in sundry visions has
there declared unto us the special instruments whereby Antichriste was to be
exalted, so has he also in other visions there described unto us those
worthies and blessed instruments by whom cheefely he is again to be cast
down: By the consent of the best and learnedest interpreters there are noted
out unto us in the Apocalypse diverse estates both ecclesiastical and civil
that have wounded Antichriste, but no interpreter that ever yet could find the
Brownistes among them: We read of diverse angels fighting against
Antichriste, Rev. 14. 6. 7. 8. 9. And these do fitly declare unto us such as
John Wickleffe, John Husse, Hierome of Prage, Martin Luther and such like, but
where be the angels that may fifthly represent unto us Robert Brown, H.
Barow, Francis Johnson etc. We read of diverse that have obtained sundry
victories, conquestes and triumphs against Antichriste. Rev. 11. 15. 16. and
14. 14. 17. and 16. 1. and 17. 16. For the further understanding whereof we
desire the reader to consider and weigh Mr. Brightmans exposition of those
places; But where is the lot and room of the Brownistes? Were is their
achievement registered among these chief instruments of the Lord?

Secondly, 2.
whereas he tells us that this his full persuasion dependes upon a condition
viz. If they continue faithful unto the end, whereas also Mr. Johnson and his
followers do now in the account of Delescluse slide back from their ancient
faith and are already proved unfaithful, Mr. Robinison also halting betwixt
them in some things, these things duly considred the full persuasion of
Delescluse may quickly turn into a faint persuasion and his vain confidence
into a wan-hope.

45.
THe reason of his glorious persuasion touching the Brownistes he sets down
in these words: Advertis. page 15.
For by that purity of doctrine which they do teach and by the sincere and
public administration of the glorious kingdom of Christ publicly and
before all the people; as also by professing that glorious liberty in the
gospel, that if any sin be showed or manifested unto them by the word of God,
is amended whatsoever opposition may be to the contrary, by those things I say
by them professed practiced and taught, it is imposible that where they have
place, Antichriste can or have any door to come in.

First, Answ. 1.
for their purity of doctrine, they have no grounds of pure doctrine which
other churches of Christ round about them have not as well as they, Why do
they exalt themselves in that which others have as well as they and before them?

Other churches have this doctrine also in better and more abundant manner then
they; 2.
for H. A. I. Delescluse, Thomas Cocky, John Hales and such like prophets do
not teach the pure doctrine with half that purity, grace, power and fruit that
the ministers of other churches do.

Besides their ignorance, 3.
their doctrine is diverse ways impure and mixed with sundry errors, new
doctrines and faithes leading unto schism and confusion and is therefore in
part recanted by Mr. Johnson.

For their glorious liberty in their public administration the anabaptists
may boast thereof as much as they, 4.
seeing the anabaptists are as public in their administration as the
Brownistes and the brownistes are but followers of them therein as they are
also in the most or all those things, wherein they differ from us.

For their sincere administration thereof against all opposition whatsoever as
he boasts, 5.
how vain is it? Before the schism of the Ainsworthians from the
Franciscanes, ^^nting (...) fox, (...). 1.
the sins and * scandalles of Daniel Studly were showed and manifested by
diverse of the Ainsworthians and yet such opposition was made against them as
that Da. Studly did neither soundly repent nor loose his office from which he
is now deposed: That which the popular government could not then effect, is
now effected since that government was changed by Mr. Johnson.

Whereas he says that Anti-christe cannot have any door to come in, where
those things by them professed and practiced have any place, 6.
it is also false: for suppose the doctrine and discipline of the Brownistes
were both of them pure, even as pure as in the apostles times yet might
Antichriste find a door to come in by, as well as he did in the time of the
apostles, where there were better means to keep him out, then the Brownistes
now have, see 1. Ioh. 2. 18. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 7.

Suppose the Romish Antichriste have no door to come in by among the
Ainsworthians, 7.
yet while they open a door to the Anabaptists to come in among them, ^rofane
^^hisme of ^^ownist. ^ag. 80.
what avayleth it? That such a door is opened by them see the testimony of the
* Franciscanes, who charge Mr. Ainsworth and his company with this evil.

46.
MOreover he adds further in praise of the Brownistes: Advertis. (...) 15.
And for my part I do bless the day in which I had that grace from my God to
know both the people and their faithful walking in their ways and religion of
God.

If a stranger meet with this book of Delescluse he may be diverse ways
deceyved by him in this deceitful speech: Answ. 1.
for if he know not that the Brownistes are broken and rent in the mids
falling one from an other, then by this false report of Delesc. he may be
drawn to think that the Brownistes do faithfully cleave unto one an other and
walk constantly in their ways without schisming from one an other, which is
most untrue.

And further again if a stranger do know that they are rent a sunder, 2.
and yet withal know not of what side Delescluse is, then shall the stranger
be left in uncertainty not knowing whether he mean the Franciscanes or
Ainsworthians to be that faithful people, hereafter therefore let Delescluse
learn to speak more plainly and to avoid his deceitful speeches; for ought
that he has here written he might be taken for a Franciscane and so his
faction might loose that praise of faithfullnes which he intends for them.

47.
DRawing to an end he seals up his book with this prayer for the brownistes;
Advertis. page 15.
I beseech the Lord of his grace even with tears that he vouchsafe to open the
eyes of their most noble and wise prince that he may see the justice and equity
of their cause and cause them to see his royal face and presence again with
joy and gladness of heart under his dominions and jurisdictions, Amen.

In this prayer or form of prayer, Answ. 1.
observe first how he dishonours the Lord and takes his name in vain by
praying for the manifestation of the justice and equity of their cause which is
so full of injustice and iniquitye: As Saul took the name of God in vain by
his blessing the Ziphims for their show of compassion which indeed was cruelty
1. Sam. 23. 21. So does Delescluse by blessing of the brownistes for the equity
of their cause which is indeed a mere iniquity.

Secondly, 2.
mark here his vain publishing of his own devotion and zeal, viz. his
praying with tears, yet is it no sound commendation of himself while his
tears are spent in such a cause: Delescluse may remember since he was a Papist
that many of those idolatours in their superstitious devotion do often times
weep and power forth their tears before their idolles and images: As those
tears can not justify their devotion, no more can these tears powered forth by
Delescluse for the idol of their separation justify his devotion.

Thirdly, 3.
mark his flattery of the king calling him their most noble and wise prince: It
is the property of true nobility to try the spirits of men by the scripture, as
the beraeans did Act. 17. 11. If therefore he be noble and most noble they will
not deny but that he has examined their spirits and the scriptures alleged by
them and presented unto his majesty in their petitions; and then withal if he
be most wise how is it that he can not see the mystery of their separation
having their chief reasons and proofs laid open before him? Yea by the
sentence of this Delesc. there is nothing to be * expected by him from Christ
but the pouring out of his aeternall wrath upon him, Advertis. pa. 9. and 11
nothing as touching his visible estate but aeternall flames of everlasting
damnation, If this be his abject and base estate, how is he most noble or most
wise.

Fourthly, 4.
we do here demand of Delescluse touching this his prayer, whether it be
lawful for any of his flock in the reading of his book and withal of this
his prayer therein to lift up their hearts unto the Lord, to desire the same
thing and to say Amen with him unto this his petition: If they may not, then is
it a sorry prayer which may not be assented unto by an other, and then is he a
sorry guide to go before his flock in such desires as it is not lawful for them
to follow him; but if they may pray the same thing with him and in the reading
of his words may say Amen unto his wish, then consider on the other side how
according to the doctrine of the Brownistes, he makes himself guilty of
idolatry, for they tell us that read prayer and set forms of prayer are
idolles and the use of them idolatry, Mr. Ain^worth in special has compared
them to the golden calves that Ie^oboam erected, and if this be so then has
Delescluse here in the end of his book set up a golden calfe by setting down
this form of prayer and then all the Brownistes that in the reading thereof do
lift up their hearts in prayer to desire the same thing, all these (we say) do
then bow down unto his calfe and worship the same and so commit idolatry.

48.
HAsting to a final conclusion he says; Advertis. pa. 15.
And so ^do here end though many more things might be said touching separation
from evil, and adjoining or following that which is good:

Mark here how he paynts the face of his separation, Answ.
in calling it a separation from evil etc. whereas indeed it is a separation
from that which is good because of some evil mixed therewith* and a reiection
of the godly for the wicked sake which is a thing most wicked, Genesis 18. 25.

Here he will end but it had been better for him not to have begun: He tells
us many more things might be said touching separation, we tell him also that
many more things may be said against the same: The judicious reader may easily
discern that in all these arrows which he has shot he has still missed the
mark, his bow of brass is broken and all his vain reasoninges against Mr.
Bright* are turned upon his own head: If he have more things to say hereafter
let him see that they be of more weight then these.

49.
LAst of all he adds: Advertis. page 15.
And in deed in a word we shall not read from the beginning of the world to
this day that there was ever any true church of God truly established but by
separation: and therefore this people not to be blasphemers but true worshippers
of God.

Behold here a heap of falsehood couched up togather in a few words for a
farewell to his reader: Answ. 1.
For first, it is false which he says of establishing churches by separation
from the beginning of the world: Let him show how the church of God before the
flood was established by such a separation as the Brownistes have in their
writings described unto us: we have here his bare word only which is of no
credit, his asseveration here used by him, viz. in deed in a word is but a word
without deed and without truth.

Secondly, 2.
it is false which he says of establishing true churches by separation unto
this day: And this not only in respect of the church of England which by Mr.
Iohnsons confession is a true church though not established by the separation
of the B^ownistes, but also in respect of the dutch and french churches which
by the Brownistes them selves are acknow^ledged for true churches and yet were
not establis^hed by the separation in question: Yea they do reject and condemn
the separation of the Brownistes as schism: Do these churches then practice
and reteyne a separation without their knowledge, against their wills and
contrary to their doctrine? Or if they do thus maintain a separation not being
aware thereof, shall this unwitting and unwilling separation be a true ground
and foundation of their church? shall their ignorant practice establish them
and justify their estate? we would feign know of Delescluse how these things
can stand sound.

Thirdly, 3.
suppose this assertion of his touching separation were true, yet his inference
thereupon is false, in that he says and therefore this people not to be
blasphemers: Though a man hold separation yet may he be a blasphemer in many
other respects: For example, Mr. Smith holding the separation of the
Brownistes was yet a blasphemer for that which he wrote against the use of the
translated and original scriptures in the worship of God. And so Mr. Ihonson
still holding the separation is yet by the Ainsworthians accounted a
blasphemer, one that speaks evil of the way of God, in respect of his new
interpretation of Mat. 18. Delescluse reasons here as though there was no
blasphemy but against separation, how blindely and partially let the reader
judge.

Fourthly, 4.
he bringes yet an other false inference from the former assertion, in saying,
and therefore this people not to be blasphemers but true worshippers of God: for
the former assertion touching separation is mainteyned by Anabaptists yea and
by some of the Arrians, does it hereupon follow that they are true worshippers
of God? Nothing less: Yet such is the fruit of Delescluse his reasoning*
further whereas the Brownistes do acknowledge the dutch and french churches to
be a separate people and true churches established by separation and yet
condemn the read prayer used by them as being a false and idolatrous worship,
it may hence appear evidently that his argument for proof of their true
worship is very vain and false: He may here see that the truth of Gods worship
does not depend upon separation.

Prove. 12. 15. The way of a fool is right in his own eyes:
But he that hears counsel is wise.
Errata.
Page 3. l. 31. read things. page 6. l. 18. and to convert them from going
(...), p. 7. li. 15. dealing. page 11. l. 15. therefore. p. 13. l. 5.
affirmation. p. 18. l. 15. for. page 19. in the margent read, ^ev. chap. 3. p.
19. l. 39. prefer page 25. l. 39. knows p. 28. l. 26. corruptions. page ^0.
l. 17. for. page 35. l. 34. fuly.

FINIS.

