A DEFENSE OF THE LAWFVL CALLING OF THE MINISTERS OF REFORMED CHVRCHES, AGAINST
THE CAVILLATIONS OF ROMANISTS.

Whereto is subjoined, AN EPISTLE TO A RECVSANT, FOR CLEARING AND MAINTAINING
SOME POINTS of the former treatise of defense, challenged by a Roman Elymas
Bar-Iesus-it.

WITH A SHORT DISCOVERY OF THE ADVERSARY his dottage in his impertinent and
rediculously deceitful demands.

BY PATRIK FORBES, of Coirse.

Read ye never in the Scriptures, the stone which the builders refused, the
same is made the head of the corner? This was the Lords doing and it is
merveilous in our eyes, Math. 21.42.

Printed at Middelburgh, by Richard Schilders, dwelling in the langen Delft, at
the sign of the Olyphant. Anno 1614.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVL MY TENDER KINSMAN AND DEAR BROTHER IN CHRIST,
WILLIAM STRACHIN, OF TIPPERTIE, GRACE and peace in our Lord Jesus Christ.
RIGHT Worshipful and dearly beloved both in the flesh and in the Lord, when,
not long ago, your love led you to come and visit me, I was, upon the occasion
even then offered, a penning of this little piece: whereof you craving
earnestly, at that time, a copy, and having, therewith told me how you had left
my tender kinsman and your own faithful friend Master Thomas Michel Minister
of the Gospel of Christ, lying sick of an ague: I covenanted with you, that,
with the first, who from you should bring me assurance of his co^valescing, you
should in recompense of so good tidings, report a copy hereof. Which
accordingly, God to him, you to me, and I to you performed. And whereof you had
then a hastily catched copy, I now send you the principal: and, so, I do
send it, as dedicated to your name that whither soever it shall happen to come,
yea if possibly it may befall any so far to fancy it, as, by print, to
publish it to the world, yet it may always carry with it this frontepiece, for
a monument of our mutual affection, and that singular regard I have you in:
not only for our conjunction in blood, and these many courtesies and kindly
offices whereof you weary not to hold me still more and more your debtor: but,
much more, for these rare christian virtues, which, in you, are so much the
more commendable, as, veiled under sweet and christian modesty, and, in
singlenes eying God, and carefully attending on a good conscience, they never
were curious, either to be known of men, or to currie the applause of the
world. Albeit I very well know, that your sincere heart toward God, and
constant care of walking christianly with all men, have bred you both the loss
of great carnal, and yet but carnal friends, and also, many apparent worldly
disadvantages. In all which loss, your incomparable commodity is both huge,
in the purchase of that one thing which only is to be sought for, and also,
passing praise worthy: in that neither any break of duty to the one, neither
any error of judgment, or defect of prudent and diligent endeavor, in the
other, but a free choice of mind, to forgo willingly, what you could have
easily either holden or acquired, if you would, but therefore would not for
that, in conscience, you ought not, has made you to count light of such
things, as the men of this world, madly running after, do lose both them
selves and all these things also: and yet herein the Lord has dealt so
indulgently with you, as you cannot, but, to the praise of his goodness and
truth, acknowledge the verity of his promise, in a hundredth fold gain, even in
this life. When the other year, I was dwelling by you, and, so, was delighted
with that sweet conversation and happy fellowshippe, which I can never record
but both with regret and joy, you remember, that, one day, Master Thomas
Michel brought John Fraser his challenge to the Ministers of Scotland: which,
albeit some years ere then, it had been abroad in our country, yet I had
never seen nor heard of, before that time: And, after I had read it, he told me
how grealty our countrie-Papists did glory thereof: And, that so much the more
as it had received no answer: they imputing that to the strength of their own,
and imbecillitie of our cause: he willed me to consider if it were not
expedient to say something thereto, I answered him then, that they had not
great matter of insulting, for any stuff which was in that treatise: whereto to
make any answer it were but to maintain an endless iangling with men who would
never be ashamed to repone unto us one and the same, a hundredth times, recocted
crambe. that nothing was in him which our me^ had not often answered: besides,
that, whatsoever might have been done at the first outco^ming thereof, yet now
when it was stale, and the author departed this life, any particular answer
should appear vorimous. But, as for the matter specially disputed by him, I
was about to publish my commentary upon the Revelation: whereby I hoped all
equitable and judicious Readers should find themselves satisfied of all such
doubts, as by his sophistical discourse might arise even to the most simple
readers thereof: loving much rather thus to maintain truth, then by contention
of disputation. which manner the Church of God has not, neither mind I for any
Thrasonik braggs of our adversaries to alter this resolution: though even a
little before your last visitation of me, some copies of a new treatise of theirs
(inscribed a little treatise of the Protestants profane calling, wherein is
proved how they have no true Pastors, and consequently no true Church at all)
sparsed here in this part of the country (the chief stage of their peirt
pride) with insolent and high boasting, have thus far in holy indignation
carried me, as, in defense of our callings to pen these few pages. not,
particularly to meet that their treatise, but generally, to refell both it, and
whatsoever thing else of any apparent weight (in that argument) alleged by any
other. I flee particular co^testing loving to clear points but not to plead
with persons: and liking to edify all, but loathing to scold with any. Albeit,
so, I might more clearly discover the childish and ridiculous ignorance of
whosoever is the author of that little treatise, and expone him more delightful
to the Readers derision. but neither desire I so to dally: and I know that a
Brother, before me has undertaken the task to tread him and overturne him in
his own traces. This, truly, I must say, that, though in neither of the two
either the first challenge or this late little treatise, there be any such
thing, as may trouble the resolution of any meanly stayed mind: yet the last,
for any apparent show of skill, comes as far short of the other, as he is,
otherwise, equal with him in high boasting and presumptuous promising of
wonders, but performing nothing at all. Receave then my dear brother, this
little piece of my pains, wherein, and in ought that is mine, you may justly
claim a special interest, and receave it for a token of upright love, as I
maintain a just cause: and howbeit that either for quality or quantity it be
far unequal to the certain truth and great worthiness of the matter: Yet,
shall it, I hope, afford you an answer hereafter to any who disdainfully
insulting would ask, what say you Masters for your callings: and to be as
good as your word once given, that, upon covenant the demanders would read it,
You should find an answer to that wherein they think us put to non plus. The
grace of our Lord JESUS CHRIST be with you.

Your kinsman and loving Brother in Christ P. Forbes of Coirse.

A DEFENSE OF THE LAWFVL CALLING OF THE MINISTERS OF REFORMED Churches, against
the cavillations of Romanists.
TO any not well acquainted with the condition of the Church in our quarters,
and the peert and perverse diligence of Romanistes against it (through their
many and strong favorers, and in great scarcity of able Ministers, the long
weak resista^ce made them) this piece of pains, how small soever, yet may
perhaps appear superfluous: in such store of both learned and large treatises
already written, by our men, in defense of the truth, and for overthrow of all
that error can allege against it: so, as, in adding any more a man may seem,
but vainlie, to hale the coard of contention with the^ who are already (...).
Which manner the Church of God has not. And as for these simple blindfolded
ones, whom they lead away captive in error, this sort of labor avails not,
in that, howsoever they are ready, fide implicita, to applaude whatsoever
Pamphlet put abroad by any of their men, and, insolentlie insulting, to
interpret our silence to the advantage of their own and weakness of our cause,
yet, they stick not to profess, that, whatsoever we either writ or reply
against the^, they neither may nor will vouchafe to read it: but, much more
inequitable, herein, then the fellows of Iehu, they hear no sooner ( you
know the man and what his talk was) but they condemn it flatly as false, and
yet will not in any case (no not thereafter) hear it told them, least perhaps,
upon some respects, they might be moo^ed to alter judgment. And, veri^y I
was my self a long time of this opinion, that all ^u^the^ iangling with them
was vain: till at length, perce^v^ng, that not only their blind leaders, and
also their miscarried ones became, thereupon, the more insolent, but that even
the resolution of some weak professors was also troubled: who either had not
the care to read or skill to discern, in our men's writing^* what,
sufficiently, might have stayed their hearts against all the objections of the
adversaries: I, then, for mine own part, thought best, by opening up the book
of the Revelation, to manifest so to all men (having eyes) the mystery of
godliness, and that, also of iniquity, impugning it, that the judicious and
attent Reader might both be instructed against their deceit, and also made
skilful to discern so, their trumperies, that, neither all the gold, skarlet,
pearl, and precious stones, wherewith the whore goes masked, should hide her
nakedness, not her golden cup cover the abominations fraudfullie propined
therinto. Which, as by the help of God, in some measure, I performed, and, at
the request of the godly, have made publik, that my p^ines, so, had I resolved
never any more to put pen to paper, at least, in this polemick kind of
writing. But, a godly brother, of the ministry, sending to me of late, a
little (whither a Jesuits or Priests) Pamphlet, whereof some written copies were
sparsed in the country, in the author his intent, proving the Ministers of the
Protestant Churches to have no lawful calling, and that co^sequentlie, with us
is neither any true church, nor true Sacraments: to the which he was requested
by a well affected Gentleman to make an answer: and, desiring thereupon, to
know my judgment in the general question, I, accordingly, affoorded him a
sheet of paper. at which time two or three godly Gentlemen falling to be in
company with me, and knowing of the matter, they at that time, and soon
after, some of the ministry also, were instant with me, that, what, in my
private lettre to that Brother, I had shortly pointed at, I would for common
use, somewhat more at length set down: that the well affected might have
wherwit^ to meet the adversaries cavillations, at t^eir incident occasions of
conference about such matter. For whose satisfaction, I have, hereby, not so
much set my self to encounter with any one (for their treatises in great
penury of matter, are, most part, spent in false personal crimination and
calumnious railings, which I disdain to answer) as shortly to give to the
godly a common antidot against all, by answering such of their maine
objections, as, whereto all the rest easily may be reduced, that, seeing by
force of truth, they are now at last driven (dispairing of the matter it self)
for all other argument, to quarrel our callings, this sarie shift may be wrung
from them also. Wherein, they may be fitly compared to those pleaders, who,
being out of all hope of their cause, labor to cast the court: Or to such men,
against whom an authentic reversion and good money being produced, for
outquyting from them a possession, which, otherwise, they can find no right to
detain, they run, by all means, to annull the order. But, as, at the Bar, it
were a preposterous order of pleading, after peremptory arguments proponed, to
return to delatours, so, when the head of all defense is placed in them, it
argues, that, even in the conscience of the proponer, the peremptours are
invalid.

2. Thus, the Priests and Scribes of the Jews (whose successors, and of
whose spirit these men bewray themselves to be) when, after many assayes
against Christ's doctrine, they were ever put to the worse in the end (pryding
themselves, and with a great deal more reason then do our adversaties, in
that ordinary place which they brooked in the Church) for all argument they
come at last to this, Math. 21. from the 23. verse to the end.
By what authority do thou these things; and who gave thee this
authority* where the Lord answering for him self, then, and for us now, in the
like case, most plainly, and at length shows, that, howsoever in the
ordinary course of a constitut Church, a careful regard must be had to the
ordinary calling, yet, when (as sometime it falls) that the ordinary
husbandmen become murderers, and the ordinary builders become destroyers,
there God, extraordinarily stirs up men, whose ministry prooveth itself to
be from heaven and not from men, even by this, that they ^ome in the way of
righteousness: and sinners are converted by them, that, so the Lord of the
vineyard may report fruit thereof, even when the ordinary husbandmen rebel,
and that the stone, rejected, even of the ordinary builders, may yet be made
the head of the corner: which, howsoever it be marvailous in our eyes, yet it
is the Lord his doing.

3. Now, this alone, without further, though we have no more ordinary vocation
then our adversaries allege, yet (in so great a confusion brought in the
Church by Antichrist, and, in such evidencie of truth in our side) it
sufficiently answers for our calling. And, albeit that perhaps it not only
may, but also ought to be brought in defense of some particular men, who,
wanting some ordinary points of an ordinary vocation, yet coming in the way of
righteousness, and, in evidencie of spirit and power, co^verting sinners and
convincing error, witnessed, clearelie, their ministry to be from heaven:
yet, for our Church, in common, I see no necessity to have recourse heereto.
For, whatsoever our adversaries may pretend, herein, against some particular
persons, whose defect, if it any were, hurts not the Church in common, yet, I
marvaill with what face they can deny our first open contesters with
Antichrist, in common, to have been ordinary Churchmen, bearing public charg
of Pastors or Doctors therein. And, that I go not higher, what, justly can
they lay, herein, against VViclesse, John Husse, Hierome of Prague, and the
Bohemian reformed Churches? against Luther, Melan^thon, etc. of the Churches of
Germany, and whatsoever cavillation, their perverse contentious minds may
suggest to them against these. yet, what pretense can they have against the
ordinary vocation of so many famous Bishops and Pastors of the Church of
England* Yea, and who of our first Preachers were not either ordinary
Churchmen, ere then had their admission to the Ministry by the reformed
Churches of England, Geneva, or Germany? If they were not blindlie miscarried,
they might perceave, that, what they speak and write of our men in derision
and contumely, (calling them Sir John Kn^x, and Friar Iohne Craig, etc.) it
verifyeth their ordinary vocation. And, giving, that nothing might be
alleged for the ordinary vocation of our first Preachers, and, that it were
als essential a defect as our adversaries account it, so as they had, thereby,
a just exception against our Church: yet, I pray you, what does this help them
against the Church of England, and so many other famous reformed Churches, all
agreeing in communion with us, and glad to give us the right hands of
fellowship? What a peevish pretense is this for their error; and how weak an
objection against so many famous Churches convincing them, that, forsooth, the
Ministers of Scotland, have no ordinary calling? But, neither is the want of
ordinary vocation in our first Reformers, any just exception against our
Church (as partly, already, and more at length, hereafter, shall be showed)
neither, if it were, Hieron. (...) Ocean. and ^d Euagr. and ^n 1. cap: Tit.
may it be justly laid against our first Pastors. They labor, indeed, much
to convince us as destitute of all lawful either Pastors or Church: and
bring to this end (as seems to them) an irresistible argument, that
ordination is only proper to Bishops. Augustinus Ep. 19. and questione ex
^eter^ test. 101.
But, by evident scripture and clear testimony from antiquity, that is
positive. Whereby, it is, that our Reformed Churches agreeing soundly in all
the substantial points of faith, and without break of communion, yet, herein,
for the matter of government, Ambrosius in epist. ^d Tim. ca. 3.
have taken liberty, diverslie as seemed best to each, to rule either by
Bishops, or the common counsel of Elders, which of them most laudably I do not
here dispute. Neither mattereth it much for the point co^troverted with the
common adversary. Na^^anzenus oration^ in Maxim.
For, giving the^ that the appropriating of ordinatio^ to Bishops were not only
tolerable, but even most of all other commendable, and also, positively,
necessary: yet, from the defect of that which by a positive law is or has
been practiced, or, which, in the judgment of many, is still most expedient,
for common order to be practiced, to infer that we have neither any lawful
Pastors or true Church: it is from that which is (...) or respectively
necessary, to conclud (...) or a necessity absolut. Wherein, both antiquity
stands strongly for us, by clear Testimony of not only lawful power, but
also of approoved practice, in that Ambrose records ^lim in Aegipto
Presbyteros absente Episcopo consignare solitos. And Augustine also that in
Alexandria and per tot^m Aegyptum, si desit Episcopus, consecrat Presbyter: and
their own lay Schoolmen also even in the last declining degree to ignorance
and corruption, yet herein will plead our quarrel. Our own country man
Ioannes Ma^^r, De gestis Scotorum, lib. 2. c. 11.
in a much semblable case, brings that distinction. which in the Schools of
Sorbon he had both learned and taught. that, ad actum moraliter b^nu^ non
^equiritur quod a vera prudentia reguletur actu^, sed sat est quod ab
ignorantia invincibili vel errore no^ imputabili reguletur. erat jus
Pontificium in oppositum quod non tenebatur s^ire, Scripturii sacru and
devotionise accommodab^t, etc. in humanis legibus positivis ^nusquisque^ suo
sensu abundat, etc. This same Major, and with him, all our ancient Historiens
do witness that, before the days of Palladius (whom he and al others confess
to have been the first either consecrated or consecrating Bishop in Scotland)
per Sacerdotes and Monach^s, De gestis Sc^t^r^m, (...). 2. ca. 2.
sine Episcopi^, Scoti in side erudiebantur. Now, I ask our adversaries (who
herein, as in a substantial defect divini juris, think they have enough
wherefore to condemn all both our Church and Pastors, for that their
ordination has not been by Bishops) if they dare say but, in Scotland, there
was a notable Church, and excellently both learned and holy Pastors, long
before Palladius? if they would deny it, they are co^vinced by clear and
uniform consent of story and testimonies eve^ of their own men: who all
confess it to have been so by the space at least of two hundredth and twenty
years: and, if not, with more, yet with alse high and just commendation both
of learning and holiness, as ever thereafter. And, if it cannot be denied but
such was the estate of our Church, then, dare they condemn those men for
thieves and who unlawfully had broken in upon the sheepfolde; whom they them
selves have both superstitiouslie canonized, and, do still, idolatrouslie
worship? Or, if that was no essential defect in them, or a relevant exception
against our Church then; how impudent are they, thereupon, to conclude so
peremptorily against us, as if all both light and life of a true Church did
hang wholly upon that one point of Episcopal ordination? whereof, when all is
granted that the most vehement (and not shameless) assertours thereof, in all
their partial heat and all probable appearance can plead for: yet, besides a
clear showed insta^ce of more then two hundredth years practice in our own
Church, and that in the primitive and most pure times thereof, their own
schools also (in the height of palpable prevailing darkness) have given us,
yet, this to answer them, quod ad actum moraliter bonum non requiritur vt a
vera prudentia reguletur actus, sed satu est si ab ignorantia invincibili and
errore non imputabili reguletur.

4. Thus, then, the Pastors of our reformed Churches, having (in common) had
even an ordinary calling: and, therewith holding the true Apostolic doctrine,
we are the true successors of the Apostles, and not our adversaries, as they
both vainly and falsely boast. For, as Ireneus says, Eu qui in Ecclesia sunt
Presbyteris obedire oportet, Libr^ 4. cap. 43.
his qui successionem habent Apostolis sicut ostendimus, qui cum Episcopatus
successione, charisma veritatis certum, secundum placitum patris acceperunt:
reliquos ver^ qui obsistunt a principali successione suspectos babere (that is)
we must obey such Pastors as are in the Church, these, who, as we have showed,
have a succession to the Apostles, namely, who, with Episcopal succession,
have, also, according to the pleasure of the Father received the gift of truth:
but all others who slide away from this principal succession, we must suspect.
And, in another place, he notes those to be only true successors apud qu^s
est caqu^ est ab Apostolis successio, and id quod est irreprobabile sermo^^^
constat, with whom is that succession which is from the Apostles, and with whom
constantly abydes that word which cannot be improved, quia (as says Augustine)
nec Catholicis Episcopis consentiendum: ^e ^^itate Eccles^s contra peti^ ep.
166. cap. 3.
sicubi falluntur vt contra Canonic^s Scripturas aliquid sentiant. For we ought
not consent, no not to Catholic Bishops, if any where they be deceaved, so, as
they hold any opinion contrary to the Canonik scriptures. and it holds ever
true, that (...), as says Gregory Nazianzen. his words are notable, and which
alone are even enough to oppose to all our adversaries shameless brags of bare
succession. (...).
they are to this sense, the succession of piety is properly to be bolden
Succession: for who professes the same doctrine of faith, he is partner of the
same chair: but who embraces a contrary faith, he ought to be accounted an
adversary, albeit even sitting in the chair. and this, indeed has the name,
but the other has the substance and truth of succession.

5. Whereupon this our acclaiming even of ordinary calling, they infer
against us, that, we justify them to be the true church, and that,
consequently, we have made defection therefrom: in so far as we could have no
such ordinary vocation, but with and amongst them: it is a childish fallacy
from themselves but a part in the Church, and yet not of it (even the
abomination of desolation standing in the holy places, ^^^il. 49. ^^ Math.
as says Chrisostom) to the whole church, or rather to the true Church, which
is both within the church and of the church. For, as within the vsible church (
in sanctis Ecclesi^ locis) are both Christ and Antichrist, truth and lies,
Pastors and Wolves, sheep and goats, wheat and chafe: and now and then,
either of them obtain and bear sway in tot^ ^cclesia commu^iter (in the whole
church in common) but never universaliter in singulis, (universally in each
one:) so, both of us (our adversaries and we who contest with them) being
within the visible Church: the true defense of either party, were by the right
rule of examina^ion, to prove them selves so to be in the church, as that
they are also of it: and not, by impudent and ridiculous assuming what is in
question, to flee all trial. We never denied Antichrist to be in the church,
and as was foretold of him, to have so far prevailed therein, by force of error
and standulent pretense of the Lamb his horns, as, he obtained place and
ruled in tota Ecclesia communiter (in the whole church in common) but a toto
communiter (from the whole in common) to conclude ad vniversum singulariter (to
vniversalli^ each one) it is a deceitful aequivocation.

6. Here, yet, they think us entangled in a great inco^venient, for that the
Bishop of Rome (whom we hold to be Antichrist) having bin for some ages
acknowledged ministerial head of the church: and, the outward ordinatio^ of al
churchmen either mediatly or immediately flowing from him, we must confess us
to have no ordinary calling at all, or then that we have it from Antichrist.
so as they think us hereby reduced to one of these necessities, either to
refuse al ordinary vocation, or then, for maintaining of our ordinary callings,
to justify their Pope from who^ they have proceeded, and, so, consequently, to
condemn al our own both church and doctrine. But, while they think us
intrapped, we are by an open way escaped: for, we both yield that our ordinary
vocation, has, outwardly in a sort, proceeded from the Bishop of Rome, and that
he is notwithstanding, that very Antichrist and man of sin. And, to show how
these two so appara^tly repugnant points do yet very well consist, without any
either discredit or derogation to the dignity or lawfulnes of our callings: we
have rightly to wey the distinct conditions of Antichrist, as he comes to be
diversely considered in his first hatching, yea and the many insensible, flow,
and long succeeding degrees of his grouth toward that height, whereby against
all that is called god, Satan his throne was erected in the mids of the church:
and again, in that top of impiety, whereto the mystery of iniquity did
mount up by time, 2. These. 2.4. Revel. 2.13.
nemo enim repent fit turpissimus (for none becomes extremely evil at
once) for, even from the Apostolic times that mischief was a workinge, and,
albeit, first, by slow and insensible, 2. These. 2.7. 1. John 4.3.
and next by more speedy and sensible degrees: and, even in the height
thereof, it had yet two degrees. In that, first, like a fraudulent Parde,
albeit having on his head the name of blasphemy, the beast deceaved, and as,
Revel. 13.1.2.
Balaam, crastily laying stumbling blocks, bewitched the earth, Revel. 2.14.
as in Pergamus. And secondly, by increase of cruelty and impiety, he became
all of the Dragon his color, and had his whole body full of the names of
blasphemy: Revel. 17.3.6.
the Whore borne up by him, being dru^kt with the blood of Saints, Revel.
2.20.
and furiously, as Iezabel an impudent cruel queein, domining in Thyatira.
and yet still, in both these states, he was long so borne out with Prophetical
pretense, as, Revel. 2.13.14.19.20.
even the true Church lurking under and within his compass ( where Satan his
throne was) yet had her eyes so dazeled and courage so quailed with the
glistring show and proud pretense of Pastoral and Prophetical authority,
that, howsoever she kept her self pure from his spiritual fornication, and
held the name of God, yet she had not either the knowledge or courage to
challenge directly the impious usurpation; which, was, indeed, an argument of
the true Church her weakness, and that Christ had therein, somewhat against her,
but no argument for all that, why either she, so dwelling, and in weakness,
tolerating that evil, was not the true Church, or that Balaam and Iezabel,
thus tolerated of her, were not that false prophet, and mystical whore.

7. An other consideration of Antichrist, is, that he is no outward enemy
openly and directly fighting against the ensign of profession and name of
Christ, but an inward traitor, deceaving by the ensign: and that so
cunningly and covertlie, as, a long time, not only his characterized ones (who
only of his favoures are partakers both of his treason and endless judgment)
but also many simple sheep deceaved by the semblance of the Lamb his horns,
Revel. 14.9.10. and 16.2.
and in singlenes of heart following the ensign, were made so to follow him,
and to receave his name. albeit they received never his character, nor learned
the deeepnes of Satan. Revel. 13. and 2.24.
and, many also, who never either received character or name, yet lurking
within him, and shrouded under the common ensign of profession, received the
number of his name (that is, were numbered and counted to be his) albeit, in
effect, they were none of his, either by acceptance of character or name.
Revel. 11.2. and 13.5.
For, he treading down the holy City and Court of the Temple (that is,
domining and ruling in the visible church) and, along time, overthrowing,
therein, all true worship, as did Iezabel in Israel 42. months, or three
years and a half, and Antiochus Epiphanes, in Jerusalem, the same space: all
which time of his usurpation, the true church within his compass. continually
lurking, as the Temple within the City and Court: No other possible access
could be to the Temple (the true Church) but through the City and Court (the
visible Church): 2. These. 2.4.
wherein, Antichrist sitting, that is, Domining, all Christians behooved, of
necessity, to join to that body where was the common ensign, which,
howsoever, or by whomsoever carried, August. lib. de vtilitate ^redends.
yet it was ever oportunum inquirendi exordium (convenient entry to inquire
by). and, so, always, many coming thither, and spying the pollution of the
City and court of the Temple, they stepped in to the Temple: where,
continually (therefore in a close and deep wisdom, that case is numbered by
days) all the time of Antichrist his most absolut prevayling, Revel. 11.3.
was the true church, and true and faithful Ministers of grace and light: and
albeit few, and long lurking, and in heavines, yet powerfully dispensing light
and grace, and free from open and barbarous persecution: Revel. 10.8.
till the little book opened, and obtained out of the hand of the great
Angel, and greedily and sweetly swallowed, enabled, and stirred them, by the
right measuring reed, Revel. 11.1.2.
to examine the church, and thereby, to find that city and court were to be
cast out. whereat the beast (Antichrist) highly chaffed, Revel. 11.7 etc.
murthereth first, even with applause, those true Ministers. But, God, still
stirring up others in the same spirit, at last, a visible separation is made,
not from the Church (as our adversaries vainlie pratle) but from Antichrist and
the long covered traitor in the church. So as, then, truth and true
professors, within the church and only of the church, but long borne down and
lurking through prevailing error, at length begun to become visible (to the
terror and astonishment of their adversaries) and to obtain and bear sway, by
the discovery and fall of Antichrist. Whose sacrilegious impiety, having come
to such height, as it could no longer be covered or borne, Revel. 11.12.
it was then, said to the revived witnesses, Come up hither, and their enemies
saw them and were afraid, that is, the long lurking, afflicted, and at last
murdered ones become visible, even to their enemies, who, first, imagined none
such to be, and next, that they could be no more: and to their grief and
terror, are seen and known to bear away the title of the true Church, in
that place (as through all that Prophecy) signified by the name of heaven, in
opposition to the earth and earthly ones. We have not only strong and
invincible arguments, but even, therewith, such clear foretold story of all
the ryfinge, grouth, doctrine, dealing, and fall of Antichrist: And of the
continual manner of God his gracious dispensation toward his true Church,
lurking under him, afflicted by him, and victorious over him, as that, wherein
our adversaries glory most, turns most to their shame, and, that, wherewith
they most reproache our Church, speaks strongly for us. And the Lord his
wise providence, for preserving, thus, his Church, in the mids of
Antichristian usurpation, while he appeared to possess all, was wonderful in
that, even in time of greatest corruption: yet a sure access and free way was
still reserved and kept, thorough the City and Court, to the Temple, the
Sacrament of Baptism, in substance remaining, and the doctrine of the Trinity
being kept sound.

8. We are so far from denying to Antichrist a place, yea and an ordinary
calling in the Church, that we affirm constantly, that so it must have
been: And, that, not only he behooved to be in it, but also Sit, that is,
bear rule therein. 2. These. 2.4. Revel. 2.13. 1. John 2.19.
But so, we grant him to be in it, as yet he is none of it, more then a
boil or apostume, in the body, is a member of the body. so we grant him to
have had rule, and ordinary calling in the Church, as had these Husbandmen,
to whom, indeed, the Vineyard was set, Math. 21.38. etc.
but, they murdered the heir, such an ordinary builder we confess him to
be, as rejects that stone, which yet, in despyte of him, becomes head of
the corner. Math. 21.42.
We yield him the ordinary vocation of a Pastor, but that he is a wolf: to
have been, sometime, a star of heaven, and minister of light, and of the
keys of the kingdom, but, to have fallen to the earth, to have changed the
keys of heaven, in those of the bottomless pit, Revel. 9.1.2.
and to have become the minister of darkness, whereby he has darkened Sun,
Moon, and Air. Satan having been once, Revel. 12.8.9.
by Michael his valor, so powerfullie cast down from heaven, had never again
been able, by the beast of his authority, to erect his throne even in the
Temple of God, if he had not pretended the Lamb his horns: Revel. 13.2 2.
These. 2.4. Revel. 2.13. Revel. 13.11. Judges 14.18.
neither had he ever been able to send out our Sampson his ridle, if he had
not plowed with his heifer.

Now, then, seeing that Antichrist of an order and succession of degenerating
Pastors (and that not at once, but slowly and by degrees) has slily arissen
to that height of impiety, as a beast rising out of the earth, ( Sensim
imperare incipiebat religio, habenas imperij capere, ius suum acquirere, nibil
subitum nihil tumultuarium (says their own parasite Steuchus: And, Revel.
13.11.
seeing that always, before his discovery, the pretense of the common ensign
carried him out: and, that, there-through, many true, both Pastors and
Professors, receaving his name, or his number, but not his character, did come
in singlenes, to the common ensign, and not properly to him: Revel. 11.12.
seeing, that albeit he was a Wolf, yet before it was said to the revived
witnesses, Come up hither, he brooked still the place of an ordinary Pastor:
and, seeing that outward ordination, and all the action of the ministers
thereof, serves but for outward order, all inward gift, grace, power and
virtue coming from God the author of the calling: what absurdity is it, that
a good Pastor receave ordination of a wolf, who yet has the place of an
ordinary Pastor in the Church, more then a true Christian to receave the
Sacraments from a reprobate, being always an ordinary minister, which
sacraments, yet by the inward cooperation of God are effectual to the
receaver? for, it is sufficient for an outward ordinary calling, that the
minister thereof have outward place and power of ordination, albeit he be but a
hireling and a thief: and the receaver of outward ordinary vocation, as he
has al gift and grace from God only, whose the work is, so, is he not tied or
sworn to the will or appetit of the outward minister, but only to the Lord: no
more then any minister baptizeth in his own name, 1. C^r, 1.13
but in the Lord his, whose badge and cognissance only we take on thereby, and
not of the minister thereof. So, as, who, thereupon, would evince me to have
made defection from the church, because I impugn the heresy of him who gave
me ordination: or that, finding him to be a wolf, and both giving warning
thereof to others, and my self shrinking from him, that, so doing, I either had
no ordinary vocation at all, or the^ had fallen from it: I think that any of
sound and settled senses would advyse to minister to him rather Hellebore for
his brain, then any other answer.

9. Now, then, albeit our adversaries be more then impudent to deny our
ordinary vocation, and, it were, in us, but childish simplicity, in such
evidencie thereof, to grant them any apparent advantage: and, albeit it harmeth
nothing our cause, that our outward calling has, in a sort, flowed from the
Bishop of Rome: whose long usurpation in the church, Revel. 13.11. 2. These. 2.4.
so little dismayeth us, as, rather it confirms us the more, Antichrist being
so proper a soar of the body of the church, as that he can befall none other
body: and thus, though no otherwise, yet even by sight of the soar, in, but
not of the body, being sufficiently assured that, certainly, the true body
was there: yet, in so clear and direct an answer and solution of this question
given by Christ him self, Math. 21.23. etc.
I will never yield that the want of ordinary vocation shall be, always, a
relevant exception against truth and the true Preachers thereof.

10. But, thus, say they, a door is opened to all confusion in the house of
God, while a liberty is left for each man to usurp a calling at his pleasure,
God forbid. Yea we are so far from this disorder, and do so far both
reverence and maintain ordinary vocation, that, in a constitute Church
holding the foundation (albeit otherwise, diverse things, therein, did require
reformation) if any man of how great gifts soever, yet without ordinary
calling, should intend him self to be a Pastor: we would no otherwise
account of him, then of a seditious and turbulent spirit, who either,
fanaticklie presuming of graces, would vainlie despise order, or, for some
infirmities and defectes, would arrogantlie and uncharitably, break the
unity of the Church. But, if corruption has so far prevailed, that the
faithful City has become an ^a^lot, Isai 1.21.22. Math. 21. Ierem. 6.13.
Ezech. 22.25. Isai 56.10.11.
and all her silver be turned in dross: if her husbandmen have become
murderers, and her builders have become destroyers: if from the Prophet even
to the Priest every one follows after lies: if there be a conspiracy of her
Prophets in the mids of her like a roaring Lion ravening the pray^: if her
watchmen be al blind, and know nothing: if they be all dum dogs and can not
bark: if they ly and sleep and love to sleep: if her Pastors know nothing
nor under stand, and look wholly to their own ways: Mich. 3.6.
if night be to them for a vision, and darkness for a divin^tion. In such a
case, God both heretofore has, and always may send out men extraordinarily,
who, coming in the way of righteousness, and in evidence of truth and power,
convincing the ordinary husbands to be thieves, and the ordinary builders to
be destroyers, even thereby sufficiently verify their ministry, Math. 7.18.
to be from heaven. For an evil tree can not bring forth good fruit, nor a
good tree bring forth evil fruit. By their fruits ye shall know the^. It is
deceitful sophistry to reason from the state of a well constitut church, to a
church dead in Baall: or contrare, from the first generation, or (as I may call
it) regeneration and reformation of a Church, from deadly confusion, to that,
which in a constitut or well reformed church is to be observed: from a
respective necessity, to conclud a necessity absolut, and he were a ridiculos
phificio^, who in the cure of a deadly and desperate disease, would admit
nothing, but, what, for maintaining of health in, ordinary diet were observed.
Our master, who most precisely fulfilled all righteousness, (...). 2.14.
has taught us by his own example, that, when the ordinary pastors have made
the temple of God a house of merchandise, and the house of prayer, a den of
thieves: that, then, by extraordinary motion from him, the tables of these
money changers ar to be roundly overturned, and these thieves to be whipped
to the doors. That which is written of the house of God, answering for the
matter, and, that, which is written of true zeal of the house, answering for
the manner. And, who, I pray you, did ever yet hear, or what instance can be
given of any reformation, of a quiet disordered state; but, by some more (at
least in some points) then an ordinary fo^me, either in the persons reformers,
or in their manner of doing?

11. Our adversaries answer, that, if such a case as that is, in which only,
we make extraordinary calling to have place, can not at any time befall the
church, the^ all our reasoning is vain. But, so it is, that such a case ca^
never befall the church. Erg^. the major or first part of the argument is from
our own ground: the assumption or minor, they prove by that, wherewith
compendiously, forsooth, they always, in all things, defend them selves, and
summarilie with one stroke, overthrow all whatsoever we bring against them.
Math. 16.18. Math. 28.20.
Namely, that the church can not err. For has not the Lord builded her on a
rock, so, as, the gates of hell cannot prevail against her? has he not
promised to be always with her til the consummation of al things, and end of
the world? we grant all these goodly and great promises made to the church: we
both rejoice and glory of them in the Lord, and know assuredly, that he, who is
faithful and true, holds well his height. But, their conclusion, hereupon
(in their sense) has a wordle of aequivocations. For, first, albeit it be most
certain, that God never so abandoneth his church, as that, finally and
fundamentally, she falls from truth, or is miscarried with error: but that
still, even in most desperate cases, she has in her both the light and life of
God, yet, hereupon, to infer, at all times and in all and every thing, such
an absolut perfection as is mixed with no degree of error or infirmity, it
concludes not. Neither is she for this, rejected, or not esteemed the true
and beloved church of God, for that he has somewhat against her, but
lovingly, thereupon, exhorted to ame^dement. And, albeit, God in his word, has
fully revealed what, for her accomplishment in grace, Revel. 2.1^.16. etc.
is requisite, yet, in this mortal course, where, we know but in part, and
prophecy but in part, she neither alike at all times is capable, neither of
all things, 1. Cor. 13.9
perfectly, at any time. And, yet, the Lord, according to his promise, leads
her in all truth, for that, by degrees, he brings her on to perfection: and,
notwithstanding of her own weakness, and of all the gates of hell assailing
her, yet error and lies never so provaile, but that she keeps the name, and
lives the life of God: And, in the end, victorious over all untruth, Ephesians.
5.17.
she is perfyted in all verity. The Lord is said to wash his church, that she
may be a holy and clean spouse to him, not having spot or wrinckle, and he
performs accordingly: but, so, as, he is still purging and cleansing her,
til, fully, at length, beautified, she be received in the marriage chamber.
Neither is she, herefore, not to be counted holy, because she not only is
exhorted to the study of sanctification, but also makes a daily progres
therein. He has promised to subdue Satan under our feet. Romans 16.20.
Neither question we therefore of his truth herein, because we find the enemy,
not only standing armed against us, but also, often wou^ding us: for, we know,
that he who has promised, will perform, Philip. 1.^.
and, the work, which he has begun, he will accomplish in his saints. Would we
accuse a physician, who had assured us of p^rfyt convalescing, therefore to be
skilles and false, because, albeit finding our selves in the way of health,
yet, before attaining the full point, we had sustained many fittes, and
apparent, deadly traunces? That, which the Psalmist says of the outward
afflictions of the Church, ^sal. 129.2.
may be truly affirmed of all whereby, in any sort, Satan assaileth her. They
have often afflicted me from my youth, but they have not prevailed against me.
And, that which the Apostle, upon his own experience, speaks of our progres
in the strength of the inner man, is most true in all the graces of God
bestowed on his Church: that, his strength is perfyted in ^^^^nes: ^ Cor. 12.9.
and, that, therefore, in patience, we have to esteem his measure of grace in
the time sufficient for us. Being assured, that, albeit we are not yet perfyt,
yet, neither in fighting we beat the air, ^ Cor. 9.26.
nor yet run in vain, but are in the way toward full perfe^tio^: forgetting
what is behind, endeavoring to what is before, (...). ^.1^.
and following hard toward the mark for the pryse of the high calling: certain
so to end our race, as, therewith to obtain the crown. And, if the condition
of the Church can be no otherwise rightly esteemed, but according to that
measure which in any of her members, or in all jointly, during her course, here
in weakness, is fulfilled: which, in the best degree of any ordininary state is
ever mixed with some infirmity and mist of ignorance: what madness is this, to
dream of a perfyt and full point; while we are yet but in the midst of our
journey?

12. Now, again, when, in a right sense (such as I have showed) it is granted
that the Church can not err: what, I pray you, is our adversaries avantage
herein? except that* still, impudently they take that which is in question.
For, even herby, we argue the^ not to be the church, because they have erred,
and that both foullie and fundamentally. And, thus, again, they fall in a
second, and their own ordinary aequivocation: concluding from them selves,
the boil, apostume, and excrement of the Church, in it and not of it, to the
true Church and promises proper to her, whereof they vainly and falsely boast:
ridiculouslie pleading truth to be with them, because they, forsooth, are the
Church: where their right defense were, by evincing the truth to be with them,
which is the life of the Church, so, to vindicateiustlie to them selves that
title.

13. For strengthening of them selves in this usurpation, they fall to a third
aequivocation. The church (say they) is always visible. and, in so far, as,
for some ages, no other church can be showed which was not of their communion,
it evinceth them to be that true Church, which can not nor has not etred. And,
here, they display all the force of their eloquence the Church being the
sheepfold of the sheep, John 10.2^. 1. Timoth. 3.15.
the house of God, the pillar and stable seat of truth: would God invite us to
a church which cannot be seen? would he so, delude his own children, as to
bid them hear a Church which does not speak? That, which I have already said
of the arysing, groneth, and success of Antichrist and of the condition of the
true Church under him and within his compass, answers sufficiently to this
aequivocation, whereby, deceitfully, they reason from the visible Church to the
truth and true Church always in the visible Church, but not always visible in
it: except in a sort, for that the visible church and common ensign ever
tells where they are. When we affirm the church to be invisible, it is not
that we deny her to be and to have always been visible in the common ensign
of public Profession. But, to infer hereupon, that truth and true professors,
always in her, and only of her, are at al times visible, obtain, Revel. 12:
and bear sway, it is a secret fallacy. Satan, first, in open and advoued
rage, oppugned the common ensign: Revel. 13. 2. These. 2.
till, dispairing of succes therein, he turned course and shape: and, in his
vicar of the bottomless pit, pretending the Lamb his horns, he took upon him
to bear it, and deceaved mightily thereby. And, yet, neither, thus, did the
Lord ever leave his own sheep uncertain or wild whether to go. For, the
common ensign, albeit carried, principally, by a traitor, yet ever told them
where the true church dwelt, even where Satan his throne was: so as coming to
the ensign, Revel. 2.13. August. lib. (...) ^tilitate ^^edends. Revel. 11.
tanquam ad op^rtunum inquirendi exordiu^ (as to a co^venient entry to inquire
by) albeit they did find both the holy City and Court of the Temple trodden
under foot of the Heathen, yet stepping inward, there never wanted two olives
and two candlestickes in the Temple. And thus, still also, the true church did
speak: but so, as amidst Antichrist his usurpation (while he seemed without
controlment to brook all, and that, under pretense of the Lamb his horns,
nothing was heard in the holy City and Court of the Temple but the Dragon his
mouth) albeit the two witnesses still prophesied: and a 144000. Revel. 14.
sealed, and secret ones, cleaving constantly to the Lamb on mount Sion
(while all the earth followed the beast) and, worshipping before the throne,
beasts and elders, had a powerful and plentiful dispensatio^ of grace (like
the roar of many waters, the noise of strong thundrings) and so, loud and
sweet a song of praise as the sound of douce and well tuned harpes could yield:
yea, and albeit they kept them selves, in the mids of so commonly a
prevailing evil, Revel. 13.3.
pure from spiritual fornication, as which were all Virgins chaste and
faithful to their Spouse the Lamb: yet, while all the earthly ones wondered,
and were in wonder, miscarried after the beast, none could either hear or
learn their high and sweet song, but themselves, who, in that common
Apostasy, were bought from the earth to be the true Citizens of heaven: and,
albeit in the earth, yet not of it, neither perceaved of their enemies, till,
to their terror, astonishment, and beginning fall, Revel. 11.12.
it was said to them Come up hither: and, till that, by degrees, they did
break forth through the mids of heaven, Revel. 14.6.
with no new, but even with that one and everlasting Gospel. Our adversaries
trifle, by concluding from the whole church in common, to universally each one
within it: and from these, who, in the Church, and even obtaining therein, yet
were not of it, to these, who were always in it, and, albeit sometime borne
down, yet were only of it. Truth is always in the visible Church, yea and no
where else, but yet not always visible therein. And who thervpo^ would infer
this, or that therefore it behoved always to obtain and bear sway, were, in
Logike, no les ridiculous, then who should conclude that lies and error did
ever prevail therein. for they are always in the church: in that the envious
one sows his tares even with the good feed, and was a lier from the
beginning. God never forsakes his church. yet we must acknowledge, to his
glory, that, sometimes, if he had not left us a remnant, we had been as Sodom,
Isai 1.9. Ad vi^c. epist. 48.
and had been like Gomorrha. Ipsa est (says Augustine) quae aliquando
obscuratur, and tanquam obnubilatur, multitudine Scandalorum: aliquando
tranquillitate temporis quieta and libera apparet: aliquando tribulationum and
tentationum fluctibus operitur at^, turbatur. It is, she which sometime is
darkened, and as it were overcludded with multitude of offenses: sometime by
tra^quillitie of time, quiet and free shows her self: sometime is covered and
troubled with the waves of tribulations.

14. But seeing by our own confession, truth ever abides in the church, with
who^ shall it be found (say they) but with the ordinary pastors and ministers
thereof, whose lips should preserve knowledge, Mala^. 2.7.
and at whose mouth the Lord will have us to ask counsel? shall the ordinance of
God be despised, and each man follow his own sense? God forbid. We know well,
that, howsoever the Lord be not tied to means, but that, against and without
al means, he may accomplish his good pleasur, Romans 10.17. 1. Corint. 2^.
Reverent reading of the scripture.
yet that faith is by hearing, and it pleases the lord to save the world by
the foolishnes of preaching, we know that how soever the careful reading of
scripture, is both reco^me^ded to al, and is commendable in all, yet, that for
understanding what we read, the common sort have need of an interpreter and a
messenger, who is a man of a thousand: we are so far, herein, Act. 8.31. Job.
33.4. Eccles. 8.1.
from permitting every man to his own sense (as calu^niouslie our adversary
give out against us) that we constantly avouch, that who ever co^temneth the
Lord his ordinance, herin he co^temneth the Lord: and is worthily given over to
giddines and blindness of mind. But, because, the Lord will save by preaching,
and dispenses all light and grace by Pastors, does it follow hereupon, that
the ordinary Pastors and Ministers can not err, and fall from this truth?
Or, is the Lord, the holy one of Israel so limited, that, though every man be
a liar, yet his truth should fail? or, is he not able, though all the natural
seed should degener, Math. 3.9.
yet of stones to raise children to Abraham? And, is he not alike able, yea
has he not more then one (to the praise of his power and truth) when
ordinary Prophets become fools, then even to open the mouths of asses,
N^^^b. 22.28. 2. P^t. 2.16.
to rebuke the foolishnes of the Prophets? It is most certain, that when
prophecy fails, the poeple perish. But from the necessity of Prophecy and
of Prophets, together, that to the ordinary succession truth, always, is
necessarily tied, who sees not herein, a plain fallacy? For, though the
ordinary husbandmen become murderers and the ordinary builders become
destroyers, yet the Lord still maintains his promise, reports fruit of his
vineyard, and builds his house, by stirring up others extraordinarily, who
come in the way of righteousness, and this, is their fourth aequivocation in
this their stout affeveration (that the Church can not err): for that not only
they conclude from the Church to Pastors, a part of the Church (which we could
pass with them,) but, that also, from the necessity of Pastors,
indefinitlie, they conclude, definitlie, and sophisticallie, of ordinary
Pastors.

15. Now, I do not herefore affirm, that ever God so left the ordinary
ministers of his church, that, albeit all did, in common, yet that ever at any
time, universally each one did fall from truth. Revel. 7.3. and 9.4. and 11.3.
and 14 1.2.3.
Yea, I am persuaded (neither that by conjecture only, but by clear warrant of
scripture) that in all ages, eve^ in most corrupt times of Antichrist, God still
had a number of true and godly Pastors: and, that, not only in them, but also
by them, he preserved light and life in his church, howsoever for their
tolerating in weakness of spiritual fornication, Revel. 1.14.
he had something against them. But, here, our adversaries fall in the fifth,
and that same aequivocation, in the case of pastors, whereby they deceave, in
the case of the church. as if because truth still abides with, and by the
ministry of Pastors, that, therefore, al, or most part of Pastors did ever
hold the truth, or that amongst Pastors in common truth did, always, obtain
and bear sway: for it is most clear and certain, that howsoever universally
each one never do fall from the light and life of God, yet when that carnally
presuming of God his promises, and of their ordinary place in the church, they
become secure, and abuse their place to fulfill their own lusts: that then,
they both may and have communiter omnes (al in common) fallen away: from the
Prophet even to the Priest every one following after his: Ier. 6.13. Ez^ch.
22.25.
that then, there will be a conspiracy of her Prophets in the mids of her: the^
all her watchmen will be blind and know nothing: all dum dogs which can not
bark: lying and sleeping and loving to sleep: knowing no^ understanding
nothing, Isai 56.11.
but looking wholly to their own ways. So as most justly, the Lord, thereupon,
gives them night for a vision, and darkness for a divination. Math. 3.6.^
In which case, for magnifying of his truth and power, and for their confusion,
the Lord has and may extraordinarily stir up men in the way of righteousness
to do his work.

16. But, whatsoever (say they) might be presumed of Pastors in common, yet,
being assembled in Counsel or Synod, they can not so fall from truth. As if,
forsooth, where all the members are, apart, bad and infected, that together
they could make up a good or sound body. Yea, as we have already cleared, that
the argume^tation from the church, or promises made thereto, to ordinary
Pastors in common, is vicious: and, from the ordinary Pastors al in common,
to universally each one, is much more halting: so, here even from the whole
Pastors universally, to the general counsel, it is still faulty. For no
general counsel can be brought, but that, albeit al, therein, had erred, yet
numbers of ordinary Pastors were besides, who might have holden the truth. O,
but the Counsels have a special promise of the Lord his presence, as which do
represent the whole church, and he blesses, his own ordinance. This is still
impudently to oppone one and the same thing. I deny not but the Lord has
promised, Mat. 18.19
that where or whenever two or three assemble in his name, he will be in the
midst of them. And, I am persuaded, that no number, how small soever, of lawful
pastors (having God and his honor singlie before their eyes, and proponing,
and following only his reveiled will, and in Christian love agreeing in one,
and in that disposition, humbly and heartily in calling to the Lord) did ever
assemble themselves, or shall at any time convene, which have not found and
shall not find the truth of his promise. That no man esteem me, herby, to loose
a liberty for men to contemn God his ordinance in the assemblies of his
Church, more then, before, in the mean of preaching of the word. But, I pray
you, had ever the Lord so limited him self, that al counsels shall undoubtedly
and always so assemble, as they may be ever secure of that promise? miserable
experience, in all ages, has taught us clearlie the contrary. So as the holy
^an Nazienzen did not stick to say, that he never did see any good effect of
counsels. And Constantin the Emperor, in his epstle to the Synod of Tyrus,
roundly tells them that, in all the dealings of Bishops, he could see
nothing but an overthrow of al religion. So while men ar miscarried with the
spirit of contention, bitterness, pride, avarice, ambition, and self-love, they
cannot, indeed, make the promise of God of none effect, which, always abides
steadfast, but, they depryve themselves of the fruit thereof. Besides this where
voices are numbered and not wayed, albeit many assemble with good hearts, ^.
Kings 22.24. ^^re^. 26.
yet, often, major pars vincit meliore^ (the grater part obtain against the
best.) Thus, Michaia was not only disdainfully checked, but also buffeted and
imprisoned. Thus Ier^mie was condemned and delivered to the secular power, as a
man who was worthy of death: and, thus, our Lord Jesus was convicted and
condemned of blasphemy, and adjudged to die. Neither gives this a liberty to
despise counsels, as which are the Lord his appointment for the rule of his
house: but, it warns wathchmen, in fear and trembling, to take heed to their
ministry: and not vainlie, while they securely follow their own lusts, yet
presumptuously to cry out, The Temple of the Lord, The Temple of the Lord. The
law shall not perish from the Priest, nor counsel from the ancient. For, eve^
the Lord answers such men, that the law shall perish from the Priest, and the
counsel from the ancient. And, it is to waken al Christians, wisely and
carefully, to discern spirits. Augustine, in few words, tells, how,
rightly, both to try and make good use of counsels. Lib. 3. advers^^ maxim.
Nec ego Nicenam Synodu^ tibi, nec tu mihi Arminensem debes tanqua
praejudicaturus obijcere. Nec ego hujus authoritate, nec tu illius detineris:
Scripturaru^ authoritatibus, non quo^um^^ proprijs, sed quae vtris^ sunt
co^munes res cum re, causa cu^ causa, ratio cu^ratione certet, that is, neither
ought I to object to thee as a prejudice, the counsel of Nyce, nor thou to
object to me the counsel of Ariminum. Neither am I holde^ to the authority of
the one, nor thou to the authority of the other, let us debate by authorities
of Scriptures. Which are common to us both, and not these authorities which are
proper to either party: let matter be set against matter, cause against
cause, and reason plead against reason.

17. The Romanists themselves perceaving well how weak and uncertain a warrant
of truth, is either the co^munalty of pastors or the decrees of counsels,
which, as Cadmus his race, each, al most, destroy other: they, in end, leave al
other refuge, and come to the Bishop, of Rome, and do co^fine al verity within
his breast: who, though he be a Devil, a Sorcerer, Ihon Gerson then alyve.
a Sodomit, a Simoniak, a Murderer, an Heretik (as was Ioh. 22. who denied the
immortality of the soul) finally, a despiser both of God and man: yet, he
cannot err in Cathedra, in the chair. Thus, as men mated with maintaining an
unequal match for a wrong cause, their last defenses are feeblest. Wherein,
albeit, not only they be destitut of all warrant either of Scripture or sound
Antiquity, but that even a great part also of their own Clergy are ashamed
thereof: yet their Jesuits and Seminaries are still more then extreemly impudent.
It is inded, true that some of the ancient fathers attributed much, yea and too
much to the church of Rome, and reverenced greatly both the judgment and
authority thereof: by reason of so many famous Bishops, who still, in that
seat, had, both holden soundly, the true faith themselfes, and had been great
ayders and conforters of others, who in diverse parts did stryve and suffer for
it. And, in this, men otherwise learned and holy, were not only too liberal,
but, even beyond measure prodigal: because whatsoever either praise or
prerogative they could have on the church of Rome (as the course of things,
then went) it made for the credit of their cause: Satan, even thus, subtillie
plowing with God his own heifer, for fetting forward the mystery of
iniquity: which (mynding, simply, but the defense of the good cause in the
time) these good men were not ware of. But, such an unbridled and blasphemous
license, as the Popes, since, have usurped and taken to them selves, and their
Canonistes and Parasites have given them, these godfathers never dreamed of.
As any who reads their writtes and stories, and, with judgment, considers
the cases and condition of these times, will easily perceave, and be never a
whit troubled, with the hyperbolick and partly evil understood; partly false
and supposititious praise, and privileges given to that seat. Wherewith when
any of the Bishops of Rome, being too much tickled, did, press thereupon, to
usurp intolerably, they were the^, oftener then once not only resisted, but
also their ambition freely checked and gravely rebuked. As the headines of
Vi^^^r repressed by Ireneus Bishop of Ly^^^ and Polycrates of Ephesus: the act
of the counsel of Chalcedon in favor of the Bishop of Constantinople,
constantly maintained against all (...) his chafe: and the act of the counsel
of Cha^tage against all appellation from thence to the seat of Rome (upon
evident conviction of his fraud in falsifying the acts of the Synod of Nice)
make more then manifest. That I speak nothing of the sharp check given to
Julius Bishop of Rome (albeit topping a good cause, yet, therein, arrogating
too much to his state) by the Bishopes of the East. So as, instead of helping
the truth, his ambition gave the adversaries an advantage to put him so to
silence, as all the sway and authority of Church matters remained with the
Eastern Bishops (says Sabellicus) till, long after Ph^c^^ restored it to
Rome, many such instances the story affords. But as the Roman Doctors are
extreemlie impudent, so, any broken sentence or wrested authority, is good
enough to blind the ignorants: whom God, justly, gives up to believe lies
because they delight in error: giving them, therefore, heap of Teachers
according to their humors. Now, how far, they are destitut of all sure
warrant, and yet, how far, in giddines of mind, and force of the bewitching
cup of fornication, they are carried to maintain this absurd and monstrous
opinion, is clear, if it were but by this, that they are not ashamed to bring
an instance and argument from Caiphas, prooving that the Popes cannot err in
the chair, in that, by virtue thereof, he did prophecy that one must die for
the people. John 11.49.50.51.
and one, of their side, goes so far herein, in a deep speculation,
forsooth, even from the bottomless pit, as, to justify Christ his lawful
succession and right to the Priesthood (which, otherwise, I warrant you, could
not been well maintained) he will have Caiphas, Master John Fras^^, in his
challenge.
by that saying (in a hudge mystery) to resign the Priesthood and instal
Christ therein. Thus rather then he should appear to brook any thing but by
ordinary succession; making our Lord, who was neither of that tribe, nor of
that order, but a Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedeck, to be
successor, in a sort to Caiphas. And, it is the Lord his just judgment, that,
who sell themselves to maintain lies, they be given over to such absurd and
blasphemous suggestions. But, what a blindness is this; to catch hold of that
one word, which was no definitive sentence of the chair, but a bloody advyse,
for encouraging the rest of his consistory to pass roundly over all points of
conscience or equity in that matter, for that, howsoever they could find no
just pretense against Christ, yet, in any sort, it were better that one man
should die, the^ that, by the peoples believing in him and cleaving to him, the
Romans should be stirred to destroy the whole nation? why pass they by these
sentences, in the chair, whereby all were excommunicated who confessed the
Lord Jesus, and, whereby, the Son of GOD was convicted and condemned of
blasphemy? Will they rather subscribe these sentences, then grant an error in
the chair? Or, if these cannot be excused, how ridiculous are they, for
prooving an impossibility of erring in the chair, to produce amongst a number
of execrable and blasphemous errors, one reckles word vnwittinge spoken?
Neither did the holy Ghost in noting that speech, mean any such matter, as
these men, to strengthen their own imaginations, fondly build thereon. But,
to show, that Caiphas, while he was utterly corrupted, and but set only on
mischief, yet, by the all and overruling power of him, who has al both hearts
and tounges in his hand, did speak such words, as howbeit he neither so
understood nor minded them, yet, if in vprightnes and knowledge they had been
uttered in that sense which the words might have borne; and according to that
event, which contrary to the speakers mind, the all and overruling hand of
God brought about: that, then, they had well besiemed that place which that
wicked man did occupy. Such a prophet then, was Caiphas, herin, as was the
Devil, when, mynding but blaspemie, deceit, and murder, he told the woman,
that, eating of the forbidden fruit, they should become like unto God. For,
indeed, out of man his fall, much contrary to Satan's mind, the Almighty
wrought that hudge and incomprehensible work of the manifestation of God in
the flesh: and making, thereby all true believers, partakers in a sort, of the
divine nature. And, such a prophet for us, let their Pope be, as, who, being
continually set on lying and murdering, yet never prophecieth true, but when
the overruling power of GOD brings some such thing to pass, which, albeit
his words might bear, yet, he neither minded not willed. Yea, this example of
Caiphas so little helps them, that, thereby, evidentlie, all whatsoever they
brag of general Counsels, and of their Pope even in the chair, is seen to
be foolish. For, I pray you, what instance can they bring of a more lawful
Counsel, or, of a Pope more solemnly sitting in the chair (as touching all
outward requisite for the lawfulnes either of persons or ordinary power) then
were, both that whereby Jeremy was convicted; and this again, whereby our Lord
was condemned as a blasphemer?

18. But, as, men, who disput more, for maintayning, any way, their point, then
for resolution, being sore pressed, do seek all corners: so, here, they
allege, that, howsoever such a decay might have befallen the Church under the
law: yet, of the Christian Church, under the Gospel, in so large a measure of
light, and ample promises, no such thing ought to be presumed. Wherein, besides
an evident halting in Logike, is also a horrible and open blasphemy in
divinity. The fallacy is, that, from the measure of dispensation, and of the
promises made, they reason to the truth of God in performing. It is true, that
under the law, albeit they had one and the same covenant, in substance, and the
same promises: yet not in a like measure, or clear manner of dispensation.
Now, heerevpon, to conclude, because God promised not so clarelie nor
plentifully opened, his grace, that, therefore, he performed not alse truly
what he height: It is, first, a vicious argumentation, and, iuxt, a
contumelious blaspemie against the truth of God. For as a true man promising a
cottage to one, and a kingdom to another, is alike true in both albeit not
alike liberal: so, is God, always, in whatsoever or in what measure soever
he promised. His Church was his Church always, and, truth, always, was the
life of his Church: and, he prooved, always, alike true, in maintayning it in
a sparkle, as he did in keeping it in a shyning toarch. If they answer, That
they do not mean, that, for the common error of the Priests, Prophets and
ordinary Churchmen under the Law, that therefore, either the promise of God
failed, or his Church perished, then, we have all we plead for. For what, I
pray you, lets him; Or is his arm now shortened; that he may not in the
like manner and in the like cases preserve his Church? And, if, in a common
apostasy of ordinary Churchmen both Prophets and Priests, he yet has,
heretofore, still had a Church, why do our adversaries make no end of bitter
contention against us? We have, indeed, great and sure promises that the gates
of hell shall not prevail against his Church: but that the ordinary
Ministers, shall always, and all, in common, hold the truth, not one
syllable, yea, contrary, we have not only many and serious warnings of false
prophets to arise in the bowels of the church, and in sheep clothing, but
also most clearlie foretold, that such an Apostasy should come, whereby
Antichrist in all effectual deceyt should even sit, and bear rule in the Temple
of God. If they will say, that the Church of Israel had not such promises of
continual presence and preservation of truth, as the Christian Church has: It
is a treacherous sophisme. For they had also sure promises of continual
presence and preservation of truth, according to the measure dispensed, albeit
not of so great measure of presence and light. And as for that point, whereof
our adversaries glory most, and, wherein, now, at last, they are feign to
place all defense (namely, the prerogative of places and persons:) the Church
of Israel had much more for them (in so ample and many promises made of
Jerusalem, And to the house of Levy and family of Aaron,) where as the Church
under the Gospel (in which, neither at Jerusalem, nor in any mountain, but
everywhere, and of all men, God is to be worshipped in spirit and truth)
albeit having great sure promises of presence and preservation: yet, of tying
God or his truth to any places or persons, in all Scripture, she has not so
much as any show of a warrant; which, if the holy Ghost had minded, he might,
with much less ado, have reduced those many grave and earnest warnings given
both by Christ in the days of his flesh, and by his Apostles, thereafter, of
the peril of false prophets: and those careful instructions of notes how to
discern and avoid them, to a short and sure compende against all fraud:
bidding the Church but hold whatsoever the Bishop of Rome did hold, for, that
he, forsooth, could not err. If our adversaries yet oppone, that howsoever
the Church under the Law did sometime fall away all in common, and, that,
albeit the Christian Church should also in like manner, yet the truth of God
his promises should not therefore fail: but, that no such thing has befallen
the Christian Church, or could befall her: in respect of the great measure of
light and clear dispensation by the Gospel. It is many ways both foolish,
and impertinentlie alleged, for, first, it is a plain taking of that which
is in question. Next, as the state of our question is (whither possibly, the
Church may err ( communiter tota) and God his promise yet abide true) to
oppone, that she has not erred, is alse ridiculous as, if in disputation de
iure, one should answer de facto. If God his promise still may consist, albeit
she did so err, we have the point we plead for. And, whither she has
erred or not, they must of necessity come with us to try by such rules of
examination, as we only labor to reduce them to, and they, in an evil
conscience, always, flee: only crying against us, The Temple of the Lord, The
Temple of the Lord: And the Church can not err. Thirdly, this their
presumption of the ones possible and easy falling away, and of the others
assured standing in truth, grounded upon the less and greater measure of
light, it shows their foolishnes in divine matters. For, as, whatsoever
measure of light dispensed, is God his free benefit, so is our either
embracing or abiding therein, his only gift. Who as he justly will give over
presumptuous and secure men to groape even at noone day, 1. Corinthians. 10.13.
so, is he faithful and will not suffer his own to be tempted above that
they are able, but will give the issue with the tentation. We have, indeed, to
glorify God, and even to glory in him, for the huge measure of light and
graceful dispensation by the Gospel: but so far ought men to have been from
vain boasting thereof, or carnal and secure relying thereupon, as, in all
watchfulnes and godly care, they should have remembered, with all, that,
accordingly Satan was to advaunce the mystery of iniquity by all effectual
working, with all power and signs and lying wonders, 2. These. 2.
and in all deceaveablenes of unrighteousness, among them that perish, because
they received not the love of the truth, that they might be saved, and
therefore, God should send them strong delusion, etc. for Satan, as a crafty
warrior and subtle enemy, reserved and framed his last cunning, force, and
manner of working, according as he did see that, for deceaving, was requisite:
and accordingly, by God his wise permission, and just judgment, obtained a
throne even in the temple of God. And, as in the dealing of God, it is not to
be esteemed strange, that he so far gave over the world to the efficacy of
error (whereby he justly punished the contempt of his truth, and clearlie
foretold the case) so, is it nothing derogatorie, either to his goodness and
truth of his promises made to his Church, or to his power of performance: as
our adversaries, because the Lord (whom they would make a varlet to their
lusts) has justly cast dunge upon their faces, therefore by a doting
dilemma, Master John Fraser, in his challlenge.
would enforce upon us this blasphemy, as a necessary consec^arie of our
doctrine. For that, if the Church have erred, it must have been that either
GOD would not, or then that he could not keep his promise to her. But, it is
the property of their king Abaddon, to blaspheme the name of God, his
Tabernacle, and them that dwell in heaven. We both acknowledge his goodness,
and praise his truth, and power, and confess, that, by this course of dealing,
they are more highly manifested, then if the gates of hell and smoke of the
bottomless pit had never assailed the Church: Or, if the weakness of men had
never appeared to the praise, both of his goodness and power. For, as his
incomprehensible goodness and constant truth, are, herein, magnified, that
though all men be liers, yet he abides true, and the infidelity of men can
not make his promise of none effect: so, did his infinite power exceedingly
extol the self in this, that as he brings light out of darkness, and makes
his light to shine in darkness: as he brings life out of death, and
preserves the children of death: so, Revel. 11.
in the midst of Antichrist his usurpation, and such absolute domination in
the holy City and Court of the Temple (the visible Church) as no possible
means appeared of intertaining light: yet, he not only, all the while,
preserved two candlestickes and two olives, true witnesses and Ministers of
light and grace: but also (when, spyed out by Antichrist, they were cruelly
murdered, and, in his, and his sectatours estimation, utterly undone) he
revived them in further vigor, to his and their terror. That, while all the
earth followed the beast (wondering and singing, who is like the Beast, etc.)
he not only, all the while, had a 144000. singing another, Revel. 13.
though an vnperceived, note: but also, at length, to the astonishement of all
the earth, made, Revel. 14.
no new, but even that everlasting, albeit long smoothered Gospel, to be
proclaimed, first, through the mids of heaven, Revel. 14.6.
and, at last, to descend, so to the earth, that all the earth is lightened
with the glory thereof: Revel. 18.1.
he thereby, I say, to the high praise of his power, shows to all men: Zach.
4.6.
that, neither by an army, neither by strength, but by my spirit says the
Lord.

19. Where they except yet here against us, that for many ages, no such
Ministers can, from any record of story, be alleged, who did oppone
themselves or contest with the Church of Rome: so, as, of necessity, it must
follow, that either none such were, or then they were not faithful in
dissembling so long the truth: which, also, could not be so preserved by
their ministry: It has a manifold Sophistication, for (to let be that
whereby our men have often answered them, by fair Catalogues (from clear
Story) of famous and worthy men, in all ages, holdinge the truth and striving
against arysing corruption) they are, here, even in Logike, rediculous,
concluding (as schools speak) ab authoritate negative, whereon nothing does
follow, they were not perceaved nor known, or they are not recorded: Erg^, they
were not, who sees not the weakness of this consequence? ^ Kings 18.13. and
19.18.
In the days of Ahab and Iezabel, though princes have long ears, and,
Prophets, in God his matters, be sharp sighted, yet, a hundredth Prophets, in
one cave, and seven thousand true worshippers in one kingdom, escaped the
knowledge not only of Ahab and Iezabel, but even of Elias also: An other
fallacy is in this, that, because they are not recorded, and, so, are not
known to the world, now: that, therefore they were not known in their own
times. It follows not, for records bear commonly, but what obtains in the
time: so as, albeit some men, in each time, have, either opposed them selves to
prevailing evils, or, at least, not being able to resist a speat of iniquity,
have kept them selves pure from the corruption, and were known to the Godly
then: yet, as they were borne down in the time, so, neither has any record of
the^ come to the posterity: through the tyranny of such who, not only,
maister-fully, did set fordward wickedness, but also disposed of all registers
and records of matters, at their pleasure: Daily experience makes this more
then manifest. How many, in all ages, and in all countries, will sigh for the
evil which iniquity of time carries through? And, from that which in a
Province, Church, or Synod, is enacted and takes place in the whole, in
common, without open resistance: to conclude, that, in that Province, Church,
or Synod, universally each one did think so, and that none were contrary
minded: whom does not daily proof teach; that it were a ridiculous illation?
How many will give open signification of miscontentment; whose both meaning and
memory yet will be buried from the posterity? How many, in weakness, will
behold, and tolerat, what they can not resist; or without evident danger
condemn? How many, at the first signification of opposition, will be silenced
and terrified, with some such check as this; Art thou also of Galilie? Was not
Christ condemned by the whole Counsel of the Priests; and yet, the Scripture
witnesses, that diverse of the Priests did believe in him? John 7.5^, John 12.4^
If one, presently, writing a story, should, therein, affirm, that, in
Italy, all universally did now hold the Roman religion: the future ages could
have no reason but to esteem it true: but we, who now live, would laugh him to
heading as a shameless lier; if he but denied that many hundredth were even in
Rome, who hold the Pope to be Antichrist. The third deceit, in this their
argume^tation is, that from their own knowledge, that is the knowledge of the
earthly ones following the beast, they conclude of all men's knowledge,
absolutely: against the rules of Logike. For, although neither the beast nor his
wondering sectatours did see them or hear their song (which, was GOD his
special care and providence for their preservation) yet the sealed ones and
followers of the Lamb, did, each generation, in their own ryme, both see and
hear them: as, by Scripture, is manifest. Their fourth illusion, herein, is in
that, upon this, that no opposition was made to their Pope, they conclude that
none were contrary minded. Wherein, besides that they, still reason, ab
authoritate negative, and, so, do impinge, foul ^y, in all the sorts above
specified: And, that, by clear insta^ces, in abages, of famous learned men
taxing the abuses of religion, I might convince them: as diverse of our men have
already done: they deceave also, crastily, by co^funding times and cases. For,
as the degrees of the mystery of iniquity wrought on slowly, at first, and
Antichrist did not mount up to the height of Satan his throne at once: so the
measure and manner of contesting behooved, in course of time and grouth of
evil, to be much diverse. No age, since the Apostolic times, brought not with
it some degree of grouth to that mischief, which, even in their days was a
hatching ^ and, no age, accordingly has not left behind it (in despyte of all
repressing and suppressing tyranny) records of some grievous complaints, of
holy men, upon the abuses in the time. Love is ever loath to cast of, till all
hope and possibility of remedy be clearlie part. The pretense of the Lamb
his horns, and of Prophetical authority carried him long outso, not only in
hi^ first and more tolerable beginnings, but, even in an ensuing hudge height
of impious usurpation: and multitudes even of true, but simple sheep,
following, in vprightnes of mind, the common ensign, and (through not
discerning of the Dragon his mouth under the semblance of the Lamb his horns)
receaving his name, Revel. 13.
or at least, his number, but never his character, so strengthened him: as, men
had not yet gotten either the knowledge or the courage to challenge him
directly for Antichrist: who, yet, both hated and abhorred his impiety, and,
freely, taxed it, both by word and writ. And, it was the Lord his will, that,
before open and full contestation, in the highest degree, his impious
usurpation should mount to the highest. While GOD gave even Iezabel time to
repent her of her fornications, Revel. 2.21. and 9.20.21
that the more justly she might be cast, at length, in the bed of torment.
Whose whoordomes, that the true servants of God did tolerat so long, it was,
indeed, a point of weakness in them, and, for which, the Lord had something
against them, but, no argument, wherefore either they were not his true and
beloved servantes, or yet, that they were not at al: as sophistically, our
adversaries do infer. And, this their infirmity, will appear, yet, the
less wonderful, if we consider how, with the degrees of arising impiety,
antichrist, also, arose to greater and greater impatiency of any cure: and to a
tyrannical entreating of opposers. At first, some freedom was of admonitions:
thereafter, they were repressed by deprivations, degradations, and
excommunications. At last, he becomes all and wholly of the Dragon his
color, and barbarously sheddeth the blood of Saints. All which course of his
waxing impiety and condition of Saints under and against him, are so clearelie
set forth by the holy Ghost, as I even loath to spend so many words in so
plain a matter. And, verelie, if compassion of the weak (whom they stupifie
with these bugbaires) did not moove me, I would not once ^ake and were to such
blind leaders of the blind, and men so perverslie contentious, against, not
only invincible reasons, but, even clearlie foretold and fallen out cases. The
two witnesses (a sufficient though a small number) had a long time of
prophesying, Revel. 11.
and, albeit in heavines, for the prevailing evil, and succes of the mystery
of iniquity, yet without open contestation. But, corruption growing to such
height (the beast not only sitting in the holy city and court of the temple,
but also treadding down all true worship therein) as, of necessity, the right
rod of examination behooved to be applied to discern the temple (the true
Church) and to try, if City and court, being so far polluted, could possibly
come in the account of God his house, or were to be cast out. Then, the
applying of the rod, made Antichrist to perceave such to be within him, as he
thought not of whom, when, thereupon, he had so cruelly murdered, even with
applause of the blind world, as they seemed not only to be no more, but,
also, that their memory was reproachful and odious: yet, he did find them
revived, in greater strength, and, visiblie, at last to his grief and terror,
to obtain the title and account of the true Church: Whereat, his kingdom
falls. And this course of the Lord his working, as it shows his great
patience, to the justifying of his judgments, against so obstinatlie
impenitent an apostasy: so it answers abu^dantlie the foolish demands of
our adversaries, whereby, in all the force of eloquence which a badde cause can
afford them, Master John Fras^^, in his challenge.
they ask, why, in any case, we would not rather have reformed the Church,
then overthrow her; and cured her rather then killed her, and forsaken her
fellowship? For, first, they are still ridiculous in assuming the question, by
usurping to themselves the title of the Church: of which they are not, and in
which they are no otherwise then a soar and proper evil of that body. We
have not forsaken the Church but have brought the Church out of Babel, wherein
she was long captive. We have not fled from the Church or left the ensign:
but cleaving still to the ensign and true Church, Revel. 13.
we have justly, gone aside from the traitor in the church, pretending the
Lamb his horns, Act. 19.9.
but speaking with the mouth of the Dragon. We have not rent the unity of the
Church, but, by the example of the Apostle, we have separated the Disciples
from refractarie enemies. Ierem. 51.9.
We were so far from wounding the Church, as feign, would we have cured
Babel (in the Church) but she neither could nor would be cured. I^r. 51.26.
So, we behooved to leave her as a burnt mountain, wherein, could not be
found, any more, a stone for a corner or for a foundation. Her grapes were
become as the grapes of Ad^a^, and her vine as the vine of Tzeboim. that,
without so much as once looking behind us, we behooved to go up to the
mountain for our lives, and forsake Sodom. Genes. 19. Revel. 11.
And least we should be partakers in her judgments, we have great reason (it
being said to us Come up hither) to escape, and be like the he goats of the
flock: coming out from among that contagious and incurable company, and
touching no unclean thing. Did we go out of Babel, till there was no balm
for her soar? Did she not so far refuse all medicine, as, we lay cruelly
slain and barbarously unburied in the streets, before we left her? And yet,
one of their mylde men (sorry, as seems, they had no more of our blood) is
not ashamed to ask: why we did not rather choose to suffer for the truth, if so
be we hold it, then to have rent the unity of the Church? Thus, still the
Whore, impudentlie, braggeth of the Brydes name: and, albeit her filthiness be
discovered, yet shamelessly having eaten, Pr^v. 3^.10
She wipeth her mouth, and says, she has committed no iniquity.

20. Now, I hope, I have cleared, that, howsoever the promise of God can not
fail, but that truth ever abides in the Church: yea, and by the ministry of
true pastors, is, and has always been maintained therein: yet, neither have
our adversaries any thing whereof to boast herein, as, who neither are the
true Church nor true Pastors of it: neither, albeit both Church and Pastors
communiter omnes (all in common) have fallen away from this truth, that it
derogateth ought to the verity of God his promises: whom, as, it pleases,
sometime, (for magnifying and manifestation of his truth and power, in man his
falsehood and weakness) to preserve his truth, in a small sparkle, in, and by a
few secret sealed ones: so, when he will have it to break forth in a great
fire, for chassing away and dispelling all overclouding error, he both may
and has, at all such occasions, raise up men extraordinarily, in the way of
righteousness, and in evidence of his spirit and power: to the just conviction
and confusion of them, who having the ordinary place of husband men, in the
Vineyard, yet were become murderers and having the ordinary place of builders
of the house, yet were destroyers. Neither tends this, to open a door, for
any, to despise the Church of God. Which, whosoeever hears not, Mat. 18.17
let him be a Heathen and a Publicane: Neither gives it liberty to contemn
the ordinary means of God his dispensation by Pastors (seeing none,
ordinarily, can believe but by hearing, Romans 10.41.
or hear, but by preaching) but, as I have said before, it is to waken
Pastors to look to their ministry, and how they keep the covenant of
Levy: and not securilie to sleep, and while they look but to their own
ways, Malach. 2.
yet proudly, to make God the varlet of their affections. And, on the other
part, it is to stir all Christians to a careful study to discern betwixt
the true church and the Synagogue of Satan, Revel. 2.9.
calling themselves Jews, and yet, are not: and betwixt true Pastors, Math.
7.15.
and false propheres, coming in sheep clothing, but within are ravening
wolves: for it becomes men not to be rechles in so important a matter. and,
if it had not been both a high and requisite point of wisdom, the Lord and
his Apostles had not given so many sad and serious warnings to that effect.

21. Here, now, as at the pulling from them of their Palladium, to the evident
peril of their Pergamus, and Satan's throne in it, Revel. 2.13.
and the undoubted subversion of their execrable Ilium, they cry out a great
cry and a bitter. That, if thus, men once depart from the judgment of the
Church, what certain warrant can they ever find to stay on? or, What guide can
they be sure to follow; for finding out of truth? So; still, they cease not to
dally, and, shamelessly, in one sort. We would not have men to depart from
the judgment of the Church (which is the pillar and stable seat of truth, and
without which is neither verity nor life) but, how much we are necessarily
to cleave thereto, so much the more carefully, by the right rule of
examination, to try and discern betwixt the Church, and the pretending
harlot, and, to this end, the Lord has given us his word and his spirit: and,
in all ages, has recommended them to his own children, as undoubted guydes,
in all doubtful cases, so under the law, men are ever exhorted to the law
and the Testimony. David, and the Prophets direct al men, Luke 16.29. John
5.39. 2. P^t. 1.19.
always, thereto, they have the Law and the Prophets, says Abraham, in
parables. And, our Lord, for clear testimony of himself, bids the Jews
search the scriptures. Peter, from an other spirit, then have our adversaries,
calls the word of the Prophets a sure and certain word, 1. Timoth. 3.14.
etc. Throughout (...) 4.
and exhorts to attend thereto. And, Paul, even upon this that the Church is
the house of God, the pillar and stable seat of truth, and that godliness is a
great mystery, groundeth both a reason why he did write to Timothy, and an
earnest exhortation, to take heed to the reading of the scripturs: for that
many, diverting therefro^, and giving themselves to spirits of error and
fables, should fall from the truth, and teach doctrines of Devils. We read many
warning not to be miscarried with common errors or the authority of men: yea,
as I have before touched, diverse times, both Pastors and people, in common, are
taxed for falling away from the word. We are exhorted, carefully, to prove
and try what word men do offer unto us, but never, in all scripture, have we
so much as one mine, of secure relying upon the authority of ordinary
Pastors, without due examination, and the judgment of al sound antiquity
accords hereto. One of the Fathers says thus, Qui vuls cognoscere quae sit
vera ecclesia non cognoscat nisi tautumm^d^ per scripturas. and sone after,
A^thor (...) ris imperfecti in Math. homil. 49.
Christiani ergo volentes firmitatem accipere doctrina verae ad nullam rem
fugiant nisi ad Scripturas: ali^qui si ad alia respexerint, scandaliz abuntur
and peribunt non intelligentes qu^ sit vera ecclesia, and per hoc incident in
abhominationem desolationis qu^ stat in sanctis ecclesi^ locis, the place is
remarkable, and in English thus, who will know which is the true church, let
him not seek to know it but only by the scriptures, etc. Christians, then,
willing to receave the stable assurance of true doctrine, let them run to
nothing but to the scriptures, otherwise if they look to ought else, they
shall stumble and perish, not understanding which is the true Church: and shall
fall, hereby, in the abomination of desolation which stands in the holy
places of the church. This same is yet more plainly showed in these words,
quum videritis, etc. (that is) when ye shall see ungodly heresy, which is the
army of Antichrist, standing in the holy places of the Church, then, let them
who are in Judea, flee to the mountains: that is, they who are of
christianity, address themselves to the scriptures: because, when once that
heresy has obtained place in these Churches, there can be no trial of true
christianity, neither any other refuge for christians willing to know the
verity of the faith, but the divine and holy Scriptures. And the same
Chrysostom in the same place; Antea multis modis, etc. before, many ways was
showed which was the Church of Christ, but, now, no manner of way but by the
Scriptures. Thus is clear not only that the scripture is the sole rule of
trial: but that the necessary reason why only to have recourse thereto is
Antichrist his obtaining so far within the Church, as, to escape the
abomination of desolation standing therein: also, we must run and run
only to the Scriptures. Non enim per alium (says Ireneus) dispositionem
salutis n^strae cognovimus quam per eos, Libro 3^. cap. 3.
per quos Evangelium pervenit ad n^^, quod quidem tunc praecomaverunt, postea
ver^, per Dei vol^^tatem, in scripturis nobis tradiderunt fundamentum and
columnam fidei nostr^ futurum: (that is) for by none other have we known the
disposition of our salvation, but by these, by whom the Gospel has come unto
us, which then they preached, and thereafter, by the will of God, delivered to
us in the Scriptures, to remain, in all times to come, the foundation and
pillar of our faith. The same father in another place speaks thus: Lib. 5.
Plantatus est enim Ecclesiae Paradisus i^ hoc mundo: ab omni ergo ligno
P^radisi manducabis, id est, ab omni scriptura dominica, etc. that is, for the
Paradise of the Church is planted in this world: thou shall eat therefore of
every tree of Paradise, that is, of all the Lord his Scripture. And as Jerome
says both pleasantly and pertinently, When ever the Church looks to any
other warrant egreditur de finibus suis (she passes out of her own bounds)
let any man, in whom is left any spunk of spiritual sense, confer these
sayings of the Fathers with the dealing and doctrine of Rome now, laboring
ever to divert men from this Paradise of the Scriptures, where only is the
fruit of life, to a barren wilderness without water and Cisternes of their own
digging, and, thus, making millions to fall in that abomination of desolation
which stands in the holy places of the Church, but their soars are seen,
and they shall prevail no longer.

22. They exclame, here, against us, that, thus, we pervert all order in God
his house: making every private Christian judge over Pastors, and subduing the
spirit of the Church to every private spirit. And, O how they both please
themselves, and play themselves in amplifying the absurdity, as they think, of
this point. But, to calm, a little, their cheer herein. First, I ask them,
is it not a common direction for all Christians; to try spirits, and not to
believe every spirit? 1. John 4. 1. These. 5.21.
Are we not commanded, to prove al things; and to hold that which is good? Are
we not often, and carefully exhorted, to beware of false Prophets? While they
cannot, or dare not (though they would) gainsay so clear Scripture, they run
to this: that the only sure trial is, to acquiesce in the judgment of the
Church. But, shameless men, is not this all one thing as if they said, the best
trial were to ^se no trial at all? And what do they, hereby, but still
assume the question? It is the true church, within the visible church, which we
have to try: and, how we shall rightly discern the bryde from the harlot. It
is in a common pretense and audaciouslie acclaimed title of the church, and
prophetical authority, to discern wisely the true church from the Sinagogue
of Satan calling themselves Jews: and the voice of the true shepherd, from
the Dragon his mouth even in the temple of God. We will acquiesce in the
judgment of the church: but, we must first know that it is she, and not a
masket harlot under that name. Yea, and even then, not acquiesce simply,
because it is her voice, but because by the word and spirit, we perceave her to
speak the words of the brydgrom: and that, therefore she is the bryde and true
mother of us all. O, but thus say they, you still subject the spirit of the
church to every private spirit: and make lay men judges over Pastors, to whom
Christ has committed the governeme^t of his house. If I ask them, what they
do mean by this their distinction of a public and private spirit; what can
they answer? ar their minds so still plunged in the pudle of their
predicame^ts, as they imagine the spirit of Christ to be a Species divided in
individua? dare they say, that there be diverse spirits, or, that the Church
has any otherwise the spirit, but because all the members of her body are
endued with one and the same spirit; each according to the measure of the
donation of Christ? there is but one spirit, albeit diverse administrations and
operations. Now, if every true member of the church has one and the same
spirit, for what use have they it? Or dare any be so blasphemous as to imagine
that the spirit of God ca^ be in any without some spiritual operations? have
not the children of God the spirit, that, thereby they may both discern the
things of God; and be capable of them? for the natural man can not: but the
spiritual man discerns al things and is judged of none. and, as the spirit of
man knows and judges the things of men, so does the spirit of God, the
things of God. Our adversaries here delude the simple with a deceitful
aequivocation: from that ordinary prerogative of government and judgment
given to Pastors, concluding, falsely, of all spiritual sense and gust given
to all and every Christians, for judging and discerning, heavenly things, by
the spirit of God in them. And, because the gift of dispensation, and ordinary
government is peculiarly given to Churchmen, or Pastors, under an
aequivocation, they will spoil all and every private Christian of al spiritual
sense, and discerning faculty: If a stewart of an house, to whom the
dispensation is committed of distributing food to the family, did offer to a
child or servant of the house a stone in stead of bread, or, a serpent for a
fish: and, if the child or servant did, therefore, reject them: had he place,
by reason of the dispensation committed to him, to quarrel either the child or
servant, for usurping his office? The horse, or ox, which neither have the
skill nor place given them by nature, to provide or dispense to themselves
their food: yet, by natural sense, have allotted to them, this faculty, to
discern hay from thorns, and provander from gravel. Any common sensible man,
which has not the art either to teach himself or others music, yet,
naturally, perceaved a ia^^e therein, and sturreth at it. and, has his
Master of art place, hereupon, to expostulat that he takes too much on him?
In divine matters, God, alone, properly, is Judge: and, the Church is index
(that is declarer) non index (not judge) of his will or word. No more then
heraults of arms are judges or discerners, but intimaters, of the Prince his
pleasure: and, yet, in a peculiar manner, and by a special power, which no
common subject, may or dare usurp; who, yet, all of them have place to crave
and examine their warrant. that ordinary and peculiar power of dispensation,
government, and judgment, according to the warrant of God his word and will
thereby, proper to public office-bearers and spiritual heralds, is one thing,
and the spiritual gust or faculty given to all Christians, whereby to try and
discern, whither it be food or poison; a stone or bread; a fish or a serpent,
that is dispensed unto them: whither it be the voice of the shepherd, which
they hear, or the voice of a stranger, it is another thing, we admit not
every subject to usurp the place of herald, nor every sheep to usurp the
office or power of a shepherd. But, by the great shepherd his own
testimony, we know, that whosoever are his sheep, John 1^.
they will discern betwixt voices: and, so, learn to avoid the thief, and
follow the true sheephearde. These two, our adversaries, either maliciously or
ignorantly, and, sophisticallie, confound: under pretense of that which is the
Pastors part, by aequivocation, pulling from the sheep, all spiritual sense:
so, making them, in stead of lightened and living members of Christ, dead and
sensles: thus, to miscarie them whither they list. To Pastors we yield,
always, both the place and honor of dispe^sing food to the family: yea and
that so far forth, as we absolve not any Christian from the necessity of
submitting himself to God his ordinance therein. But as Christ has given his
spirit to al his sheep, whereby they live spiritually: and, has left his word
to be the only food of his house, for fostering and nourishing that life: so,
we affirm, that al true sheep, even who has neither the skill nor the power
to be their own carvers, have, yet, by his spirit in them (that unction which
teaches all things) a spiritual discerning faculty to know what is propined
them, 1. John 2.20.
so, as even the weakest in that faculty, yet having in any measure, the true
gust, albeit, in infirmity, he will be brought to muse and doubt, ye and
sometime to mistake that for food which is not, yet as a man seeking after some
precious Jewel, though many things in appearance like it, present them selves
to him, and even detain his mind, as doubting, but some of the^ may be his
darling: yet this is ever still without satisfaction of heart. so as he cannot
rest nor acquiesce, but still his mind gives him that he is deceaved. and so
he, still searceth and sends after something, which he has not, as yet,
gotten: and if he could yet but once see, he would sone know. Upon which having
fallen, then as two well accorded lutes, the one being stricken, the other also
sounds: so at the first sight, his heart leapeth and is filled with joy, his
mind with clear light, and his soul with solid peace. And, then, he,
disdainfully, casts from him these counterfaits, which he never heartelie
embraced. Is it not a strange impudency, in these men; that, in so manifold
warnings, given us by our Lord, to try well what we embrace or hold; and in
so fair a faculty affoorded us by his spirit dwelling in us, to prove
things, that they notwithstanding, dare, so malapertlie, exact, of Christians,
a blind obedience, and implicit faith? Who sets any wares a seal, boasting
of their fynesse, and, yet, in any case, will not have them looked on, or tried,
but, will be, blindlings, believed upon his baire word: for me, I would never
seek any greater argument, that he were a thief, and no true merchant. The
Romanists plead, stoutly, that the truth is with them: why? Because they are
the Church, and why the Church? Because they have an ordinary succession of
Pastors since the Apostolik times. If, here, you urge, that in so far as,
often, personal succession holds not the same doctrine, but, even all, in
common, have and may fall therefrom, therefore, to approove themselves true
successors to the Apostles, they must also verify themselves to hold the same
doctrine: Act. 7.54.
then their hearts brust for anger, and they will gnashe at you with their
teeth, and cry out, fie on such an heretic as once thinks such a
blasphemy. That no such thing has befallen, or possibly could befall the
Church. If yet they be required, to bring, then, their doctrine to due
examination, by the written word. No: but you must, fide implicita, believe
them upon their word. And, albeit Scripture did seem never so far to
condemn them, yet you must not suspect any evil of them, why? Because that is
only the true sense of Scripture which they approve, so as you must not so
much as doubt, or once call in question their interpretation. And why? Because,
foresooth, they are the Church. Is not this, proudly to mock God; and,
impudentlie, to delude men? Is not this, to pick out the eyes of the world,
to carry them, blindfolded, as oxen, to the slaughter; and, as fools to the
stocks, for correction? Augustine, pleading for the truth, and, having, truly,
for him all, which our adversaries do, falsely, glory of: yet, shows, that
he was of another spirit, which taught him, that verity was otherwise to be
defended, then by such subterfuges, as they, in an evil conscience flee to.
Contra Ep. fundam^nt.
His words are these, Nemo nostrum dicat jam inve^isse veritatem, sic ^am
queramus quasi ab vtrisque nesciatur. Ita enim diligenter and concorditer queri
potest si nulla temeraria praesumptione inventa and cognita esse credatur: aut,
si and hoc a vobis impetrare non possumus, saltem illud concedite vt vos
tanquam incognitos nunc primum audiam nunc primum discutiam: justum puto esse
quod postulo, hac sane lege servata vt vobiscum non orem, non conventicula
celebrem, non Manichaei nomen accipiam, si non mihi de omnibus rebus ad salutem
animae pertinentibus sine vlla caligine rationem perspicuam dederis. That is,
let none of us say, that he has already found out the truth, let us so seek
it as if it were unknown to us both. For, so, it may be diligently and
peaceably sought out, if, in a rash presumption, men do not esteem that they
have, already, found and known it. Or, if neither this can be obtained of
you, yet grant me that other, at least, that I may now first hear you, and,
now first, try you, as unknown before. I think it be an equitable thing
which I crave, observing, foresooth, this rule, that I neither pray with you,
nor keep conventicles, nor take the name of a Manichaean, except of all things
concerning the salvation of my soul, you give me, without any obscurity, a
most clear reason. And, in that same place, vt ergo hanc omittam sapientiam
quam in Ecclesia esse Catholica non creditis, multa sunt alia, quae in ^ius
gremio me justissime teneant. Tenet consensus populorum atque gentium, tenet
authoritas miraculis inchoata, spe nutrita, charitate aucta, vetustate firmata,
tenet ab ipsa sede Petri Apostoli cui pascendas oves suas post resurrectionem
Dominus commendavit, vsque ad presentem episcopatum successio sacerdotum, etc.
Ista ergo tot and tanta Christiani nominis charissima vincula recte hominem
tenent credentem in Catholica Ecclesia etiamsi propter nostrae intelligentiae
tarditatem vel vita merit^m veritas nondum se apertissime ^stendat: Apud vos
autem ^^i nihil horum est quod me invitet ac teneat, sola personat veritatis
pollicitati^, quaequidem si tam manifesta monstratur, vt in dubiu^ ve^i^e non
possit, praeponenda est omnibus ill^s rebus, quibus in Cath^lica teneo^. (that
is) to pass by, then, that wisdom which you believe not to be within the
Catholic Church, there be many other things also, which most justly do hold
me within her bosom, the consent of peoples and nations: the authority by
miracle begone, nourished by hope, increased by love, and stablished by
antiquity: a succession of Priests from the self seat of Peter the Apostle
(to whom Christ after his resurrection, recommended the feeding of his sheep)
even to this present Bishoprike, etc. These then, so many and dear bands of
christianity, do rightly hold a man, believing, within the catholic churh,
though for the slownes of our understanding, or merit of our life, the truth do
not as yet most plainly show it self. But, with you, where none of these are
either to draw ^e or detain me, nothing sounds but a bare promise of the
truth, which notwithstanding, if you can so evidentlie show, as it cannot be
doubted of, it is to be preferred to all these other things whereby I am holden
within the Catholic Church.

23. But, this truth (say they) can neither be showed but by the church,
which, only, has it: neither could men be otherwise induced to believe the
Gospel, except therewith, the authority of the church did move the^, as
Augustine speaks: Contra Ep. f^^damental.
ego vero Evangelio no^ crederem nisi me ecclesiae commoveret authorita^. We
deny not that the church only has, and shows the truth. Yea we grant also,
that, according to Augustine his mind in that place, the authority of the church
is the ordinary and necessary motive whereby a infidel who neither knows
Christ, nor believes the Gospel, may and will be first induced to reverence
religion: but it is but a co^motive, Libro de vtilitate (...).
and, as the same Augustine speaks, oportunu^ inquirendi exordium, so as
albeit men be so stirred to revere^ce and inquire, yet they rest not upon this,
that the church says so, John 4.42.
no more the^ did the Samaritans upon their woman's report, but because by the
word and spirit they find that she speaks true, Augustine. contra Ep.
fundamental. cap. 14.
non iam hominibus sed Deo intrinsecus mentem illuminante atque firmante. for,
as in his testimony little above cited, he says, there be many things which
be great motives to hold a man in the bosom of the church, yet truth
manifested is to be preferred to all, and, as truth is only in the church, and
showed only by the Church, so is it, that, which only makes the church to be
the church, and whereby, only, she is discerned. O, but all heretics (say they)
do pretend the truth. yes verily, and the name and title of the true church
also, and so much the greater ought our attention and care be to examine all
their pretenses. For, bare pretense of truth, as it never yet did, so neither
ever shall it be able to bear outfalshood longer, then by the right rule of
examination it is reduced to due trial. It is a great fallacy, because that
truth can be no where found, but in the church, nor showed by any but by the
church, and that the authority of the church, as a fit entry to inquire by,
first induces men to reverence and seek after the truth: thereupon, to
conclude that truth, opened, has no other virtue, or clear note, whereby to
be discerned from contesting error, but the authority of men affirming it.
For, being admitted to plead for it self, it is not so weak (as to blindfold
men, 2. Cor. 4.4.
our adversaries would make the^ believe) but that any, whose eyes the prince
of this world has not pyked out, or, whose hearts, forstalled prejudices have
not hardened, may easily discern it from lies: indeed, these, to whom, in God
his justice, the mysteries of the kingdom are spoken in parables, Math. 13.11.
etc.
that hearing, they should not hear or understand; and seeing, they should not
see or perceive, can never discern them. But, they to whom it is given to
understand them, will clearlie and well. for a scorner seeks wisdom and
finds it not, but knowledge is easy to him that will understand. Prove. 13.^.
and, as it is a vain thing to reason with, or offer any sound instruction to
a drunken man, while his wine is on him, and possesses all his senses: so, is
all travel, taken for clearing truth but fruitles toward such as God has
given over to the bewitching cup of fornication. but, who neither in pride,
singularity, nor bitterness, are wedded to their own will, or to the will and
appetit of men. and, give a free and an vnforstalled heart to God, John 7.17.
to do in singlenes his will, they will know of the doctrine whither it be of
God, or whither men speak of them selves. as witnesses the Lord him self:
Prove. 8.9.
and, as Solomon, in the spirit, speaks of the words of wisdom, They are
all plain to him that will understand, 1. Cor. 3.13.
and straight to them that would find knowledge. For, as says the Apostle:
The day makes every man his work manifest: Ephesians. 5.13.
for it shall be revealed by the fire. The word of God is not like the word of
men. He that has the word of the Lord, Ierem. 23.28.29.
let him speak it faithfully what is the chafe to the Wheat, says the
Lord. Is not my word even like the fire; and like a hammer that breaks the
stone? as the lilie among the thorns, so is my love among the daughters: Cant.
2.2.3
and, as the apple tree among the trees of the forest, s^ i^ my well-beloved
among the sons of men: Ecclesiast. 12.11.
The words of the Wise are like Goads and like nails, fastened by the
Masters of the assemblies, given by one Pastor. Yea, even as the night flies
before the sun, in such sort, as no thiknes of clouds or foggie mist can so
far darken, but that men do easelie discern the light of day: so truth,
once showing her face (how few, how base, or how weak soever the
instruments be) then, nether multitude, nor high quality of maintainers, nor
prescription of time and prevailing darkness, can give to error any strength to
stand against it. For, the wise resolution of Gamaliel holds, Act. 5.38.39.
ever, true, that if the Counsel or work be of men, it will come to naught,
but if it be of God, none can destroy it: but, even, in that wicked endeavor,
they will be found fighters against God. The powerful, yea and miraculous
prevailing light of the Gospel, whereby, against all the deceit, force, and
malice of Satan, and power of the world, Antichrist is so sensibly going to
destruction: that, howesoever they obstinatlie blaspheme, yet, they are gnawing
their toungs for sorrow: it shows sufficiently, what power is in the word of
truth against al oppositio^ whatsoever.

24. And, this miraculous success, and evident finger of God, we, indeed,
glory of, in the Lord, who, thus, bears witness to the word of his truth.
Whereby as by the roar of a Lion seconded with seven thunders, Antichrist is
thunderstricken with astonishment and going, sensibly, to powder. Neither do
we this, for that we think us holden to produce miracles for a warrant of
our doctrine or callings: as our adversaries, jesting (but with fained cheer)
at this our success, require of us. For, a wicked and adulterous generation
requires a sign, Math. 12.39.
and no sign shall be given them but that of the Prophet Jonas: and, that,
albeit they destroy this Temple, yet God shall raise it up again in three
days. Ihon. 2.18.19.
This sign they have gotten, and have seen it to their terror and just
confusion. In that, howsoever, with all malice, fraud, and barbarous feritie,
Revel. ^^.
they have crucified the Lod Jesus in his members, and destroyed his true
Temple: albeit his faithful witnesses lay slain and unburied in the streets
of their great City, Revel. 14.^.
three days and a half, yet God raised them up again. But, to discover yet,
more clearelie, in this point, their either ignorance, or evil conscience, or
both. I would ask the^, who, thus, cry after miracles, if we did work alse
many, yea and in appearance, alse great miracles, as ever did Christ, and all
other Prophets or Apostles: would they therefore believe us; teaching any other
gospel the^ which is already taught and written? they are worthy, indeed,
whom God should give up, in his justice, to this grossenes, who, by false
miracles and lying wonders, have seduced the world to believe lies. Yet, I
think there is none of the^ that dare say so. If the^, our doctrine be new (as
they stoutly affirm) how vain are they to require of us miracles? when
only, this, that it is new, may sufficiently improve it not only being
destitut of miracles, but even albeit it were backed with all the wonders of the
world. But if our doctrine be not new, but even that everlasting Gospel: then,
their desire, prooveth them to be a wicked and adulterous generation. If any
man or Angel preach any other Gospel then which has been taught and
written, though he remove mountains, Deutr. 13.
let him be Anathema. In the very infancy of the old Church under the law,
when, in a small measure of dispensation, miracles had their own place and use:
the Lord, yet, was so far from making them the warrant of truth, as, even
then, he would have them controlled by the word of truth. Now, shame, I think,
shall dryve our adversaries to say, that they require not miracles of us for a
warrant of doctrine: but that, seeing we have no ordinary vocation, of
Pastors in the Church, that for maintenance of the lawfulnes of our
extraordinary calling, we have to work miracles. Who, of any sound mind, can
not but extremely wonder; how, by so manifold and childishe a cavillation, men
affecting the opinion of learning and holiness, should so evidentlie make
themselves ridiculous and bewray openly an evil conscience? For, first, as I
have already cleared, for our Churches, in common, they are impudent to deny
our ordinary vocation. But, to let this pass with them, if my doctrine prove
it self to be the truth, what place have such men as it convinced to be
^yers, to except against my vocation; which justifies it self sufficiently
even by that fame? Math. 7.16.
Do men gather grapes of thorns, or fygges of thistles? And, if necessity
were of miracles, Mat. 21.42
what greater can be then this; that, The stone even rejected of the builders,
is yet made the head of the corner? Which by the Lord his own Testimony, is
marveilous in our eyes, and, yet it is the Lod his doing. If our doctrine be
truth, their mouths are stopped who, directly, impugn it: and, if it be
false, what foolishnes is it to crave a warrant of our callings; as if all the
miracles which ever were wrought, could warrant a man to teach lies? Besides
all this, that miracles are, always requisite for justifying an extraordinary
calling, it is falsely assumed. For, Mat. 21.25.
of Iohne Baptist (whose calling, Christ his answer to the Priests, prooverh
to have been extraordinary) it is witnessed, ^^hn. 10.4^.
that he wrought no miracles: as neither did diverse Prophets, Chris^^. in
Math. homil. 47.
before him. And, whatsoever was, then, either used or requisite, while that
manner of dispensation had place, yet, now, when the whole Counsel of GOD is
reveiled, and, that manner of dispensation altered: miracles, in these our
times, without any more, were even enough, wherefore to mistrust the worker.
For that, howsoever at the beginning of the Gospel (in so strange and great
alterations, as were, the inbringing of the Gentiles, and the abrogation of the
legal worship, which was of GOD his own appointement) it was, as says
Augustine, miraculis inchoata (begun with miracles:) yet, now, the Son of man
having long ago, come in his kingdom with power, and the Sinagogue being
buried with honor: the case, in these last times, 2. These. 2.
varieth so far, as, miracles and wonders are the badge of Antichrist: who
has come with all effectual working of Satan, in signs, lying wonders, and
strong delusion. So, as, whosoever, now, works miracles, Lib. 21. de ci^itate
Dei cap. 7.
quanto magis mira^ilia confi^emur, tanto cautius vitare debemus. (How much
more wonderful we confess them to be, we ought the more warily to eshew
them) as says the same Augustine. And, this diversity o^ dispensation, the
holy Ghost, in goodly and convenient types, most fitly expresses, Chapter 4.
and Chapter 15. of the Revelation. In the first is put a clear Christallin
Sea, with seven burning Lamps, apart. So, to design the pure word and worship
according thereto, in these first times, accompanied with the powerful
cooperation of the holy spirit: but, in such sort, as then, there was a
distinct outward and visible dispensation, and donation of the holy spirit, by
imposition of hands: and kything in visible symbols of the holy spirit, and
diverse gifts, and miraculous operations. In the fifteen Chapter, is showed
again, that the Sea is clear as Crystal, and has the joined operation of
the holy spirit: but, the Sea is mingled with the fire. To show, in the last
dispensation, for overthrow of Antichrist, a purity of the word and worship,
and the virtue of the spirit joined therewith, as at first: but yet so, as no
dispensation of the spirit should be, but by and with the word, as mingled
therewith: all outward, and visible extraordinary donation of the spirit, and
miraculous operations, now, ceassing. And verelie, an other manner was
requisite for bringing in first the Gentiles to the faith, and so, casting
Satan from heaven, (even that the Gospel should be miraculis inchoata) then
for overturning his fraudfully reerected throne in the church under pretense of
the Lamb his horns: and to much different dealing for burying the Synagogue
with honor, then for thrusting Antichrist to the door with shame. At first,
the Lord had to procure credit to his Gospel as to his own sacred will and
word: next, again, he had by this Gospel, so now obtaining, as the party to
be detected and overthrowen thereby dare not openly deny the authority
thereof, but to convince the traitor covered under false pretenses.

25. To disproove this power of plain and prevayling truth, and, to discredit
the argument of our miraculous success thereby: our adversaries yet rise
against us with two objections. The first is, that, if success and wide
obtaining were a note of truth, then also, or more justly, might Arrianisme
and Mahometisme acclaime the title thereof, as we. But, these instances are
sophisticallie, brought against the truth and us. For, albeit we confess
heresy to be very contagious, and the word thereof to be fretting as a
gangrene: through the conveniencie it has with the vain humor of man, who
is, naturally a liar: yet when soever it is put to just trial by the truth,
then can it retain no strength. It is indeed, true, that truth always
prevayleth not. (for then, the mystery of iniquity had never attained to such
height,) but, this falls not through the weakness of truth, but partly,
through the vanity of men, who falling away from the love and due regard of
truth, are, in God his justice, given up to the efficacy of error: Partly,
through their unjust fury, rejecting and persecuting the truth untried.
wherein, yet the great odds betwixt verity and lies, is wonderful: in that,
even in the highest degree of prevailing error (while Satan has a throne in
the very temple of God) yet, Revel. 2.
even then, as, in Pergamus, the truth still dwells, and a number keep the
name of God, even where Satan his throne is, and against the terror of
bloodshed. Whereas, on the other part, truth being but admitted to plead for it
self, albeit the holders have little strength (as, Revel. 3.
in Philadelphia) yet, the adversaries are forced to come and worship at their
feet. But, this we maintain and hold, that when ever it pleases the Lord to
send out his light and truth for leading men to his holy mountain: Revel. 11.
and, that herefie, how strongly soever grounded, is reduced to due
examination thereby: that, then, albeit it has usurped even the holy city and
court of the tempel, yet, by the true measuring reed, it will be clearlie found
to be cast out. Their argument is a deceitful falacie by confounding of diverse
cases and causes: of the truth admitted to plead, and of the same, again,
after in God his justice hid, or, by men's cruelty and unjust violence,
debarred from all defense. And, this is evident, in both the alleged
instances. For, Arianisme, albeit having, for it, great (but unsanctified) both
learning and eloquence, yet was ever ashamed before the truth: till by the
cruelty and violence of Eastern Emperors, in Asia, and by the Barbarous
feretie of Vandall and Gothik Kings in Africa and Europe, it was enforced. and
yet, neither, so, could it ever either bear down the truth, or continue long
vngone in smoke before it. As for Mahometisme, nothing bred it, but preceding
degrees of Antichristian darkness and decay of light in the Church: and, with
Antichrist his arysing to a heigh, it, still, increased as, which was both an
effect thereof, and, in God his wrath, Revel. 9.
a punishment of Antichristian Idolatry. Neither does ought yet still
maintain it, but ignorance of the Gospel: Revel. 1^.
the revived light whereof, has not, as yet, come to them. For, thereby,
first, the waters of Babylon (at which both they and the Jews do still
stumble) must be dried up: that, so, the way may be prepared for the East to
receave the Gospel: as, increase of Antichristian Idolatry (the swelling of
Euphrates) first alienated the one from it, and, still, holds the other in
induration. Moreover, this instance of Mahomet, and the comparison thereof with
our powerful prevailing light of truth, is ridiculous. For that Mahometisme
never was advanced one foot of earth, but so far as by sword and fire it was
set forward. Whereas the Gospel, having sword and fire, and when sword and
fire, even in the hands of pitilesse persecuters, yet by the patience of
Saints, have fainted, having now, at last, privy poisonings, bloody
complots, and all the treasonable and tragical machinations, which the
Emissarie frogs of hell can hatch against it: yet, it prevails: and, still,
shall, in despit of all opposition: till, Antichrist being undone, these errors
of Iudaisme and Mahometisme shall also vanishe at the clear light thereof,
when they shall even see him who pearsed him, and shall mourn apart for him:
which great events, no doubt, are approaching near: in such strange and busy
endeavor ^^ ^he frogs of Satan's mouth, to assemble their forces to
Armageddon that their just destruction, Revel. 19.
may, much against their intention, minister matter even of an Ebrew song: in a
sweet and high tuned Halleluiah.

26. Their other objection, is, the manifold Sects which have sprung up with
the revived light of the Gospel: each contrary to other, and, all stoutly
acclayming the prerogative of truth. And, O, how our adversaries do here
applaud themselves, of their unity, and, how skoffinglie they exagitat this
(as they call it) our distraction and multitude of opinions, so, as, one of
them, in a fair, but faintlie fought, challenge, sent to the Ministers of
Scotland: at the end of his weak wrestling, minding to finishe it with a
deadly blow, concludes his discourse in a good tale fair tale, forsooth, of
this our diversity: which, for the greater force, he fetches from a tippling
Tavern in Germany, seeking, belike, in Vino veritatem. But, do not these men
err; because they know neither the Scriptures nor the power of God? yea,
though they themselves be Ministers of Satan his deceit, and men of his right
hand, yet, are they not skilled to discern his slight and malicious manner of
working: Might not this, wherewith they reproach our Churches, have been laid
alse, yea and more justly, against the first outgoing light of the Gospel,
and primitive Church raised thereby? yea, was not this, then, the common
accusation thereof, in the mouths of all ignorant and earthly men? for that,
even with the beginning and prevailing light of the Gospel, Eusebius. lib. 3.
Ecclesiast. hist. ca. 20. and libro 4. cap. 7.
Satan stirred up such an infinite number of detestable heresies, and
prodigious opinions, abominable even to any natural man of stayed wits, and
all, under the name of Christianity: that, thereupon, without more sifting or
trial, the world was stirred, madlie, to reject and condemn the whole
profession: and, with sword and fire, to persecute it as a horrible Pest. Luke
11.21.
When Satan brooketh all at ease, then is he at rest: but, if a stronger then
he come in to spoil his house, Revel. 12.
then he employed might and slight. When, by the valor of Michael and his
Angels, Satan is thrust out from brooking a place in Heaven, then, comes he
down on earth, Luke 10.18.
with great rage: then, VVoe to the inhabitants of Sea and earth. For, being,
by the power of the Gospel, cast out of Heaven, and falling down, thence, as
lightning, then, seeing he can not brook a room in God his house, he,
furiously, mistrammeth his own. When he can not keep down the light of the
Gospel, nor, by all his guyle and malice, obtain, but, that precious pearl
must come forth: his next endeavor, is, to cast in, therewith, such a
multitude of counterfaits, as may make the upright pearl either hardly to be
discerned, or then, with the rest, to be esteemed all alike false. so, to
divert men's hearts from it. This their objection, then, makes so little
against the Gospel, as, it shows evidently, by this angry business of Satan,
that he is, indeed highly chafed. and therefore the wise hearted ought the
more diligently to search after that precious pearl, the manifestation
whereof so breeveth him, and for that true and upright money, which he
labors among the mids of his counterf^its and false coin to conceal, ^r
then to discredit. When Satan by the beast of his throne and authority,
brooked all: then, was that ^ase and unity whereof our adversaries glory.
Revel. 17.17.
For, God had put in the hearts of the Kings of the earth, with one consent to
give their Kingdoms to the beast, till the words of God were fulfilled.
Sahtan never invyeth unity in error, nor zeal in a false religion. If
unity, simply, without respect of that, wherein parties are united, were a
note of the church, then might hell vindicate to it self that title. Math.
12.2^.
For, the Devils have an unity, and Satan his kingdom is not divided against
it self. Brigands, conspiring to shed blood, and having one purse, Proverb.
1.10. and ^.
are united. It is then unity in truth, and not a conspiracy in error or
brotherhood in evil, which men may glory of. As, at the first publishing of
the Gospel, Satan was put besides his possession, and, thereupon, stirred up
swarms of herefies: so, having, once again by the beast of his power, got
his throne erected even in the Temple of God, and brooking al peaceably
therein: when, again, the little, Revel. 10.
long closed but at length opened and sweetly swallowed, book, gave hability,
by the right (...) to examine him and cast him out: Revel. 11.
then, he returned madly to his former policy. Thus the sorcerers of Egypt, to
discredit the works of Moses and (...), ^xod. 7
did work the like: and, thus, ever, the invious one, with the good seed,
sows in his ^ares. But all this makes so little against the truth, Math. 13.24
that (by the contrary) the virtue and power thereof a^ so much the more
clearly manifested: In that these, who are the Sinagogue of Satan ( calling
themselves (...) and ^re not) ar eve^ forced to come and worshipe before the
feet of P^il^^^^ia: Revel. 3.9.
and are compelled to know that God loves her, in that she only is
stablished, and made a pillar in the house of GOD, which shall go out no more:
and, shall, at length, bear away the name of the true Church written on her
evidently with her Lord his finger, even of the true and new Jerusalem from
heaven, in despyte of all this slight of Satan. Whereas all counterfaits,
calling themselves Jews and are not, shall, either come and worship at her
feet, or be cast out of God his house, and lose the name which they do
falsely vsurp. In one word, though all the Inchanters of Egypt (strengthened
with all both the craft and power of darkness) should make, Ex. 7.1^.
apishlie, to imitat Mos^s, yet Aaron, his Rod shall, always, devour the Rods
of all inchanters. Even truth, shall, both discover and consume error in the
end. And this virtue, in the truth now preached, all, who with single eyes,
look on things, may evidently perceave: and so much the more, as, in little
outward strength, walking in meeknes and patience, and oppugned with all
wordlie power, and great pride and bitterness, yet, in despyte of all
opposition, ^t prevails. Glorified be the Lord our strength.

27. All, whatsoever our adversaries lay against us, and whereby they syle the
eyes and beguyle the minds of the simple, being looked on with judgment, is
found but mere Sophistry and cavillation; so as they have to bring more
solid stuff, if they would spoil our Pastors of all lawful calling, and us
of any true church.

28. We plead ordinary vocation for our Church, in common, and, this, because
so it is, and not, for that of absolut necessity it behooved to be so. Neither
speak I thus, as partiallie carried to maintain the credit of some particular
men, whose defect, herein, (if it were any) could never preiudge our Churches.
For mine own part, as, in all sobernes and cleannes of heart, by the gift of
GOD, I have been careful to know the truth, so, was I never much curious to
inquire of the particular state of our first men's callings. Which, whether it
were ordinary or extraordinary, and, that, wholly or partly, in some men or
in all, as it matereth little o^^othing (in so great and extraordinary a work
wrought by their ministry, as is the discovery and conviction of Antichrist,
sitting masked in the Temple) so is the disputation thereabout, but idle and
childish. For, if ever any such evil and confusion did befall the church, as
that, for reformation thereof, any extraordinary dealing was requisite. The
usurpation of Antichrist, most of all other: as I doubt not but God,
accordingly, showed, in some, either persons workers, or works of persons or
both. I approve our men who sustain our ordinary vocation, in common, but, who
plead so for it as a point absolutely requisite for approoving our cause, and in
such a case of the church, do place al defense therein: in my judgment, they
do, wronglie limit the holy one of Israel, against both the privilege of his
power, and his usual manner of dealing in such cases. And, who defend our
first men's callings to have been partly ordinary, partly extraordinary
(whither that some extraordinary persons were raised by GOD, or, that, ordinary
persons were, by him, stirred to extraordinary motions and actions (I think,
for me, they have fallen upon the right defense: and which is both most
agreeable to GOD his honor and manner of working, and also most strong and
honorable for our church and cause.

29. And, these, now, forsooth, are the invincible arguments, in confidence
whereof, they are bold to offer, that, if we can be able to maintain the
lawfulnes of our callings, and, that, so we have any true Church: they will,
without any more doubt or disput, about other points in controversy, join in
communion with us. But, certainly, if truth be with us, and they,
consequently, be heretics, they jangle with us, impertinentlie of outward
calling: the having whereof, as it will never justify error, so, neither will
the defect thereof be ever a relevant exception against truth, Math. 7.18.
Mark. 9.4^. Luke 9.5^.
clearlie, convincing it. For an evil tree cannot bring forth good fruit, nor
a good tree bring forth evil fruit. And, whosoever is not against us, is on
our part. And, if our doctrine may be prooved false, why make they such ado
about, calling, or why, thus flee they the trial of the cause, and go not the
nearest and plainest way, to justify themselves; and to bereave us of all
defense? An evil conscience makes men to seek subterfuges. And, as they
bewray it, evidentlie, in this their quarrelling of our vocation: so, when, in
course, they are put to their defenses, they manifest themselves yet more.

30. When, by clear scripture, we prove their Pope to be Antichrist: to free
him of that blot, albeit they be otherwise extreemelie impudent and malicious,
in forging false criminations, and calumnious slanders, yet, with all the
ingyne of hell finding none other, upon whom to lay over the stain of that
odious title: they are feign to refuse that he is yet come: and, that, when
he comes, he shall openly overthrow all true worship, and obtain rule
over the whole earth. Rhemists ^^ their annotations upon the 17. of the Revel.
Yea, some of them are so straited by evident truth, that, with pale faces and
trembling lips, they are forced to confess, that probably, he may expel
the Pope from Rome, and Domine there. And, shall, so strangely destroy all
truth and true Professoures, as, forsooth, Enoch and Elias must return (I know
not whence) to fight with him, and to be killed of him. Now, in this case, I
pray you, where shall be all the long boasted of prerogative of Rome, and of
Peter his chair; whereto, against us they infalliblie do chain all truth?
Where shall be these goodly and true promises; which they wronglie wrest, and
falsely usurp against us? Where shall, then be the notes of universality (in
their sense) multitude, visibilitie, personal succession, and external
majesty and Pomp? If these, be the certain and infallible notes of the true
Church; how fail they at any time? Or, if, as they themselves confess, in
Antichrist his usurpation, the case shall be such: why see they not that,
vainlie, and absurdlie (for eximing their Pope to be that Antichrist) they
object to us, as impossibilities, and horrible blasphemies; these same, yea
much smaller things, then they themselves grant, that, in Antichrist his
usurpation the Church must suffer? If, when Antichrist comes, multitude,
visibilitie, and universality shall be with him, if all personal succession
of Pastors shall so far fail, as, that, for pleading the truth, Enoch and
Elias must come from another world against him: if, the church then shall, not
only in truth and true professors, but even in all publict ensign of
profession, be invisible: if he shall (possibly) sit in Rome and peaceably
brook all: why (in the disput about Antichrist) are multitude, universality,
personal succession, and visibilitie, still laid against us? Why is ruinous
Rome as an infallible rock opposed, for all defense, unto us? and why see they
not, that by their own confession, they must otherwise vindicat their Pope
from that blot; and that we have, but, to clear, whither the Pope be he who
was to come, or, if we must look for another? If they would pretend the short
space of the churches defect under Antichrist (according to their dream of
three years and an half (yet, how does the truth of God his promise consist
(as for their own defense they interpret) if it fail but one day? or, if he
may and shall, in a totallie prevayling evil, whereby, not only truth, but
also al pretense and profession of Christianity is overthrowen, yet, preserve
both his Church and promise to her, three years and an half, why might he not
alse well, and under the veil of permitted profession, much better, for many
ages? and if under their imaginary Antichrist, directly impugning
Christianity, and advowedly exalting him self against GOD and Christ, whose
name he shall not so much as pretend, yet, both truth and a true Church shall
lurk three years and an half: how much more (under him, who, of a
degenerating succession of ordinary Pastors, pretending Christ his name and
power, and, who did not become extremely evil at once, but by degrees,
mounted to the height of impiety, masked in a Mystery) might the true Church,
under the common ensign of profession, have lain long hidden? For where
deluding simple minds, they affirm, that Antichrist must be one singular
person, (because in scripture he is named (...) (that Antichrist the
adversary, and the man of sin) they prove exceeding either childish, or
shameless cavillators. Might not the 4. Kingdoms of Babel, Persia, Macedonia,
and of the Seleucides, prophesied of Daniel, Chap. 7. have, by this reason,
excepted, that the four beasts there foretold, could not be meaned of them,
in so far as in each of their Kingdoms was a succession of mo^ persons then
one, and these four beasts are of the Prophet interpreted, to be but four
kings? Who would hereby refell any affirming that there is but one great Turk,
because that from Ottoman many diverse persons have succeeded in that Empire,
should he not prove but a ridiculous sophist, reasoning from one in seat,
state, succession, and subrogatio^, to one in person? the seat has but one
person at once, who by reason of succession dies not. It is the Pontificality
which we challenge, and not personally, Pius, Leo, Paulus, or Clemens. And, to
how hard shifts our adversaries are driven in this point, it is easy to
perceave: when, to pull men's minds from espying their Pope, they propone to be
exspected such an Antichrist, as, coming, could not, possibly, in all his
three years and a half, find three phrenetick fools to be his followers. As
if, foresooth, one, directly damning all Christianity, openly blaspheming
the name of God and Christ, and impudentlie and advowedlie, challenging to him
self all divine honor (in such daily growing light of the Gospel, and
settled knowledge of God) could possibly in three years and a half root out
all religion, and subdue all nations of the earth. in which space, a very
deliver single man in fulness of bodily strength and continuing vigor, yet
were scarce able, with all possible speed, upon a wager, to survey them. And,
that they should not appear vnresolved, forsooth, in such important matter
(without so much as any mine of Scripture warrant) they will have him a
singular person of the tribe of Dan: Revel. 20.
who (albeit it was the honor of faintes a thousand years, that they received
not the beast his mark) yet, shall, in three years and a half, 2. These. 27.
Revel. 13.11. and 17.5.
immediately before the day of judgment, begin, accomplish, and end, in open
and avowed impiety, that mischief: which, (that in the own time it might come
forth, cu^ninglie and covertlie masked up in a mystery) Satan, in all deep
deceit, was working since the Apostolic times. and, thus, whereas God has
reserved to him self alone the knowledge of that last day, which shall come as
a thief in the night, upon a sleeping and secure world: these men, set upon it
so fair and conspectible a mark, as, either no Christians at all, shall, at
that time, be in the world, or then, they may alse well know, and calcule that
day, as we do, now, Christmas. namely, having so iumpe a space of years and
days, and so notable coincident cases, as the returning of. Enoch and Elias,
their slaughter, and miraculous resuscitation. But, it is not my purpose, here,
to handle this point of matter, either for prooving their Pope to be
Antichrist: or to refute these their foolish dreams. for more full resolution
whereof, and, of ought else, that from that book may appear here, of me to be
too shortly touched, I refer the reader to my commentary on the revelation.

31. The waxing light of the Gospel, daily more and more discovering the man
of sin, makes our adversaries to paint out Tragelaphos and Chimeraes. whereby
they may stupifie and detain foolish hearts in expectation of such an
Antichrist, as shall come, I warrant you, ad grecas Calendas: some thousand
years after the Jews have gotten their, long, but, vainlie looked for,
Messiah, But, as these shall never get another Christ then whom they pierced,
so, neither shall the others, any Antichrist, but whom they follow. The Jews,
in God his mercy, shall, yet see their true Messiah, and mourn for him: Our
characterized adversaries shall follow, still, blindlings, their Abaddon, to
the lake of fire and brimstone, and wail, then, with him. And, they are so
anxiously careful of their credit herein, that, for holding, still, simple
minds in a maze, least, longing, perhaps, they should look more nearly, and
so, with settled senses, espy the Dragon his mouth under semblance of the Lamb
his horns: some surmise, for intertaining exspectation, (of one, never to
come) must be brought, now and then, from the East: of some dumb Devil borne at
Babylon, and begotten, forsooth, betwix some feind or farie, and a devised
Daniel, who has I warrant you, two thousand years ago, lost all the writings
of his genealogy. It is not so strange, that these men, whose filthiness and
shame, the glorious light of the Gospel has so far detected, that, now they
see no remedy, but, desperately to pass all bounds of shame, should therefore,
so impudentlie delude the World, with such foolish fantasies. but, it is both
wonder and pity, in so clear light of truth, that, still, so many should be
abused with them. a just punishment of the careless misregarde of that light
which is come in the world; but the world loves darkness more then light. And
howsoever some of the Ancients, whose times and perception were far remooved
from the knowledge of these mysteries, in a slender and careless consideration
of them, did fall upon some points of these fond speculations: yet, now, when
not only knowledge is, with course of time, increased, but also the eventes
have made things clear: it is not only a maigre defense, but, bewraying, also,
evidentlie, perversenes of minds, and guiltines of conscience, to run to
such doting dreams, and ridiculous raveries, as, albeit they were not refelled
by clear Scripture, yet, were fitter to be an addition to Rables, or to make
up the last book of Amades de Gaul, then to be reputed profound points of
Christian wisdom.

32. Thus have I shortly answered the maine objections of our adversaries,
which, as, an irresistable ordinance, they proudly plant against our callinges
and Church: and, finding now, their battery directed, specially, against
that quarter, wherein our Lord and Captain has assigned me a station in his
service (for that, by reason of our weak fortification, and their great inward
intelligence, they conceave great hope of an easy surpryse on that part:) I
have, as becomes, albeit a weak, yet a faithful soldier, hasted to the
breach, with such arms as came to hand. That, if, perhaps, the courage of
our weak once has been, in any degree, dismayed, with the terror of this
recent alarm, yet, finding the ennemie effronted, their hearts may be,
thereupon, so far stayed, as to stand and perceave, that all this
supercilious show of a fierce assault, is but a vain, and weakly backed
bravado. which, to offer us with a new and high morgue, our adversaries have
newly been animated, by their late supplement of fresh^ forces from beyond
sea. who, and their cuilliers, what disposition they are of, is evident by
this, that they are puffed up, and made more insolent, with that, which,
justly, has dumped in a deep sorrow, all true hearts of both the Islands. and
the daily surmises, from them, of yet, more doolfull events, with the cursed
hope whereof, they can not dissemble but they are tickled: (albeit, all praise
to God, yet found false, and we hope in the Lord, shall still prove) yet, they
clearlie show, either what plottes they are on: or, with what plotters they
have intelligence: or, what practices, perniciously performed, would chiefly
cheer their poisonable minds.

And, now, howsoever I be in a weak guerison, not the strongest of all, yet so
strong is the truth, and that Lord, in whose strength, and whose cause I
plead: as I hope that, even hereby the deceit and imbecillitie of these their
objections are so clearelie discovered, that the judicious and free hearted
Reader, shall remain satisfied: and, even our simple once hearts strengthened
against our adversaries high boasting. To men of corrupt minds nothing is
enough. Neither is our labor for any either ecclesiasticke or (as they term
them) lay persons, of that Antichristian body, which have received the beast
his character, and are not reclaimable: who, deceaving, and being deceaved,
wax worse and worse: and, compassing sea and earth, and with lying and
murdering (to uphold their tottring kingdom) madlie mixing all, do
evidentlie bewray, what spirit they are of. but, they shall prevail no longer,
for their madness shall be manifest unto all men. As for such, whether
ecclesiastike or lay persons, among them, who are, in simplicity of heart, and
blind zeal miscarried, having but the name or number, but not the character of
the beast: we both pity them and pray for them, that the Lord would open
their eyes and put in their hearts to come out of Babylon, least they be
partakers of her judgments. for, her plagues shall come in one day. even the
Lord will cut of all lying lips and the tongue that speaks proud things.

TO A RECVSANT, FOR CLEARING AND MAINTAINING SOME POINTS IN THE PRECEDING
TREATISE, challenged by a Roman Elymas, Bar-Iesus-it.
RECOVERING, some days since, a copy of my Treatise in defense of our
callings, which had fallen in your hands some months ago: I perceaved that
it had passed the examination and censure of some one of your ghostly Fathers:
(if I misdeeme not) even the same, whose pamphlet against our callings stirred
me to the defense of them, yet so, as, amids diverse dumb draughts of a silent
Aristarchus, there is but one only open challenge through all. Which (while he
is perhaps, a breeding of a bigger birth) his weak heart could not keep, til,
with the rest, it should be timely borne: thinking, belike he had, theirin, so
clear an advantage over me, as, upon that place, he might be bold to put out
some speech: thus to intertaine his applauders in hope that he had also much
to say against the rest. But, if this his glorying Goliath, so confidently
stepping out single shall be easily foiled, it may well be presumed, that, with
noe great a do, the rest of his dumb Host may be made both to flee and fall.

Over a place; in my Treatise, he sets this sign,. and therewithal, this
saying, agree this and the other places that is marked with this sign. My
words, first signed by him, are these. And the Lord his wise providence for
preserving thus his church in the mids of Antichristian usurpation (while he
appeared to possess all) was wonderful: in that, even in time of greatest
corruption, yet asure access and free way was still reserved through City and
Court, to the Temple, the Sacrament of Baptism, in substance, remaining; and
the doctrine of the Trinity being kept sound. Sect. 7. The places,
thereafter, signed with the same sign, and, in the challenger his conceat,
contradicting this, are two: and these both, Sect. 10. the first in these
words. Yea we are so far from this disorder, and do so far both reverence
and maintain ordinary vocation, that in a constitute Church holding the
foundation (albeit, otherwise, diverse things therein, not only for manners but
also for manner of worship, did require reformation) if any man of how great
gifts soever, yet, without ordinary calling should intrude himself to be a
Pastor: we would no otherwise account of him then of a seditious and
turbulent Spirit, who, either, fanatikly, presuming of graces, would vainlie
despise order: or, for some infirmities and defects, would arrogantly and
uncharitably break the unity of the Church.

Now, that I may the more clearly reco^cile any apparent repugna^cy betwixt
these places, I will, first, set down, (as I can take it) the challenger his
conceaved co^tradictio^, thus, Who in a constitute Church holding the
foundation, etc. would intrude himself, without ordinary calling, to be a
Pastor, is to be accounted a seditious and turbulent despyser of order, and an
arrogant and uncharitable renter of Church unity.



But the Christian Church, since her first constitution, always, even in time
of greatest corruption, has holden the foundation. Therefore, who at any time,
without ordinary vocation intruded himself to be a Pastor therein, he was but
a sedicious and turbulent despyser of order, and an arrogant and uncharitable
renter of Church unity.



I will not, here, dally upon these words ( intrude himself) which in no case
can ever be lawful, and may never be justly said of any who is truly,
albeit, extraordinarlie, sent out by God. I come to the argument. The
proposition of the sillogisme is mine own, and I can not disadvow it. The
assumption (that we iangle not about the state of our question) must be cleared
from equivocation. for, no question, but the true Church elected according to
the purpose of grace, has always, and ever shall hold the foundation,
without which she could be no true Church at all. But, from the true Church
and elect, to the visible Church, the argument concludes not. Next again,
albeit, in a right sense, it be true of the visible Church, that she ever
holds the foundation: because within the compass of the visible Church the
true militant Church abides always, as under the common ensign: yet,
hereupon, to conclude, that, always, visibly, and the visible Church, tota
communiter (whole in common) does hold the foundation, it is a seen fallacy.
for, she may fall from the foundation tota communiter (the whole in common)
but, never vniversaliter singuli in ea (universally each one within her.) And
howesoever mine adversary will not yield me this point, yet he can not but
condescend, that this is, here, the state of our question: whither I have, in
my first signed words granted so much, as will conclude clearly against my
self that even the visible Church, and whole in common, ever holds the
foundation. which is the assumption of this syllogism: and which he thinks
to prove out of mine own words, thus: Where the Sacrament of Baptism in
substance, remains, and doctrine of the Trinity is kept, sound, that
Church holds the foundation.



But, in the Church, always, even in time of greatest corruption, the
Sacrament of Baptism, in substance, remained, and the doctrine of the Trinity
was kept sound. Therefore, the Church always, even in time of greatest
corruption, held the foundation. and, consequently, no place was at any time in
her, since her first constitution, to extraordinary calling. Which is
contrary to my position.



The proposition has an equivocation: which to discover, and, so, to avoid the
deceit intended thereby, I distinguishe thus. If by the Sacrament of Baptism,
in substance, be understood all the substantial matter by Baptism
represented to our knowledge, sealed up through faith in our conscience, and,
all the grace thereby, through the cooperation of the holy Ghost, conferred to
us: and, if by the doctrine of the Trinity, be understood whatsoever we are
taught and do believe of that triple one, either in himself or his
dispensation toward us, and our duty again to him: in that sense, I yield
the proposition to be true. But, if by the Sacrament of Baptism, in substance,
remaining, be understood only the sacramental action in the substantial rites
thereof, so making it still to be counted lawful baptism in substance,
albeit otherwise, miserably infected with many superfluous and superstitious
ceremonies: and, if by the doctrine of the Trinity, no more be understood but
that only one point of God one in substance and three in persons: without
which, and the solemn invocation thereof in baptism, even the substance of
that Sacrament were abolished: then the proposition is clearlie false. And the
proponer would but illude in the words Substance and Doctrine. except he will
affirm, that, for the foundation of our faith, no more were requisite but
these only two points. And thus, (outtaking Samosatenus, Sabellius, Arrius, and
Manes, and such others as, either before or after them, under whatsoever diverse
names, symbolized with their particular errors) all heretics of whatsoever
sect or time shall be reputed to have holden the foundation. So shall Nestorius,
Eutiches, and Appollinaris be absolved from fundamental errors: so shall the
denyers of the resurrection: so shall the followers of spirits of errors, and
teaching doctrines of devils: so shall the Nicolaitans teaching and committing
fornication and idolatry, have kept the foundation. Shall not the incarnation
of the aeternall Son; the personal union of the assumer and assumed; the
natural verity of both natures in that one person; be counted foundamentall?
Shall not the only mediation and merit of that Person; his Prophetical,
Priestlie, and Royal offices, and actions thereof; the perfection, efficacy,
and virtue of all, be counted foundamentall? Or shall the bare holding of GOD
one in substance and three in persons be any foundation at al to such as in
the other points do overthrow it? It is strange that one acknowledging that
the baptized by heretics are not to be rebaptized, and, consequently,
acknowledging the baptism ministered by them, to be baptism in substance:
which yet it could not be without the invocation of the Trinity: should yet,
upon baptism remaining in substance, and that one point of the trinity of
persons think the foundation to be kept, when not only open perverters and
direct oppugners of foundamentall points, but also adders of any other to that
only one foundation (by the Apostle his sentence) do even fall from the
foundation which, otherwise, they would appear both to profess and keep.
The Sacrament of Baptism and sound doctrine of the Trinity still kept in the
visible Church, and even in tota communiter, was ever a sure and free entry,
and, as Augustine speaks, opportunum inquirendi exordium (a common and
convenient beginning to inquire by: but yet so, as who, thereby entering, held
the straight course to the Temple, where were the Candlestickes and the Olives,
and to mount Sion, where was the Lamb: These, indeed, held the foundation, and
the gates of hell never prevayled against them. But, who entering by that common
entry, declyned from the right way leading to the Temple and mount Sion: and,
did fall aside upon, and rest in the common pollution of City and Court:
following, wondering after, and worshipping the Beast and the Dragon (even that
abomination of desolation, standing also within the visible Church, in Sanctis
Ecclesiae locis, as says Chrysostom,) these fell so from the foundation, as,
even that which to the others was the entry and fair way to the Temple and
Mountain, was to them of no more value, then if they had never entered at all.
For that, in missing of the rest, they loosed even that also, which otherwise
they appeared to have, as, in the foundation of a large City, who raises so
the building as he keeps but one stone of all, must of necessity even fall
from that also: and be no otherwise said to hold the foundation then Saul
pleaded that he had fulfilled the commandment of the Lord, which,
notwithstanding, the Prophet affirmed he had casten away, and, therefore was
justly cast away of the Lord from being king of Israel. Thus, then the
proposition of his argument being evidently false, his conclusion also fails,
and my two places do well and clearly consist. And, considering how we do
charge the Church of Rome with intolerable prevarications, almost, in all
fundamental points (against that one GOD, in giving his glory to creatures:
against the verity of Christ his humane nature by their prodigious
transubstantiation: against al his mediation, offices, and actions thereof, by
many fold and sacrilegious derogation, usurpation, mutilation, and overthrow of
all the perfection, fruit, force, and effect thereof) so as the censurer cannot
dissemble the clear knowledge of my meaning in granting them the Sacrament of
Baptism in substance, and sound doctrine of the Trinity; in this
consideration (I say) how can his challenge of contradiction, in my words, be
excused of either childish triffling, or shameless cavillation; or both?

Now, albeit what I have already said, abundantly serves for reconciliation
of the other place signed also by my censurer, yet let us see what is the
contradiction he would infer thereupon. My words, and continually,
following the former, are these: But if corruption has so far prevailed that
the faithful City has become an harlot, and all her silver be turned in
dross: if her husbandmen have become murderers and her builders have become
destroyers: if from the Prophet even to the Priest every one follows after
lies: if there be a conspiracy of her Prophets in the mids of her like a
roaring Lion ravening the pray: if her watchmen be all blind and know nothing:
if they be all dumb dogs and can not bark: if they lie and sleep, and love
to sleep: if her Pastors know nothing nor understand, and look wholly to
their own ways: if night be to them for a vision, and darkness for a
divination: in such a case, etc.

Now, to commit my self, with my self, he would, appearantly, reason thus:
Extraordinary vocation (by my own position) has only place in such a corrupt
state and case of a Church, as that the faithful City has become a harlot,
and all her sylver is turned in dross: her husba^dmen are become murderers,
etc.



But, the case of the Christian Church even in time of greatest corruption was
never such. Therefore, by mine own position, no place, was in her, at any time
for extraordinary calling. And, so, I am contradictour to my self.



The Proposition is mine own. The Assumption (of the visible Church) is false.
And he seeks to succor it from my Position thus: Of a Church keeping the
Sacrament of Baptism, in substance and sound doctrine of the Trinity, no such
case, as I have put, can be truly affirmed.



But, by mine own position, the Church, even in time of greatest corruption,
has kept the Sacrament of Baptism in substance, and sound doctrine of the
Trinity. Therefore, of the Church, at no time, such a case could be truly
affirmed. And consequently, no time ever for extraordinary calling. Which, by
mine own Position, has only place in such a case.



The aequivocation of the Proposition, I cleared in my answer to his first
conceaved contradiction. Now, in the sense, there, showed to be mine, a church,
holding only these points, albeit she err in, yea and overthrow most part of
all other foundamentall grounds, and, consequently, even these same which she
seems to hold, also: that, notwithstanding, the holding, barely, of these,
may vindicat her from the blame of my proponed case, I even muse if my
challenger will affirm it. And, that (taking hold, perhaps, on the peremptory
and precise strictnes of the words) he would, thus, reason: that where but
even so much is holde^ as I have yielded, and even in the sense I have called
mine, there, all cannot be turned in dross, neither can Pastors, there, be
said to know nor understand nothing, etc. and consequently, that no such case,
as I have put, has ever be fallen, I will hardly be induced to believe, or
that a man of any sense or shamefastnes will bewray himself to be so
ridiculous a jangler. Wherein yet he should not contend with me, but with the
Lord, whose the words are, and not mine: and who charge therewith a Church
holding more of the foundation, then ever we will grant to the Church of Rome:
who, in the abominations she does commit, has justified the Church of Judah,
of whom the Lord affirmed my proponed case: and, which, therefore, more
justly, a great deal, might have alleged against the precise strictnes of
the Lord his accusation. They held the Sacrament of circumcision, the name of
the God of Israel, the outward profession of his Covenant and worship; and
the public practice thereof in daily sacrifices and oblations. And, had they
place, herefore, to plead, that all their silver was not turned in dross? The
Lord, in challenging our defections, when the substantial grounds are most
part subverted, he pleads a total apostasy. His own Bellarmine, telling
how, iudiciouslie, to read and make right use of the sayings of the Fathers,
might have taught your man, that in Homilies to the people, where, in vehement
contestations, speeches are, of purpose, framed, rhetorically, and
hyperbolically to force of persuasion, for sturring motion, and for agreaging
and amplification: they are, then, to be wyselie distinguished from a
scholastike and more press and proper manner in laying down foundamental
points: and, that they are not to be alike or indifferently drawn for
stablishing or prooving heads of faith, in the praecise strictnes and
propriety of words. for, one and the same man will have a much different
manner of style in homilizing and in dogmatizing. Not that, therefore, the
Fathers, and much less, the Lord (who though all men were liars, yet abides
true) did say (...) then truth. But that from a figurative, rhetorical, and
hyperbolike truth, to conclude a truth, in praecise strictnes of proper
signification, it is either foolish ignorance, or perverse tergiv^rsation.
And, to shorten all disput, herein; I would ask your ghostly Father; so being
that all, wherewith we do charge the Church of Rome, and whereupon they with us
and we with them have now, so many years contested, and do contest still,
were verified against her; if, in that case, she could be denied to be the
very Synagogue of Satan? and, that the case, proponed by me, might not be as
justly said of her, as he dare not deny but it was objected to Judah: except
he would belie the almighty? Now, whither we charge her rightly or not; in
our disput here, it were impertinent, and a slyding from the cause in hand,
either for him to plead the one, or me to prove the other: the question,
here, betwixt us, standing so, as I having laid this ground, that in a
condition of a corrupted Church, (and such as I proponed) extraordinary
vocation may have place. and, again, pleading, that the condition of the
Church, in common, at the beginning of our reformation, was such: whither, if,
by yielding her, still, and, even then, the Sacrament of Baptism in substance,
and sound Doctrine of the Trinity, I have admitted ought which contradicts
mine own positions. which to evince against (...), I think it must cost your
Confessor some more pains, then, but in passing by only to point at it. This
his proposition being false, he concludes nothing, and my places do yet
well consist.

In an other place, (...) on my margent this word ( REMARK) without any (...)
sig^^fication for what defect he would make me, the (...). thinking, belike,
the absurdity of my (...) exposed to the perception of any, as a gene(...)
sufficient to make the Reader advert it. My w^^^es are these. Sect. 8. And,
seeing that outward ordination, and all (...) action of the Ministers thereof,
serves but for outward order, all inward grace, power and virtue, coming from
God the Author of the calling: what absurdity is it that a good pastor
receave ordination of a Wolf, who, yet, ^^th the place of an ordinary
Pastor in the Church; more then a tru^ Christian to receave the Sacraments
from a re^probat, being, always, an ordinary Minister? which Sacraments, yet,
by the inward cooperation of God, are effectual to the receaver for, it is
sufficient for an outward ordinary calling that the Minister thereof have
outward place and power of ordination, albeit he be but a Hyreling and a
Thief. And, the receaver of outward ordinary vocation, as he has all gift and
grace from God only, whose the work is, so is he not tied or sworn to the
will or appetit of the outward Minister, but only to the Lord: no more then any
Minister, Baptizeth in his own name, but in the Lord his, whose badge and
cognissance only we take on, thereby, and not of the Minister thereof, etc. I
will not think my remarker so remarkeably gross, as that he thinks the
efficacy of the Sacraments to depend on the worthiness or unworthiness of the
Minister thereof. for, in the contrary of this, I hope we do both agree. and,
again, that he, who holds ordination to be a Sacrament no less then any of
the other, will deny the same common case of it also, I have no reason to
imagine: Neither yet, for my similitude, taken from the common condition of
Sacraments, that therefore, he would think me to make ordination also a
Sacrament (with him) in the most strict and proper signification. for, the
similitude of things, in some cases, makes not things, always, to be the
same. and, thus far, I hope we shall accord in the truth and convenience of
my similitude: that, as the Minister of Sacraments (having still outward place
and power) neither conferreth inward grace, for any worthiness in him, neither
lets the collation thereof through his unworthiness, so, neither does the
unworthiness of the ordainer (having (...) place and power of ordination) let
the effectual (...) ordination in him who is ordained: every good gift
^escending from above from the Father of lights. For, there is but one Lord who
has led captivity captive, and gives gifts to men: my adversary will
confess this also, that from what Bishop soever the Sacraments may be received
(except Baptism, which, in honor of Christ, forsooth, he relegateth not only
to Women but even to Jews and Turks) from the same Bishop ordination, may be
received also. but, as I can scanse at his meaning, he thinks my error to
be, in this remarkable: that, to him, I appear to make it all one thing or
alike to receave the Sacraments or ordination from a Wolf or Thief, as to
rereave them from a hyreling or reprobate. which, if I did, absolutely, hold,
and did accordingly, reason, from the one to the other: it were, indeed, a
manifest halting in Logike, and therewith, no sound point of Divinity also.
The course of my argumentation, in my treatise, is so at length and evidently
led, and my cases so clearly put, as, I am sure, no upright hearted Reader
could ever have fallen upon so sinistrous a conception. but, it is the manner of
men, who read only to resist, to snatch at syllables, and wrest parcels of men's
speeches so to maintain iangling. And seeing that my remarker, albeit he has
busied himself most, yea, and almost, only on the 6.7. and 8. sections of my
Treatise (as his tokens left thereupon well show) yet even there has
understood least, and, either has not conceaved, or deceitfully dissembled my
meaning: I will, therefore, here, summarily resume the substance of my matter,
and drift of my discourse there.

Upon the prerogative of the Bishop of Rome, a long time reputed head of the
Church, and all ordinary vocation flowing (in that respect,) either mediatlie
or immediately from him, our adversaries labor to infer against us, that
either we have never had any lawful ordination at all, or then have fallen from
it. Because, that the Bishop of Rome was, then when our ordination flowed from
him, either the Antichrist (as we affirm) and, consequently, being a Wolf
and Thief, could have no power of ordination: or then a lawful Pastor
holding truth: in which case, we falling from his communion, have fallen from
the truth, and all lawful vocation also. against this (to show how, in that,
which, in the pamphlet that came to my hands, was inscribed the invincible
argument, there is no more vigor then in a roape of a rotten rushe) I laid
down this contrary position. That our outward ordinary callings did, in a
sort, flow from the Bishop of Rome, without any discredit or derogation to the
dignity or lawfulnes of them: notwithstanding that he is that very Antichrist
and man of sin: and, so, not only a Wolf and Thief, but even of al other
the most execrable. The sum of that argument, whereby to infer this my
Position, and which, at large, I did set down in my treatise, and the
mentioned sections thereof, is this. From a Wolf or Thief, who, descending
in an ordinary succession from good and lawful Pastors at first, and who
degenereth not at once, but by long and slow degrees, and, that, not, as an
open outward enemy directly oppugning the ensign, but, still, pretending
Christ his power and service, and, covertly, by pretense of the ensign,
deceaving: before he be detected and known to be a Traitor, Wolf, and
Thief, and, so, retaining still, with all, in common, the account and place of
a lawful Pastor: lawful ordination may flow: and the ordained by him, taking
ordination uprightly as from a lawful Pastor and reputed so still, in common,
not knowing nor being partakers of his treason, may even, so, have lawful
outward vocation: and, falling from their ordainer, eftsoons detected to be a
Wolf and Thief, yet still retain the prerogative of their callings.



But, such a Traitor, Wolf, and Thief was the Bishop of Rome, what time our
ordination, in a sort, did flow from him; before it was said to the revived
witnesses, come up hither, Revel. 11. and he proclaimed a Traitor 14.8. and
al, thereupon, interdicted his worship, and character 14.9. Therefore from
the Bishop of Rome, our outward callings, in a sort, might flow: and, we
shrinking from him (now declaired Traitor) yet still retain the prerogative
and privilege of our callings.



In the tenor and drift of this argument (that diverse points and cases be not
ignorantly or deceitfully confounded, either to the obscuring or perverting of
my meaning) two things are, heedfully, to be eied, and the distinct
considerations of them. First, my Positions: and, th^se distinctlie, als well
the special and definit position which I take to prove, as the general and
indefinit which I bring for a mids or argument to infer the other. And,
secondly, the restrict cases of both. The special definit position, which I
take to prove, is the conclusion of my sillogisme. The general and indefinit,
whereby I conclude it, is the Proposition thereof: the restrict case of my
special and definit position is, that, I affirmed not our callings to have
flowed from the Bishop of Rome, absolutely, but, in a sort. The restrict case of
my general and indefinit position, is, that I affirmed not lawful ordination
might be taken of a Wolf or Thief, absolutely, but from such a Wolf and
Thief as in my Proposition is set down at length, and in my treatise, more
amply. Now, who either does confound my positions, or draws them from my
restrict cases to absolut assertions, he wrongeth me, therein, greatly. And to
clear this. In the restrict case of my special and definit position, that I
affirmed our callings to have flowed from the Bishop of Rome, in a sort, it
has two considerations to be well adverted. First, that the Bishop of Rome was
not the proper, particular, and personal minister of their ordination (at least
in common) howsoever in a sort or mediatly, it did flow from him. Secondly,
that even this in a sort or mediatly, must not be so understood as if the
particular, proper, and personal ordainers had done it but as the Bishop of
Rome his deputies or procurators: but, as having also themselves properly place
and power of ordination. Wherein, (by your adversaries doctrine) the Bishop of
Rome might well have the first place and highest power: but, not the only place
or only power. For, giving him this that he were, not only, primae sedis
Episcopus (in which degree the Fathers would feign have stayed his usurpation,
and yet by canons of counsels, could not) but, (which was, then, interdicted)
that he were also primus Episcopus: yet was he never sole Bishop. And, though
he got at length, (by prevailing iniquity) chief place and power of
ordination, yet never only place. For, if he only were properly to be held a
Bishop, and, if ordination were only proper to him, then could not he him self
be any Bishop at all. For none can be a Bishop without lawful ordination: and
none can or may ordain him self. Neither can any other ordain him by any
power flowing from his predecessor, quia mort^^ mandatore expirat mandatum.
And, as Grogorie Bishop of Rome does infer, if he were sole Bishop, then,
vniversa Ecclesia corruit vbi ille vniversus cadit, (he falling, the universal
church should fail also.) And, how hardly the said Grogory did esteem of any
such usurpation, these words do show. Triste valde est patie^ter far vt
omnibus despectis, frater and coepiscopus noster solus nominetur Episcopus. (It
is a heavy and hard matter to bear that our brother and fellow Bishop should
be called only Bishop) and he gives the reason in another place. Quia si vnus
Patriarcha vniversalis dicitur, Patriarcharum nomen caeteris derogatur, for if
one be called universal Patriarch, the name of Patriarch is taken from the
rest) so, then, is ordination of all Churchmen flowing in a sort from the Pope,
to be understood: not, that either he was the personal minister of all, or
that he had sole power of ordination: but, because he was acknowledged first
in that power: and, for that, in the outward order, policy, and form of church
government, al did acknowledge their subjection to him. Now, for that
ordination is granted to flow from him in this sort, therefore, upon the
conviction of him to be a Wolf and Thief; shall al ordination in the church,
particularly, properly, and personally ministered by whatsoever other Bishops,
be unlawful? Or, shall he (convinced to be a Thief and Traitor) necessarily
involve al other pastors of the church in the same guiltines with him, because
their ordinatio^ has, in a sort, flowed from him? This were indeed, to admit
that, which even a Bishop of Rome counted an execrable absurdity, quod vniversa
Ecclesia corruit vbi ille vniversus cadit. your man might have learned from his
own Bellarmin (by force of truth driven thereto at last) that, though the Pope
should become an heretic, yet should not the church therefore fail, or fall
from truth. We will never yield him this, that at any time in the church,
universally all and singularly each pastor, or ordainers of pastors were
Wolves and Thieves, albeit we affirm that he from whom al ordinatio^, in a
sort, did flow, was, long ago, a Wolf and Thief. Now, then, I having, in the
special and definit position of our callings flowing from the Bishop of Rome,
put this restrict case, that they flowed from him in a sort: he should greatly
wrong me and sophistically also reason, who would make this all one thing, as
if I had granted them to have flowed from him particularly, as the proper and
personal minister thereof: or, from the Wolvish and Thievish condition of him
from whom they but flowed in a sort, would conclude of all and every
particular, proper, and personal ordainers: or if he should reason from
ordinatio^, as it flows in a sort, to ordination properly and personally
proceeding. My remarker might indeed have made me remarkeably forgetful of my
self and truth both, if in my answer to their first objection (sect. 5.) not
admitting them therefore, any just claim in the title of the true church, for
that we, forsooth, could have no orditnary vocation but with and amongst the^
(who, howsoever they were in the church and even bore sway and obtained in tota
communiter, yet were but a part in the church, and no true part of it: in that,
always, within the church also were true both pastors and professors) if now
(I say) I should again confess that all our pastors ordination had flowed
properly and personally from the detestable head of all that mischief. Which
were not only a manifest lie but an absurd impossibility also. If any here,
would oppone, that this my distinction is vain, and, that it freeth us nothing
more to have had our ordination but in a sort from the Bishop of Rome, and
properly and personally from others, then if we granted the having it of him
even particularly, properly, and personally: because all others particular and
personal ordainers whatsoever, were not only in outward order of Church
government subject to the Pope of Rome: but also agreed all in one and the
same faith and doctrine with him, approving both his opinion and power: and,
moreover, had all of them, or their ordainers or the ordainers of their
ordainers, etc. their ordination even properly and personally of the Bishop of
Rome. In which respects, neither could the personal ordainers be free of any
imputation laid by us against the Bishop of Rome, neither ye ordination from
them be any better to the ordained by them, then if it had properly and
personally proceeded from him, as the particular Minister thereof I answer that
in this allegation, is a manifold sophistication. First, as I have already
showed, from common subjection in the obtaining state of Church policy, to
conclude Unity in opinion and all points of faith: and, from the overruling
Pope, or Metropolitan his corruption and guiltines, to conclude the same of al,
who by the course of the time, and prevailing laws of Church government are,
ordinarily subject to him, it is, even in common experience, ridiculous, and,
albeit of all, in common, it might, perhaps, be said, yet never of universally
each one: as, in my treatise, I have showed at length, and, in my commentary
on the Revelation, more plainly. Secondly, he ^^^ld thus conclude from
toleration to approbation, most falsely. For many did tolerate the evils and
usurpation which they never approoved but even detested and lamented: as did
the Church in Pergamus, dwelling even where Satan his throne was: and the
Church of Thyatira, where Ie^^abel under proud pretense of prophetical
authority, impudently domined. Against which Churches, howsoever the Lord had
some thing, for that their weakness: yet, were they, no the less his true
Churches: and, as taxed for toleration of the obtaining and proudly borne out
evil amongst them: so on the other part even praised for keeping the name of
God, and for increase of works, even there, where Satan his throne was, and
Fornication and Idolatry craftily and proudly set forward: which, yet, and
the (first) subtle, and (nixt) proud and cruel usurpation of the committers,
teachers, and imposers thereof, they had not the either knowledge or courage to
challenge, directly, in the time. And, in these two Churches, the holy Ghost,
in a depth of wisdom, and purposelie, sets down the type of the condition
of his true church first and last in the mids of Antichrist his usurpation, and
all the time within his compass. Thirdly, in alleging that al having place and
power of ordinatio^, or then their ordainers, or, at least, the ordainers of
their ordainers, etc. have received ordination even personally and particularly
from the Bishop of Rome: besides that, for many ages after Christ no such
vsurpatio^ was known or had place in the Church: and that even after the first
proud acclayming thereof many churches stood long out and refused the yoke: in
reasoning even from the stare of the prevailing tyranny since the time it took
place, there is a double fallacy. First, in not distinguishing betwixt any one
particular Bishop of Rome, and the Bishop of Rome in succession of seat. And,
next confounding the different and much diverse consideration of distinct times,
and of an evil, in time, waxing, and by degrees, arrysing from not so
intolerable beginnings at first, to the height, at last, of al detestable
mischief and importable impiety. If any should affirm the personal and proper
ordination of all ordainers, or, of their ordainers, or at least, of the
ordainers of their ordainers, etc. of any one particular Bishop of Rome, he
were senseles. If, of, the seat: then the answer is easy: that none shall
ever be able to show it so possibly personal, in that sort, throw all the
visible Church: but, that, in a succession of many Bishops, and these
(singularly) almost all, of short aboade; and little painful in the personal
actions of their calling, and, in the progres (as I have said) of a waxing
evil: we may easily and clearly evince not only a probable but even a plain
possibility of preserving and reducing upward lawful ordination in the Church
(at least in freedom from all personal contagion of that pestilent seat) to
some more tolerable times and a less corrupted state of a church.

Thus have I cleared the special and definit position of our outward ordinary
callings flowing from the Bishop of Rome, and restrict case thereof. Which
position, as it was the conclusion of my syllogism, and all that I either
affirmed or took to prove of them: so will I never grant the Bishop of Rome
any further interest in them. And, thus, the flowing of our vocation in a sort
from him (even confessed to be and to have then been the very Antichrist)
derogateth so little either to the dignity or lawfulnes of the^: as, though it
were granted that not only not from him, but even from no Wolf or Thief any
proper or personal ordination might be lawfully received, yet our ordination,
and flowing, in a sort, from the Bishop of Rome (the Antichrist) may be well
sustained to be lawful. Neither am I thus precise in the special case of our
ordination, because I think my self so straited (in granting even personal
and particularly ministered ordination by a Wolf and Thief, in some case to
be lawful) as that therefore I would narrowly seek out this evasion: but,
because it were foolish prevarication to stain the honor of our vocation
more then is necessary, by yielding any further place therein to Antichrist his
contagion, then the nature of the case and truth of story enforces: for, as in
the Church, always, even in most miserable times, have been some (albeit few)
lawful and true pastors, so, consequently, always, some remnant also of
lawful ordination. And, I pray you, with or amongst whom could it possibly
remain; but these, who were, first, the Candelstikes and Olives (ministers of
light and grace) while no possibility appeared of any: and, for applying the
right rod of examination whereby City and Court were found to be cast out,
were next cruelly murdered: and yet Thirdly, in vigor standing up against
Antichrist, were at last separated so from his contagion, as thencefoorth
Babylon falls, and they bear away the name of heaven, the true church? Now
then, howsoever, in the special case of our ordinary vocations, and in facto,
(as Iuristes speak) I will yield no more then my position thereof bears: yet,
in jure, I have not forgotten what my general and indefinit position speaks:
neither mind I so to slide from it. But, as I brought it for my argument,
whereby as from the more to the less, to infer my special position: so will
I, now, come close to your man his hand: and although no necessity of
maintayning our callings co^straine me thereto, yet, for cutting from him of
all matter of cavillation, even grant this also to be my position.

That from a Wolf and Thief (such as my proposition proporteth) lawful
Ordination may be even properly and personally taken as from the particular
minister thereof. And, (to be yet more indulgent to my Remarker then he,
perhaps, exspecteth) that, in that case, it might even so have been taken from
the Bishop of Rome also. Whereupon, if my Remarker marketh me as holding that
Ordination may be lawfully ministered by, or taken from a Wolf or a Thief,
absolutely, he has taken his marks by the Moon, or then by his own
imaginations: whereto my words will never affoorde him any ground. For,
besides all that, which the tenor of my Discourse, on that part, did clearlie
expose to any not wilfully wincking even over against his [REMARK] was put
the restriction of a Wolf, Retayning ordinary place and power of Ordination.
If there he had thought, that these two can not consist: to be a Wolf and a
Thief, and yet to retain place and power of ordination, from which, even
thereby, he does fall: yet, he might have remembered to distinguish betwixt a
Thief without, and a Thief within. And again, of inward Thieves, betwixt a
Thief detected, notore, noted, and proclaimed to be a Thief, and a Thief
still covered under false pretenses, and, so, retayning with all in common the
reputation, if not of a true or faithful, yet of a lawful Pastor. He should
not separate my position from the restrict case thereof. For, as calling is
double, outward, and inward, and, a man may have the inward calling (by a
convenient measure of gift, and a Divine motion to consecrate it to the giver)
who has not yet gotten outward ordination: and, again, one may have outward
lawful calling, who, inwardly, has none, but, by the contrary, is even a
Thief in his heart: so may an ordinary Pastor, being, or beco^ming a Traitor
and Wolf, fall, so from all inward vocation, and, yet retain, still, outward
place and power of ordination, because, albeit a Traitor and Thief, his
treason notwithstanding, is not yet detected: whither through his own crafty
carriage and deceitful pretenses, still, of a lawful Pastor: or, through the
simplicity of these, who, receaving ordination of him, are not skilled to
discern his treason, albeit even then deeply and pertly practiced, Who, if
they knew it, and yet, would receave ordination of him: as they could not but,
in that case, be Traitors also, and have no ordination at all: so, coming, in
singlenes, to him, as to a lawful Minister, and so accounted of all, in
common, through the pretense of his Lord his ensign and service: they may
(that way) receave from him a lawful ordination, the hid or vnperceaved
defect of the ordainer no more derogating to the lawfulnes of the ordination,
then does the open and seen wickedness of a hyreling Minister impede the
efficacy either of ordination or the Sacraments ministered by him, in the
faithful receaver. And, if the equity of this be so evident, always, as,
even in the state of a Church holding purity, al in common, and, where, in that
respect, the ordination of but one or few persons (who had been thus ordained
by an unknown, in the time, and, eftsoons detected Wolf) might with less
commotion or peril to the body of the Church, be annulled: albeit some men, in
detestation of heresy, would urge it, and, even the, so, ordained, also, (for
the more clearing of themselves) should assent to the receaving of new
ordination: yet, if, even in such a case and condition of a Church, no
necessity could ever enforce it upon the conscience of any: how much greater,
yea and a diverse consideration ought to be had, when the whole body of the
Church, in common, being affected; ordination is, in common, stained through
all? most part, in common, being Wolves and Thieves, albeit not, as yet, in
common, reputed so. For, as Augustine, wisely both wayeth and advises, a much
different course and cure is to be taken and used, in a common evil, which has
overgone the whole body: then when, in a well constitute body (in common) but
one or few particular members are affected. And, hereof, Christ, the true both
Master and mirror of all Wisdom, in his own practice, gave a clear lesson.
The Scribes and Pharisees were, all, in common, Wolves and Thieves: if
perverters of the true sense of the law, and corrupters of all true both word
and worship, by mixture of their leaven: if persecuters and murderers of
Prophets and of the Lord himself: if, who had losed the key of knowledge, and
neither themselves entered nor suffered others to enter in the Kingdom of
Heaven: if destroyers of souls, making their Disciples, doubly, the children
of the Gehenna, may be counted Wolves and Thieves, and, yet, in consideration
of their ordinary place in the Church (totally, in common, as then, affected)
and, the reputation which they retained, notwithstanding with all, in common,
of lawful Pastors (...)e Lord commands to hear and obey them, in the time
so far, as, sitting in Moses his chair, (...)ey should teach accordingly.
from whom, notwithstanding, as from Murderers and destroyers, he had resolved
to transfer his vineyard and house. And, is, I pray you, the baire receaving
of outward ordination, from a man, of more importance, then is our total
submission to him, as to our Pastor, for the whole dispensation of grace to us
in the word and Sacraments? and, if, in such a condition of a Church, we not
only may, but even are commanded to submit our selves so, as, in the time (till
the Lord discover them and cast them out) we may take good of them, and eschew
their evil, in the whole outward ordinary dispensation of graces may not
ordination also, in such a case, be lawful? And may it not be taken also
without contagion of the ordayner his treasonable wickedness? and thus my
general position also stands true, that, even from a Wolf or Thief
vndetected, and, so retaining still the account of a lawful Pastor, and
outward place and power of ordination, etc. lawful outward ordination may
properly and personally flow. If your Elimas has remarked me for more then
this (I having ever, joined the restrict case so clearly) he has wronged
himself more then me for, if I had but put these words for all ( seeing
outward ordination serves but for outward order) they might, with any honest
hearted Reader, have freed me from all suspicion of so lourd an absurdity.
For, what order can be imagined there, where known and advoued Haeretikes
retain any place or power in the Church? Now, Antichrist, in diverse
considerations is said to be hid or covered: and, in diverse considerations,
to be revealed and detected. First, albeit he was in the world (as in the seed
and first beginnings of his hatching, while the mystery of iniquity was
covertly begun to work) yet he was hid and covered while light and the
truth of the Gospel so prevailed, in common, as, error was borne down, and
he did not arise to any sensible height. And ^^cordingly, he is said to be
revealed, when, through prevailing darkness of the bottomless pit, he obtained
a throne even in the Temple of God. And, even thus, again (albeit, in a sort
revealed) yet he is hid and covered, so long, as, by his effectual deceit
and pretense of the Lamb his horns (men not adverting the Dragon his mouth,
or made yet wise to count the number of his name) all, in common, do still
follow him, and wonder after him. and to be revealed, again, but that in two
degrees (requiring a distinct and wise consideration, and, which, most
plainly, in his story, are delivered by the spirit,) First, when, by the
reviving light of the Gospel, men were brought to see great pollution both in
manners and worship, and most part flowing from that execrable seat:
whereupon they were moved to detest, and even grievouslie to complain of the
obtaining evils, and corruption of that seat in special. And, yet, this was
so, as, his great place and proud pretense of Prophetical authority dazeled
their weak eyes, in common, from perceaving him clearly to be, as a corrupt
Bishop, so even the adversary also and Antichrist and, therefore, scarce
daring, yet to challenge him so, or to resolve separation from him: they urged,
only, and instantly, reformation of worship and manners, in simplicity
(poor honest souls) yet thinking, or not altogether dispairing, but, that the
pard could leave his spotts, and the Thief and Traitor would reform: and not
yet fully resolved that Babylon could not be cured. And in this degree, (while
not only the Church in Pergamus, but even in Thyatira, albeit waxing in good
works, yet tollerateth: yea even while that first of the three Angels flees
and preaches through the mids of heaven, Revelar. Chapter fourtheene, verse
8.) yet is he not fully detected. But, when his impatiencie of any cure, and
bloody cruelty in murdering the Saints (whereby the, erst, spotted Pard
becomes wholly of the Dragon his color, and, where, first, but the head,
now the whole body is full of the names of blasphemy) stir men not only
to apply the rod of examination, (whereby to try, if, possibly, so bloody
and blasphemous a body could be the true Church of God) but also, that,
thereby, City and Court are clearelie, found to be cast out, when the
revived Witnesses are called up and visiblie separated from his contagious
fellowshippe: when the second Angel Revelat. Chapter 14. plainly denounces
Babylons fall, so, proclayming the Traitor: then was he fully revealed to
be a Thief and Wolf, and, from that time forth, no lawefull Ordination
could either be given by him or taken from him. As, thereupon, convenientlie,
the third Angel Revelat. Chapter 14. verse 9. warns, and, that, sadly, that
none receave his mark. To reason, then, from Antichrist in the first degrees
of the mystery of iniquity working toward a height, to Antichrist inthroned
in the Temple: or, from Antichrist sitting, and, by effectual deceit obtaining
in the Temple, to Antichrist revealed: or, from the first degree of detection,
to him, now, publicly, proclaimed a Traitor, and the true church separated
from his fellowship: or from ordination, flowing from him in the one case, to
ordinatio^ flowing from him on the other: it is deceaving, and yet but gross
sophistication. Now, if even thus, and, in the sense, which I have cleared to
be mine, your man yet has remarked my position to be erroneous. And, if he
holds that from no Wolf or Thief of whatsoever quality or condition any
lawful ordination could ever properly and personally be taken. Then you may
tell my remarker, from me, that he has remarked that for an error, which is
so evident and stable a truth, as all, any where bearing the Beast his mark,
shall never be able to overthrow it. Though it should never so much grieve
him, that thereby, his invincible argument is so utterly overthrowen, as it,
shall never any more find one foot to stand on.

What your man his ( REMARK) does point at in this part of my words: [ And he
who receaveth outward ordination is not sworn or tied to the will or appetit
of his ordainer, more then any minister baptizeth in his own name, etc.] For
these words he draws also, I could hardly, conjecture. To show that the
forsaking of the obedience, and deserting the fellowshippe of ones ordainer
(tried a Traitor) takes not away the deserters ordination: I used this
argument. That, in our ordination, we are consecrated, not to men, but to God.
And to prove this, I brought the Apostel his reason of the common condition of
all Christians. Whom, as Christ has redeemed with his own blood, and
vindicated to the liberty of the Sons of God, so, has he thereby exemed
them, in their spiritual state, from being servants to men. For we have but
one Lord: and, we are, no more Paul his, nor Apollo his, nor Cepha his, but
Christ his. And accordingly, with the Apostle, I brought the use and privilege
of our baptism, the sacrament of our initation and entry to that liberty in
Christ: in whom only we are baptized, and, to whom only we are thereby
consecrated, and not to men. according to which common and constant liberty of
al Christians by baptism, I did argue, that, so, in our ordination to any
public office in the church, we are consecrated to Christ and not to men: to
be his servants, and not the servants of men. Otherwise, our ordin'atio^
should destroy the liberty of our baptism: being baptized, first to Christ,
and being ordained, next to men. and so should Christ be robbed of his
inheritance, so dearly purchased, and we of our liberty also. Whereupon, it
does clearly follow, that in deserting the minister of my ordination (being
found a wolf) and, so, cleaving still to Christ, whose I am, I do not fall away
from the prerogative of my calling. For, who did separat us, Christ or the
Pope? and to whose service were we separat, Christ his or the Popes? were we
baptized the children of God; to be thereafter, ordained servants of the Pope?
what does your Elymas remarke here? or, because I but touched the argume't, in
a word, thinking it enough in so plain a matter, to point at the place, has
therefore, a Doctor of divinity, mistaken my meaning; whereof no sensible
christian could miss the perceptio^? Or, does this perhaps offend him; that,
where in ordination, subjection was professed and sworn to the Pope: yet I make
the ordained to be no more sworn to the will or appetit of the ordainer, the^
any minister baptizeth in his own name? But, I was not co^paring the rituall
action or outward form of baptism with that of ordination. But (with the
Apostle) from the liberty obtained and sealed up to us in baptism, pleading
the same in ordination also: the outward ministry whereof makes me no more
servant to him who is minister thereof to me, then I was baptized in the name
of the minister, but of the Lord. next, it is childish fallacy to reason from
the oath of subjection given to our ordainers in the matter of outward policy
and governeme^t, and for keeping dece^t order in the house of God: to our
spiritual servitude and subjection of our consciences to the will and appetite
of men. I let go, that it is a fallacy also to reason from the ordinary and
subjection to him, to the minister of our ordinatio^, who is not always the
ordained his ordinary. In our reformed Churches, we give our oath of
subjection to our ordinaries: for, we know that the house of God is not the
house of confusion, but of order: and that the spirits of Prophets, are subject
to Prophets. but, does this mancipate either us or our ministry to their will
or appetit? Thirdly, I would ask, if your man thinks it all one thing to
swear subjection to the Pope; and to be sworn or tied to his will and appetit?
I ask fourthly, if that oath of subjection to the Pope was essential to
lawful ordination; or, but accessorie? if essential, then for many hundreths
of years in all the Church, almost, there was no lawful ordination. yea, and
the Pope him self could have no lawful ordination who can not, neither does
swear subjection to him self. and, if it be not essential, but accessorie,
then may both ordination consist without it, and the loosing of it annulleth
not the substance of ordinatio^, and the man, who holds ordination to be a
sacrament (whose common nature is to have relation to the graces of God only,
sealed up or conferred to us thereby: and to serve for notes of our profession
of these duties we owe again immediately to God) he should know this also,
that by making any oath, in ordination, given to man, to be an essential part
thereof, he makes that man to be God, and that to be his sacrament and not
the Lord his. finally, I demand whither the oath be given, first, properly,
and principally, to the Pope: or, first, properly, and principally, to Christ?
And, whither it be given to the Pope, absolutely, or but in Christ, as to his
vicar and minister? If first, properly, and principally, to Christ, and to
Christ only, absolutely: and to the Pope but secundarilie, and in Christ (as I
hope none dare deny: except they would, in plain terms, avouch this Pope to be
that adversary exalting himself as God above all that is called God, or
worshipped) the^, I ask, whither finding the Pope to be not Christ his vicar,
but the vicar of Satan his throne; king of locusts, and head of apostasy, and
thereupon, falling from him; if I have broken any oath given in my ordination?
or, if my renu^cing of his obedience (found a traitor) loses my oath first,
properly, principally, and absolutely made to Christ? or, if it annichilateth my
consecration to his service only, in my ordination first and properly from him,
and only to him? whither we do justly charge the Pope to be Antichrist or not,
it is not here the question, but whither he being Antichrist by our doctrine,
and we thereupon deserting him to whose subjection we were sworn: if that
annulleth our ordination.

I have been the larger in this matter remarked by your man perceaving his
chief endeavor bended against me there. whither he has esteemed me, in that
part, weakest: or if he has felt himself assailed, there in the foundation of
his strength: the peril of his invincible argument pricking him. for, except
upon the 6.7. and 8. sections of my treatise, he neither utters any word, nor
gives any other signification of his meaning throw al, but that upon the 28.
section, he sets this sign?. and that so sensibly as any may well perceave
he was careful it should be seen, for showing therewith my defect also signed
thereby: and accordingly I stirred my own mind to find out what so notable a
slip that could be, which he had so singularly noted. But in my dulnes
could see nothing, except that there perhaps he thought some occasion might be
catched to calumniat, or that there, was ministered to him some matter of
mirding. Which sort of wares, these men, in dealing with us, are accustomed to
give us in steed of solid demonstrations. My words to which his sign
looks, are these: for mine own part, as in all sobernes and cleannes of
heart, by the gift of GOD I have been careful to know the truth. So, was I
never much curious to inquire of the particular state of our first men's
callings. Which, whither it were ordinary or extraordinary, and that wholly
or partly, in some men or in all: as it mattereth little or nothing (in so great
and extraordinary a work wrought by their ministries as is the discovery and
conviction of Antichrist sitting masked in the temple) so is the disputation
there about but idle and childish, etc. If upon my assertion here (in the case
so clearly put in my words) that disputation about calling is idle and
childish: he would build up this calumny, that, absolutely I misregard all
respect of calling, and count absolutely al disputation thereabout, idle and
childish: he bewrays what spirit he is of: and, both my words here, and the
whole tenor of my treatise will answer for me. If he would skoffe, perhaps, at
this: that confessing my self never to have been much curious to inquire of the
particular state of our first men's callings, etc. I should yet undertake the
defense of that which I confess I know not. he shows him self, forsooth, to
be a solid and serious disputer: who out of 29. sections of my book has
pyoked out this great point against me. But, does it follow, because I was not
much curious to enquire that therefore I do not know the? do me^ never know
ought, but which they think of such moment as meriteth to be curiously
inquired? because I esteemed it no material point, can I not therefore know it?
does it follow, that I have not sought to know it for other respects? Our
adversaries vanity and perversenes make us to seek and know diverse things:
which for any fruit in them, otherways, we would never pain our selfs: but
that for stopping their mouths, and informing the simple against their deceit,
we are forced, though with small delight, yet to dig in the du^ghils of their
durtie devises: so to make the stink of the^ known. because I have never bin
much curious to know the particular state of our first men's callings; can I not
therefore, possibly, know the common case? or, can no man be able to defend our
first men's callings, in common, but he who has curiously inquired, by whom,
where, and in what particular form every one singularly was ordained? it
becomes one professing Divinity, conscientiouslie and gravelie to confer
for edification; and not, for seducing simple souls, either sophistically, to
disput, or childishly, to dally, to his own disgrace. What is this to the
matter in hand; that, forsooth, I am ignorant of our first men's callings? Or
what advantage has he even in the confession of my ignorance? If, how little
soever my care or curiosity has been to know that matter: yet, in this my
careless ignorance, I have said so much for our callings: as (howsoever they
would appear to vilipend it) may make them not only careful and curious, but
even perplexedly anxious also for their own credit: who always, and every
where, vantingly and vainly gloried, that we were all mad dumb in the matter
of our callings. And albeit I know, that, according to their manner, they will
make no end of boasting and altercation: (wherein, I mind not, by the grace of
God, to be so badly busied, as to keep a part with them) yet I may boldly
affirm: bark, as it as they please, that yet they shall never be able to
bring down or, by sound and solid reason to shake any one ground laid down in
that treatise. Wherein I have showed the bow of our callings so doubly and
strong stringed with two stringes: as either of which they shall never be able
to cut with all their cunning.

I could have, perhaps, coniectured (as I know somewhat the manner and meaninges
of these men) what surder he would particularly have said by his other
draughts which he has drawn frequently and only on the 7. and 8. sections. but
having cleared the maine point, I will not dally impertinently with him; or
struggle with mine own shadow. as even of this, I have here done, he may
perhaps say: and you, even therefore, esteem it true. but, I am sure, I have
either met with his mind; or then he shall not be able to render any other
such reason of his challenge, which shall not be found as little, or less to
his credit. And when ever his dumb draughts are made speaking lines, upon the
little I have looked in them, I dare give my word, that they shall bewray
weakness of sense, defect of sincerity, or fraudulent shifting of the question.
Now, as my treatise was written, but for information of modest minds and
neither for any who will not be cured, neither yet to moove or to maintain
iangling with any (an exercise both fruitles and evil beseeming Christians)
so, now, for ought your man could either have said or signed I would not have
interchanged one line with him. I know what is the efficacy of error, and
bewitching force of the cup of forniation in refractary seducers. I know that
not only the blind leaders of the blind, but even such as are joined to their
Idols are to be let alone. And that such as would appear to ask counsel of
a Prophet, having set up their Idols in their hearts, and having put the
stumbling bloke of their iniquity before their eyes: the Lord will eve^, in
justice answer the^ according to the multitude of their Idols. But these pages
ar to you: in remembrance of my offer once made you: if I should find any
assurance of a sincere disposition, in all singlenes, and laying a side
prejudice, that you wou^d uprightly hear and learn: and, with an impartial
heart, try and ponder both parts: giving us the one ear and alike attension:
with such other signs of indifferent affection, as might assure us of half
bar and aequall bench in the seat of your judgment: and so much the more, as
you have these years past given us evidences of a heart quite alienated from
us, and, as we plead, from the truth also. And, albeit, as yet, we have gotten
of you small or no tokens of any such intention: yet, I would not leave you
this to say, that I had failed you promise at the first as neither (if I can
yet see your mind sincerely, carefully, and humbly set for resolution) will I in
this sort, or any other kind of pains, weary to do you pleasure according to
my power, in Christ. But, if either you, or any other lust to be contentious,
we have no such manner, neither the Church of God. Now, God even the Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ, according to his good pleasure and abou^dantly rich
grace, grant us that our love may more and more abound in knowledge and all
spiritual sense, whereby we may be able to discern things that differ: and,
prooving all, to hold that which is good: that we may be sincere, and without
offense till the day of Christ.

Yours in Christ P. FORBES, of Coirse.

A SHORT DISCOVERY OF THE ADVERSARY HIS DOTTAGE, IN HIS IMPERTINENT AND
ridiculously deceitful demands.
THat thou may perceave (Christian Reader) how foolish and fruitles a labor
it is to dispute with these men. When their pamphlet against our callings,
which stirred me to defense, was put abroad: it was backed by the applauders
thereof, with insolent braggs that no answer either would or could possibly be
given it: and, that, though twenty answers were made thereto, yet they should
all be refelled with als many sound replies. Hereupon, at the entreaty of some
well affected brethren (least the hearts of our weak ones should be dismayed)
I was moved to writ my treatise of defense: whereof a copy falling in the
adversary his hands (and that without my knowledge and against my purpose,
who, hating contention, framed my pains only for resolution of modest minds)
I heard diverse and daily surmises from them, that my treatise would be in
short time solidly refuted. And, I, accordingly, more exspecting what a
traveling mountain would bring forth, then mynding any reply thereto: at last
my copy returned to me carrying such notes of a censuring pen as occasioned my
epistle to a recusant. Whereupon their boast of refutation still waxing, and I
thereby, exspecting some what more then in end to find but a ridiculous mouse:
were brought to me, at length, after many weeks from the party, and delivered
with no small circumstance, forsooth, and earnest protestation of an answer in
writ, these ensuing lines. It is to be demanded of the ministry, for the true
resolution of a Christian soul, which if they resolve not, we will account
them, etc.



SEeing the Ministers of Scotland graunts the church of Rome to have been once
the true Church of Christ, we desire them to thew in what year of God she
made first defection from the true religion, and by whom she was condemned for
heresy. Likewayes, we desire to know the names of these who since the Church
of Rome fell from the truth, hes continually from time to time, and age to age
professed this religion in all substantial points of doctrine as they
presently profess, whose doctrine and writings in all points of religion,
they will advow and bide by.

NOw consider (good Reader) what either pitiful ignorance, or rather
poysonable perverseness of an inpudently evil conscience these demaundes bewray
most evidentlie. Our disputation was about the lawfulnes, or unlawfulness of our
Pastoral callings. This they by their treatise labored to evince: I by my
defense pleaded the other. In this our litis-contestation, partly by dumb,
partly by speaking signs and draughtes set by them on the margent, or drawn
betwixt the lines of my book, they sought, at first, that it might seem they
had somewhat to say against me. Thereupon, in my epistle to a Recusant, I
sustained my point. Now, in steed of replying ought, either for confirming
their own, or impugning my part of our debated matter, the question is,
(whither impudently or ignorantly) altered: and, from the institut point of our
vocation, like slipperie Isles, they slide back to new demaundes of our
doctrine. Is this, I pray you, to dispute, or to dally? Are these the fresh
fyrie edged schoolmen arrived lately, and with so great exspectation of working
wonders, from Paris, Lovan, Rhems, and Rome; shaping, shooting, and slopping
men through with syllogismes; who neither, can propoune ought, or sustain to
hear any answer but in forma and figura; that now they forget not only all
form and figure; but therewith, all both mense and sense also, in so
shamelesly shifting the question, and casting in, kowardly, a kard of another
kind? why remembered they not their own offer so often and confidently made us
by word, write and printe; that if we could but once clear the lawfulnes of
our callings, they would, without more ado or further disputation about heads
of doctrine, give us their hands? For our vocation I have said somewhat
against their objections in my Treatise of defense. and, again, in my epistle
to a recusant, I have replied to their censuring notes. If I have cleared the
point, why remember they not their covenant? If I have not, yet why, in place
of refelling my arguments and strengthening their own point, am I deceitfully
drawn away from the question in hand; by new and impertinent demands of a
different matter? and yet if in this their shameless shifting, there were, in
them, any one spunke of sincerity, I could even gladly be drawn to follow
them. for that, I confess, it is a much more sure way from truth of doctrine
to establish lawefulnes of vocation, then, upon the slipperie ground of outward
ordinary calling, to build a warrant of doctrine.

But consider, I pray you, first, the ingenuitie of the demaunder, in the
substance of his demau^ds: and, next his aequitablenes, in his prescribed
rules. we are desired (in sum) to evince that the Church of Rome has made
apostasy from the truth: and, therewith, to clear that our doctrine is the
verity of God. But, (shameless men) what have we been doing, these more then a
hundredth years ago, but filling the world with volumes; whereby we have so
plainly discovered their abominations, and verified the truth of our Doctrine;
as wearied with contesting therabout, or rather vexed with their clear
convincing power of light, they were feign to cast up all either disputation,
and come in end as to their last refuge, to quarrel our vocation? the
lawfulnes whereof, when, thervpo^ we have stablished against al their
cavillations, they leap now back, and of new again intend accusation against
our doctrine. what is this else, but (as children, in their sporting,
childishly practice and more childishly speak) to play titbore tatbore with us?

Now, as he has forgotten all shame in so childish shifting the question, so,
by his limitations laid down to us (I know not by what law) how to answer him
in both the points demanded, he exponeth plainly to the perception of any
sensible Reader, what sound mind he has and what aequitablenes is in his
dealing with us. First, for evincing the apostasy of the church of Rome, we
must take this law of the demander: that in so far as the Church of Rome was
once the true Church of Christ, we must, therefore, condescend what year of
God she made first defection, and by whom (accordingly) she was condemned of
Haeresie. Reasonable men, indeed. And yet their companions in spirit, John 19.7.
pretended in als bad a cause, some more equity: We have a law (said they)
and by this law he ought to die. Our adversaries, neither having nor so much as
pretending any stable law against us, and therefore in an evil conscience
shunning all right laws of examination: they will (in no small modesty
forsooth) set down rules of their own brain, whereby they will have both
them selves and us tried.

But, herein, first, I can not but greatly muze, whither foolishlie or
fraudfullie the demander has fallen upon so either an improper or so
presumptuous a manner of speech, as, indefinitlie and absolutely, to call the
Church of Rome the true Church of Christ. that, consequently, all other
churches may either be secluded from this title, or be compelled to come in
under the name of the church of Rome. Neither do I so much muze hereon, for
any doubt I have of the Demaunder his own meaning (for I know how
blasphemouslie bold they are, if not to mende the magnificat; yet to carve
carelessly at the Creed, by adding Romanam to Sactam Ecclesiam Catholicam: thus
forcing all, if not to receave the character, yet at least the name or number
of the beast; but that he proponeth this as a point granted by us. I admire
his impudency: for, of the church of Rome; before she became a harlot, we
confess that she was a true church of Christ: or one of his true churches: or
a true part of that his true church which is but one. but to entitle any
particular Church, absolutely and indefinitly, with the name of the true Church
of Christ, it is an insolent speech, and not according to the style of holy
scripture, which adds always some distinguishing designation, as the Church
which is at Rome: in Judea: in Corinth: of Galatia: of Ephesus, Smirna,
Pergamus, etc. As for the church of Rome, Revel. 17.5
at length, becumming not only a harlot, but also the mother of whoordomes in
all the earth, in which respect only it was that all commonly therein did take
her name; we deny her, so, to be either the true Church of Christ, or any
true part thereof; but the Synagogue of Satan and an abominable Whore, borne
up and advanced by a blasphemous and bloody beast. howsoever, all the while,
under and within his usurpation (even where Satan his throne was) the true
Church of God long dwelt shruded and suffered to live under the name and number
of the beast, yet free always from his character. but, least I seem over
narrowly to sift syllables, I pass this there, whither ignorant or arrogant,
manner of speaking.

For prooving the church of Rome to have made apostasy from truth, we must, by
our adversaries injunctions, co^descend upon the year of God, wherein the first
made defection: and who they were that, thereupon, even then, convinced her of
haeresie. and shall this then serve to exime her or any other church from the
blot of defection or haeresie in all time thereafter; and make all whatsoever
she holds to be undoubted truth, if the first hour and first degrees of
her apostasy have escaped a public note? or howsoever noted, if yet she has
not been publicly condemned of haeresie, or howsoever, both noted and
condemned, yet if no public record thereof be extant to future ages? shall any
long space of time justify waxing and obtaining error? or is there any such
prescription against truth, but that, jure postlimin^ at least, it may always
plead justly for reposition? I leave, here, to the upright consideration of
any indifferent mind, what true confidence these men can have of their own
cause, who prescribe such limitations: and, being challenged of sacrilegious
guiltines, will offer themselves no otherwise to trial: then, as if a cunning
and long covered Thief tatched with innumerable fangges, and having all his
houses stuffed with stolen wares, yet should partly protest, that in so far
as he had been once honest, and of all men accounted so: he ought therefore to
be reputed so still, notwithstanding of any thing found by him, except it may
be cleared, what hour of his life he did first begin to steal, in what
place, and from what persons, and, therewithal; who had even then convinced
and condemned him for a Thief. Or as if a subtle and long dissembling harlot,
discovered at last, to have opened her feet to all that pass by the way,
should yet plead, that, in so far as she was once a virgin, and had long
retained the reputation of an honest and chaste woman, she ought therefore, to
be esteemed so still: except it be plainly prooved against her, what time,
first, she became lascivious, and when, where, and who did first press the
teats of her virginity: and therewith also who even then upon the point had
cleared and convinced her to be a Harlot, and, thus, the greatest Thief in the
world might panel without peril: and the most arrant whore yet impudently
wipe her mouth and say she had committed no iniquity. He were an impudent
fellow who selling rotten and corrupted Wines, yet would boldly affirm them to
be fresh and healthsome, because that once they had been recent and good:
neither could any man precisely point to him the hour when they became first
purifyed, or produce any who, at that instant, had condemned them for such.

We know that putrefaction comes not at once: but that wine, after that it
have loosed some of the color, yet it will retain taste: and after that both
color and taste are a little changed, yet while better is not commonly to be
had, it will be drunk of and pass for wine. Which, notwithstanding, when it
has not only become aigre, but so rotten also, as it can neither be counted
wine nor serve for vinegar, may then not only be condemned as reprobate, but
even justly be cast out as not only improfitable but also noisome and
pestilent. 2 These. 2.7
We know by scripture and agreeable experience, that the course of iniquity is
a mystery which Satan even in the Apostolic times and thence forward was a
hatching; first by vnperceptible, and next by perceptible, but either not well
adverted or not, duly regarded degrees, till cunningly and covertly at
length, in all effectualites of deep deceit under fair pretenses, and from
small, Revel. 13.
and (as appeared) not intolerable beginnings; Antichrist under pretense of the
Lamb his horns, obtained a throne even in the temple: and, by proud pretense
of Prophetical authority, was so borne out in that usurpation, as, Revel. 2.
a long time, the true church dwelling even where Satan his throne was, and,
even there (keeping the name of God, yet had this piece of weakness, that they
tolerated spiritual fornication: Neither that only in the first degree of
subtle insinuation thereof, as by Balaam, but even when together with
Prophetical pretense, cruel and bloody tyranny, as of Iezabel, was
conjoined to maintain and advance Idolatry, as, by the states of Pergamus and
Thyatira, true types of those times is most clear: and as, both in my treatise
of defense, and in my commentary on the Revelation I have so clearelie showed,
as, if the demander were not either Piti^ullie ignorant, or perverslie
refracta^^, might have kept him from forming out thus his own shame by so
ridiculous demaundes. When almost all and every particular point of doctrine
wherewith we charge the church of Rome, are well considered: they will be
found either of late invention, or then with time and by degrees to have grown
up to capital praevarications: and that from partly, so laudable, partly, so
plausible, partly, so tolerable, partly, so small and insensible beginnings, as,
to men either not so circumspect as to perceave, or of a more peaceable
disposition then to contend about every thing gave not, as they thought, at
first great occasion of contesting albeit n^islyking diverse things which for
regard of the Churches peace they tolerated. Which men if they had but once
imagined whereto, by time, Satan his eras^ and man his vanity would have
brought things, they had undoubtedly resisted the very smallest beginnings
even to the blood. Who, but, a stranger in Church story and writings of the
Fathers, knows not, that, albeit some of the^, through deceit of Philosophy
did slide upon some fond fantasies of Purgatory; yet their opinions thereof
at first were als far from such a Purgatory as thereafter and now the Church
of Rome defends, as the Roman^s make their Purgatory to be different from
hell? Who knows not also, that it was then with such freedom of judgment,
as of a thing not much mattering what any did estsome thereof, that Augustine
(who mislyked it) yet in his accustomed modesty, speaking thereof, says no
more but non ^^lide c^^rgu^, forfitan verumest? Would Augustine have so spoken
of such an article of faith, as under pain of eternal flammes must be
believed, and for denying of which fantastike fire, the Romanists have made so
many thousands to feel here, the cruel fla^mes of real burning. If that Godly
Father had thought that ever any could have so impudently usurped as to impose
so tyrannical a yoke of bondage on the consciences of Christians; he had
altered, I warrant you, his style to valide (...) and, est ^tique (...).

Now, as this forged flame of a pretended Purgatory, in course of time,
through Satan his bellows, waxed hotter and hotter: who knows not, that,
therewith also the doctrine of men's merits, of works of supererogation, of
humane satisfactions, of indulgences, and the rest of that sacrilegious (...)
set up in contumely of the cross of Christ, Revel. 9.
did also more and more prevail and take place; through the craft of these
locustes, who for their own gain, like scorpions, did sting men of the world
with a pain less tolerable the^ death? Auricular confession though it was of
anicient use: yet, who but ignorants know not, that the practice thereof in
primitive times was free? Yea and so free, that Nectarius an orthodox and
highly commended Bishop of Constantinople, did abrogate al use thereof, as
greatly offensive in the Eastern Churches. Would (I pray you) so godly and
approoved a Father have discharged that without which can be no salvation or
remission of sins committed after baptism? Or albeit he might have erred
herein, yet would all the Eastern Churches have so lightly subscribed to such
an heresy? And howsoever both he and the Eastern churches with him might have
fallen so lourdly, yet would all the Western Churches and the Bishops of
Rome (who otherwise were, in a praeposterous aemulation, more then ready
enough often times to pry in and carpe at the defects of that seat) have not only
been silent, at so sacrilegious a derogation of the faith; but also have
kept still communion with Nectarius and the Eastern Churches? Can the
Romanistes produce any law, imposing private confession before the
Pontificalitie of Innocentius the third; who was in succession the 183. Bishop
of Rome? Who knows the date of the Counsel of Latran; but can well enough
calcull what time, first, any Canon of auricular confession was inacted? A
laudable and loving practice of the primitive Church in the commemoration of
Martyrs, and (according to both the expediency, and, some times, the
necessity of these days) the assembling and exercising of GOD his worship at
their sepulchers: and the godly care, which, against the feritie of beastly
persecuters, was had of their funeralles and collecting of their dissipated
relicts: to how, not only a superstitious dottage, but even to how detestale an
Idolatry, time, by Satan his subtilitie, made it to degener in the worship
not only of creatures, but even of carions, miserable experience has proved.
The Fathers, in a preposterous zeal and piece of carnal wisdom, seeking to
abrogate all memory of Heathenisme, and finding how difficill a thing it was
to reduce superstitious people from a long and plausible custom of evils,
they turned all the solemn rites and festivities of times and places dedicated
and practiced in the worship of Heathen Idols, to the celebration of the
memory and honor of saints. Thus (as blind Steuchus foolishly glories of
Satan his subtle success in the mystery of iniquity) Omnia Profane Sacra
effect^ (...) and ritus profani corporunt esse ^itus sacri, Pro donat.
Constant. ^ont. Valla^.
etc.) and, by time, through Satan his slight working by the superstitious
humors of vain men, what was gained hereby, but that with interchange of
Idols, the Idolatry abode no less abominable then before? The execrable
erecting and adoration of Images (against plain scripture, express judgment
of the Fathers, and clear Canons of orthodox Counsels) of what time it was,
the terrible Tragedies stirred up thereabout, and the proud and respectles
renting of the Church of Christ have left us too lamentable records. If all
the Fathers who lived even many hundreths of years after Christ, were
presently reduced to life, and did hear what a stir is made in the world
now about tra^ssubstantiation, would they not all start at once, astonished at
so strange a sound? and even be greatly amazed what monstrous meaning under
so prodigious a word could be employed? What would these holy Fathers (who if in
any other, have most plainly left their mind in that point) think of the
doctrine which now the church of Rome holds of the sacred Supper? When even
the author of the gloss on the Decretal: albeit him self plunged in a hudge
measure of prevayling darkness, yet did so far skunner at the porte^tous
words prescribed by Pope Nicolam to Berengarius (who, as they have given out
of him, whither falsely, or that fleeing one extremity he did fall perhaps
too far to the other, did think too slenderly, and speak to warshly of that
sacrament) that he exclaimeth no small peril to be in them of breeding a
worse haeresie then was that of Berengarius? Who is so childish as to be
ignorant how lately and how audaciously, in an advowed contempt of the Lord his
institution, and of all ancient and pure practice of the primitive church, the
sacred supper was mutilated, and the people proudly and profanely prohibited
all use of the commanded cup? 1. Tim. 4.
Now in these two points, whereby the Apostle designeth the devilish doctors of
later times, who knows not what liberty both is left to christians in the
written word, and was also long practiced in the primitive Church? and how that
voluntary abstinence in both kinds: first to hyperbolically praised; next,
too superstitiously admired; albeit no way necessarily required, yet brought
men and women by time to delight too much in wil-worshippe; and vainly, to
become votaries of more then either the Lord required at their hands, or they
were able to perform? And Satan thus in end took advantage, by his
hypocritical doctors, to the overthrow of all christian liberty; to lay on
importable burdens on the consciences of men. Single life, though by some
Fathers (too full of their own sense) it was over far extolled, even with
the contumelious reproaching of that holy band, which the Lord him self first
instituted, and that even before sin came in the world: which by his presence
in the flesh he both countenanced and graced: Genesis 2. John. 2. Heb. 13.4.
and which by his Apostle he calls honorable in all persons: yet was it long
ere Satan durst be so impudent as, under any hypocritical pretense of holiness,
by the vicar of his throne to open so plainly his Dragon his mouth, 1. Tim. 4.3
as to come to (...) and (...). Which usurpation how late it was, the miserable
vexation of many churches, and of these in this our Island in special, for
constant withstanding: and at last, this yoke of bondage not willingly
received, but violently imposed, can well enough verify. Now, withal, how
cunningly and by what degrees, for advancing, strengthening, and maintaining
of all these errors, the vicar of Satan his throne under pretense of the Lamb
his horns, ascended (as Gregory speaks) cul^^^ singularitatis, it has been
a thousand times more then manifestly showed. And yet in a silly shift, God
wot, our adversary summoneth us, and that, foresooth, with certification, to
show the^ how, tanqua^ vomere tusco, Erutusille Tages, repent doctus in ipso
nascendi articulo. so, the church of Rome has, in one instant made defection:
and even in that point, has been not only pointed at, but also painted out as
haereticall. But, vainly and impertinently (which once to think were execrable
impiety) had Antichrist his arysing and work of iniquity been of the holy
Ghost named a mystery, wherein Satan in all deceaveablenes of unrighteousness
should bring on such a common apostasy, as whereby his vicar his throne should
be erected even in the Church, and who in his own time should be discovered:
if the first degrees thereof had been not only exposed to common perception,
but noted also: neither this only but also publikelie condemned of haeresie.
And what will you do then with these men who will admit no other rules of
disputation and examination; but which are plainly repugnant to all the clearly
foretold and fallen out course of GOD his wise dispensation in the case of his
Church, and of her condition accordingly?

Now, how aequitable our adversaries are in their own case (that they will,
foresooth, he content to be tried by a rule of their own appointing) so
reasonable they show themselves toward us in admitting us to the defense of
our doctrine, but so, as we must take also from them the law of examination:
Namely, that they will accept no defense of us except we design the particular
persons who from age to age have holden the same doctrine which we profess,
and that in all the substantial points thereof, and whose writings in all
points of religion we will advow and bide at. And is it so indeed, that we
have not a more certain rule of truth; then what from age to age men may be
cleared to have holden? Or, rather, are not all ages, and all men in all ages,
and all and whatsoever opinions of whatsoever men in any age, to be reduced to
examination by that stable truth and everlasting Gospel which Christ and his
Apostles first preached, and thereafter, by the will of God, (as says
Ireneus) did put in writ, to remain for ever, Lib. ^. (...) pra^^^s.
the constant ground and rule of our faith? Shall this invariable and
inviolable truth of God be subject unto men; or men unto it? And, though all
men were liars, shall therefore the truth of God fail? Shall time so strengthen
error, as, what from the beginning was invalid, any length of days shall make
it good? Math. 15.9.
The Lord himself being accused (as we are now) of transgressing the tradition
of the Fathers, answered that in vain they worship God, Math. 19.8.
who teach for doctrines the traditions of men: and against most inveterat,
strongly authorized, and obtaining errors, he opposed this one reason that it
was not so from the beginning. The most approoved amongst the Fathers have
taught us, that, for warrant of faith, we have neither to rely upon what they
themselves, or what the Fathers who were before them have said, but upon that
which Christ and his Apostles who were before all have delivered. Antiquity I
confess, were a great argument for truth, if Satan had not been a lier from
the beginning. And yet the adversary is so ridiculous as to demand us what
men they are, whose doctrine and writtings in all points of religion we will
advow and bide ate. But miserable men, is there an option left us, or any who
will not perish in blindness, to make a choice to whose doctrine and writings in
all points of religion we will betake us? Has the Lord left us so uncertain
what to flee or follow? We are not to advow or bide at any either doctrine or
writings as undoubted truth, but what in the sacred scriptures is set down.
All other whither doctrine or writings of whatsoever men and in whatsoever age,
Epist. 19. all Hieronym. which words are insert in the decretall distinct. 9.
can. ^is so^^^.
we advow and bide at but so far as they are consonant to that. So as if an
Angel from heaven preach any other Gospel, let him be anathema. Eis solis
Scriptur arum libris qui iani Canonici appellantur (says Augustine) didici
hunc timorem honoremq^ue defer, vt nullum serum authorem scribendo aliquid
errasse firmiter credam. And a little after. Alias autem ita lego vt quanta
libet sanctitata doctrinaque pr^p^lleant, non ideo verum putem quia ipsi ita
censerunt, sed quia mihi, vel per ill^s authors canonicos, vel probabili
rations, quod a vero non abhorreat, persuadere potuerant. That is, only to
these books, of Scripture, which are called Canonik, have I learned to yield
this fear and honor, that I firmly believe no Author of them to have erred
ought in writings. As for others I so read them, as, how excellently soever
holy or learned they be, yet I think not ought to be, therefore, true,
because they have thought so, but because either by these Canonical authors,
or, by probable reason they were able to persuade me that which does not
abhor from truth. And have we not more then a thousand times evinced
evide^tly that we profess and maintain no other doctrine, then that which
Christ and his Apostles first taught by word, and thereafter left us in register
for a stable and vndoudted rule to al succeeding ages: and which, in despyt of
Satan, albeit busily advancing the mystery of iniquity, yet was commonly
holden in the Church more then three hundredth years thereafter? And, which,
howsoever by prevayling darkness of the bottomless pit, it was so far, at
length, eclipsed, as Satan obtained a throne even in the Temple of God, yet
was, all the time of that prevayling error, the true both light and life of
these, who dwelling even where Satan his throne was, and albeit in weakness
tolerating spiritual fornication, yet kept the name of God, Revel. 20.
and lived and reigned with him a 1000. years not receaving the beast his
character: albeit lurking under the shadow of his name or number: and, which,
from under that overwhelming deluge of darkness, has broken forth again now
three hundredth years ago, and that by degrees (praised be God) so clearly and
powerfully, to the convincing and dispelling thereof, as it makes the
recurelesse characterized followers of the beast to gnaw their toungs for sorrow
and blaspheme bitterly. Our adversaries, in this their demand are no less
ridiculous, the^ were either a senseles fool, or a perverse iangler, who, the
sun arysing bright in the morning, yet because, soon after, it is by degrees
so lapped up in clouddes and mist as it is not seen of men in the earth, till
that; some hours before even, breaking out again clearly, and dispelling all
that overshadowing darkness, it lighten of new the earth, would, therefore, with
pertinacie plead that the sun thus wrestling out from under that overvailing
cloud, were not the true sun which in the morning had shyned, but some
counterfeit and never before seen Comet: because, foresooth, their eyes had
not all the minutes of the day sensibly seen the shyning body and particular
progres of it. But, poor Idiots, the sun has such a sovereign and singular
both light and heat, as, though all the dolts in the world would disclaim it,
yet will evince it, to be always one and the same: Exodus 10.23.
and, albeit long covered and vnperceaved in common, yet that, all the while,
it still so shyned, as howsoever in all Aegipt was palpable darkness, yet, in
Gosben was clear and confortable light.

In my treatise of defense and 19. section thereof, answering this same
objection, I alleged, that as diverse of our men had done, so I might bring
fair Catalogues of men who in former ages had holden the truth and heavely
lamented the prevayling corruptions of their times. But I gave, there, diverse
and good reasons why neither ought that justly be required of us, neither we
be so foolish as to divert with our adversaries to so unnecessary an
altercation. And, long before, in my commentary upon the 14. Chap. of the
Revelation, I showed, how, to answer the adversary ought hereto, were but
vainly to hale the coard of contention with men whose mouths we might stop
by more sure and evident arguments. And yet the adversary (in a good
conscience I warrant you, of a just cause) will admit, now, no rule whereby to
examine us, but which he knew very well that, before any demand from him, I
had, for good reasons, rejected: and he is so extreemly impudent herein, as
not only without refelling any of my reasons, he still urges it: but fearing
also what herein I might very well perform if I pleased to answer a fool to
his folly, and so prove a fool with him: that, whereto I refused to answer,
being proponed eve^ in a large case, he reponeth to me now with such strict
limitations, as any sensible Reader may evidently perceave, he has fore-caston
his evasions how to escape taking. And for this it is that, forsooth, we must
show who from age to age not onley held, but also professed the same Religion,
and that in all substantial points. And whose writings, in all points we
will advow and bide at. Here, he has prepared to him self exceptions
against any whom he thinks that, in those most corrupted times, we can
produce against him. First, if he has not openly avowed and professed: next,
if he has not professed all the substantial points which we hold. Thirdly,
if we advow not and bide at al whatsoever they have written in all and any
point of Religion. Sweet, indeed, and sound hearted disputers. By this law
laid down to us by these aequitable men, not only shall they serve us for no
witnesses who through ignorance or infirmity, or common error in the time
have impinged, perhaps, in some points, but even their silence or want of a
remaining record behind them, in any one point professed by us, shall get
them casten. But (which before I have showed) as all evils did not arise at
once, neither, at first to such degree as where fore men would be soon carried
to open contestation: so (albeit in a common use and prevayling practice, yet
before any tyrannical yoke was imposed on consciences, by enforcing laws)
while a liberty was left to men of holding them selves pure, and keeping the
name of GOD, they were loath, with evident hazard, to contend against evil so
subtillie insinuated, and by pretense of Prophetical authority, so arrogantly
advaunced. A weakness, I confess, in them, but such as the holy Ghost has
clearly foretold us should befall even his true and faithful Church,
dwelling where Satan his throne was. And, which, the more the mystery of
iniquity wrought on, was the less wonderful: in regard of the tyra^nicall
usurpation, whereby no liberty was left (without certain peril) of any open
opposition; or, if, of open profession, yet not of publishing in writ: or, if
of this, yet not of preserving any record thereof to the posterity.

Now, besides this, what marvaill, in such a common apostasy, and eclipse of
all true light, though even these good and godly men (who both mourned for it,
and in the mids of it kept the name of God, holding the substantial
foundation of salvation) were some what tainted in many things with the
contagion of the time? Whither that thorough defect of knowledge they were
imprudently miscarried in some points, or, rather through defect of courage,
they tolerated what otherwise they would never have approoved. Whose weakness,
herein, albeit the holy Ghost taxes, Epist. 119. ad Ianuar.
yet has he, indulgently, covered it under the lap of his garment.
Augustine, while some tolerable estate of a Church still remained, yet heavilie,
regraiteth, that even in his time the Church of God (which her Lord will have
to be free) was so burdened with multitude of superfluous and superstitious
ceremonies, as the state of the Jews, under their Pedagogie was more
tolerable. In the succeeding ages, the evil had so far waxed, as, in
consideration of the great corruption, Gregory the first Bishop of Rome, did
not stick to affirm (and truly) that, Antichristus, lib. 4. epi. 34 and
epist. 38.
qui appellationem sibi vindicabit vniversalis Episcopi, even pro foribus est:
and that, quod dici nefas est, Sacerdotum exercitus paratus est ad a^^ectandum
eum. Bernard, whose groans and lamentations did meet almost, with the height
of Antichristian usurpation, albeit, for such a measure both of learning and
holiness as was rare in so corrupt a time, he was so reverend as gave him more
freedom of taxing common corruption, then would have been tolerated in an
other; yet, by his timorous style, he shows, clearly, that, as evils were
mounted to a great height, so, was any liberty of rebuke extreemly dangerous.
To the Bishop of Rome he writes thus: inter haec, Ad Eugen. Pap. (...).
tu pastor procedis multo and precioso circu^datus auro. Si audere^ dicere
daemonum magis qua^ ovium pascua haec. Scilicet sic factitabat Petrus, sic
Paulus ludebat: and mur mur loquor and quarinicniam omniu^ Ecclesiarum. And
facitis hoc quiae potestis, sed vtrum debeatis, quaestio est. And, that no man
think he taxes the particular vices of one man, these are also his words: a
te tamen mos iste vel patias (...) non venit, ^^inam in te def^^at. Consider, I
pray you, how timerouslie even the most free speaker, in his time, steppeth to
talk of that, which albeit it was (...) and quatimonia (...) ecclesiarum, yet
is he feign to use this preface. Si anderem dicere* and, vtrum debeatis
quaestio est. And yet, least, even thus, he should have too much irritated, he
behooved to sweetten his hard speeches with this syrope ate tames mosiste non
venit. Soon after these times men began not only to see the Bishop of Rome a
corrupted Bishop, but also to suspect him a Traitor: and not so much look
that, by him, any reformation should come, as to despair that he could be
cured: Revel. 10. and 11.
till at last, the eyes of some (through the little book sweetly swallowed and
reid applied) were opened to see him, and confidently to call him the beast of
the Dragon his throne and authority. The adversary forecasting with him self
what, in this case we might be able to allege against him, has tymouslie, in
his demands, builded to him self backdores, whereby if we would show murmur
and querimonia^ omnium ecclesiarum, he shall start out at the postern of open
profession, and that of all substantial points. If we bring Gregory or Bernard,
or other such: then, some particular defectes of these godly me^ (which both
the Lord has mercifully passed by and we also would charitably cover) are
narrowly sitted out and cast in our teeth, to deprive us of al their good. so
as, except by his forlaid rule, we advow and bid at all whatsoever they have
written, they must stand us for no witnesses. But, herein, a needles fear has
made my adversary unnecessarily to bewray himself how small either confidence
or good conscience he has in the matter which he maintains. For, I was never
purposed to dally with him in this kind; or to be drawn deceitfully by him
from sure and solid grounds, to divert foolishly to so wide and vain a field of
endless altercatio^. We know assuredly, that God, always had a number who
kept his name and leived his life not only in the Primitive and most pure
times while the woman was yet clothed with the Sun, Revel. 12. and even
thereafter also when corruption came on in such degrees, as the third of al
green thing in earth, Revel. 8.
the third of the sea and things therein, the third of fountains and rivers,
the third of Sun, Moon, stars, day and night, was smitten: Neither only now
again, in the reviving light of the Gospel since the first of three Angels
break out through the midds of heaven with the everlasting gospel, Revel. 14.
(whereby the Sun, by degrees, wresting out from under that darkness, Revel. 18.1.
has now at last lightened all the earth with the glory thereof) but that eve^
in those mid and most miserable times, Revel. 9. and 13.
wherein Su^ne and air were totally eclipsed by the smoke of the bottomless
pit, and all the earth followed the beast, yet still also God had a number
sealed: and, that, howsoever (in common) they were so far either in
simplicity abused, or by fear dismayed, as to tolerate spiritual fornication,
and to receave the name or number of the beast, yet, they kept the name of
the Lamb his father, and never received the beast his character. of whose
murmurings and regrets (in despite of all repressing and suppressing tyranny)
we could bring, and diverse of us have more then once brought such insta^ces
from story, as may confirm any clean hearted man that, both sparkles of true
light remained and many also were enlightened and lived thereby even while
Antichrist by prevayling darkness appeared to obtain all. But, to be drawn
childishlie to answer our adversaries herein according to their perverse
mind, and prescriptions and limitations, impudently, against al law and
reason, and in an evidencie of an evil and self-accusing conscience, laid down
unto us, it were not only to answer a fool to his foolishnes, and so to become
a fool with him: but it were even to discredit that undoubted truth which we
profess: by laboring to prove such a case as is flat contrary to the clearly
foretold course, both of God his wise dispensation, and (by his permission) of
Satan his subtle dealing in the mystery of iniquity waxing, obtaining,
discovered, and overthrowen. The holy Ghost has so clearly foretold both the
case, and particular course, as, either our adversaries ignorance is miserable,
or their perverseness abominable. We are forwarned of such an Apostasy as
whereby Antichrist shall sit Lieutenant of the Dragon his throne, even in the
Church of God (as even Augustine inclines to interpret.) De civitate De^, lib.
20. cap. 19. Revel. 2.
In this usurpation we are forwarned that GOD should still have a Church
dwelling even where Satan his throne was: but with this note of infirmity,
that, albeit themselves keeping the name of God, yet they should be brought to
tolerat spiritual fornication. And, yet, even in this case our adversaries
will needs have instances given them of open profession and advowed
contestation, Revel. 9.
and that, in all substantial points. We are forwarned that spiritual
darkness shall so overgoe Sun and Air, all spiritual both active and passive
light in the visible Church, as none shall be exempted from the evil arysing
thereof. Except a few secret sealed-ones, who while all the earth follow the
beast: shall cleave constantly to the Lamb: Revel. 14.
but so, as none shall either hear or learn their song but themselves. But
our adversaries will have both them and their song not only even then
commonly known and heard, but also registrat records thereof remaining. We
are forwarned that Antichrist shall so tyrannize in the holy City and Court of
the Temple (the visible church) Revel. 11. and 13.
as all true worship shall be trodden down therein as it was in Israel by
Iezabell three years and a halve of famine: and by Antiochus Epiphanes,
abrogating the daily sacrifie and erecting the abomination of desolation in
place thereof, the same space: and yet that all the while GOD should secretly
and wonderfully preserve two Candlestiks and two Olyves within the Temple. And
our adversaries yet will have us to show an advowed standing true worship all
that time even in the City and Court. Now what were this, I pray you, but
either blasphemouslie to belie the holy Ghost, or foolishlie to discredit that
undoubted truth which we hold? So miserably ignorant are our adversaries,
that they perceave not how that, which they most object against us, speaks
strongly for us; and even in that wherein they most glory, is their evident
disgrace.

And yet these demands, which I have thus shortly discovered to be
impertinent, foolish, and fraudulent, are sent to us with a supercilious
certification, that except we resolve them, therein they will account us, etc.
Satis, foresooth, pro imperio: their, etc. I warrant you implies a ponderous
Apostopesis of much worse then they would say out, or yet their Paper could
bear without blushing: yet, they can account no worse of us then their
companions in spirit did of our Lord and master, whom they called a Samaritan
and a Devil. And with them we can neither exspect nor covet to be in any
better account, except we were liars and murderers like themselves. But we
pass very little to be judged of such as the Lord, in justice, has given up
to minds void of all true judgment. And shall any terror then of this their
supercilious certificat stir us to play the fools in answering the^, in that
which a 1000. times already has been evinced? That as, now, to escape taking,
they have in an evil conscience start from the question of our vocation to
these demau^ds of our doctrine, so when they are reduced of new to any strait
herein, they may als shamelesly cast in again to us. O but where is your
calling? Shall we labor to resolve those who even profess that they are in
nothing so much resolved as in this that they will never either seek for or
admit any resolution? shall we either disput with such Doctors; as give their
disciples infallibly to hold; or take pains for resolution of such disciples,
as readily receave, believe, and maintain; that for them to read scripture, is
not only a profitles, but also a perilous exercise: that the true sense of the
holy Ghost and of scripture may be more certainly had from the Doctors then
from scripture: and that yet, through their diversity of opinions and even
doubtful delivery thereof, wherthrough the protestants plead that the most
approoved Fathers stand for them, so incertaine also is any resolution that
way, that to have the soul fully settled, it must simply and wholly rely upon
the judgment and determination of the church: which the ghostly Father will
take upon his soul to be only that Rome: that, in any case, all conference with
ministers, all reading of their works, and hearing of their sermons be
carefully eschewed. And, if upon any necessity it should befall them at any
time to be present at a preaching, then, either to sleep or stop their ears:
or if they must here, yet that they never suffer their hearts once co^descend
to esteem any better of them (how plainly, powerfully, or holily soever they
appear to speak) but that it is Satan speaking to them in a man his
semblance. These late arrived Rabbis who are so securely roving in these
quarters and subverting instable souls: and their disciples also who give them
so glad ears, know very well, if I have here summarily comprysed and rightly
recounted to them the compend of their Ca^echisme. So as, in conference with
some of ours, one did not stick (o prodigious blasphemy) to answer, away with
your Scripture, you may prove a hundredth lies from Scripture. And is it with
such Doctors as deny the principles, and destroying all true grounds of
resolution, will tie men to fancies of their own imposing that we should
disput? Or have we to busy our selves for resolving of such disciples, as
(because the shining light of the Gospel cannot be gotten extinguished)
therefore, either gladly learn, wilfully to winck at it, or, willingly, yield
their eyes to be pyked out, least they should see and turn? shall we then
answer these demands. Or (as Godly and wise Ezechia, in the case of railing
Rabsacbee) shall we not resolve rather not to answer them one word, but to
spread out their blasphemies before the Lord? Yea verily. Neither is ought I
have here said so much to make them any answer, as to open to true Christian
souls (in Christian singlenes and sobernes seeking light, and not in pride and
perverseness to strengthen the Idols of their own hearts) how impertinently,
ridiculouslie, and deceitfullie, these demaundes are proponed. For whose fuller
resolution herein, etc how far and what is requisite to be answered to them:
besides many other and more learned works the^ my sle^dernes can afford: let
the^ read also my preceding treatises of defense, and my co^mentarie on the
Revelatio^: and thereof, specially, that typical relation which the seven
Churches of Asia have to the militant Church according to her distinct and
succeeding conditions in the mystery of iniquity working on the height, and
her arising again from under that evil (which point in the London copies,
upon misconceaved ielousies was left out) what I have written on the
8.9.10.11.14.16.17. and 20. chapters thereof. Read my Lord of Plessie his
learned works of the mystery of iniquity. and, who lift to take the pains,
for more clear and ample accommodation of all, let them read the Magdeburgick
story and the particular conditions of the church set down therein at length
every centenarie of years from our Lord his incarnation till our days. By
these, any soundly set and sensible soul shall find sufficient resolution of
all the course of Antichrist by degrees arysing to the top of sacrilegious
impiety: and how God still preserved a church, in the mids of his most
tyrannical usurpation: as for such persons as demand us with no other hearts
then the Pharisees did Christ, or, these, who hypocriticallie asking counsel
at the Prophet, and, then, not finding it agreeable to the biais of their
foreplotted and corrupt conceptions, did therefore, impudently tell him, Ier.
43.2. and 44.16.
thou speak falstie, the Lord our God has not sent thee and, the word which
thou hes spoken to us in the name of the Lord we will not hear it of thee, but
we will do whatsoever thing goes out of our own mouth, etc. These we leave
to the mist of their own imaginations, and just induration of their own
deceitful and deceaved minds: whereto they are given up justly of the Lord, 1
Cor. 14.37 Math. 11.19 Revel. 22.1^
because they delight in lies. If any man be spiritual, let him acknowledge,
that what I writ, is the truth of God: if any man will be ignorant, let him be
ignorant. Wisdom will be always justified of her own children: and such as
are filthy, let them be filthy still.

Augustine de civitate Dei, lib. 2, cap. 1. Si rationi perspicua veritatis
infirmus humana co^suetudinis sensus non anderet obsistere, sed doctrinae
salubri languorem suum tanquam medicinae subderet, donec divine adiuterie fide
pietatis impetia^te sanaretur: non multo sermon opus esset ad co^vincendum
quemlibet vanae opinionis errorem, his qui recte sentiunt, and sensa verbis
sufficientibus explicant. Nunc vero quoniam ille est mayor and tetrior
insipientu^ morbus animorum, quo irrationabiles motus suos, etiam post ratione^
plene redditam (quanta homini ab homine debetur) five nimia casitate, qua nec
aperta cernu^tur, sive obstinatissima pervicaciae, qua and ca quae cer^untur
non feruntur, tanquam ipsam rationem veritatemque defendunt: fit necessitas
copiosius dicendi, plerumque res claras, velut ^as non spectantibus intuendas,
sed quodammodo tangendas palpantibus and conniventibus offeramus. Et tamen quis
disceptandi finis erit and loquendi modus; Si respondendum esse respondentibus
semper existime^us? nam qui vel non possunt intelligere quod dicitur, vel tam
duri sunt adversitate mentis, vt, etiamsi intellexetint, non obediant
respondent vt scriptum est and loquuntur iniquitatem atque infatigabiliter vani
sunt. Quorum dicta contraria si toties velimus refellere quoties obnixa front
statuerint non curare quid dicant dum quo cunque modo nostris disputationibus
contradicant, quam sit infinitum and erumnosum and infructuosum vides.
Quamobrem nec te ipsum, mi fili, Marcelline, nec alios quibus his labor noster
in Christi charitate vtiliter and liberaliter servit, tales meorum scriptorum
velim Iudices qui responsionem semper desiderent, cum his quae leguntur
audierint aliquid contradici: ne fiant similes ^arum midurcularum quas
commemorat Apostolus, semper discentes and ad veritatis scientiam nunquam
pervenientes.

That is.

IF the weak sense of humane custom were not bold to withstand the reason of
clear truth, but did subdue her malady to healthsome doctrine, as to a
medicine, till (holy faith obtaining) by divine aid it were healed: then to
such men as, both themselves mean soundly, and, with dexterity do express
their meanings in sufficient words, it should not be needful to spend much
speech, for convincing what soever erronius and vain opinion. But, now,
because that disease of foolish minds is so much the greater and more
detestable, as, even after a reason is fully given them (so far as man to man
is holden) yet they maintain no less their unreasonable motions, then if they
were self reason and truth: whither that this falls through too great
blindness whereby they are not able to perceave most plain things; or through
most obstinat perverseness, whereby they cannot abide even these things which
they perceave clearly: therefore, oftymes, men are, of necessity, forced to
speak the more amply even of plain matters: as offering them not so much to
the view of men who see, but even, in a sort, to be handled by groapers and
winkers. And yet, what either end shall their be of disputation, or what
measure of writing; if we think that replies must be always, made to them who
answer us? for, who either are not able to understand what is said, or, are so
refractarie through frowardnes of mind; as even, though they understand, yet
they will not yield: they answer still (as it is written) and pratle
iniquity, and they are vain without wearying. Whose gaine-sayings if we would
refell als often as, with wilful headines, they determine not to care what
they say, so they, any way gainsay our disputations: thou see how endless,
toilsome, and unfruitful a business it were. Wherefore, my son Marcellin, I
neither would have thee nor any others (for whose use and utility these my
pains are, in the love of Christ, and freely taken) to be such judges of my
writings as do, always require a reply to be made, whenever they hear that
ought is said against these things which they read: Least they become like to
these women of whom the Apostle makes mention, which are ever learning, but
never attain to the knowledge of the Truth.

FINIS.

