FAMES MEMORIAL, OR The Earl of Devonshire Deceased: With his honorable
life, peaceful end, and solemn Funeral.

-- quis talia fando
Mirmydonum, Dolopumue, aut duri miles Vlissi
Temperet a lachrimis? --
AT LONDON Printed for Christopher Purset, dwelling at the sign of the Mary
Magdalens head near Staple Inn in Holborne, 1606.

To the Rightly right Honorable Lady, the Lady Penelope, Countess of
Devonshire.
MOST NOBLE LADY, had the blessings whilo^ bestowed, and too soon deprived,
been as permanent, as they were glorious: the world had not then had such a
general cause of just sorrow to bewail, nor I of particular grief to
inscribe, the present loss of so worthy a lord: but a most sad truth it is,
Fate may be lamented, never recalled: upon which infallible axiom, desperate
of all possibility, either of regaining the same, or hoping his peer* as much
as in the reach of my weak talent lay (unusual to this style) I have
endeavored to register his memory, whose memory will grace my labors. To you, (
excellent Lady) it was intended, to you it is addressed: not doubting, but
whatsoever has been of him said, and trewly said, your honorable favor,
will allow the favorable protection of your expressest patronage, who whiles
he lived endowed you and justly endowed you, with all the principalles of his
sincerest heart, and best fortunes. Let not therefore (worthy Countess) my
rasher presumption, seem presumpuous folly, in the eyes of your discreeter
judgment, in that without your priuitie (being a mere stranger altogether
unknown unto you) I have thus adventured, to shelter my lines, under the
well-guided conduct of your Honorable name: grounding my boldness upon this
assurance, that true ge^tility is ever acco^panyd (especially in your sex, more
specially in your self) with her inseparable adiunct, singular Humanity,
principally toward those, whom neither Mercenary hopes or servile flattery,
have induced to speak but with the Privilege of troth. And as for such, who
misdeeme virtue without cause, innocence shall pity them, though not eagerly
with mortal hate: yet simply with naked truth to which envy is ever opposite.
Thus ( Madame) presuming on your acceptance, I will in the mean while, think
my willing pains (hitherto confined to the Innes of Court studyes much
differente) highly guerdoned, and mine unfeathered Muse (as soon dead as
borne) ritchly graced, under the plumes of so worthy a protectresse.

The honourer and lover of your noble perfections, Io: FORDE.
To each affected Reader.
Perverse construction of a plain intent,
NEither is scorned, respected, or dispis'd:
LOsing of their slight loves, who never meant,
PEculiar knowledge, willingly is pris'd,
CONTEnted happiness, Secured peace,
OF self content is ever happiest ease.
DEVOtion to the careless is mere folly,
NO SHallow envy of malicious IRE,
Can move my resolution, grounded wholly
On hopes of better judgment, I desire
The favor of my favorers, not any
Unwilling eyes, I strive not to please many.
Non omnibus studeo, non maleuolis. To Master John Forde of the Middle Temple,
up on his Fames Memorial, this Madrigall.
IF that renowned Lord (whose powerful fame,
in strength of wars, and calmes of peace exceeded)
has after death purchased so great a name,
that it must prosper as it has proceeded:
Then must in time those spightfull plants be weeded;
which living yet, him living would have choked:
and those sweet wits touched with a sacred flame
of his rich virtues, shall advance the same.
But thou (by those deserts in him provoked
that song his honors which so much exceeded;
whose pleasant pen in sacred water soaked
of Castaly did register his worth)
Reapest much part of honor for thy pen,
through him: fair mirror of our Englishmen,
whom with due dignity thy Muse set fourth.
BAR: BARNES.
In eundem.
Viuit, in aeternum viuet Dux inclitus armis,
Mountioyus: viuet Forde Poema tuum,
Mayor vterque suo genio. Vi carminis Heroes,
Materiae faelix nobilis author open,
T. P.
THE EARL of Devonshire deceased.
SWIFT Time the speedy purseuant of heaven,
Sommons to glorious virtues canonized,
The lasting volume where worth roues uneven
In brazen characters immortalized;
Where merit lives embraced base scorn despised:
Linckt to untainted Truth sprung from the same,
Begets his eaglet-towring daughter Fame.
Fame, she who long coucht her imperial crown,
Within the blinded dark of swarthy night,
Sores now aloft triumphant up and down,
With radiant splendor gayer then the light,
And by how much more known so much more bright,
Proclaims aloud defiance to disdain,
Which her with thoughts profane should entertain.
Nor does she lacky in this vale of mud,
This razed world, but still in state arise,
Lifting her plumed crest from out the flood
Of Sea and Land: whiles she with wonder flies
About the circle of the toplesse skies:
And Spirits most heroicke does inflame,
With adoration of her sacred name.
Base Fear the only monument of slaves,
Progenitor to shame, skorne to gentilitye,
Herald to usher pesants to their graves,
Becomes abiected thoughts of faint seruility,
Whiles hauty fame adornes nobility:
Planting her gorgeous throne upon the crest,
Of honor casked in a royal breast.
This makes gross dregs of souls admire the verse
Of shrill strayn'd Artsmen whose Ambrosiack quills
Whiles they desert's Encomions sweet rehearse,
The world with wonder and amazement fills,
Affrighted with the threats of horrid ills:
Astonishing the chafe of pampered men,
With high reared accents of their golden pen.
O that some sacred poet now suruiu'd,
Some Homer to new mourn Achilles loss,
Our dear Achilles loss, of life deprived,
Who living, life in dangers death did toss,
Not daunted with this hazard or that cross:
O that he lived with scholyes most divine,
To cote and add one worthy to the nine.
The nine had past for saints, had not our time
Obscured the beams of their bright splendent praise,
By a more noble worthy whose sublime
Inuicted spirit in most hard assayes,
Still added reverent statues to his days,
Surmounting all the nine in worth as far,
As Sol the tincture of the meanest star.
Now houering fame has veiled her false recluse,
Makes reputation and belief her warrant,
Wonder and truth her conuoy to traduce
Her train of shouts accomplishing her errant,
Venting concealed virtue now apparent:
Imprints in Canons of eternal glory,
Worth's monumentall rites, great Mountioyes story.
Great MOVNTIOY? were that name sincerely scand,
Mysterious Hieroglificks would explane,
Each letter's allegory grace the hand,
By whom the sense should learnedly be drawn
To stop the dull conceits of wits profane:
Diuing into the depth of hidden art,
To give but due to each deserving part.
That is with homage to adore thy name,
As a rich relic of memorial,
A trophey consecrated unto fame,
Adding within our hearts historiall,
High Epithetes past hyperbolicall*
Yet all to mean to balance equal forage,
And sympathize in ioincture with thy courage.
Live, o live ye whom poets deck with lies,
Raising your deeds to fames which never end,
Our Patriot staynes your fictions, no disguise
Of painted praise his glory shall extend,
His own great valor his deserts commend:
Such is his sounding notice all do know it,
No poet can grace him, he every poet.
None him, He all can grace, his very story
Gives laurel to the Writer crowns of bay,
The title of his name attributes glory,
The subject does the Authors skill bewray,
Enlarging still his theme and scope to say:
Nor is one found amongst a world of men,
Who perfect can, his actions with his pen.
Had he himself like lulius Caesar wrote,
Whiles as he lived his own acts commendation,
In fluent Commentaryes used to cote
Each hazards conquest by a true probation,
Exemplified with terms of arts relation:
Then had he wingd in height of fame for ever,
His fame his name (as now) been razed never.
Go yet Ritch-stiled Peer and overtake,
(Thy self shall privilege thy self by merit)
Thy soules-vnited Essex for whose sake,
Thou did advance thy love, which did inherit
The dear reuersion of his elate spirit:
Then go great Montioy luster of this age,
Pace still thy name in pompous equipage.
When first his birth product this prime of hope,
An impe of promise mild procliuitie;
Gracious aspects even in his Horoscope,
Praedominated his nativity,
Alotting in his arm nobility:
That being nobly borne he might persevere,
Inthro'nd by fame nobilitated ever.
Now when his infant years waxt mellow ripe,
Ballac't in pithy scales of youths discresion;
As past the childish fear, fear of a stripe,
Or schools correct with deeper grave impression,
He scorned the mimick thoughts of base condition:
By earnest documents foreshowing wholly,
His just contempt of vnreguarded folly.
For having sucked the rudiments of learning,
Grammars Elixar juice and quintessence,
He soon approved his judgment by discerning
Applying with industrious diligence,
To follow studies of more consequence:
Then by a syllogistick kind of war,
He ruminates on thoughts which nobler are.
He learnes sharp-witted logic to confute;
With quick distinctions, sleights of Sophistry,
Inritching his ritche knowledge does it suit,
And sounds the depth of quaint philosophye,
Himself the mirror of morality:
And proves by instance Aristotle lies,
Who young men's aptness to the same denies.
He studies it, yet is himself the subject,
Subject of civil virtues, chief of good,
Arts pith and natures dearling, honors object
As noble by his wit as by his blood,
Honor and wisdom on his forehead stood:
Thus now to court he goes there to remain,
For court should none but nobles entertain.
Noble he was, witness his elate spirit
Whose unappalled stomak scorned compare,
Noble he was, witness his peerlesse merit,
Which stained competitours, witness his rare
Renowned examples do the same declare:
Noble he was, in that he could not brook
To have his equal, or for sword or book.
O had his ancestors but heretofore
Dreamed such a son should spring from out their line,
They might have truly grieved, and evermore
Have blushed to think on it, that one divine
Should be their offspring, deeming it a sign
Of a less glorious happiness for them,
Better might they have drawn their race from him.
The happy they that are or shall be ever,
Deducted from the issue of this blood,
Immortal be this name worn-wasted never,
The Index to true fame, happy the good
Allied in him by kin or Brotherhood:
Such his desert nor time nor malice termed it,
His youth first promised and his years confirmed it.
For being now appendant to the court,
His presence was the court to draw it to him
The saints of that smooth Paradise resort
With pleasure to behold, beholding woo him,
And what their favors can they vow to do him:
Yea he reioyc'd the earths great deity,
That such a subject graced her empery.
Here he began to taste the fragrant smack,
The catapotion of heart-easing love,
Here he perseuerd to assault the wrack,
Of supple passion, proving to disprove,
That any soil firm-setled thoughts should move:
Here was he first who taught what should be done,
How Ladies should be loved, served, wood and won.
In this secured solace of sweet peace;
He nurc't his younger joys, not wholly bent
To wanton, sick, lascivious, amors ease
But to more primer passions of content,
of civil mirth and iocond merriment:
Mirth in his looks, and virtue in his tongue
Fresh as the balm, smooth as the Mermaides song.
Actiuity abroad, daliance in chambers,
Becomes a perfect courtier, such was he,
What maiden breast so nice, as locks of amber
Could not inchant with loves captivity?
Free spirits soon are caught when slaves go free:
What uncontrolled soul is so precise,
As may, yet will not taste earths paradise?
Mountioy (the mounting joy of heavens perfection)
Was all a man should be in such an age,
Nor void of lou's sense, nor yoakt in subjection
of servile passion, theme for every stage,
Honor for him did honors pawn engage:
Be witness slanders self, who must auow
Virtue adornd his mind, triumph his brow.
Nor did the pleasure of these courtly sports,
Indeer him to the softness of such ease
His euer-mounting thought far more imports,
The thirst of fame such formed Ideas please,
The resty delicates of sweet disease:
To run a race at tilt, to catch the ring,
Did greater glory to his proiects bring.
Let smooth-chind Amorists be cloyde in play,
And surfeit on the bane of hateful leisure,
Let idle hours follies youth betray,
Unto the idle shame of boundless pleasure,
Such petty apes of silk want reasons measure:
Great Mountioy saw such loosnes of the witty
Which seeing did not more disdain then pity.
No, his deep-reaching spirit could not brook
The fond addiction to such vanity,
Reguardfull of his honor he forsook,
The smicker use of court-humanity,
Of rural clownage or vrbanity:
He loved the worthy and endeavoring proved,
How of the worthy he might be beloved.
Now he delights to see the faulcon sore,
About the top of heaven: then to chase,
The nimble Buck, or hunt the bristled Bore
From out the Sty of terror, now the race;
Barriers and sports of honorable grace:
Not games of thriftlesse prodigality,
But plots of fame and fames eternity.
For after toys of courtshippe he affaies,
Which way to manage an untamed horse
When, how, to spur, and rayn, to stop, and raise,
Close sitting, voltage of a manlike force,
When in career to meet with gallant course:
As Centaures were both horse and men: so he
Seemd on the horse nor could discerned be.
Such private exercise which limn'd the way
To public reputation was his scope;
Each howr graced howr, and each day graced day
With further expectation of great hope
Nor did his youth his noble leuels stop:
He aymd at high designs, and so attaynd
The high assigns to which his spirit aymd.
Lo here the pith of valor molded fast,
In curious workmanship of natures art:
Lo here the monuments which ever last,
To all succeeding ages of desert,
Noble in all, and all in every part:
Records of fame, and characters of brass,
Containing acts, such acts conceit do pass.
Triumphant soul of such a princelike Lord,
O I could dry the fountains of mine eyes,
Upon thy coffins hearse and every word,
Which sorrow should out-sigh or grief implies
I could resolve two drops of sacrifice:
And spend them on the ever gaping womb
Of the vnseason'd earth thy sacred tomb.
The sweetest cygnet of thy comforts heaven,
Thy life's last paradise, thy hearts first love
Could not bemoan the loss of thee bereuen
With more sweet-piercing plaints then I have strove,
To volly my discomforts yet approve
(Deer creature) thy to deerly bought distress,
By vulgar censures base unhappiness.
But ah be still thy self, let not defame,
Of the rude Chaos aggrauate thy woes
The multitudes blind slander is no shame;
Rusticity his joy by malice knows,
The better best in judging better shows:
Let gross uncivil hinds reguardlesse sleep,
Remember thou thy loss, remembering weep.
So may thou knightly youth who were his friend,
Companion to his chamber and his bed,
His lou's much largess did to thee extend,
And made the rumor of thy name be spread,
Eue^ to thy native West where thou were bred:
Ah do not him forget who honored thee
With perfect rites of mutual amity.
Nor can thou stop the floodgates of thine eyes,
Great Peer of worth, and state who grieved thy thrall,
For Peerlesse Essex strife who sought to rise,
In virtuous honor which procured thy fall
Devonshire bewayld thy dangers bitter gate
Then in requital of much more then this
Sigh thou for him, still love, and cherish his.
As much grave patron of sage wisedoms lore,
May thou lament thy friends untimely race,
Who ever favored thee cause thou have bore,
(Whiles he was Ireland's viceroy) thy great place,
Of treasurer in most respected grace:
His death deserves thy tears to solemnize
His ceremonious funeral obsequies.
Ye safe secured fathers of wise peace,
Just senators and magistrates in aw,
Wealthy home-breaders which ingrosse your ease,
Ye learned legists of contentious law,
Ye rulers all who him victorious saw:
Fear ye like strokes as him of life depriues,
He was a brazen wall to guard your lives.
Double toung-oyled courtiers whose neat phrases,
Do model forth your wits maturity,
In honied speeches and sick-thoughted graces,
Cloking your souls in sins obscurity,
Yet fan your lightness in security,
Weep on his reverent coarse: for such as he
Now is, (not as he was) your selves shall be.
But o forsaken soldiers ye have lost,
The Atlas of your hopes your staff your stay,
The staff and stay of your ambitious boast,
Who guerdon'd you with services due pray,
On him the burden of your treasure lay:
Reason commands your sorrow for whose sake,
Himself all toil of pains would undertake.
Like Mars in arms triumphant ye have seen,
This warlike champion whose undaunted mind
Was never yet appalled but still has been,
Steeled against the worst, nor has, declined
To dull distrust but evermore enshrind
In goodly views of horror ready pressed,
To purchase glory by his hands unrest.
Witness (ye wars of Belgia) who tell,
Of his eternal fame heroique spirit
Incomparable height which did excel,
The common height of common stomachs merit
He lineally did thirst of worth inherit:
A chronicle of lasting memory,
A president of matchless souldery.
Let every private action of desert,
Be theames for other pen's to labor in,
My quill shall only known reports insert:
Who public credence and belief may win
Not to be taxt with fictions Idiots sin
Time cannot wrong nor envy shall not wound,
The lawful right of his due praises sound.
O who will lend me some deep-mouing style?
Or add unto my bluntness quick conceit?
What gentle goddess will vouchsafe a smile
To mine unpolished muse? what tempting bait
Of formal grace upon my lines will wait?
What power divine of some more angel woman,
Will make me think my verses more then common?
Flint-hearted Lycia may with mild aspect,
Cast up the sigh of some fore-matched skorn
And in the mixture of disdayns neglect,
My death-bewayling scope of grief adorn,
Reviving dullness of a wit forlorn:
Amongst the fancies of her rival lover,
Some groan with this dear nobles funeral cover.
No beauty full of change forbear thy care,
An Angel more celestial pays her vows,
Upon her lord deceasd who did not spare,
To gratify the frontyres of her brows,
With as much pleasure as content allows:
Thou Lady on my lines cast favors glory,
Whiles I inscribe great Mountioys Irish story.
When fickle chance and deaths blindfold decree,
From the tribunal seat of awful state,
Had hurried down in black calamity
Renowned Deuoreux, whose awkward fate,
Was misconceited by foul enuies hate:
Back was he called from Ireland to come home,
And noble Mountioy must supply his room.
Look how two heart-vnited brothers part,
The one to slaughter, the other to distrust,
Yet sorowing each with other pawns his heart
As being loath to go, yet go they must,
Either to horror and a death unjust:
So Essex parts with Mountioy, either mourning
The loss of others sight as nere returning.
So Mountioy parts with Essex, and now flies
Upon the wings of griefs to tents of terror;
Or else to vaunt his name above the skies,
Or leave his liuelesse carcass as a mirror
Of monumented fear to friends of error:
Vowing revenge should on that land extend,
Which wrought the downfall of his worthiest friend.
Unblessed soil (quoth he), rebellious nation,
Which have with treachery sent troops to death,
Butcher of valiant bloods, earths reprobation,
Heavens curse and natures monster drawing breath,
By others wracks (as trial witnesses)
Since by the means of thee my friend has died,
Mine arm shall scourge the looseness of thy pride.
Incenc'st with rage and treble-girt with force
Of Justice, force and valor on he goes,
With sword and fire void of a smooth remorse,
He greets the strength of his half-conquered foes,
And on them yoakes of bondage does impose:
or all must yield to mercy, or else fly,
Yet flying all must fight, and fighting die.
But o far be it from the height of fame,
To triumph on submission, he would not
Not tyrant-like in bloodshed boast again,
He hated it as to his worth a blot,
By lenity more honor has he got.
He was as by his favorites appeared,
More feared then loved, yet much more loved the^ feared
Destruction to the stiffneck't rebels stout,
(Stout in their headlong miseries) was bent,
Ruin unto the false inconstant route;
But favor to the willing still he meant,
A perfect noble mind's true document:
A rule infallible experience bred,
To strive for conquest, spare the conquered.
What myriades of hosts could not constrain,
He by his courteous mildness brought to pass
What all deuoyr of mercy could not train,
By his victorious power enforced was,
Both words of milk, and thunderbolts of brass
Attended on the pleasure of his nod,
They deemd him for a humane demy-god
And thou Tyrone the idol most adored,
Amongst the superstitious mutiners,
Whose deep ambitious reach was still implored,
To raise more millions of treacherers,
Of homicidiall cruel slaughterers:
Even thou thy self, when any traitor spoke
of Mountioy, at that very name did quake.
That very name did prostitute the heart
of mischief-breeding counsels in the dust;
In hearing of that name they felt the smart,
of vanquished dread as augur to distrust,
Which was by fear inthral'd, by doubt discust:
Mountioy a name importing threats of thunder,
Frustrating hopes of life, and life asunder.
Mountioy a name of grim severity,
Mountioy a name of meeknes peace and love,
Mountioy a name to rain temerity,
Mountioy a name which virtue did approve,
Mountioy a name which joy did ever move:
Mountioy a charter of inuicted fame,
Yet Mountioy was far greater then his name.
His name which stretched beyond the boundless limits,
Of all the oceans empire and made known
His hauty chiualry in foreign climates,
Which by the trumpe of glore was lowdly blown,
In courts of greatest princes of renown:
Each palace with an echo speaking shrill,
Rosounded his fair deeds of honor still.
The wily Irish whose inueterate hate,
Unto the laws of Justice nere would bow,
Whose sleightes no power of power could abate,
Or ever undermine before till now,
With gentle menace of a pliant brow:
This man more then a man, this god in arms,
United ceasing plots of further harms.
Now they began to see, and seeing feel
The sweet of concord, bitterness of war,
The sharp reproof of double-edged steel,
The peace of peace how wretched brawlers are
How blessed the secure, content does far
Exceed contention, better shun wars toil,
Then ever live in faction by the spoil.
The son against the Father long opposed,
The Uncle with the nephew at debate,
The friend with troops of foe-like friends enclosed.
Brother with brother set in mortal hate,
Kin which with Kin did kindred violate:
Duty, alliance, frindship blood, and love:
All striving he to concord all did move.
Peers in defiance of each others greatness,
Nobles complotting nobles speedy fall,
He reconciled, and made the^ taste the sweetness,
Of happy league and freed them from the gall
Of steep destructions ruin, ruins thrall:
Tigers and lions, bores, and raging Bulls,
Has he atton'd with Leopards and Wolves.
A land of penury scarcity, and want
He has inritcht with plenty, ease and store
A land where humain reason was most scant
He has endowed with wisdoms sacred lore
Accosting it more fertile then before:
A land of Barbarous inhumanitye
He has reduced to blessed piety.
Now had he ripened all his hopes at full,
Imparadiz'd his soul in dear content
And wrought the nature of a people dull
To what his glory aimed at when he meante,
To set a period to his banishment:
And greet his native soil with much desire
To get a guerdon'd favor for his hyre.
Now did he feed his labors with delight
Of viewing his diuiner sovereign,
presenting conquests of well mastred spite:
unto her gracious love, and thence obtain,
Her willing acceptance as a gain
Of reward after toil, and glad her years,
In strengthening her dominions chasing fears.
But o ere he could apprehend that joy
She flew from earth to bewtifye the heaven,
Eliza died, death's iauelin did destroy
The ever boast of England fate had weauen
The twist of life, and her of life bereauen
She died and left the world in tears of terror
To weep her loss and wonder at her mirror
Never it was her hap to see that land
which long had boyld in stern rebellious treason
To be subdu'de unto her mild command
And vaunt the Trophey of that peaceful season
Malice did ever blind their senses reason:
She died ere rumor could that ease relate
The news was happy, but for her to late.
To late for her and for our Lord to late
Her death for him too soon, but short anon
Distrust was turned to trust, for in great state
England's Maecenas in succession
was soon made known by praclamation
And undertook the Burden of the crown
Aduauncing merit low disgrace threw down
As Caesar led his captive slaves to Rome
To grace his triumph magnify his fame
So now did Mountioy with Tyrone come home
Victorious, welcome, adding to his name
(By favor of our King who gave the same)
A Style of honor to his blood innated
Deuonshieres ennobled Earl was created.
In Robes of peace accoutrements of rest
He was advanced a Counsayllour and joyed
The soft fruition of a grauer breast
Not with the Brunt of warrefare more annoyde
Nor with the dint of hazard ouercloyde
But sat with judgment to discern of laws
Which he had guarded with his swords applause.
In him was England two fould fortunate
He was her champion and her Senator
Both to defend her good and moderate
To fight both for her safety, and confer,
Both to encourage subjects and deter
Reuollter's from offending, both in one
And one in both himself he was alone.
Thus loving all he lived beloved of all,
save some whom emulation did enrage
To spit the venom of their rancour's gall,
Which dropped upon themselves and made the stage
A public Theater for follyes badge
Their shame will still outliue their memory
Only remembered in infamy.
Such poorer in desert then rich in worth,
Are but as shadows which appear but are not,
Such but disgorge lanck indiscretion forth,
Of needless repetitions which declare not
True grounds, when for the truth it self they care not,
Yet hold themselves abusd and highly scorn,
To brook the chance to which themselves at born.
Go weak betraiers of your witless madness?
Your malice will reuert upon your breasts,
Not looks of grauer niceness nicer sadness,
Can shadow imputations of vnrests,
His greater spirit at your fondness jests:
You vex your selves, not him, and make men gaze,
At your own wro^gs which your own tongues do blaze
Sinck blind detraction into lowest earth,
Lest ballad-rimers tire their galled wits,
Scorns to their patrones making iuycelesse mirth,
To gross attentors by their hired writs,
Dispraise with such poor hackneys better fits:
Well may such envy those heroyicke deeds,
There apprehensions lean conceit exceeds.
Fame-royallized Devonshire settled now,
In well-deserued place of eminence,
The expectance of his wisdom does allow,
By cancelling affairs of consequence,
And by endeavors of sage diligence:
Approues his greatness, largess to apply
The fruits of dear-experienc't policy.
Not puffed with weening self-affected pride,
Common to vpstart honors counterfeite,
But favoring the worthy he supplied,
Deserts necessities, and made the height
Of his advancement on their needs to wait
"True noblenes with breath sucks noble spirits
"When bastard broods conceit but bastard merits.
Men raised to flote of fortune from the mud,
Of low deiection and at length grown great,
Forget that they are men, and scorn the blood
Of mean alliance, boasting in the seat
Of empire which ambition does beget:
Such not esteem desert but sensual vaunts,
Of parasites and fawning sycophaunts.
Be tyrants kings to such seruility?
And peasants servile to such currs of shame?
Devonshire the issue of nobility:
Avoided rumor of such foul defame,
True virtue graced his mind, applause his name:
Applause his name, which whiles the heavens divine
Contain their lights upon the earth will shine.
True virtue graced his mind be witness ever,
The provident forecare of wise discretion,
His wary prudence which did still endeavor
To hold him from the wrack of spights impression,
From faith approved he never made digression:
"That is true prudence when deuoyd of fear,
"A man untouched himself upright does bear.
True virtue graced his mind in which was grounded
The modest essence of firm Temperaunce
Which never was with fortunes change confounded
Or troubled with the Cross of fickle chance,
Distrust his spirit never could enhaunce
That man is perfect temperate whose life
Can never be disturbed but free from strife.
True virtue graced his mind, witness his courage
His resolution armed Fortitude
Witness his stomack's prime which strived to forage
Extremes even by extremityes subdu'de
Slaves with the eyes of pity he reuiew'd
He who can Conquer miseryes in need
Enioyes the height of fortitude indeed.
True virtue graced his mind, witness at last
His sober carriage, twixt the scales of measure
Who when he was in awe of Justice placed
Studied how to the meanest to do pleasure
So rare a gift in such a man's a treasure:
Sincerest Justice is not to decerne
But to defend, aid, further and confirm
True virtue graced his mind, witness all these
Which in his person were essenciall
Ready to help the poor, the great to please
In rites of honor, neither great or small
Would he prefer, but merit paiz'd them all
Since all these virtues were in him combined
Truth will auow true virtue graced his mind:
Not in the wrack of Prodigality
Nor thriftlesse riot of respectlesse mean
Did he extend his liberalitye
But to his honors credit, where was seen
Apparent worthiness, he still has been
A Patron to the learned and a propp,
To favor studyes now despised cropp.
Thou marrow of our English poesy
Thou life and blood of verse can record this,
The Bounty of his zeal can gratifye
Thy labor's of endeavors: what was his
He granted to thy muses happiest bliss
A liberal Mecaenas to reward thee
A Lord of special favor to reguard thee.
By firm allegiance, courtesy, and kindness,
unto his prince, his peers, his frindes in deer'd:
By stern constraint, meek scorn, and willing blindness,
Of all his foes, backbiters grudgers feared
He in his lifetime evermore appeard
Peace, pity, love, with mildness, ease, and rest,
Ruled, forgave, ioyde, his soul, his wrongs, his breast
Linck't, in the graceful bonds of dearest life
unjustly termed disgraceful he enjoyed,
Contents abundance, happiness was rife
Pleasure secure, no troubled thought annoyd
His comfort' sweetes, toil was in toil destroyed
Maugre the throat of malice, spite of spite
He lived united to his hearts delighte.
His hearts delight who was that glorious star
which bewtified the value of our land,
The lights of whose perfections brighter are
Then all the lamps, which in the luster stand
Of he auens fore head, by discretion scanned
Wits ornament, earth's love, loves Paradise
A Saint divine, a bewty fairly wise.
A bewtye fayrely-wise, wisely discreet
In wincking mildely at the tongue of rumor,
A saint, merely divine, divinely sweet,
In banishing the pride of idle humor
Not relishing the vanity of tumor:
More then to a female of so high a race;
With meekness bearing sorrowssad disgrace.
A sad disgrace? o that the eyes of sense
Should prye into the nature of the worst
Poor fortunes envy greatenesse eminence,
Because themselves in worldly cares are nurc't.
Deluding types of honor as accursed
When they themselves ar most accursed of all
Who being lowest lower cannot fall.
Even as a quire of modell-tuning birds,
Chirping their lays in natures pliant strain,
Even so these courtiers flowed in terms of words,
Until the Nightingale in sweet complain,
Did urge the rest as ravished to refrain:
So this heart-stealing goddess charmed their ears,
To hear her fluent wit, they blush at theirs.
Let merit take her due, vnfeed I write,
Compelled by instance of apparent right,
Nor choa'kt with private hopes do I indite,
But led by truth as known as is the light,
By proof as clear as day, as day as bright:
I reck not taunting mocks, but pity rather
The foolish offspring of so vain a father.
Devonshire I write of thee a theme of wonder
Wonder unto posterity succeeding,
A style importing fame as loud as thunder,
Sounding throughout the world: the times yet breding
Shall deifie thee by thy stories reading:
Making large statues to honorifie
Thy name, memorialls rites to glorify.
As often as James the monarch of our peace,
Shall be in after chronicles recited,
In that to heavens applause and subjects ease
England and Scotland he in one united,
A sight with which true Britains were delighted:
So often shall thou eternal favor gain,
Who recollected'st Ireland to them twain.
A work of thanks in strengthening the force
Of such an entire Empire now secure,
A world within it self which whiles the course
Of heaven continues lasting will endure
Fearelesse of foreign power, strong and sure
A bulwark intermur'd with walls of Brass,
A like can never be, nor ever was.
It Was the Puissant vigor of thine arm,
It Was the well-labouring project of thy brain
Which did allay the further fear of harm,
Enriching Brittayn with this happy gain
Of blessed peace which now it does retain,
It was thy warye resolution brought it,
It was thy ready policy that wrought it.
Thou were a Phoenix, such a bird is rare
Rare in this wodden age of avarice,
When thirst of gold, not Fame may best compare,
with those of choycest woe th'rich men are wise,
"Honest, if honesty consist in vice
"Strong purses have strong frinds he has most praise
"who has most wealth: o blindness of our days?
Dye thoughts, of such corruption we intend
To show the substance not the shadowed gloze,
The praise we speak of does it self commend
And need's no ornament unlike to those
who by proconion's virtue does impose
A task upon our quill, not what we would,
Do we infer but what in right we should.
He whom we treat of was a president,
Both for the valiant and judicious,
Both Mercury and Mars were resident;
In him at once, sweet words delicious,
And horryd battle were to him auspicious:
Both arms and arguments to force or train,
To win by mildness, or by threats constrain.
Two special beauties chiefly did adorn
His fair unblemished soul and spotless mind,
To god religious he himself has borne,
With zealous reverence in zeal enshrind,
And to his prince still loyal ever kind:
At thon's monarchick government he trembled,
'Cause it the others deity resembled.
Devout in feruency of ardent love
Unto the value of salvation,
The due respect of sou'raignty did move,
Unto his princes throne an intimation
Of fear, not mask't in smooth dissimulation:
He of his race hereafter may be voucht,
That he was sound in both, in both untouched.
What more yet unremembered can I say,
And yet what have I said that might suffice?
He was the trophey of a greater day,
Then time would ever limit to our eyes,
He was a peer of best approved guise:
He was the best, the most, most best of all,
Heauen's pride, earths joy, we may him justly call.
Heavens pride? for heaven into him infused,
The quintessence of ripe perfection,
No gift on him bestowed he has abused,
But betterd by his better life's direction,
Keeping contempt of virtue in subjection:
A penitential contrite votary,
To sanctimonious taintlesse purity.
Earth's joy, for in the earth he lived renowned
By all the excellency of natures art
With all the boast and pith of honor crowned
That royalty to merit could impart,
The wreathe of joys was set beneath his heart
The light of worth's delight, the Pharaos tower
Which was refulgent by his Lordly power.
Thus in the iollity of humane pleasure
Aduaunc't to steps of state and high degree
Beloved and adored in equal measure
Of greatest and the meanest fates decree,
Bent power against his power, for (aye me)
(Fie on that for) whiles he in glory stood,
Of worldly pomp cold droop't his noble blood.
O what Heraclitus would spare his eyes
To shower tears in showers and distill
The liquid of a grieved hearts sacrifice
Which will consume it self, what doleful knell
Of pearcing groans will sigh the worst of ill
The worst of ill, the worst of cruel fate,
Could spit even in the bitterness of hate
All ye who hitherto have read his story,
Just Panegyrickes of Heroyque deeds,
Prepare your eyes to weep, your hearts to sorry
The wrack of darkness which from death proceeds,
The murder of delight which murder breeds,
Lo here an alteration briefly chaung'd
Now all but joy, now from all joy estranged.
o Coward times why do you keep your days?
o Orbs of heaven why do you run your course?
o seas why do not floods your waves vprayse
And never reflow again with moderate sourse?
o Sun why do not quench thy beams hot force
o why do all things certain settled tarry,
Save men's short lives who still unconstant vary.
Instance impartial death, deaf sorrow's subject
Pleasures abater, fickle youth's dispiser
Headstrong in malice, in affected object
To every sense, the subtle slye inticer
To gilded hopes, the heauen's wil's reuisor
Instance his triumph, instance his sure dart
Which misseth none, hits home still to the heart.
Now had the season enterteyn'd the spring
And given a welcome to the days of mirth,
When sweet harmonious birds began to sing
With pleasant roundelayes which graced the earth,
By long expectance of the blossoms birth,
When at the dawne of Floraes trimmed pride
Ere she persum'd the air, great Deuonshiere died.
He died, a sullyde word, a wore of ruth:
For ever be it stamp't in misery:
Fearful unto the old, hated of youth,
Marked with the fingar of calamity:
Blotted from light of day, nights Herauldry,
He died, brief accents but enduring woe
The letters for whole dates of griefs may go.
Torment of mischief how thou grat'st my breast,
Mischief of torment how thou rackst my soul,
Unhappy cares how is your heart distressed,
Wretched unhappiness which do controwle
The bliss of comfort, and alike enroule
Sad fortune in the dust, break life asunder,
Death is life's miracle, scorns thanklesse wonder.
Wonder o wonder of short breathed error,
A relic consecrated to defame,
A curb unto the wise to fools a terror;
A terror of contempt, fear hate and shame,
A black obliuionizing of worths name:
A razer out of memory the merit,
Of many noble peers and peerlesse spirit.
Who died? not he whose mungrell baser thought
Was steeped in the puddle of seruility,
Not he who days of easy softness sought,
But threats of horror fitting his nobility,
To coronize high-soar'd gentility:
Who di'd? a man? nay more a perfect saint
Leaving the world in tears of sad complaint.
Life ah no life but soon extinguished tapers?
Tapers? no tapers but a burnt outlight
Light? ah no light but exhalutions vapors
Vapors? no vapoures but il-blinded sight?
Sight? ah no sight but hel's eternal night?
A night no might but picture of an elfe?
Ah elfe? no elfe but very death it self.
Then life is death, and death the farthest goal
Of transitory frailty to conclude
The freedom of the while-imprisond soul,
And stop the streams of heat by death subdued
To wan and chilly cold, fates hand is rude:
None favoring the limit of an howr,
But does all sort of states alike devour.
Devour thou them and surfeit on the bait,
Of thine insatiate rapine? exercise
The utmost of thy vengeance nor delay it?
Let meagre gluttony yet tyrannise,
To use extremes? thy power we despise:
Kill whom thou dare, since Devonshire did depart,
We scorn the malice of thine envious dart.
Sleep still in rest, honor thy bones enshrine,
(Victorious lord) sweet peace attend thy grave,
Mount thy best part with angels wings divine;
About the throne of Jove in quires to crave
By madrigalls the joys that thou would have.
So ever shall while dates of times remain
The heavens thy soul, the earth thy fame contain.
If to be learned in the Arts of skill
If to be bewtifi'de with choice of nature,
If to be guiltless from the soil of ill
(Save soil of sclaunder) if the perfect feature,
Consist in being heauen's quaintest architecture
Then ever shall while dates of times remain,
The heavens thy soul the earth thy fame contain.
If to be feared and loved be humane glory,
If to be dow'd with plenty of desert,
If to be chronicled in honors story:
If youth which grave discretion did convert
It self in commendation may insert:
Then ever shall while dates of times remain,
The heavens thy soul, the earth thy fame contain.
If wisdom stand in checking rasher folly,
If virtue do depend on perfect zeal,
He in the one was wise, in the other holy;
If to reguard the prosperous common weal,
Be shows of commendation to reveal.
Then ever shall while dates of times remain,
The heavens thy soul, the earth thy fame contain.
If to be virtuous, zealous, valiant, wise,
Learned, respective of his countries good,
Upright, in case of conscience precise,
Just, bounteous, pitiful, noble by blood,
Be to deserve the name of liuely-hood.
Then ever shall while dates of times remain,
The heavens thy soul, the earth thy fame contain.
For thou wast all of these too high for earth,
Therefore more fit for heaven where thou rainest,
The angels joyed thy souls delightful mirth,
And therefore fetched thee hence, whereby thou gainest
The fruit of paradize where thou remainest:
And ever shall remain from us bereauen,
Great as thou wast on earth, more great in heaven.
But o give leave ere I forbear my pen,
Thy worth in what I may t'exemplifie,
And set thee as a president to men,
The due of thy desert to amplify,
And thy humanity to deifie:
Of thy much merit to cast up the sum,
Thus be thy epitaph, and here thy tomb.
His Tomb The Epitaph.
The course of time has finished now his breath,
whom brunt of war could never force to death:
whose thirst of worth the world could not suffice,
within a breadth of earth contented lies.
betwixt the gods and men doubly divided,
His soul with them, his fame with us abided;
In this his life and death was counteruaild,
He justly lived beloved, he died bewaild.
And so his happy memory,
Shall last to all posterity.
Day wears day, hour consumes howr,
Years years, and age does age devour;
The man who now beholds the sun,
Ere it decline his life is done.
So by this great Lord does appear,
Whose honored bonesly buried here;
Whose bones though they interred lie,
His glorious name will never dye:
But live in praise,
To after days.
Here lies he dead who living lived in Fame,
Consumd in body, fresh revived in name;
His worthy deeds exceeded term of date,
Alike his praise will never stoop to fate.
For who is he that can suppose,
That stones, great Devonshire could enclose;
Whose noble acts renowned were,
Whiles as he lived every where:
England rejoiced in his valors due,
Which Ireland felt, and feeling did it rue:
but now by destiny here sleeps he dead,
Whiles as his glory through the world is spread.
Urging the great in emulation,
Of his true honors commendation.
No one exceeds in all, yet amongst many,
Yea amongst all he could do more then any;
Though more then mortal virtue graced his mind,
He was unto a mortal end confined:
and forced to yield unto deaths force,
who in his shaft has no remorse:
Princes, beggars, great and small,
he spares none, he kills all.
So did he rob high Devonshire of his breath,
whose worth in spite of death will out live death;
advantage such his merit does retain,
He in his name will live renewd again.
And so though death his life deprive,
His life in death will new revive.
By
cruel dint
of death's respectlesse dart,
Great Deuonshires soul
did from his body part:
And left his carcass in this earthly slime,
whiles his fames essence to the skies did clime:
Roauing abroad, to fill the latter days
With wonder of his JUST deserved praise:
So that each AGE will in the time to come,
Admire his worthiness, and mourn his TOMB:
Which they shall ever count a shrine,
Of some deceased saint divine.
Lo here
I rest,
who living
was adored,
with all the honor
Love could have implored:
what earthly pomp might beautify my name,
In pride of glory I enioyde the same:
A Champion ever ready to defend her,
A Senatoure priest always to commend her:
Though with my hearts delight my life is graced,
Yet I in peace of death was crossed at last:
And now entombed here I lie,
A mirror in eternity.
O what so ere thou be that passest by,
Look on this hearse and weep thy eyelids dry,
The monument of worth, the angels pleasure,
which hordeth glories rich inualued treasure:
The relics of a saint an earthly creature,
Clad in the perfect mould of angel feature:
who lives even after life, now being dead,
welcome to heaven in earth canonized.
The shoutes of fame,
Echoe his name.
In blessed peace and soule-vnited rest,
Here sleeps the carcass of a peer most blessed;
Whose downfall all the plots of cursed fight
Could not procure, or terrify his might:
but evermore he tamed the pride of folly,
and castigated drifts of slaves unholy,
Yet death at last with force of vigor grim,
When he had conquered many, conquered him.
and here amongst the quiet numbers,
Of happy souls he sweetly slumbers.
The boast of Britain and the life of state,
The pith of valor, nobleness innate,
Foes scourge, friends hopes, sustainer of the poor,
whom most men did embrace, all men adore.
Fautor of learning, quintessence of arts,
Honors true liuelihood, monarch of hearts,
The sacred of spring of a virtuous womb,
Lies here enshrined in this hallowed Tomb.
From out whose Phoenix dust arises,
Renown, which earths whole globe inticeth.
Lo here nine tombs, on every tomb engrau'd,
Nine Epitaphs showing that worthyes nine
For each peculiar on a Toomb has craved;
That their deserts who while the lived did shine
Might now be monumented in their shrine,
Yet all those nine no glory hence have gained
For Devonshire in himself all nine contained
The nine poor figures of a following substance
Did but present an after ages mirror.
Who should more fame then they deserved advance
And manifest the truth of that times error
Including Deuonshiere earth's admired terror,
For all the Poets who have sung of them
Have but in mystery adored him.
O now drop eye balls into sinck of mudd?
Be harsh the tunes of my unfeathered muse?
Sorrow suck up my griefs? consume the blud,
Of my youths mirth? let meager death infuse,
The soul of sadness to untimely news?
Dead is the hight of glory, dead is all
The pride of earth which was angelical.
Ah that the goddess whom in heart I serve
(Though never mine) bright Lycia the cruel
The cruell-subtile would the name deserve
Of lesser wise? and not abuse the Jewel
Of wit, which adds unto my flame more fuel,
Her thoughts to elder merits are confined
Not to the solace of my younger mind.
Be It so? yet on the theme of this I Will spend
The residue of plaintes and ever mourn
The loss of this great lord, till trauayles send
More comfort to my wretched heart forlorn,
Who since at home disgraced abroad is borne
To sigh the remnant of my wearied breath
In lamentation of his hapless death,
Sheath up the sword of war, for Mars is dead
Scale up the smoothed lips of Eloquence,
For flowing Mercury is buried,
Droope wisdom Numas grave intelli gence,
Is vanished, Affrican's stout eminence,
In Devonshire lies obscured, for he alone
Exceeded all, they all did in him one.
Charles the great is dead who far excelled
Charles whom former times did call the great
Charles who whilome whils on earth he dweled,
Adorned the exaltation of his seat
By the alarm of deaths grim retreat,
Is mustered to the camp from whence he came
Cherub's, and Seraphims of datelesse fame.
O that a man should ever be created
To eternize his glory here on earth:
Yet have his pomp of glory soon abated,
Even at the present issue of his birth
And loose the Trophey of that instant mirth
Here is the guerdon'd meede of victory
No sooner to atchieue, as soon to die.
Is death the reward of a glorious deed?
Is death the fee of valor? is desert
Repayd with death shall honors gain Proceed
By loss of life? o then a cowards heart
Of earthly comfort has the better part
Then better live in peace and live, then try
The brunt of conquest and reguardlesse dye.
Dye thoughts of such disgrace dye thirst of state.
Dye thoughts of empty ayr'd ambition
Dye thoughts of soring maiestyes elare
Dye inclination to conscript condition
Dye pride of Empire sou'raignetyes commission,
All that in soul of life may be estem'd
Oh dye, fat cannot be with bribes redeemed.
Dye portly hunger of eternity
Dye hott desires of unbounded pleasure,
Dye greediness of false prosperity,
Dye giddie solace of ill suited leisure,
Dye hopes of hoorded canker-eaten treasure
Ambition, Empire, glory, hopes and joy
For ever dye, for death will all destroy.
For death will all destroy as he has donn,
In seizing to his strong remorslesse gripe
All triumphs Noble Deuonshiere ever wonn,
Plucking the blossoms of his youth unripe
And make them yield unto his thanklesse gripe:
But, ahwhy should we task his dart uneuen
Who took from earth what was more fit for heaven.
He was more fit for heaven then to survive
Amongst the chafe of this un seasoned age,
Where new fantastic joys do seek to thrive
By following sensual toys of follyes rage,
Making the gloss of vice true virtues badge:
He saw that shame which misery begun it,
Seeing he did it scorn and scorning shun it.
Hence sprung the venom of impoysoned hate,
Poor malediction's sting, who did despise
Bright honor's stamp, which in his bosom sat,
For that he could not brook to temporise
With humors masked in those times disguise:
But let dogs bark? his souls above their anger
They cannot wound his worth with enuies slander.
He sleeps secured and in blessed slumber's
of peaceful rest he careless rests in peace,
Singing loud antheames with the sacred numbers
Of happy saints, whose notes do never cease:
But evermore renewing fresh increase
Whiles he does sing and angels pleasure take,
We mourn his death and sorry for his sake.
Not for his sake but for our hapless own,
Who had so rich a prise and did not know it,
Iewell's being had for Iewel's are not known,
For men in happy fortune do foreslow it,
The value when it is lost does chiefly show it
So wretched is our blindness, and so hate full,
As for the gifts we have we are ungrateful.
Even as a poring scholar who has read
Some Cosmographick Book, and finds the praise
Of some delitious land deciphered
Cast's sundry plots how by what means and ways,
He may per take those pleasures, months and days,
Being spent he goes and ravished with the main
Of such delight he nere returns again,
So Deuonshiere by the Books of inspiration
Contemplating the joys of heavens content
In serious thoughts of meditation
Which he in perfect zeal had long time spent
Thirsting to be immortal hence he went,
He thither comes and glorying it in that spear
Unmindful of this home, he triumphs there.
Long may he triumph over topping clouds,
Of our all-desperate mouldes vexation,
Pitying the sorrow which our danger crowds
With ioylesse taste of true joys desolation,
Whiles he enioyes his souls high delectation
Long may he live whom death now cannot move
His fame below, his spirit wings above.
Above the reach of humane wits conceit
Above the censure of depraved spite
Above earths paradizes counterfeyt.
Above imagination of delight,
Above all thoughts to think or pens to write
There does he datelesse days of comfort spend,
Renowned in his life, blessed in his end.
Anagramma ex Camdeno. CAROLVS BLVNTVS. Bonus, vt sol clarus.
IN life upright and therefore rightly good,
Whose glory shind on earth and thence a Sunn
By his renown as clear he is understood,
Whose light did set when as his life was done:
Bright as the sun, good ever to advance,
The soul of merit spurning ignorance.
Good in the virtue of his powerful arm,
Which brought more peace to peace, chac't fears of harm,
And whiles he lived a wonder mazed the light,
Two suns appeared at once, at once as bright:
For when he did and left his fame behind,
One Sunn remaynd, the truest Sun declined.
Dignum laud virum,
Musa vetat mori.

