A TREATISE TENDING TO CLEAR THE DOCTRINE OF JUSTIFICATION.

Written by Io. FORBES, Pastor of the English Church at MIDDELBVRGH, for the
instruction of his flock: And now published by some of them for the good of
others.

Blessed is he to whom the Lord imputes not sin, Psalm. 32. 2. This is the
name that they shall call him, The Lord our righteousness, Ier. 33. 6. For God
was in Christ reconciling the world to himself, not imputing to them their
sins, 2. Cor. 5. 19. For he made him who knew no sin to be sin for us:
that we might be made the righteousness of God in him, 2. Cor. 5. 21. AT
MIDDELBVRGH, Printed by Richard Schilders, 1616.

To his welbeloved in the Lord, the faithful of the English Church in
MIDDELBVRGH, whose love to the truth has entertained his Ministry amongst
them, The Author wishes grace to discern, and in humility to embrace and
co^stantlie to hold the truth in faith and love unto eternal life.
THE love of you, dearly beloved, whom I have and yet do serve in the Lord,
stirred by the earnest and forward desire of some of you, has moved me to
alter my former determination, of abstayning from all writing, especially
during the present estate of Gods Church, more wasted and whithered, then
watered, and builded in grace, by superfluity of writing: I ever was loath to
put my hand to the pen, and rashly to adventure the declaring of my mind,
in so deep mysteries: seeing so many, by their inconsiderate forwardnes in
writing, do darken the truth, more then clear it, and do breed contention,
rather, then godly edifying. The sight of whose weakness, joined with the
conscience of mine own inabilitie, as being in judgment far inferior, so
also in uttering by word, and expressing in writ, the conceptions of my mind,
fa^re less prompt and able, then many who have so stumbled: has made me
afraid, to meddle in such sort, with the sacred truth of God. Moreover, in this
contending age, I see and perceyve, that answering of errors, does more kindle
then quench the fire of endless strife: presumption of knowledge, deceyving
the minds of many: and true humility, so necessary a virtue, for learning
the mysteries of God, so far removed from men, even otherwise of excellent
gifts, that the most part, striving in preiudged humor, more for victory,
then truth: it is hard to find, almost one, who in this heat of contention,
does not in something, more or less mar the soundnes of Gods truth. So
dangerous a thing it is to do any thing, in contentious manner, and through
vain glory, and not in that meeknes of mind, whereby every man esteems
others better then him self. Philip. 2. 3.
and therefore wisely does the Apostle forbid oppositions of science, falsely so
called, in the handling of Gods truth: 1. Tim. 6. 20. 2.
as a thing which makes both them which profess it, to err concerning the
faith: and also turns others away from the truth: and commands the servant
of the Lord, 2 Timothy 2. 24. 25.
not to strive, but being gentle toward all men, to instruct the^ with meeknes:
and wills those that are strong in the faith, to receive unto them, the weak
in faith: but not unto controversies of disputations, Romans 14. 1.
because that does greatly harm such as are weak: who thereby are cast in a
greater doubtfulnes and uncertainty of the maine fou^dations. For as a ship
before one fair wind, is carried forward in her course, and saffely brought to
the have^: which by contrary blastes, is not only hindered, but greatly
endangered, if not drowned: even so the faith of the Saints, which is to be
promoved by the only simple and sound breath of Gods mouth, 1. Cor. 1. 10
in his faithful servants, all both minding and speaking one thing, Phil. 2. 2.
must needs be marveylously hindered in many, Romans 15. 6.
and in many quite destroyed by these so many contrary doctrines, blowing
every one against another, and casting the faith of the children of God, upon
so many dangerous Rocks: and tossing it with so many winds and waves, that
it is no marvayle, to see so many, make woeful shipwrackes. It were more to the
honor of God, and profit of the Saints, if the Builders were more careful of
keeping unity in the truth, in following the true pattern of wholesome words,
in faith and love, 2. Tim. 1. 13.
which cannot be condemned: then curious in showing their knowledge. Tit. 2. 8.
And that all Pastors, did labor, after the example of that Prince of
Pastors, to lead his people by the still waters: rather then by the turbulent
streams of their fighting opinions, and by strange language, to divert the
children of God, from the waters of Shiloa, that runs softly: which only are
able to refresh the City of God. In so doing, they should not have sinned,
in quenching so many smoking flaxes, and breaking so many bruised reeds. I
speak not against the faithful labors of Christ's witnesses: co^tending with
courage against the errors of the common adversary, either within or without
the house of GOD: and opposing them selves, both in plain simplicity of
truth, and moderate help of art, to every corrupt doctrine. But my speech
is against our own intestine debates, arising not so much upon any
substantial contrariety, as to much curiosity of judgment, whereas in one
and the same point, they holding the substance, do contend for the shadow.
as is too manifest in this same point, whereof I am by your Christian
importunity, forced to write touching the Justification of a sinner before
God. Wherein even they who do hold Christ, to be our righteousness,
according to the word: do yet notwithstanding greatly perturbe the peace of
the Church, and destroy the faith of many: and give matter of offense to all,
in striving for the difference, which is in the measure, rather the^ in the
matter of their faith. They that see more deeply, by importune and untimely
forwardnes, renting such as are yet old bottells, with their new wine: and they
who are not come so far in knowledge, in unadvised temeritie, judging and
condempning that, whereto as yet they themselves have not attained. Both
failing in the duty of love: the one not contenting to have their faith with
them selves, until without hurt and offense of others, they may imparte it to
their edification, and not to their destruction: the other sort, not having
learned in sobriety, to be wise according to the measure of their own faith,
do not admit what more the Lord reveyleth to others. as though the measure of
their faith and knowledge, should be the rule and limittes of the spirit, to
bind the whole Church, and every man therein. And this woeful seed of
contradiction (while men are too much addicted to the vain deceyte of their
own reason) has now at last, not only troubled the faith of the weak ones,
but has begun, to cast darkness upon the minds, of some of the strongest
sort. while they evanish in their own reasonings about the truth of God
reveyled in the Gospel: as did the Gentiles, in that truth which God made
manifest unto them in the creatures. Romans ^. 2^.
These have been the causes of my unwillingness, to give any thing in write, and
that now, being overcome by your request, I do follow a plain manner of
declaration of my mind, without contention with any, or direct disputing
against any: as being resolved, to have no part, in the noisome wrangling, of
this contentious age. But as one desirous to walk honestly, in all things: I
endeavor, to keep me within the measure of my own faith: and to benefitt the
Church of God, with that which he has given me: not hindering, nor envying that
others, who have receyved more, do more good in our common Lords work. Of whom
(as he who is only able to give it) I most humbly crave the gracious
direction of his spirit, in this and all my labors: with his blessing
thereupon, to your comfort, and theirs who shall have the use thereof. His
grace be with you. Middelburgh, 20. July, 1615.

Yours in the Lord Jo. Forbes.

A Table of things contained in this Treatise, according to the order of the
Chapters.
CHAPTER I. Four grounds proponed which serve to make us conceyve aright of
the nature of the benefits dispensed unto us by God in Christ. 1. The knowledge
of Gods Decree. 2. Of Christ as Mediator. 3. Of the order of the benefits. 4.
Of their difference. Chap. II. Of the two chief things to be considered in Gods
Decree, to wit, the substance, and chief cause of it. The twofold description
of Gods Decree or Predestination. And of that which is the most proper. Chap.
III. Of the substance of Gods Decree consisting in three things. 1. the persons
who are ordained. 2. that whereunto they are ordained. 3. the mean whereby. Of
which the first two are spoken of in this chapter. Chap. IV. The third part of
the substance of Gods Decree touching the mean of adoption, that is JESUS
CHRIST. Chap. V. Of the cause moving God to decree, that is, the will of God
cleared from the Persons who are ordained unto adoption. Chap. VI. The same
cause cleared from that thing whereunto they are ordained. Chap. VII. The same
cleared from the mean whereby they are ordained to be adopted. Chap. VIII. Of
the second ground, which is touching Christ the Mediator. Chap. IX. Of the
third ground touching the order of Gods benefits, specially of Adoption and
Justification, and of five things serving to clear the same. Chap. X. Of the
first of those five touching the order of subsistinge of the persons of the
Trinity. Chap. XI. Of the second of these five, touching the several obiectes
wherein the grace of God is to be considered. Chap. XII. Of the third of these
five touching the difference of order betwixt Gods dispensation and our
perception. Chap. XIII. Of the fourth of these five touching the different
extent or largenes of Gods benefits amongst them selves. Chap. XIIII. Of the
last of these five touching the covenant of God. Chap. XV. Of the first reason
why most men place Justification in order before Adoption. Chap. XVI. Of the
second reason why most men place Justification before Adoption, drawn from Io.
1. 12. examined in the first point, that is touching the persons there
described. Chap. XVII. The examination of the same reason from the second and
third points therein to be considered, that is the benefit bestowed, and him
who bestows it. Chap. XVIII. Of the fourth and last ground, serving to clear
the nature of Gods benefits touching the difference of these benefits. and
first of the diverse manner of speech used in scripture touching them. 2. Of
these things wherein they agree, and use hereof. Chap. XIX. Of the twofold
distinction of the benefits. 1. according to the manner that we enjoy them. 2.
according to their particular nature. Chap. XX. A proposition of the doctrine
of Justification and things therein to be entreated, And first of the diverse
opinions of men touching justification in general. Chap. XXI. The four
principal points controverted. 1 touching the efficient cause. 2. touching the
material cause. 3. touching the formal cause. 4. touching the subject
justified. and the first handled. Chap. XXII. Of the second point touching the
material cause of Justification: the different opinions of men, reduced to
four principal: and examination of them. Chap. XXIII. Of the true matter of
our righteousness, what it is, and wherein. and the first handled showing that
Christ only is the matter thereof. Chap. XXIIII. Of the second point touching
that wherein Christ is our righteousness: the different opinions of men therein:
and the truth examined by six grounds out of the word. Chap. XXV. Of those
things in Christ which are required to make that wherein he is our
righteousness, to be righteousness both in his Person, Priesthood, and actions.
Chap. XXVI. Of the formal cause of justification consisting in three things,
1. in Gods giving. 2. in his imputing. 3. in the manner of both. that is by
grace. The gift being two fold: the first which is faith is first entreated of
in four points: and first, what kind of gift it is. Chap. XXVI. Of the
second point touching faith: to whom, it is given, and in what part or faculty
it is wrought. Chap. XXVIII. Of the third point touching faith: what it is: of
the diverse significations of it. of the true signification of it, when it is
said to be imputed unto righteousness: of the particular nature thereof, both as
it is wrought by God in our hearts, and as our hearts work by it. Chap. XXIX.
Of the fourth and last point touching faith, that is, the end and use wherefore
it is given unto us: consisting in four things. Chap. XXX. Of the second gift
which God gives in justifying, which is Christ crucified. Chap. XXXI. Of the
second point touching the form of Justification consisting in imputation: the
signification of the word: the things that are said to be imputed, and what it
is that in justification is imputed. Chap. XXXII. Of the third point touching
the form of justification, consisting in the grace of God. Chap. XXXIII. Of
the object of justification both what man is in him self, and what by grace,
when he is justified. Chap. XXXIIII. Of the final cause of justification.
Chap. XXXV. Of the description of justification considered in the particular
points thereof, gathered out of the former grounds.
FINIS.
A Treatise tending to clear the Doctrine of Justification.
CHAPTER I.
THE Evangelist Luke, willing to make Theophilus, to acknowledge the certainty
of those things, whereof he had been instructed: did search out perfectly all
things, from the beginning: and then did write unto him, from point to point.
According to whose example, (for giving the more full assurance to minds
desirous of knowledge) it shall not be amiss, being to treat of the true
nature of the Justification of a sinner, that we first beginning at the very
foundation, do shortly speak of those points, upon the knowledge whereof,
chiefly depends the light and evidence of this matter.

Amongst diverse others: there are four principal grounds. upon the sound
knowledge* whereof, it evidently appears, that the right conception, of the
true nature of Gods saving benefits in Christ, does chiefly depend.

The first is, The sound knowledge of Gods Decree or Predestination. The second
is, The knowledge of Christ, as Mediator betwixt God and us. The third is, The
right order of the benefits imparted unto us. The last is, The sound knowledge
of the special difference and distinction, of those benefits amongst them
selves.
These four points have such affinity one with another: and the knowledge of
each one so depends upon another, that hardly can any one of them be soundly
known, without the sound knowledge of the rest. For error in one, does bring
commonly, if not continually, error in all. Which is manifest, if we lay
before our eyes, the different opinions of men, touching this point, which we
have in hand: in the which we shall evidentlie perceyve, that as many main
differences as are amongst them, concerning the justification of a sinner: so
many different judgments have they, touching Gods Decree, Christ's merit, the
order of Gods dispensation, and nature of the benefits dispensed. For
according to our mistaking, or confounding, or wrong placing of any of those
respectivelie, we do mistake, confound and order amiss, the benefits of
God: in our conceyving, speaking, or writing of them. Wherefore it is more then
evident, that it is dangerous to err in any of these four: and therefore
before we come to the particular consideration of the benefit of our
justification, I do esteem it first necessary, that for the clearing of the
true nature thereof, we lay some solid goundes in our minds, concerning the
knowledge of these four points: so far as in general, is requisite to
preserve us from error in the particular consideration of any one blessing
bestowed upon us in CHRIST.

CHAPTER II.
FIRST then touching Gods Decree, the true nature thereof cannot rightly be
known, except besides other things therein to be considered, we specially
understand: First, what is the substance of it: And secondly, what is the chief
ground and cause of it. Which two things do principally teach us how to make a
right reference of all Gods benefits unto it, and of it unto them. and
therefore they are chiefly to be marked of us. The matter or substance of Gods
Decree, is two manner of ways considered in the Scriptures: First more
properly: which manner in show seems more strict, and yet does imply the
largest sense. Secondly, in a more improper manner according to the consequent
fruits and effects following necessarily upon the proper substance and nature
of Gods Decree, whereby it is most properly described: which proper
description is chiefly to be perceived in those places of scripture, where the
spirit of God purposelie sets it down, in the own proper nature: expressly
distinguishing it both from Gods purpose or foreknowledge going in order before
it, and from Gods election and remanent blessings in the execution thereof
following in order after it.

Of these places there be two principally to be marked, which being compared
together, do make up the full and sound nature and description of the Decree of
God in so far as it is restrained to the vessels of honor, in which respect
we speak of it in this treatise. The one place is in the first chap. to the
Ephesians. verse. 5. The other is in the 8. chap. to the Romans ver. 29. In the first
it is thus described, He has predestined us unto adoption through Jesus
Christ in him self, according to the good pleasure of his own will unto the
praise of the glory of his grace. And this is the most proper and most perfect
definition of Gods Decree, from the next and most proper blessing unto which we
are predestinate, and whereupon all the rest (from which the Decree of God in
other places is more improperly defined) do consequently depend as necessary
effects and adherents thereof. And this appears to be manifest by the other
place, where it is thus described: Those whom he knew before, he also
praedestinated to be made like to the Image of his Son. Which place compared
with the former, does show evidentlie, that in the former description,
contained in the first chap. to the Ephe. all blessings wherein stands our
co^formitie to the Image of Christ, are such necessary consequences of
adoption and inseparable adherents thereof: that to be predestinate to adoption
includes them all. And for this cause is it that sometimes the Decree of God
is described from them, as namely from eternal life, Act. 13. ver. 48. As many
as were ordained unto eternal life, believed. And from salvation, as 1 Thessalonians.
5. 9. God has not appointed us unto wrath, but to the obtaining of salvation
through our Lord Jesus Christ, etc. And these we call more improper
descriptions of Gods Decree, because they are taken from the fruits and
effects, or inseparable consequences of that blessing whereunto we are said
most properly to be predestinate, which is adoption, whereby Gods Decree is
most properly described, because in Gods dispensation to usward it presupponeth
no preceding benefit, whereof it should be the effect, but is the next end
whereunto God does ordain us: and so the first blessing of God, which he does
bestow upon us in Christ: comprehending in it by necessary consequence all the
rest: as inseparable fruits and effects thereof: and therefore is it that in
that other place, in the 8. to the Romans Gods Decree is described from the
making of us conform to the Image of his Son: which always presupponeth the
making of us sons, in his son, to go before it.

CHAPTER III.
HAving now considered the places where the decree of God is most properly
described, we are next out of them to mark what is the substance of it, which
is clearly set down to consist in three things.

The first is, The Persons who are ordained. The second is, The thing whereunto
they are ordained. The third is, The Mean whereby they are to receive that
whereunto they are ordained.
Touching the persons, they are described in the 8. Chap, to the Romans from Gods
foreknowledge or purpose, where it is said, Those whom he knew before, them
also he predestined: and therefore is it that predestination is said to be
according to the purpose of God, Ephe. 1. verse. 11. And to the same effect
election is said to be according to the foreknowledge of God, 1. Pet. 1. 1. and
2. And this is that sure foundation of God which never fails: as says the
Apostle to Timoth. the 2. Epist. chap. 2. v. 19. whereof also James speaks
Act. 15. 18. as the ground of the calling of the Gentiles to the participation
of grace with the Jews: when he says, from the beginning of the world God
knows all his own works. Which two places, lead us to the consideration of
these two things: First, that the foreknowledge of God, or his purpose does
comprehend the determinate and complete number of all that are predestinate,
and according thereto effectually called. Secondly, that those who are so
called, that is according to Gods purpose or foreknowledge, do remain sure,
and never can so fall away from grace and from the truth of God, that they
should err from the mark. But here it is not my purpose to speak more of
the persons that are ordained: because hereafter we will have occasion at
greater length to entreat of them.

The second thing in the substance of Gods Decree to be considered of us, is
that whereunto they are ordained, which by the Apostle is called Adoption, that
is sonneship or filiation. When he says, he has predestined us unto
adoption: which benefire implies all the rest, which consist in these things
whereof we are made partakers in the son of God: to make us conform to his
Image both in death and life, in suffering and reigning with him. Which as we
have said, appears evidently by that other description of predestination set
down in the 8, chap. to the Romans where it is said, that he has predestined
us to be made like to the Image of his Son. Whereby it is evident that the
thing, whereto first and principally we are predestinate, is to be sons, by
adoption: and secondarily in and under that adoption, we are, by infallible
consequent, predestinate, to be made like unto the only Son of God. For
first we are made Gods sons in his son: and then we are made like Gods
son, in his son, for the conforming of us unto Christ, succeeds not only
in order, but also in some respect, in time, unto our being sons in him,
according to that saying of John, in his 1. Epist. chap. 3. verse. 2. We are now
the sons of God, but yet it is not made manifest, what we shall be: and we
know that when he shall be made manifest, we shall be made like him, for we shall
see him as he is. And to the same effect speaks the Apostle to the Colossians,
chap. 3. verse. 3. and 4. saying, That we are dead, and that our life is hid
with Christ in God: and when Christ, who is our life, shall appear, then shall
we also appear with him in glory.

For this ground is to be well marked, that the likening of us who are made
sons in Christ, requires necessarily, the manifestation of Christ unto us,
to go before in the same blessings, wherein we are to be made like unto him.
For as to make us sons by adoption, requires necessarily the revelation of
Jesus Christ, as the son of God unto us: so the conforming of us unto him,
either in death or life, requires necessarily that he be manifested to us in
his death and cross, and in his life and glory. Therefore does Peter in his
1. Epist. chap. 1. verse. 13. ascribe the bringing of all grace to us, unto the
revelation of JESUS Christ, saying: Trust perfectly in that grace which is
brought unto you, in the revelation of Jesus Christ. And of this it comes to
pass, that in this present life, we are in some measure made like unto Christ,
in the communion of the benefits flowing from his death and suffering, and his
resurrection from the death: because he has already appeared to us in these
things. But in this life, we are not, neither shall be made like unto him in his
glory, which follows the resurrection from the dead: because in that, we
cannot be made conform unto him; until that he appear unto us again, in
glory. but we rest in full assurance of it: because of our conformity in his
death, already begun. For as says the Apostle Romans 6. 5. If we have been
planted with him unto the similitude of his death, we shall also be planted
with him to the similitude of his resurrection. And this assurance made the
Apostle Paul, to labor above all things, to know Christ, and the virtue of his
resurrection, and the fellowship of his sufferings, in being made conform to
his death, Phil. 3. 10. because as in the same place he declares by that
co^formitie, unto his death, he did know, that he should attain unto the
resurrection from the dead: that is, the glorious and immortal estate in all
perfection, which the Saints do enjoy, in the resurrection from the dead. In
respect of this ground, it is, that first and principally, as we have said, we
are predestinate unto adoption, as unto that wherein Christ is first of all to
be manifested unto us: and in the communion whereof, is builded and grounded,
our communion with him, in all other things, wherein he is hereafter to be
revealed unto us: to this end that we may be made like unto him.

This is one of the main points, chiefly to be marked, in the consideration
of the substance of Gods Decree. Which not being rightly conceyved, makes that
not only the Decree of God it self, is mistaken by many: but also that the
benefits of God in Christ, are both wrongly defined, and ordered, and
specially the benefit of Justification: as hereafter we will see more
clearly.

CHAPTER IIII
THE third thing to be marked in the substance of Gods Decree, is the Mean,
whereby we are to attain unto that, whereunto we are predestinate: that is,
whereby God has ordained us, to be Adopted, which is Jesus Christ, according
as the description of predestination contains: when it fayeth. That we are
Predestinate to be adopted through Jesus Christ. Of which point for avoiding
idle repetition, we will not speak much, until we come to the second of these
four points: which we have propounded to be considered: because unto it, it
properly belongs: only these two things, we are to mark, by the way: First,
that Jesus Christ, is not the cause why, but the Mean, whereby God does
ordain us to adoption. Which will more clearly appear, when we speak of the
cause, mooving God to predestinate us.

The second thing that we have to mark, is, that all other secondary Means,
whereby in the Scriptures we are said to be made sons, or justified, etc. as
namely, the Gospel preached, the Sacraments, and faith: are no ways to be
esteemed Means, simply in respect of them selves, but only by relation, and
reference to Christ: in and by them revealed, offered, and receyved. Which is
most evident, by the description aforesaid of predestination: in the which
nothing saving Christ alone, is set down to be the Mean, whereby God
ordayneth us to be adopted: so that it is not the word but Christ revealed by
the word, neither the Sacraments, but Christ signified by the Sacraments, nor
faith, but Christ receyved by faith, which in proper sense makes us sons,
and justifies us. They only by consequence and mediatly being said in
Scripture, to make us sons, and Justify us, etc. because they are the
means, appointed of GOD, whereby we atteyne unto Christ, who is the only
proper and immediate mean, whereby we are Adopted and Justified, etc. Neither
are they appointed mediate Means, absolutely necessary, unto our adoption and
justification: Christ only being the immediate and absolute necessary Mean,
appointed of God for the enjoying of these blessings: as being the only matter
and substance of them, in him self. The word Sacraments and Faith being in
them selves, neither part nor portion of the Matter and substance of these
benefits, but only the signs, or seals, or instruments of enjoying him,
who alone is the substance. And that only unto such, as are partakers of the
outward dispensation of the covenant. others who die before they either hear
faith preached, or are made partakers of the Sacraments, such as are many
children of the faithful, and such also as are called like unto the thief, in
the last hour: being adopted of God, and justified through Christ, without
them, and therefore, when in the Scriptures, the spirit of God does
indifferently attribute our adoption, justification, salvation, etc. unto
Christ, and unto ^aith: yet they are not of a like large extent, nor alike
relative, in all persons adopted, justified, and saved, etc. For albeit actual
believing, does necessarily imply Christ: yet to be adopted and justified
through Christ, does not always, in all persons, necessarily imply actual
believing: seeing that faith, comes of hearing the word preached: and
therefore is to be restrained to such as are by outward dispensation called:
which all that are adopted, and justified, are not: for we are to distinguish
betwixt these two things: that is, to be partakers of the covenant, and to be
partakers of the outward dispensatio^ of the covenant: and therefore when it
pleases God by outward dispe^sation, to call those who are within the
covenant: these means are then necessarily required unto salvation. For we are
bound to these outward Means, when it pleases God to use them toward us, for
our calling: but God is no ways bound to them, nor his grace in Christ, but
that he may freely, by his grace, without them, perform his Decree through
Jesus Christ in us: after the manner known to him self: whose ways are past
finding out, else, if those means, were absolutely necessary in all, who are
within the covenant: then certainly the children of the faithful, who,
according to the Scriptures, are within the covenant, dying without external
dispensatio^ of the covenant: should, contrary to the scriptures, not be
accounted holy.

Of this it follows, that when it is said in scripture, that without faith it
is impossible to please God: that we are to understand that saying, prudently,
least we fall in a dangerous error: so as to esteem the children, of whom
consists the kingdom, not to be acceptable to God: who notwithstanding, are
baptized, as belonging to God in Christ* and heirs of that righteousness, which
is by faith: although they have never heard says preached.

Of all these things we may easily perceive, that seeing Christ, who is the
matter of our righteousness and life, is not the cause why but the Mean,
whereby, God does decree to adopt us, and justify us, etc. that faith, which
is no material but instrumental Mean, can much less be the cause why, but a
mean, whereby, God does predestinate us, to be adopted, justified, and
glorified: otherwise faith, which is powerful only in respect of Christ:
should be of greater respect, with God, then Christ himself: which were
abominable to think. In danger of which sin, many notwithstanding do fall:
in defining, both Gods decree, and our justification. When as they distinguish
not, first, between the thing which is decreed, and the cause moving God to
decree that which he decreed. Secondly, when they distinguish not, in the thing
which is decreed, that whereunto we are ordained, from the Mean, whereby God
does ordain to adopt us. and thirdly, when in the mean, they distinguish not,
betwixt that, which is absolutely necessary, in all within the covenant: from
those things, which only are necessary, in such, as not only are within the
covenant, but also are called by outward dispensation thereof: and which are
not, substantial parts of our righteousness, but accidental means thereof.
except we will say, that to be justified by Christ, and by faith, is one, and
the same thing, in proper and not borrowed speech. which is impossible: except
we hold that faith in proper and not figurative speech, does signify Christ.

These oversights, cause some to make faith the cause moving God to
predestinate us to adoption, etc. and others, to esteem faith, not to be the
Mean, and that isntrumental and that in some case only: but the very matter
of our righteousness. and that not in borrowed or figurative, but in simple and
proper speech. of which matter we shall have occasion to speak hereafter.

CHAPTER V.
THis much being spoken, of the substance of the Decree. we are next to
consider, what is the cause that moved God to make this Decree. Where we are to
observe, that we do not speak of the final cause: which is the praise of the
glory of Gods grace. neither yet of the Material cause, and that which in the
schools is called causa procataretica, that is the foremost after the first, or
after the beginning: which in the substance of Gods Decree, we have already
declared, to be Christ. but the cause we inquire of, is that, which in the
schools is called proegumena, that is to say, which goes before all causes,
and does lead, order, and guide all the rest. Which the Apost. sets down in
these words: according to the good pleasure of his will. by which words, it is
evident, that nothing, either in Christ as Mediator, or in Man himself, or any
thing else, without God: but only Gods own will in him self, was the cause
that did move God, to predestinate such as are predestinate, and to
predestinate them unto that whereunto they are predestinate, that is adoption:
and to predestinate them to be adopted, by no other Mean, except through Jesus
Christ alone. so that both Gods action of decreeing, and the persons who are
predestinate, and the thing whereunto they are predestinate, and the Means
whereby they are predestinate, does depend upon no cause without God, but upon
the cause that is in God him self: and upon no cause in God him self, except
only his will. Which sometimes is called in the scriptures his Mercy, his
love, his grace, his purpose, his gift, his good pleasure and counsel of his
will. And for the clearer understanding of this point, we are carefully to
mark, these two phrases, contained in the description of predestination. The
first is, that God is said to have predestinate us in him self. The second
is, that he is said to have predestinate us according to the good pleasure of
his own will. By the first of these sayings, the spirit of God would teach us,
that God went not without him self, neither consulted with any thing but him
self, neither looked to any thing that was not in him self: when he did
predestinate us. and so consequently that the Decree of God, or predestination,
is an action of God, not in Christ the Mediator, nor in us that are his
members, but in God him self. For the benefits of God toward Mankind, and
the fruits of his love to the vessels of honor, are clearly distinguished in
scripture, in three degrees.

The first is, of those things, which God does in him self. of which kind
are, his purpose, foreknowledge and predestination.

The second is, of those things which he does in Christ the Mediator. of which
kind are our election, redemption, and blessing of us with all spiritual
blessings, etc.

The third is, of those things which he does in us through Christ. of which
kind are our adoption or calling, our justification, and sanctification, and
glorification, etc.

By the second pharse, the spirit of God would teach us, that albeit in God,
there be many things set down in scripture, to be considered, as the
fountaynes of Gods working: as namely his infinite wisdom, his omnipotent
power, his infinite goodness, etc. yet this action of predestinating us to
adoption, is only attributed to the will of God. which limiteth the
infinitenes, both of his wisdom, power, and goodness, in all his actions
outward, toward the creatures: both in their creation and government, and
dispensation of all blessings toward us, both bodily and spiritual. Hereby
we may learn, that our blessedness, if we shall examine it, in the cause: does
surmount all reason, and all the capacity of the reason, of man and Angel:
seeing it is builded upon no reason of any creature, or ground of reason in any
creature: but upon the will of the Creator. which is not moved, directed, or
ruled by any thing, that is in the creature, but by it self alone: and is the
rule of all reason, in the creature, and of things done by the Creator, unto
the creature.

This shall yet be more easily perceyved, if we shall severally consider it, in
those three points of the substance of Gods Decree, before mentioned: that is
in the persons predestinate, in the thing whereto they are predestinate, and
the Mean whereby.

Concerning the persons: who can give a reason why Jacob should be beloved, and
Esau hated, before any of them, had done either good or evil: except only the
Will of God? as it is written. I will show mercy to whom I will show mercy:
and will have compassion upon whom I will have compassion, Exodus chap. 33. ver.
19. Romans chap. 9. ver. 15. And the spirit of the Lord, giving the reason, why
the Lord did set his love upon Israel, and did choose them: does remove all
respects, which can be considered in them. First their number, Deuteronomy chap. 7.
saying: The Lord thy God has chosen thee to be a precious people unto him
self above all people that are upon the earth: the Lord did not set his love
upon you, nor choose you, because you were more in number, then any people, for
you were the fewest of all people. Secondly, he removes their power and
strength, Deutero. chap. 8. saying: Beware least thou say in thy heart, My
power and the strength of mine own hand, has prepared me this abundance.
And thirdly, he remoueth their righteousness, Deuteronomy. chapt. 9. saying: Speak not
thou in thine heart, saying: For my righteousness, the Lord has brought me in
to possess this Land. And shortly after in the same chap. Understand
therefore, that the Lord thy God, gives thee not, this good Land to possess
it, for thy righteousness, for thou art a stiffnecked people. Fourthlie, he
clears this ground most evidently in the 10. chapter of Deutero. by removing
all praerogative and respect of right, or reason in respect of right, why the
Lord should have chosen the^ above any other people, all people being alike
belonging to the Lord, saying: Behold heaven, and the heaven of heavens, is the
Lord thy Gods: and the earth, and all that therein is: notwithstanding the Lord
set his delight in thy Fathers, to love them, and did choose their seed after
them, even you, above all people, as appears this day.

Moreover, the same point is yet further cleared by the Lord him self in the
Prophecy of Ezechiel, chap. 16. by removing all respect of their worthiness, or
perfection, declaring their wretched estate, in them selves, in filthiness, and
natural corruption, in the very time, when the Lord did choose them, saying:
In thy nativitie, when thou wast borue, thy navell was not cut, etc. And when I
passed by thee, I saw thee polluted in thy own blood, and said unto thee:
When thou wast in thy blood, thou shall live, etc.

And this ground, is made clear, by Christ him self, Math. chap. 11. verse.
25. 26. when he speaks of the persons upon who^ the Lord bestows his grace,
and of the reason moving him thereto, saying: I thank thee O Father, Lord of
heaven and earth, because thou have hid these things from the wise and men of
understanding: and have opened them unto babes, It is so Father, because thy
good pleasure was such. These words do plainly teach us, that the will of
God only, without any reason in the creature: yea which is more, contrary to
all reason that may seem to be in the creature, is the cause of Gods mercy
toward man. When the simple are preferred to the wise: the weak, to the
strong: the poor, to the rich: the vile, to the honorable: and which is yet
more strange: the sick, to the whole: and sinners, to the righteous. Therefore
to conclude this point, we shall see sufficiently the evide^ce of it, by
comparing the first of John. verse. 13. with the first of James, verse. 18. in
the 1. of John it is said, That the prerogative to be the fonnes of God, is
given to those who are borne, not of bloods, nor of the will of flesh, nor of
the will of man, but of God. And in James it is said: That of his own will,
God begat us. Of which it appears evidently, that the persons who are
ordained unto adoption, are pre destinate, chosen and called: for no cause
without God, either in Christ as Mediator, or in them selves: but only of Gods
free will, and good pleasure. For it is not in him that wills, nor in him
that runs, but in God, that shows mercy, Romans chap. 9. ver. 16.

CHAPTER VI.
WE are next to consider the same ground, in that whereunto we are ordained:
which is adoption: including in it, our conformity with Christ in
righteousness, holiness, life and glory, etc. of all which benefits, there is
not one, which is not the gift of God: and that of mere grace: according to
his will and good pleasure. For albeit al blessings be in Christ: yet neither
he, nor any of the^ in him, are given to us, but according to the will of God.
so that he is a Savior and Redeemer of none but of such as pleases God of his
good will: so that his death and satisfaction for sin, is not for any, nor
imputed as righteousness. unto any, for any cause, either in Christ, or Man: but
only to such as it is the will of God to give it. therefore does the Apostle
say, Romans chap. 11. ver. 7. that the Election has obtained it. to show us that
the cause of obtaining the promise, and all blessings therein contained,
depends neither upon Christ as Mediator, nor upon Man, but upon the Lords
free choice: who gives Christ, for who^ and to whom he will: and therefore is
Christ him self called the gift of God, John chap. 4. ver. 10. and John chap.
3. ver. 16. because even he is given unto us of grace: according as the words
of John declare manifestly saying: God so loved the world, that he gave his
only begotten Son. And although all power be given unto Christ both in
heaven and earth: yet in dispensing of life, he is limited by the Fathers will.
and therefore says him self, that al power is given him to this end, that he
may give eternal life, not to all, simply and indifferently: but to all, that
the Father has given him. John chap. 17. verse 2. And that because such is the
Fathers will: as Christ him self witnesses, Ioh. cha. 6. ver. 39. This is the
will of my Father that sent me, that of all which he has given me, I should
loose none. and the reason why he restrayneth his dispensation of life unto
the Fathers will, whose will and pleasure is that he should save only those
whom he had given unto him, is declared by Christ him self in the verse
immediately preceding, saying: I am come down from heaven, not that I should
do mine own will, but the will of him that sent me. which words plainly
teach us, that the dispensation of life, depends not upon the will of Christ
as he is Mediator, much less upon the will of Man: but only upon the good will
and pleasure of God. And this is clear in all the blessings bestowed upon us
in Christ, and of all the means which God grants us to bring us to the
communion of the blessings, which all, are said in scripture to be according to
the will of God: and to be given us freely by grace: as namely the revelation
of the mystery of godliness, Ephesians. chap. 1. ver. 9. and preachers to reveal it.
Ephesians. cha. 3. ver* 7. etc. and Gala. chap. 1. ver. 15. 16. also the benefit of
our calling, 2. to Timot. chap. 1. verse. 9. also our believing, and by faith
assenting to the calling of God, 1. to the Corint. cha. 12. ver. 9. 11. and
Ephe. chap. 2. ver. 8. Phil. chap. 7. ver. 29. and 2. chap. ver. 13. Romans chap.
11. ver. 7. Ioh. chap. 6. ver. 36. 37. and 44. 45. and Math. chap. 11. verse*
25. 26. and Mat. chapt. chap. 13. ver. 11. Also the gift of perseverance, 1. to
the Corinthi. chapt. 1. verse. 8. 9. and John chap. 10. verses 28. 29. and 1.
Epist. of John chapter. 2. verse. 27. and chapter 3. verse. 9. 1. to the
Corinthians chapter 15. verse. 57. and 58. 1. epist. to the These. chap. 5. ver.
23. 24. and 2. epist. to the Thessal. chapter 16. verse 17. and I eremy chap.
31. verse. 32. 33. and chap. 32. ver. 40. and so forth of all the remanent
benefits of God, and namely of our Justification: for we are justified freely
by grace. And therefore even the righteousness of Christ whereby we are
justified, is said to be the gift, of God, and that of free grace, Romans chap.
5. verse. 15. 16. 17. For of whatsoever worth, virtue, and value, the
satisfaction made by Christ be of in Gods sight: far exceeding al unworthiness
and weakness of all mankind: yet it is no farther extended nor given to any
more, but such as is the good will and pleasure of God, Neither is it contrary
unto this, that all the blessings of God are said to be in Christ, and we said
to be blessed with all spiritual blessings in him. For neither he nor they in
him are made ours for any cause, either in him, or us: but only by the will
and good pleasure of God, which is manifest by the saying of the Apostle, Ephe.
chap. 1. ver. 6. which is, That God by his grace has freely made us acceptable
to him self in his beloved Son. Which words do evidently witness, that
although GOD give us no blessing but in Christ, yet the cause moving God is
only his own grace and good pleasure: which excludes all other cause
whatsoever, either in Christ or in us. Neither is this to be understood of the
benefits themselves only, but also of their measure: which also depends
wholly upon the purpose and good pleasure of Gods will. Which is clear by the
speech of Christ, in the 20. chapt. of Math. ver. 23. And Mark, chap. 10. ver.
40. where he says: To sit at my right hand and at my left hand, is not mine
to give: but to whom it is prepared of my Father.

Moreover, this is not only to be understood of the blessings them selves,
and of their measure: but also of all the circumstances concerning their
dispensation. Which wholly depend upon the will of God: who has assigned the
seasons, which were ordained before: and the bounds of men's habitatio^, Act.
chap. 17. verse. 26. And who has put the times and seasons in his own power.
Acts chap. 1. verse. 7. and has appointed a day of grace to every one that
shall be called. Hebr. chap. 3. ver. 13. and 15. and Hebr. chap. 4 verse. 7. 8.
and 9. so that the reason that one is called from the womb: another in his
mid-age: another in the hour of his death. why the Gospel is salvation, first
unto the Jews, and next unto the Gentiles: why Christ did come at such a time:
died at such a time: and the Gentiles not called till such a time: is the only
appointment of Gods will, who, as says the Apostle, Ephe. chap. 1. verse. 11.
Does all things according to the counsel of his own will. Thus it is
manifest, that not only the blessings in Christ, and the measure of them: but
all circumstances of these blessings, either in respect of persons, place,
time, or manner, do depend wholly upon the counsel of Gods will.

CHAPTER VII.
IT rests now thirdly, that we try the truth of this same ground in the
third point of the substance of Gods Decree, that is in the Mean whereby we
are predstinate unto adoption, which is Jesus Christ. of whom it is manifest in
the Scriptures, that he is the Mean of our happiness by the same will of God.
as is evident by the Apostle, Coloss. chap. 1. verse. 19. and 20. For it pleased
the Father that in him should all fulness dwell, and by him to reconcile all
things to him self, making peace by the blood of his cross. For first there
was no cause in Christ, why he should have been made Man, and sin for Man.
Secondly, there was no cause nor reason in us which could move the Father, to
give him to the death for us: or which could move him, to become our brother,
and to lay down his life for us, but as says John, cha. 10. verse. 18. He
receyved this commandment from the Father to lay down his life. And the
Apostle Peter Acts chap. 2. ver, 23. says plainly: That he was delivered by
the determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God. And the scriptures do
witness, Hebr. chap. 3. ver. 2. and Hebr. chap. 5. ver. 5. that Christ did not
take this office to him self to be either King, Priest or Prophet of the house
of God: but that the Father did give it him. and as he receyved it from the
Father, so does he perform it, not according to his own will, but according
to the will of the Father that sent him. that is, he lays down his life for
none but such as the Father wills: that is the sheep which the Father gives
him: that he should give them eternal life, Ioh. chap. 10. 14. 15. 16.
compared to Ioh. chap. 17. ver. 2. and Esaias chap. 8. ver. 18. compared with
Hebr. chap. 2. ver. 13. 14. and 15. 16. and 17. neither does he make
intercession for any but for such as the Father had given him: but secludeth
all who were not given him of the Father from al benefit of his intercession,
and fruit of his death, Ioh. cha. 17. ver. 9. Thirdly, he manifests the name
of God, and gives the words and the glory which the Father has given him,
to no others, saving those alone whom the Father had given him. In the same
chapter 6. verse. 22. and 26. Fourthly, he gives eternal life to none but such
as the Father has given him. John chapter 6. verses 37. 38. and 39. And John
chapter 10. verse. 26. 27. 28. 29. And John chapter 17. verse. 2. for the work
which he performed on earth* the Father did give it him, that he should do
it: as he him self witnesses John chapter 17. and verse 4. Wherefore also in
the performing thereof, when the bitterness of that cup which the Father had
given him to drink, makes him in his agony to will, If it were possible that
it might pass from him: He rangeth his own will in order, and submits him
self to the will of his Father, saying: But not my will, but thy will be done.
Matthew chap. 26. verse. 39. and 42. Of all which grounds it evidently
follows, that what Christ is, as Mediator: and what he does, as Mediator:
and to whom he does any thing, by Mediaton and intercession, is all by the will
and appointement of GOD, according to his good pleasure. Whose Decree, and free
election, according to his will, boundeth and limiteth JESUS Christ the
Mediator, in his suffering, intercession, and whole performance of his office,
and dispensation of all blessings unto righteousness and life, as is clear in
the 11. chapt. to the Romans, verses 5. and 7.

Of all that is spoken, touching either the substance or cause of Gods Decree:
we may easily perceyve, that the whole Decree of God, in all the substance of
it, depends upon nothing but only upon the will of God: so that he
predestinates, because it is his will, and he predestinates so many and no more,
because it is his will. And he predstinates them to adoption, because it is
his will. and he predestinates this adoption to be thorough Jesus Christ,
because it is his will.

Whilst men in humble reverence, do not acknowledge this, and acquiesce in
it, as the truth of this matter, they not only fall in blasphemouse errores
against God: but involve themselves in the danger of that curse, pronounced by
the Prophet Esaias, chapt. 45. verse. 10. Woe be to him that striveth with his
Maker. Woe unto him that says to his Father, what have thou begotten? Or to
his Mother, What have thou brought forth? Which surely they do, which search
for a reason of this will of GOD, as though the Lord could not be just, in
ordayning some unto adoption, and not others, upon his only will: but that
some cause there must be in the creatures of this difference of his will: what
is this else but to buyld the equity of Gods doeings upon the creature, and
not upon God the Creator him self. making things just, not because he wills
them, but because he wills them according to that, which he finds in the
creature: and which in the judgment of man, seems to be a just reason why
God should do so. even as though the Potter, of one and the same lump of
clay, did not freely according to his own will, make one vessel to honor, and
another to dishonor, without any respect of any worthiness, or any reason
whatsoever taken from the clay. Surely it is a wretched Divinity which does
not simply acknow ledge all things just which God wills: eve^ because he
wills the^: although they not only pass the capacity, but also appear most
contrary to humane reason. For, are not his judgments unsearchable, and his
ways past finding out? who the^ shall find out the reason of his counsels, and
declare the causes of his will? We will conclude this point, with the saying of
Augustine, touching these me^, lib. pri. ca. 2. de Genes cont. Manich. They
seek to know the causes of Gods will, when as the will of God it self, is the
cause of all things that are: for if the will of God have a cause: there is
something that goes before the will of God, which is not lawful to believe.

The use we are to make hereof, in the doctrine of justification, is great: for
first, hereby we learn, that Gods Decree is not builded upon our
righteousness, as the cause thereof, but by the contrary, that our righteousness
is builded upon Gods Decree. For God does not predestinate us, because of our
righteousness: but he makes us righteous, because he has predestinate us: so
that whether our righteousness consist in Christ and his sufferings, or as some
do think in works, or as others do esteem in faith: yet it still holds,
that this righteousness, is never the cause why God predestinateth us. Secondly,
we learn of this point: that whatsoever be our righteousness, we must go
above our selves, and above our righteousness, to search the cause why it is
ours. For it is not any thing in us, nor any thing in that, that is our
righteousness, but the will of God in God himself, which is the ground of our
enjoying it. Thirdly, we learn hereby, that whatsoever we seclude from the
Means of our righteousness, justification, and life, yet Christ can never be
secluded. seeing God Decrees, to do all what he decrees: thorough him alone.
Thus much concerning the Decree of God, and the nature thereof.

CHAPTER VIII.
NOW follows the second point: which stands in the knowledge of Christ, as
he is Mediator. Whereof, because diverse things have been already spoken, we
will be the shorter. The main point, chiefly to be considered in this head, is
this: that no man is made, that, unto the which GOD does predestinate him, in
him self and through him self, but in and through another, which is JESUS
Christ only: who being ordained of God, the Mean of al his mercy to
Ma^kinde, he comes in, as Mediator between God and us, in all things
decreed of God for us: so, as we are to expect nothing of all that is decreed
concerning the vessels of honor, whether it be in making of us sons, or
making us conform to the Image of his Son, in righteousness and glory: but
only in and through Jesus Christ our Lord: in whom alone all the promises of
God are yea and amen. For he is the first borne among all the sons of God:
and the beginning and first begotten of the dead: for it is the Fathers will,
that in all things he have the praeeminence, Romans chap. 8. ver. 29. Col. chap.
1. ver. 18.

Thus, albeit God in him self and of him self ordain us to great dignity
and manifold unspeakable blessings, yet this honor does he reserve unto his
only begotten son, that of all these blessings we shall enjoy none, except
in and through him only: so that it is true that we are ordained to nothing
without Christ: but not in that deceitful sense, whereby the minds of many
are deluded: as though he were the cause why GOD does ordeyne us to adoption.
The Scripture teaches us far otherwise: distinguishing betwixt the cause why
God decrees us to adoption: and the cause why he ordeyneth us to this adoption
through Christ only. Setting down the cause of the Decree, to be his own
will and good pleasure in him self. And declaring the cause, why he ordeyneth
us to be adopted through Christ to be this, that Christ might be the first
borne among many brethren: and that he might have the praeeminence in all
things: whereupon it follows, that albeit he be not the cause why we are
ordained to adoption, yet notwithstanding seeing it is Gods will to perform
toward us his gracious purpose and good pleasure of his will, only in and
through Christ, that of necessity, we must first enjoy him, before we can
enjoy any thing, of that that is decreed. And therefore it was the Fathers will
that in him should all fulness dwell, Coloss. chap. 1. verse. 19. That out of his
fulness, we all should receyve. John chapt. 1. verse. 16. And for this same cause
is it said, That God has made him wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and
redemption, and that unto us, 1. Corinthians. chapt. 1. verse 13.

For whatsoever God has made Jesus Christ the Mediator, he has made him that
for our cause: so that the love of God to us and the good pleasure of his will
toward us, is the cause why Christ is made of God the mean of our salvation.
And therefore, in the consideration of Gods Decree, Christ as Mediator,
comes in order, after the consideration of that whereunto we are ordained:
although in the execution and performance of Gods Decree, Christ in us must go
before all other things ordained for us: for that is the nature of all Means,
which are subordinate to that, whereof they are appointed to be Means.

Thus God first in order purposes and decrees what to do to us: and secondly
by what Means: but when he performs his Decree, he first prepares the
Means: and then accomplisheth thereby, his purpose and decree toward us. For
if the Lord had never ordained us, that are men, to be made his sons: he had
never ordained his son, to be made a Man, this is clear by the Apostles
speech wherein he declares the cause why the son of God, did take man's
nature upon him. Hebr. chap. 2. ver. 14. saying: For as much therefore, as the
children were partakers of flesh and blood, even he likewise took part with
them: And thereafter showing the cause why not only he took our nature^ but
also did take it with the same infirmities (sin only except) wherewith our
nature is endued, he uses these speeches: For it became him in all things to
be made like to his brethren. Hebrews chap. 2. verse. 17. according to which
ground it is said in another place, That God sent his Son in the flesh, in
the similitude of sinful flesh, Roman. chap. 8. verse. 3. This point is
evidently clear by the same Apostles speech, Galath. chap. 4. verses 4. and 5.
when he shows the end wherefore God sent his son in the flesh, saying:
When the fulness of time was come, God sent forth his own Son, made of a
woman, etc. that we might receyve the adoption. Letting us see that in Gods
execution he gives us the adoption to the which he ordained us by the same
Mean thorough the which he ordained to give it us. Thus we may see evidently,
that that part of Gods Decree, touching the Mean of our adoption: does in
order of Decreeing, depend upon the former part, touching the adopting of us:
but in order of performing, the sending of Christ, made of a woman, and made
under the Law, and made righteousness, sanctification, and redemption, etc. does
go before our adoption. For he was not made the cause of eternal salvation to
his own, till he was perfited, Hebr. chap. 5. verse. 9. For which cause the
Apostle says Hebr. chap. 2. verse. 10. when he gives the reason why he was
made to taste of death: That Christ being to bring many children to glory, it
became him for whom are all these things, and by whom are all these things, to
perfect or to consecrate the Prince of their salvation, through afflictions.

This shall be yet more clear if we consider who it is that is appointed the
Mean, of our adoption, that is not the Father, nor yet the holy Ghost, but the
Son only. and that because he only is that, unto the which we are
ordained. For this ground we must hold: that what so ever we are made by
grace: it must first be in GOD him self: and then made ours by our communion
and fellowship with GOD.

Now this blessing of sonne-shippe which is ordained unto us, is no property
of the Father, nor yet of the Holy Ghost, but of the second person only: who
by that property is distinguished, both from the Father, and from the Holy
Ghost: and therefore although the Father and the Holy Ghost do with the Son,
not only ordeyne us to adoption, but also adopt us: yet they neither ordeyne
us to adoption, neither do adopt us, through any, but the Son alone: for the
Father and the Holy Ghost are not the Son, neither can be, because their
personal properties are incommunicable: howsoever their natural properties
be common: yea one and the same in all three. because the nature of all three
is most simply one and the same.

Of which it comes to pass, that we being adopted thorough Christ: and so
consequently called to the communion of Christ in that, which he is by
subsisting, that is sons: we are also made partakers of the Divine nature,
as says the Apostle Peter. that is, we are made like to all three, in that
which they are by nature. for all three have but the self same common nature
and essence, albeit in subsisting and personalitie, none be that that the other
is, and therefore none of them, except the Son alone, can be a meet
Mediator betwixt GOD and us in the work of our adoption. For this office of
Mediation is not the office of the Divine nature: but of a Divine person, that
has the Divine nature.

For if it were the office of the Divine nature which is common to all three
alike: and as we have said one and the same in all three, surely it should no
less belong to the Father, and to the Holy Ghost, then to the Son: but as
says the Apostle, 1. to Timoth. chap. 2. ver. 5. There is but one Mediator
betwixt God and Man, that is the Man Christ Jesus.

But as every common nature is communicate to others by their personal
subsisting, flowing from a person of that same nature (for no nature has any
existing but by subsisting) even so we can not be made pertakers of the Divine
nature, except first we have our subsisting from one that is of the same
nature, and from that person of that nature, which is that, in personalitie and
subsisting, which we are ordained to be: that is fonnes. for we must be
pertakers of the Divine nature, by subsisting the sons of God, which cannot
be naturally, neither in, nor thorough our selves: therefore it is ordained to
be through Christ. by making us one with him, who by nature, is the only Son
of God, that by our fellowship with him, through grace, in that which he only
is by subsisting, or personalitie: we only consequently by grace, be made
pertakers of the Divine nature, in our conformity to the Image of God.

For as among men nature does not produce nature, but one person by procreation
of another person does communicate the same nature: even so in the Godhead, the
nature produces not nature, else there should be many Deities, and so many
Gods: but a person produces a person: and production of a person, carries with
it, communion of nature: even so God does first make us his children by
adoption in Christ: in which respect he is said in the scriptures to beget us:
and we are said to be borne of God: which birth bringes with it the
participation of the Divine nature.

Thus we have to distinguish our communion and fellowship with Christ: which
God by his grace bestows upon us, in that personal propriety of his son:
whereby we are made members of his body, flesh of his flesh, and bone of his
bones: that is, the sons of God, and brethren of Christ: which is our
adoption. From that communion which follows hereupon, and stands in our
participation of the Divine nature: whereby we are made one with Father, Son,
and holy Ghost. Thus by Gods mercy, in calling us to the fellowship of Christ
in his sonne-ship: the Father of Christ is made our Father, and his spirit our
spirit, and so consequently the nature of all three communicated unto us. And
for this first union with Christ, which stands in the communion of the
dignity of his sonne-ship: all Gods children are said in the scriptures to be
one, in Christ, Galath. chap. 3. ver. 28. And the whole body mystical is said
to be but one, and is called Christ, 1. Corinthians. chap. 12. ver. 12. and for
that cause, the promise of God is said to be made, to the seed, as to one, and
not to the seeds, as to many, Galat. chap. 3. ver. 16. where we may perceyve,
the unspeakable goodness and infinite wisdom of God, in his Decree: Goodness,
in ordayning us to be his sons: and Wisdom, in ordayning him only to be
the mean of our adoption, who in him self only is that which GOD ordayneth us
to be. Of which it is manifest, that the Decree of our adoption, goes in order
before all, not only other benefits in Christ, but also before the ordayning
of Christ him self, to be a Mediator. For if this office of Mediation, did not
hang and depend upon that, which we are ordained to be, surely the Father, or
the holy Ghost, should no less have been Mediators, then the son. Besides
these things, it is also hereby manifest, that the benefit of adoption, is
the first of all benefits in Christ, and foundation of all the rest. For which
cause it is that Gods Decree is most properly defined from it: but of this we
shall have occasion to speak hereafter.

The use that we have to make of this point, in the doctrine of justification,
is: that seeing God, ordayneth us to nothing, but through Christ: our
righteousness, can not consist of any thing, that is not in Christ: for as we
are made all other thing, whatsoever we are made, in him, so also are we made
the righteousness of God in him, 2. Corint. chap. 5. ver. 21. which ground well
marked, does clear many errors: specially those, which are about the matter of
our righteousness. of which, it is a wonder, that such controversies should be
among learned men. when as the Scripture of God speaks plainly, that God
has made Christ, righteousness unto us. 1 Corinthians. chap. 1. verse. 30. And that
he is, all in all things. Coloss. chap. 3. verse. 11. And that he fills all,
in all things. Ephesians. chap. 1. verse. 23. Whereupon it follows, that neither, in
whole, nor in part, can possibly our righteousness, consist in any thing, that
is in our selves, nor yet in any other thing without our selves, but in Christ
only. And thus much concerning the second point.

CHAPTER IX.
THE third thing, needful to be known, for the right understanding of the
nature of Gods saving benefits is, the order in the which they are Decreed,
and accordingly dispe^sed unto us. In which point, I know there is great
need, of circumspect and considerate dealing: because, albeit in my judgment,
the mistaking of this point, be no small occasion of the errors, which are
mantayned by many of great learning, as in other things; so specially in the
point of justification: yet, notwithstanding the speaking against an error, by
the most part received: and almost contradicted by none: must needs at the
first, be distasteful to many: except their minds be by grace sanctified,
with a greater love of the truth, then of themselves. The maine point which
clears all, stands in this, whether adoption or Justification be in order
first. The greater part, do hold that Justification is first. so that first,
we must be justified in Christ, before we be adopted to be sons. and
therefore, they devide reconciliation, which they make to comprehend both: in
Justification, as the first part, and adoption as the second. But what
inconvenience may arise upon this opinion, and what an open entry it makes to
many errors, we shall perceyve by these things that follow.

Some there be, and those but few: that hold the contrary opinion: and do
rather point at it, then expressly treat of it. esteeming Adoption, to be
before Justification: or rather to be as if it were the whole: and
Justification reconciliation etc. to be comprehended in it, as the parts
thereof: or to follow upon it, as inseparable accidents and infallible
consequences thereof: or to be nothing, except the way of Adoption. Which
opinion seems most to agree with the Scriptures.

The special ground whereby the first of these opinions is maintained, is
(besides other places of Scripture) that saying which is in John chap. 1. verse.
12. which is: as many as received him to them he gave prerogative to be the
sons of God, that is, to those that believed in his name. Upon which place,
they, who defend the former opinion, seem chiefly to rely. as though it did
import, Justification necessarily to go before Adoption: because that Christ,
gives prerogative to be the sons of God, to none, except such as first have
received him, and have believed in his name.

But before I either speak of these opinions, or yet of this place of John: it
shall be first expedient, for the better satisfaction of all minds, to lay
some grounds, upon the knowledge whereof, the light of this point depends
much, in my judgment.

Besides other grounds, there be five of greatest consequence and most
expedient to be known, for clearing our judgment in the knowledge of the
order of Adoption and Justification.

The first is, the order of subsisting in the blessed and eternal Trinity.

The second is, the distinct consideration of the order of Gods gracious love,
in the three several objects, in the which it is to be considered.

The third is, the order of our sense and perception of the blessings of God in
our selves.

The fourth is, the difference of extent and largenes, of one benefit, in
respect of another, amongst themselves, by mutual reference of one to another.

The fist and last is: the consideration of the covenant of grace, which God
has made with man in Christ.

CHAPTER X.
THE first ground, is most necessary to be known: not only to the end that we
may know God in him self aright: but also, that we may know, his gracious
working toward us aright. Wherein by the special consideration of the
Trinity: three things are to be marked.

First, That every work of grace, is the work of all three.

Secondly, That the order of their working, is according to the order of their
subsisting: so that in every work, the Father is first, the Son second, the
holy Ghost third, in order of working.

Thirdly, That in respect of these two former grounds, these works of grace,
which according to the manner and order of subsisting, are most properly
attributed to every person: according as their manner of working does chiefly
shine and appear in every work: are to be ordered, according to the order of
the persons them selves. So that the actions, attributed to God the Father, are
in order first: the actions attributed to the son, in order second: and the
actions attributed to the holy Ghost, in order third. And this consideration,
of the order of Gods working, is no more to be altered, then the nature of God
it self: in whom the unity of essence, is no more essential, then the
Trinity of persons.

These three points, are clear in the scriptures of God. The first: when one,
and the self same work, is sometimes attributed to the Father, sometimes to
the Son, and sometimes to the holy Ghost. to teach us that not only these
three persons, are but one God in nature: but further, that what things the
one does, the other does also. according as Christ says: My Father works
unto this time, and I also work, John chap. 5. ver. 17. And again:
Whatsoever things the Father does, the same things does the Son. likewise,
Ihon chap. 5. verse. 19.

The second of these points, is likewise manifest in the scripture: when in
one and the same work: The Father is made in order of working, first: the
Son, second: and the holy Ghost, third: according to the saying of Christ:
The Son can do nothing of him self, except he see the Father working. John
chap. 5. ver. 19. And again, I do nothing of my self. as I hear I judge.
Ioh. cha. 5. ver. 30. And again: The things that I speak, I speak them so
as the Father said unto me, John chap. 12. ver. 53. And again, The Spirit he
shall not speak of him self: but whatsoever he shall hear, he shall speak.
He shall glorify me, for he shall receyve of mine, and show it unto you. John
chapt. 16. verses 13. and 14. By which speeches, it is manifest, that as the
Father, subsisteth in order first, and so in order possesses life before the
Son: and the Son before the holy Ghost: even so in operation of life and
all good grace in us: the Father in order works before the Son, and the
Son, before the Holy Ghost. According to which order, we are taught in the
scriptures, to worship God, praying and giving thanks to the Father, in the
Son, by the holy Ghost. according to the order of our access unto God: which
is unto the Father, through the Son by the Spirit, Ephe. chap. 2. verse. 18.
Drawing near unto God, in our ascending up to him, according to the order of
his drawing near unto us. that is, we ascend by God, in God, unto God: who of
him self, and in him self, and by him self, works all grace in us. of him
self as the Father, in him self, as the Son: and by him self, as the holy
Ghost. For no man has any grace, either of him self, but of God alone, and
that as he is the Father: either in him self, but in God alone, and that as he
is the Son: either by him self, but by God alone, and that as he is the Holy
Ghost.

The third point, is likewise manifest in scripture. When as the work of
creation, and of the first being and existing of all things, be it either
natural or spiritual, is attributed unto the first person: of whom are all
things and the work of dispensation, and redemption is attributed to the
second person: in whom only we enjoy all grace. And the work of
consummation and sanctification is attributed to the holy Ghost. For according
to the distinction, that is inward, arysing from the inward properties, whereby
these persons are distinguished: there is also a distinction outward, in the
works of outward dispensation: according to the term in which is the
beginning of acting. Neither is this only to be considered, in the actions of
outward dispensation, toward us: but in the actions that are inward in God
himself. according to which ground, Christ acknowledges that the Father has
given him to have life in himself. John chap. 6. verse. 26. For albeit all
operation of blessings in us, proceed from the nature and essence of God, as
the common beginning and term in all three: yet notwithstanding thy are
restrained in respect of order, to one beginning: that is to one of those three
persons: according as in every work, the manner of every persons working,
either of, in, or by, does most clearly shine.

And as they are thus restrained: so also they are in order to be considered.
So that whatsoever works of grace, are chiefly attributed to the Father, must
needs in order of dispensation be first. And what works are chiefly
attributed to the Son, must needs in order be second. And the works
chiefly attributed to the H. Ghost, must needs in order be third.

Of this it will follow, that adoption being chiefly the action of God the
Father (for none save he who bears the person of a Father can properly be
said to adopt any to be Sons: for the Father and the Son are relative) must
in order go before our redemption, which is chiefly the action of the Son:
for he only dyed to redeem us: and he only bought us by his blood unto God.
Revel. chap. 5. verse. 9.

And seeing our Justice or righteousness, consists in the action of our
redemption; for as says the Apostle Romans chapter 3. verse. 24. we are
justified freely by his grace through the redemption which is in Christ Jesus.
Therefore it must follow, that justification in order of dispensation must
follow adoption. For albeit all blessings be bestowed upon us of the Father, in
the Son, in whom alone we are adopted justified and glorified, etc. Yet
still the former respect of order must perpetually be kept.

For which cause it is that in the Scriptures, the Decree of God or his
predestination, is defined from the benefit of adoption: as the first and
chiefest of all blessings: and the first fruit of the love of God, in the
first Person, that is the Father unto Mankind.

And for this same cause is it that in the Scriptures we are said first to be
the Fathers: and to be given by him unto the Son: for as the Son has
nothing of himself, but of the Father: so he has not us of himself but of
the Father. Therefore says he: Thine they were and thou gave them unto me,
John chap. 17. verse. 6. And again; Behold I and the Children whom God has
given me. Esaias. chap. 8. verse. 18. and Hebr. chap. 2. verse. 13.

Thirdly it is for the same respect, that in the Scriptures the first of all
the works of grace in us, which is the bringing of us unto Christ, is still
attributed unto the Father: as his special work. For no man comes unto the
Son, but by the Father. John chapter 6. verse 65. Neither can any man come to
me says Christ, except the Father which has sent me, draw him. John
chapter 6. verse. 44. Upon which work, depends two other principal works of
grace.

The first is, our embracing and receyving of the Son: according to the
saying of Christ, All that the Father gives me, shall come unto me. John
chapter 6. verse. 37.

The second is, the infalliblenes of Christ his saving of us. according to his
own saying: This is the Fathers will that has sent me: that of all which he
has given me, I should loose nothing: but should raise it up again at the
last day. John chapter 6. verse. 39. For whatsoever we have of Christ, whether
it be righteousness, sanctification or life, etc. it wholly depends, upon this
work of the Father his giving and bringing us unto him. For as the Son has
us not of himself but of the Father; so he dispenses nothing to us of
himself: neither is he redeemer to us of himself, but according to the will
of the Father. For according to the order of the persons, so becomes God our
God in order. And therefore according to that order, are we baptized in the name
of the Father, of the Son, and of the holy Ghost. God sealing us unto
himself, and his blessings unto us, according to the order that he is our God:
and in which he dispenses his blessings unto us.

Thus by this first ground it is manifest, that the benefit of sonne-shipp,
(which is the proper work of God, as he is the Father) must in order be first
of all. and next the benefit of freedom and christian liberty by redemption,
and so consequently of righteousness, must be second in order: seeing it is the
work of the Son. For If the Son make us free, we shall be free in deed, says
Christ, John, chap. 8. ver. 36. and that the work of sanctification or
glorification in the which it comprehended sanctification, must be third in
order of dispensation: seeing it is the work of the Holy Ghost. And this order
the Apostle plainly confirms, in setting down the order of Gods working, in
the execution and accomplishing of his Decree, Romans chap. 8. verse 30. saying:
Whom he predestined, them also he has called: and whom he has called.
them also he has justified: and whem he has justified, them he has also
glorified. The whole execution of Gods Decree being comprised in these three
works: our calling, our justification, and glorification: according to the
number of the persons and order of their working. For (as we have marked) two
special blessings in Gods Decree or Predestination, are ordained unto us. The
first and principal is our adoption, or making us sons through Christ.
according as is manifest by the definition of predestination, set down by the
Apostle, Ephe. chap. 1. verse 5. The second which is included and employed in
the first, is, The making us (now being sons) to be like to the Image of the
Son of God. as is clear by the definition of predestination set down by the
Apostle, Romans chapter 8. verse. 29. Both these blessings are accomplished in the
execution of this Decree. The first blessing which is adoption, is chiefly
performed in our calling: when as we are brought by the Father to the Son,
and are given unto him, and have it given unto us to come unto him, that is, to
believe in him, or to receyve him: which are all one in effect. The second
blessing which is the making of us like to the image of the Son of God, is
performed in the other two points: that is in our justification and
glorification. For the Image of God, consists in righteousness and holiness of
truth: which begun in this life, is the beginning of our glory, wherein we
shall be perfited in the life to come.

CHAPTER XI.
THE second ground follows, which consists in the beholding of Gods saving
grace, in the several objects wherein it is to be considered, which are three.

The first is God himself, in whom our life is hid, Colloss. chap. 3. verse. 3.
Who is the Father of lights, from whom every good giving and perfect gift
comes down to us. lames cha. 1. verse. 17. For our grouth in blessedness, is
nothing else but A filling of us with a greater fulness of God. Ephesians. chap. 3.
verse. 19. Until at last he be all in all. 1. Corinthians. chap. 15, verse. 28.

The second object is Christ, God and Man, as Mediator betwixt God and us: in
whom it pleased the Father that all fulness should dwell. Coll. chap. 1. verse
19. and out of whose fulness we all receive grace. John chap. 1. verse. 16.
therefore he is said to fill all in all things. Ephesians. chap. 1. verse. 23. and to
be the first borne amongst many Brethren. Romans chap. 8. verse. 29. and to
have the preeminence in all things. Coll. chap, 1. verse. 18. and to be the
first fruits, 1 Corinthians. chap. 15. ver. 23.

The third object is our selves, who out of Christ's fulness have received grace.
For even in us it may be seen what is the riches of the glory of the
inheritance of God: and what is the exceeding greatness of his power. Ephesians. chap.
1. verse. 18. and 19.

Thus our life and salvation, is first in God himself, as in the first
fountain, and in him it is ours, by the eternal purpose and Decree of his
good will and pleasure.

Secondly it is in Christ, as the Mediator betwixt God and us: to whom
belongs the birthright and all the blessings thereof: and that not only in
consideration of his divine nature: in respect whereof he alone is only Son
and heir of all things: but also in consideration of his humane nature, in the
which by personal union thereof, with his divine nature, he is become the
Son of God and our Brother, and is made head both of Men and Angels.

Thirdly, life and salvation is in us, who are in Christ: through whom, as the
appointed mean, we receive from God all saving graces. for nothing comes to
us from God immediately, but mediatly, through Christ: in whom only all the
promises of God are yea and amen. 2 Cor. cha. 1. ver. 20. And therefore the
Decree of God is first accomplished in him as our head and Prince of our
salvation: who must bring the rest of his Fathers children unto glory, Heb. chapter
2. ver. 10. as being the first fruits of them that sleep, 1 Cor. cha. 15.
ver. 20. and our forerunner unto heaven, Hebr. chap. 6. verse 20.

Of this it is evident, that nothing of all Gods Decree is accomplished in us,
until first it be accomplished in Christ. And in whatsoever order God
performs al things in him, in that same order does he also perform the^ in
us: so that whatsoever blessing is first accomplished by God in Christ the man,
must needs be the first in order, both in Gods Decree and dispensation toward
us.

Now albeit in all these three objects our happiness be to be considered: yet
in none of them can we so cleerlie perceive it, as in Christ: who is the only
Image of the invisible God. Colloss. chap. 1. verse. 14. in whom only God is
manifested. For all that ever we are to see of God, either in this life, or in
the life to come, we are to see it only in Christ. for which cause the
Ministers of the Gospel, are said to give the light of the knowledge of the
glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. chapter 4. ver. 6. And as God
himself, so also his grace is only to be seen in the Lord Jesus. Therefore
says the Apostle, 2 Timothy c. 1. v. 9. 10. that the grace of God which was given
us in Christ, before the world was, is now made manifest by the appearing of
our Savior Jesus Christ.

And as touching our selves, whatsoever grace or glory comes unto us, by the
sight of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ: it is in us but in part,
which in him is fully. And many things yet rest unaccomplished in us, which are
accomplished in him. having in us no other subsisting, but that which faith
gives them. Wherefore the Apostle speaking of the glory wherewith God has
crowned man, which yet we cannot see in our selves: sends us to Jesus, as to
the cleerest light, whereby to perceive the accomplishment of that which is
written, touching man in the 8. Psalm. Hebr. chapter 2. verse. 6. and for this cause
says Augustine, that Christ himself is the cleerest light of predestination
and grace. Whose humane nature did by no preceding merit either of faith or
works, purchase that it should be received in unity of person by the Son of
God: so that that Man, should be the only Son of God: for Christ the Man as
he is Man, is made the Son of God of mere grace, who according to his divine
nature was from everlasting the only begotten Son of God.

Seeing therefore that in Christ, the cleerest sight of predesti. and grace is
to be had: if we would know in what order God does adopt and justify us, we
must first consider in what order God makes Christ adoption and righteousness
unto us. For if he make him our brother in order, before he make him our
redemption of righteousness: the^ surly our adoption in order must go before our
justification.

Concerning Christ, it is clear in the Scripturs that it is so, whether we
respect Gods election before all time, or his performing thereof in time: for
the one, that is the dignity of Christ, as man to be the Son of God: is
performed in the incarnation; the other whereby he is made our righteousness: is
thereafter accomplished in his suffering. For when the word was made flesh, that
flesh in subsisting and personalitie, was made the Son of God: never having
from the first moment of co^ception, any subsisting a part of it own, but only
that of the second person of the Trinity. being not so much as co^ceived by
the H. Ghost in the womb of Marie, but in unity of person, with the eternal
Son of God. Therefore justly do the Fathers call this benefit, gratiam Vnionis,
that is, the grace of Union. Thus in the very first action of Dispensation,
toward the Son of Marie, the grace of siliation shines clearly, before all
other grace. After which in order follows the action of God, making him our
righteousness: when as he made him, now being his Son in our nature, sin for
us, which he could not have been made for us, until first he was our brother.
Like as we can have no right to his redemption, except we first be his
brethren. For brotherhood is the foundation of redemption: in so far that
according to the Law and Ordinance of God, Christ can not offer up him self a
ransom for any unto God, but such as are his brethren. Neither can any have
part or portion in his oblation, whose brother he is not. For he that
sanctifies and they that are sanctified are all of one, wherefore he is not
ashamed to call them Brethren. Hebr. chap. 2. verse. 11.

This ground is made manifest by the law of God: whereby it is ordained, that
the first borne of every man and beast, that is the male that first opens the
womb: and the first ripe of all fruits, shall be offered and consecrate to
the Lord: that in the consecration thereof, all the rest coming of the same
Womb, or being of the same Mass or Kind, might likewise be consecrated to
God. For as says the Apostle, Romans chap. 11. verse. 16. If the first fruits
be holy, so is the whole lump. And this is that which the Apostle will
signify, when he says that Christ is the beginning and first be gotten of
the dead, that in all things he might have the preeminence, Coll. chap. 1.
verse. 18. Revel. chap. 1. ver. 5. As also when he says that Christ was made
the first fruits of them that sleep. 1 Corinthians. chap. 1. verse. 20. this same
thing does the Apostle declare in the 8. to the Romans. When he shows the
reason why God has predestinate us to be made like to the Image of his Son,
which is, that he might be the first borne amongst many Brethren. For his
prerogative in birth, is made manifest by this, that in his consecration we are
consecrated, according as says the Apostle, Hebr. chap. 10. verse. 14. with
one offering has he consecrated for ever, those that are sanctified.

Thus the very law of God does teach us, that as the first borne Male did
consecrate all the rest of the same womb, that is brethren begotten of the
same parents, and no other: and every first ripe fruit of every man's ground
and in heritance did consecrate to God the remanent fruit of the same ground
and inheritance and no other: eaven so Jesus Christ is consecrate for none but
for his brethren, and none are consecrate by him, who are not brethren with
him. For it is not his oblation that makes brotherhood, but it is brotherhood
that makes his oblation. Whereupon it must follow, that seeing Christ must
first be our Brother, before he redeem us, that we also must first be adopted,
before we be justified.

This same the Lord would seem to declare by the law of redemption which he
established in Israel: whereby all right of redemption, is given to the nearest
kinsman.

As also by the law touching the prerogative of the first borne: whereby he is
made Lord amongst his brethren, but amongst none other. by which it appears
clearly, that brotherhood is both the ground and limitation of Christ's office,
both as Redeemer and Head of the Church; and this same brotherhood is the
ground of all right that we can pretend unto the death or life of Jesus Christ
ourhead.

CHAPTER XII.
THE third ground serving to clear the order of the blessings of God: is the
difference betwixt the order of Gods dispensation and our perception or sense
of his benefits. For that is not always foremost in order of dispensation,
which is first perceyved by our sense: for in our conception of Gods benefits,
we ascend from the later in order, to the former. Gathering the knowledge and
certeintie of the blessings going before, by the sense and feeling of those
which follow after.

Hereof we have many examples in Scripture. For as Christ teaches us, it is
with every man that is borne of the Spirit, as it is with him, who hears the
sound of the wind blowing, but cannot tell whence it comes, nor whither it
goes. John cha. 3. verse. 8. Thereby informing us, that the man begotten of
God, knows neither from whom the working of the Spirit is, nor yet what is
the end of it at the first, until afterward, that the effects following
manifest both the Author, the work, and the end thereof. According to which
John says, 1 Epist. chapter 1. verse. 6. By this we know we have fellowship
with God, because we walk in the light: and again, by keeping his
commandments, we know that we know him, and yet surely we must have
fellowship with him, and know him, before we either walk in the light, or
keep his commandments. So also by confessing that Jesus is the Son of God,
we know that God abides in us and we in him, as says the same Apostle, Ephe.
chap. 1. ver. 15. yet God must be in us by his spirit, and we in him, before we
can give any such confession: for no man can do so much as call Jesus Lord,
but speaking by the spirit, 1. Corint. chap. 12. ver. 3. Likewise it is said,
that we know that God loves us, because we love him: and yet as says the same
Apostle, we love him because he loves us first, 1. Epistle, chap. 4. verse. 19.
For the former blessings lying in our hearts vnperceyved, are made manifest
unto us by these effects following. For as John says, Hereby do we perceyve
Gods love to us, by giving his son for us, 1. Epistle chap. 4. ver. 9. For
the love of God toward us, which did go before as the cause, is not
perceyved of us, but by the giving of his son for us, as the effect
following. And to this end is it, that Peter 2. Epist, chap. 1. ver. 10.
wills us by our succeeding holiness, as the fruit of our righteousness, to
make our calling and our election sure.

Thus we see, that the blessings of GOD are not at the first perceyved of us,
in the order wherein they are dispensed. For there is a contrary course of
order, betwixt the Lords dispensing of his grace to us in Christ, and of our
perceyving of the graces imparted unto us. for we ascend upward unto God the
fountain of all blessing, back again by the same steps, by the which he did
descend first unto us. The ladder of God, reaching from heaven unto earth,
does bring GOD down to us, from the vpmost step to the lowest: but it
leads us upward to God, from the lowest to the vpmost. Therefore God does
not begin in dispensation to usward, where we begin according to our
apprehension, to raise our minds upwards, in the collection of the benefits
dispensed. But if we will rightly know how God has made that ladder: we must
begin at the vpmost, nearest unto God, and step down to the lowest, where
first we began to step up unto God. so shall we know the right order of Gods
dispensation toward us.

It may be probably thought, that the negligent consideration of this point,
makes many to mistake the right place of adoption. For although we do not
thoroughly perceyve, neither have the clear knowledge of our adoption, until
the time that we have remission of sins, and feel the peace of God, and joy
of his Spirit in our hearts, and that confidence and boldness whereby we may
cry Abba Father: yet it follows not, that these go in order before our
adoption.

But even as our Justification is thoroughly perceyved and confirmed in us, by
our succeeding sanctification (for he that does righteousness in righteous,
John first Epistle, chapter the third, verse 7.) eaven so our Adoption, is
cleared and confirmed unto us by our succeeding Justification and fruits
thereof. For our Adoption has the accomplishment of it, partly in every one
of the remanent blessings of God, and wholly, in the joint and full
accomplishment of them all. Therefore are we said still in this life, to
wait for our Adoption, Romans chapt. 8. verse. 23. because our Adoption is not
fully finished, until our full redemption be performed. But more clearly of
this in the next ground: which serves to clear both this third ground, and
the main point which we have in hand.

CHAPTER XIII.
THE fourth ground stands in the marking how every benefit goes above each
other amongst them selves, in largenes of extent. for that benefit, which is
comprehended under another, must needs in order follow that which does
comprehend it: and that which does comprehend all the rest, must needs in order
go before them all. For things which are universal and general, go before
things which are special and particular.

Now amongst the benefits of God, we find in scripture, that redemption is of
very large extent: so that it does comprehend under it, both our justification
and glorification, for it is defined ofte^tymes by both. Touching justification
it is clear, when as redemption, is defined so often by remission of sins: and
we are said to be justified freely through the redemption that is in Christ
Jesus, Ephe. cha. 1. ve. 7. and Romans 3. 24. And as concerning glorification,
Christ expressly calls it our redemption, Luke chap. 21. ver. 28.

As touching the rest of the benefits, we shall have occasion to speak of
them hereafter, and we will now only speak of Adoption: comparing it with
Redemption: to try which is of largest extent: for if it be larger then
Redemption: I think in the judgment of all men, it shall be without
contradiction esteemed, the first blessing of all: but especially it shall be
found in order to go before Justification: seeing that our righteousness, is
comprehended in our Redemption.

For clearing this point, if we mark narrowly the Scriptures of God, we shall
see, that as our Redemption comprehends under it, our Justification,
Sanctification and Glorification: so our adoption comprehends under it our
whole Redemption, and all the parts thereof. which is manifest by three
special reasons.

The first is, because Adoption is extended by the Spirit of God, to the last
blessing, wherein stands the accomplishment of our Redemption, that is the
redemption of our bodies: from the which, as from a part, Adoption is
described, Romans chap. 8. verse. 23. and that because our Adoption, is not fully
accomplished, but in the full accomplishment of our Redemption. Therefore
says John, 1 Epist. chap. 3. verse. 2. That now we are the Sons of God: but
yet it has not appeared what we shall be. Thereby declaring, that eaven to our
selves, the clear and full sight of our Adoption, is not, nor shall not be
given: until the day of the second appearing, of the Lord Jesus: when all
things Decreed shall be finished. Therefore that day, is called by the Spirit
of God, the day of the Revelation of the Sons of God, Romans cha. 8. ver. 19.
Out of which place, it may evidently be gathered, that our whole Redemption
and every part thereof, and especially the last part, is nothing else but a
manifestation of our Sonne-ship or Adoption. And therefore it must follow, that
Justification, which is a part of Redemption, must serve to this same use in
part, like as the whole parts of Redemption fully accomplished, Iunius in amica
colla. ^^m Armin.
serve for it in whole. And this is the cause, why by a most learned Divine,
Justification and all subsequent benefits, are called Via Adoptionis, that is
the way whereby Adoption is performed.

The second reason is taken from that ground, which was laid down in the XI.
chapter, by which it was cleared, that Christ can redeem none, but such as are
his brethren. For by his consecration, he was to bring none but children unto
glory, Hebr. chap. 2. ver. 17. and therefore it must follow, that Adoption in
order must go before Justification: seeing whatsoever Christ does in the
flesh, he does it wholly for his brethrens sake. so that our whole Redemption is
the fruit of our Adoption, and an infallible consequence thereof.

The third reason, is taken from the definition of Gods Decree or
Predestination: which under the benefit of Adoption alone, comprehends all
the blessings of God, and whatsoever GOD of his eternal purpose has ordained
unto us, for our full felicity in Christ. for by it alone, without mentioning
any of the rest of the benefits in Christ, predestination is defined, Ephe.
chap. 1. verse. 5. to show us, that it contains all under it, and is of the
largest extent of all: as being before all, in all, and through all the rest.
For then is an adopted son, fully a son, when he enjoys the full
inheritance. and we know that to be adopted, includes and implies the
enjoying of the inheritance always: and therefore the Adoption of God must
needs have included under it our righteousness: seeing that righteousness is a
part of the inheritance, which is by faith, Heb. chap. 11. verse. 7.

It is true that Adoption is taken in two diverse senses, not only by Divines,
but also by the Scriptures themselves. But in what sense soever it be taken,
yet in respect of order, it is ever first. For if we take it in that sense,
whereby the nature of Adoption is thought most properly to be expressed, when
it signifies a several blessing, distinguished from all the rest: then it is
nothing different, either from our eternal election in Christ, before all
time, or then our effectual calling in time. Which is the first action of God
his gracious dispensation, preceding our justification: as witnesses the
Apostle, Romans chap. 8. verse. 30. and it consists in the bringing of us unto
Christ, by the Father, and ingrafting of us by faith in him, as the Son of
God: and by that unity with him, making us Sons: that we may be likewise
heirs. But if we take Adoption in that more large sense: wherein it is taken
in that foresaid definition of Predestination; Whereby it comprehends all the
remanent blessings, from the first to the last: then it partly differs from
the rest, and partly is nothing else but the rest. For in so far as it
concerns our calling or chosing in time, it is different from justification
and the rest, and goes before them all: and the rest must necessarily follow
it, as inseparable adherents thereof. For whom he calleht them he justifies:
and whom he justifies, them he glorifieth. Romans chap. 8. verse. 30. But as it
concerns the rest of the benefits, it is nothing different from them.
Therefore it is described by them, as parts: because they are the full
accomplishment of it. In which sense as we have said before, they are called
by some, the way of Adoption.

CHAPTER XIIII.
THE last ground for clearing this point, is the due consideration of the
Covenant of God with Man. In the which, two things are especially to be marked.

The first is, Those to whom the Lord makes his promise.

The second is, The promise it self, which God makes to them.

Touching the first, the promise is not indefinitely made to all men, but to
Abraham and to his seed alone. For God has said, he will be his God, and the
God of his seed after him. Therefore no man that is not of this seed, does
obtain any part of the promise: because it is a benefit belonging to none,
except to the seed only. Of which it is manifest that we must be Abraham's
seed, before we have right to the promise.

Now what is meant by the seed, the Apostle tells us, Gal. chap. 3. verse. 16.
saying: he says not to the seeds as speaking of many, but unto thy seed as
of one, which is Christ. That is Christ mystically considered with his members:
who all spirituallie ingraft in him, make the body, whereof he is the head:
as is manifest by the Apostles speech, 1 Corinthians. chapter 12. verse. 12. Now we
are made the seed, by our Adoption. For to be the seed of Abraham, is to be the
children of God, as is clear by the Apostle, Romans chap. 9. where he says:
Neither are they all children, because they are the children of Abraham, but in
Isaac shall thy seed be called, that is, they that are the children of the
flesh, are not the children of God, but the children of the promise are counted
for the seed. This same the Apostle confirms Gallat. chapter 3. verse 29.
saying, And if ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's seed and heirs by
promise. Of these things it follows, first, that to be of the seed and to be
the children of God and to be Christ's, is all one thing.

Secondly, that we must be the children of God, that is of the seed, before
we can enjoy the promise. And so consequently, that we must be Adopted before
we be justified: seeing justification is a part of the promise, made unto the
seed: as is clear by the words of the Covenant. Ierem. chap. 31. and Hebr.
chap. 8. I will be merciful to their unrighteousness, and I will remember
their sins and iniquities no more.

This ground is yet more clear, by the Apostles speech, Romans chap. 9. where he
answers the doubt which might rise, upon the reiection of the Jews. videli.
Whether GOD had failed in performing of his promise? seeing they were the seed
of Abraham which were rejected. The Apostle answers this, and cleeres the
constant truth and verity of God, in performing his promise unto the seed,
according to his Covenant: by defining the seed aright: showing that they are
not accounted for the seed, because they are the children of Abraham, according
to the flesh, but because they are children of the promise. In which discourse,
the Apostle lays those as necessary and infallible grounds.

First, that we must be of the seed before we claim the promise.

Secondly, that being of the seed, we must be partakers of the promise. For
otherwise God should fail in his truth, and his word should be of none effect.

Of which things we may perceyve, that the grace of God in which stands our
Adoption, by which we are made of the seed, must go before all the graces
contained in the promise, which is made unto the seed, seeing the being of the
seed is the ground and foundation of enjoying the promise.

This leads us to the knowledge of another point, which serves to clear our
judgment touching this same ground. To wit, in what order to place the fruits
and effects of our faith. Which, as we shall hear hereafter, is the effectual
instrument of God, by the which all blessings are communicate unto us. For in
this life we enjoy no saving blessing but by faith only: for by it we embrace
our Adoption, and are made the Sons of God. As witnesses the Apostle,
Galath. chap. 3. verse. 26. saying: ye are all the Sons of God by faith in
Jesus Christ, and by faith we apprehend our righteousness and are justified,
Romans c. 3. v. 28. Gal. c. 3. v. 8. And so of all the rest of the blessings.
Thus both the parts of the Covenant, are wrought and effectuate in us by God,
through faith. for by it we are both made the seed, and do obtain the
promise: but as being the seed, must go before the enjoying of the promise:
even so that fruit of faith in Christ, whereby we are made the Sons of God,
must in order of dispensation, go before that fruit of faith, whereby we are
made that, which is promised unto the seed: and so consequently by faith we
must first be made Sons before we be made just.

Thus much touching these five grounds, which serves for clearing the order of
the blessing of God, dispensed unto us in Christ. Which was the third of these
four points, which we laid down, as necessary to lead us to the knowledge
of the right nature of the saving benefits of God: and so perticularlie of
Justification. So that it follows, that we should enter to speak of the
last of the four, touching the difference of one benefit from another: but
first it shall not be amiss, to speak somewhat of that other opinion, which
houldeth Justification to be in order before Adoption: and to consider the
grounds whereupon it is builded.

CHAPTER XV.
THE grounds of any moment, which I have marked, whereupon this opinion is
builded, are two. The first is: It is thought an impossible thing, that God
should adopt us before he justify us. Because God cannot esteem those that are
unjust, to be his Sonns. And this is the cause apparently, that makes so many
to put reconsiliation in the first place, and to divide it in justification, as
the first part thereof, and Adoption as the last.

The other ground is taken out of the Scripture, especially out of that saying,
which is in the 1. of Ioh. ver. 12. Where it is said, as many as received him,
to them he gave prerogative to be the sons of God, even to them that believe
in his name, which are borne, not of blood, nor of the will of flesh, nor of
the will of man, but of God.

As concerning the first ground, although it seem to have great show of
truth: yet it is most dangerous, if it be not rightly conceived. For it may
import so much as that the love of God and his grace, is not free, and freely
bestowed upon us: if so be it should be builded upon our Justification: Which
is contrary to the course of Gods truth in Scriptures. Which shows plainly
that God loved us, even while yet we were sinners and unjust: yea while we
were enemies, Romans chapter 5. and that when we were polluted in our own
blood, he did pity us, and of his love did promise life unto us, and washed
us with water, and purged away our blood from us, and anointed us with oil,
and decked us with ornaments. Ezekiel. chap. 16. Whereby it is evident, that our
Justification is not the cause why God acknowledges us to be his children: but
by the contrary, his taking of us to be his children, is rather the cause why
he does wash away our filthiness from us, and justifies us. For seeing the
Lord loves us, before he justifies us: there must be some ground of this
love, before our Justification: seeing he loves us not, then as just men:
because we are yet sinners: and God does justify the ungodly. And no other
ground can preceede in dispensation, except our calling: which is nothing else
in effect, but our Adoption: or at least, the first part and beginning of it.
Which is the first fruit of his love toward us: by the which we are made of
the seed, and so heirs of the promise of righteousness, conform to the reason
of the Apostle Peter, Acts chap. 2. verse. 39. Where he shows that the promise
belongs to all that the Lord our God shall call. Which calling, is nothing
else but the applying to us in time of our eternal election in Christ before
all time: which election is nothing else but our Adoption. This point is clear
if we consider, who they are, whose filthiness God promises to wash away, Esaias.
chap. 4. and to whom he promises to open the fountain for sin and
uncleanness, Zach. chap. 13. that is, to the Daughters of Jerusalem, and to the
house of David, and inhabitants of Jerusalem. Which in effect is as much as to
say: Those who are the children of God, who are citizens with the Saints, and
of the household of God. And this is that which we said before, that we must
first be of the seed, before we enjoy any part or portion of the promise: and
so consequently righteousness. For the love of God to his Son, as his Son,
being the only foundation of Gods love unto us: it must follow that the first
ground of Gods love to us in Christ, must be builded upon our communion with
him, in that which is the foundation of all Gods love to us: that is the
Sonne-ship. For it is for this cause, that it is said in scripture, that
Christ is the son of Gods love, and his beloved: and that God is said to make
us acceptable or beloved to him self, in that his beloved Son.

Secondly, we shall perceyve the truth hereof more clearly, if we consider
the grounds in Christ, whereupon depends our Adoption and justification in
him.

Touching our Adoption, it must of necessity be grounded, neither upon the
Divine nature of Christ, nor simply upon his humane nature, neither upon his
Obedience and suffering in that humane nature, now assumed: but only upon his
personalitie and subsisting, whereby he is the Son of God. For which cause
our nature, which he assumed, was taken by him, in unity of subsisting or
person with his Divine nature. In that personal unity of our nature assumed,
with the son of God, laying the foundation of our Adoption, to be the sons
of GOD.

As touching our Justification, it is builded upon his obedience, in giving him
self to the death of the cross for us: as it is clear throughout all the
scriptures.

These grounds being considered, we have next to mark in which of these two,
is our communion by faith with Christ, first in order accomplished: that is
whether first by faith, we are made partakers of his sonne-ship, in being made
one with him as the son of God: or whether first we be made partakers of his
obedience and death.

In answering of this question, I think there shall no man be found, who
shall not agree, that we must by faith have fellowship and communion with him
self, as he is the Son of God: before we can have communion and fellowship
of his sufferings. For how can his death be our death, until first he and we
be one: seeing all unity and communion of his sufferinges, flows from our
communion and unity with himself.

Whereupon it may easily appear, that if that saying of those learned and
holy men be not rightly understood, it may make many to cast from them
selves, the very foundation and ground, whereupon the assured confidence and
knowledge of their Justification in Christ depends. For no man can ever have
hope, to have part in his death, that first does not find, that he has
part in him self: for first we must be flesh of his flesh, and bone of his
bones, and he of ours, before any thing that ever he has done in the flesh, be
made ours. Of which it follows, that we must first be sons, before we be
justified.

For as in earthly Marriage, Man and Woman are made one flesh, by conjunction of
their bodies in one: and thereupon follows communion of all other things:
even so in our spiritual Marriage with Christ, we have no communion with him in
any thing that is his, until the time that first he be ours and we be his: so
as he and we be but one. And this agrees with the saying of the Apostle,
Gallath. chapter 3. verse. 29. where he says, And if ye be Christ's, then
are ye Abraham's seed and heyers, according to the promise. Where the Apostle
shows, that our being Christ's, makes us the seed, that is, the childeren of
God. And that our being the seed, makes us heirs of the promise: And so
consequently, of the righteousness, that is by faith.

This same is evident by the Apostles speech, Ephez. chapter 5. Where he
exhorts men to love their Wives, as Christ loved his Church. Which love is
declared in these effects, that he did give himself for her, to this end that
he might sanctify her, purifying her by the washing of water, that he might
make her to himself glorious, not having spot or wrincle, etc. By which place
it is manifest, that the death of Christ and fruits thereof, are the effects
of his love, to those that are now already his spouse, and joined with him in
that spiritual Unity, which is by faith. And this we must acknowledge, except
we will consent to that vile opinion, which overthrows the foundation of all
religion: which is, that even in the intention and purpose of God; Christ dyed
equally and indifferently for every man alike. That is, that he did give
himself to death, as well for those that perish, as for the elect of God.
Whereas this place of the Apostle, shows the direct contrary: that he gave
himself only for his Church. Which is clear by the Apostles argument,
whereupon he urges the like love in husbands toward their wives, as was in
Christ toward his Church. For the analogy of love, is builded upon the
analogy of Union. The force whereof is this: if Christ so loved his Church,
because those of his Church, are members of his body, of his flesh, and of his
bones, so likewise ought men to love their wives: because they are one flesh
and one body with their husbands. For as the Apostle requires of husbands
toward their wives, more then that common love, which they owe to all women:
and that because they are one flesh with their wives: but not with any other
women: even so he urges it, from a like example in Christ: who beside and
above that common love, which he carries to all flesh: did in greater measure
declare his love to those that were members of his body, flesh of his flesh,
and bones of his bones: in that he did give himself to death for them: to this
end, that he might justify them. For as the bond of Marriage, does oblige the
husband to a particular and special love to his wife, wherein he is obliged to
none other: even so the Lord Jesus, did submitt himself unto the Fathers will,
to lay down his life for none, but such as were given him of the Father, and
made members of his body, and his spiritual spouse.

And if any will object, that this place of the Apostle is to be understood of
the order of Christ his doing, according to the eternal purpose and Decree of
God: and not according to the Dispensation of God toward us in time. It is
easy to be answered: that the order of God in both is one and the same. For as
the Lord does particularly predestinate men, to Adoption, before he give his
Son to the death for their justification; even so in time, he does Adopt us,
that is effectually call us, and bring us to his Son, and make us one with
him, before he justify us.

Moreover, this shall yet be more manifest, if we shall mark this one
distinction of the fruits of faith. to wit, if we can discern betwixt the
immediate fruit of faith, and the mediate fruits. The mediate fruit we call
that, which is wrought by God in us, even by the very working of faith in our
hearts, together and at once: and that is, our very union and conjunction
with Christ. For by faith Christ dwells in our hearts: and this is the work
whereby we are made the sons of God. For as says the Apostle: If we be
Christ's, we are the seed, Gal. chapt. 3. verse. 29.

The mediate fruits of faith I call those, which by virtue of this union, as
the necessary forerunning mean, faith produces in us: such as is our
justification, sanctification, etc. so that in a manner, we can distinguish
betwixt these benefits and our faith: but more hardly betwixt our faith and
Adoption: seeing our abiding in Christ, and Christ's abiding in us, is all one
thing with our believing in Christ.

That saying therefore, of these learned Divines, that GOD cannot acknowledge
us his sons, before he justify us: is not simply and absolutely to be
understood: but by comparison and relation: that is, because God powers in our
hearts, after our justification, a more lively sense of his love, and a
cleerer sight of our Adoption, then we receyved in our calling. And this manner
of speech the spirit of God uses familiarly in the scriptures: which is
comparatively to be understood. as John chap. 7. verse. 39. For the holy Ghost
was not yet, because Christ was not yet glorified: Which is not to be
understood, as though the holy Ghost had not been at all, but only that he was
not in that measure that he was thereafter to be given. Likewise in that of John
chapter 16. Christ says, touching his Disciples: hitherto have ye asked nothing
in my name: which were great prophanes in us, to understand simply of those
holy men of God: who knew Christ to be the Christ, and Son of the living God:
and who were directed in their prayers by the spirit of God, who inditeth none,
but in the name of Christ: albeit more darkely and obscurely manifested in our
hearts, then after the coming of the holy Ghost in greater measure.

Even so it may be justly said of our Adoption: that God does not
acknowledge us his sons before he justifies us: because that, which in
small measure and darkely was manifested to us, in our calling, is more fully
and clearly revealed in our Justification. because then the spirit of Adoption
is more abundantly shed abroad in our hearts, for the sealing of our
Adoption. For as we have said before, although our Adoption be begun in our
Calling, before our Justification: yet has it the clearer manifestation, and
fuller accomplishment, in, and through all the rest of the benefits following
our Calling. For as says John in his first Epistle, chapter 3. verse. 2. We
are now the sons of GOD, but yet it is not made manifest, what we shall be.
Therefore are we, who are already called, Justified and Sanctified, still said
to wait yet for our Adoption, Romans chapter 8. verse 23.

Not as though we were not already Adopted, but because our Adoption, is not
fully accomplished, until our bodies be redeemed and fully glorified. So that
with as good reason, we may say, that God does not acknowledge us to be his
sons, whylest our bodies are yet vile and corruptible: seeing we must Wait
for our Adoption, until our bodies be redeemed*

CHAPTER XV.
THE second ground whereupon this opinion is builded, is, the testimony of
John. Which not the less in my judgment, makes not much for it, if it be well
wayed. For it would appear, that that place is mistaken by many: and that
especially in three things.

The first is, in mistaking the right sense of that description, wherein the
property of these, to whom Christ gives this benefit, is set down.

The second is, the mistaking of the benefit it self give^ by Christ.

The third is, the ground of both the former two: in not distinguishing betwixt
the Fathers part and the Sons, in that work of our Adoption.

Touching the first. the description of those persons, is set down three manner
of ways. I. Those that receyved him. II. Those that did believe in his Name.
III. Those that are borne of God.

Of these three, the first two, are interpreted to signify Justification. of
which sense, that place well marked, does give no warrant, seeing in scripture
these phrases, may as well be interpreted of Adoption, as of Justification. For
as by faith in Christ, we are justified, so by faith in Christ, we are the
sons of God, Gal. 3. 26. and therefore to restrain believing in Christ's
name, and receyving of him, unto the benefit of justification, is an oversight
which easily may breed mistaking of the true sense, not only of this place,
but diverse other places of scripture. so they take it for granted, which in it
self is questionable. Moreover, the place it self, and the very words of this
description do yield two sufficient arguments, to prove, that here adoption
by these phrases, is rather designed, then justification. The first argument
lies in the first words of the description: which is, Those that receyved
him. Which phrase, is in the scripture still meant of the work of the Fathers
Calling of us unto the Son, and not of his justifying of us in him. For no
man (says Christ) can come unto me, except the Father that has sent me,
draw him, John chap. 6. ver. 34. Now to come unto Christ, and to receive
Christ, are both one. as is manifest by Ioh. cha. 5. where that, wherewith in
the 40. verse Christ charge the Jews, under these words: (but you will not
come unto me) is in the 43. verse, interpreted by Christ him self, in these
words: And you receyved me not. For there is a great difference betwixt these
works of the Father: to wit the bringing of us to the Son, or giving of us
unto him, or making us to receyve him, which are all one, and the same thing:
and the Fathers justifying of us in the son, whom now we have receyved. The
first is the proper work of God calling us* The other is the work of God,
after our calling. Which evide^tly appears by the speech of Christ him self,
Math. cha. 11. ver. 28. where first, he invites us to come unto him, and then
promises to such as do come, that he will give them rest unto their souls:
for God justifies none, who have not first receyved the son. For who ca^ be
made the righteousness of God in Christ, who is not first ingrafted in him. Now
the first work of faith, stands in our receyving Christ, and making him to
dwell in our hearts: in, and through whom now receyved and possessed by faith,
the Lord does thereafter justify and glorify us. so to make a Man to be just,
before he be a son, is as much as to make an accident or quality to be
before or without a subject: or to make a Man wise, before he be a Man. and
this ground the Apostle cleers by his own speech, when he counted all but
dongue, that he might gain Christ, and be found in him: to this end, that he
might not have his own righteousness, but the righteousness which is by the
faith of Christ, Phil chap. 3. thereby playnelie he shows us, that we must
first gain Christ and be found in him by faith, before we can have the
righteousness that is by the faith of Christ. so that to receyve Christ, and to
be justified in Christ, are in no sort to be confounded: although they cannot
be separated. For this is the principal cause, why Justification and all
remanent blessings are attributed unto faith: because by faith only, we are
made one with Christ, and joined unto him, who only is the substance of all
our blessings: as being made of God unto us wisdom righteousness,
sanctification, and redemption, 1. Corint. ahap. 1. verse. 30 Upon which union
with Christ, follows our communion with him, both in death and life. For
being once in him, we can not but be pertakers of all blessings in him. And of
this work of the Father, it is that the Evangelist speaks in this place.
which is the first work of his gracious dispensatio^: when as he makes us to
believe in his only son. as is manifest by the Evangelistes own words,
interpreting the first phrase, that is, Those that receyved him: by these
words, that is, Those that believe in his Name.

The second argument lies in the third phrase of this description, which is,
Those that are borne of God. By which words, both the two former phrases, that
is those that receyved him, and those that believed in his Name, are,
interpreted. thereby teaching us, that this work is not the work of
Justification, but of Adoption, and of our receiving of Christ himself by
faith: that in unity with him, we may be the Sons of God: and not our
receiving of his obedience by faith, unto righteousness. For by being borne of
God, we are made the Sons of God. Which birth, especially is performed by the
Father: when by his Spirit, he brings us unto the Son, and makes us to
receive him by faith in our hearts: so making us one with him. By which Unity
alone, it is, that we are made the Sons of God. For as the Unity of Christ's
humane nature in subsisting and personalitie, with his divine nature, makes
that Jesus Christ the Man, is the Son of God: so our spiritual Unity by
faith, with Jesus Christ the Son of God, makes us also, to be the Sons of
God.

Thus it is plain by the third phrase, that the former two are not rightly
taken, when they are expounded of those that are justified.

If any man would expound this birth, not of our effectual Adoption it self,
but of the preparation of us thereunto, (as some most learned and reverent
Divines do.) Yet never can it make the former opinion true: for our being
borne of God, in the Scripturs can never be showen, to be meant of our
Justification. And if they take it for our Regeneration or Sanctification to
the obedience of God, then it will follow, that wrongly they make Adoption to
be a part of Reconciliation: If sanctification which is no part of
Reconciliation, must go before. For they them selves acknowledge that
Reconciliation has but two parts: Justification and Adoption.

Besides: this distinction of Adoption, will hardly be warranted by the 9. of
the Romans except men will make the Apostle plainly to contradict himself:
who restrayneth the Adoption, which he ascribes to the Jews, only to the seed
of Abraham according to the promise, and not according to the flesh. Because
otherwise, the truth of God in his promise would have failed. Which
consideration likewise appears evidently to destroy that distinction of
Adoption (albeit first devised by one of the ancient Fathers) whereby one
Adoption is made Adoption, but by figure and resemblance: the other in
substance and effect.

But it seems that the ground of this opinion, (in some, though not in all,)
is builded upon this, that they esteem our Righteousness to consist in the very
act of believing: which may be more justly said of our Adoption, albeit in a
circumspect meaning.

CHAPTER XVI.
TOUCHING the benefit it self, which Christ bestows upon those that receyve
him: although we should grant it to be the same in sense which they expound it
to be: yet it will never infer, that in this place, To receyve Christ and
believe in his name, is to be understood of Justification: but (according as
some of themselves say) of the work of God in making us to believe. Of the
which follows, the dignity and prerogative of being sons: as the first and
immediate fruit of faith, in Jesus Christ. In which sense we deny not, but
this place may be commodiously interpreted: although it seems that the
spirit of God does mean somewhat more. For understanding whereof, we are
first to consider the third point, which we have said to be the ground of the
mistaking of this place: which stands in the not distinguishing, betwixt the
Fathers work and the Sons, in our Adoption: although in the same place, they
be clearly distinguished by the Evangelist. Which oversight makes great
confusion in knowledge.

For we are to understand, that although the three persons of the Trinity, be
neither in subsisting nor working to be separated: yet in both, they are still
to be distinguished: and never to be confounded: if ever we think to have a
clear and vnconfused sight, of these great works of grace, which they
perform in us.

Now in this place, the work of the Father, and the work of the Son in our
Adoption, are clearly and distinctly set down. Like as in other parts, the
work of the spirit, in the same Adoption, is distinguished from both: The
work of the Father, is our Union with Christ: when he brings us unto him, and
makes us to receive him, by believing in his name. And this is our coming to
the Son: Which is the proper work of the Father. For none can come unto the
Son, except the Father draw him. And this is the principal act of our
Adoption: which most properly is to be called Adoption: and as we have said,
consists chiefly in our calling. For seeing most properly, it is the work of
the Father to adopt: certain it is, that our Adoption, most properly must
consist in the action of the Father. For which cause, the Fathers work, in
making us to receyve the Son, that is to believe in his name, is in this
place expounded, by way of similitude, in a borrowed speech, that is, to be
borne of God. For the begetting and working of faith in our hearts, is the
chief and principal part of our spiritual birth: being the root and ground
of all that follows.

The work of the Son is next subioyned: which stands in giving to those who
have receyved him, prerogative, or as some do render the word, dignity, as
others authority, and as others power to be the Sons of God. Of all which
significations of the word, there is none which does not fit this place:
without giving any advantage unto the Papists, in their forged sense of the
word power. Which benefit proceeding from the Son, is always to be
distinguished in our Adoption, from our Union and communion with him by faith:
which is the work of the Father: upon which, as the cause, depends the other
as the effect: for to those, whom the Father does give to the Son, to be his
brethren, and in unity with him, to be the Sons of God: the son does give
the prerogative, the dignity, the authority and the power belonging to the
sons of God. And this work consists in the sons bringing us to the
Father. For none can come to the Father, but by the Son: for Christ suffered
for us, that he might bring us to God, 1. Pet. chap. 3. verse. 18. And this is
that, which is so often spoken of in scriptures by Christ himself: that to
those whom the Father gives him, to those he gives eternal life: and that he
gives the glory that the Father has given him, unto those that believe in
him. For whatsoever prerogative, dignity, etc. the Father has given unto the
Son, the same does the Son impart to us that are his brethren. For the
prerogatives and privileges of sonne-ship, appertain only to Jesus Christ,
as the only son of God. and therefore it belongs to him alone, to
communicate those prerogatives, to such as the Father does first by Adoption
make his brethren. For the prerogative of a son, is a dignity depe^ding, not
upon the essence and nature of our Redeemer, but upon his subsisting and
personalitie. For as the prerogative of a father, is proper to the first
person: so the prerogative of a son, is proper to the second person. and
therefore, as we do hold that to adopt, is the prerogative of the first
person, because he only is the Father: so to communicate the prerogatives
belonging to those who are adopted to be children, is the prerogative of the
second person, because he only is the Son. And therefore is it said, if the
Son make us free, we shall be free indeed, John chap. 8. ver. 36. for
freedom, is the prerogative of a Son, and not of a servant. And therefore
the whole liberty and freedom, be it from ignorance, Satan, sin or death,
which the saints enjoy in Christ, is called by the Apostle, the liberty of the
Sons of God. in which liberty is comprehended, both our wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification and redemption. Which prerogatives, when we do
enjoy them, then may we bouldly esteem our selves the Sons of God. And this
is that, which it seems the spirit of God does mean, when he says, that
Christ does give us the prerogative to be the Sons of God: that is, that he
bestows upon us such privileges and blessings, or such authority and power,
over all our spiritual enemies, as may make us, not only to glory in God the
Father of Christ, as our God and our Father: but also to carry our selves in
our whole conversation, as becomes the sons of God. For we do esteem, that
to be adopted or made sons, and to receyve prerogative to be sons, are two
distinct benefits, of the two first persons of the Trinity. For a man may be
a Son, and yet want the prerogative, dignity, authority, and power of a
Son. For as says the Apostle, Gallath. chap. 4. verse. 1. 2. The heir while
he is a child differs nothing from a servant, though he be Lord of all, but
is under Tutors and Governors. until the time appointed of the Father. Which
custom of men, the Apostle applies to the Church of God. to let us know, that
it is a thing to be considered in the children of God, as well as in the
children of men: so the oversight stands in the not distinguishing betwixt the
being of a son simply, which comes by procreation and birth: and the being of
a son in prerogative, dignity, authority and power of a son, which comes
by age and fulness of time, appointed by the Father.

For every child is a son to his Father, as soon as he is borne: yet long
after he receyveth not the prerogative of a son: but still is in condition as
a servant.

But when the time appointed, for his freedom comes: he, who was before a
son by birth, but a servant in condition, becomes to be a son likewise by
condition, as well as by birth: when as the prerogative, or dignity, or
authority, or power, to be a son in estate, is given unto him. And in this
sense is this place to be understood, if it be rightly taken: that is, that
unto them who were borne of the Father, and so which were sons by the Fathers
begetting of them: Christ the son did give prerogative, or dignity, or
authority, or power, to be sons in condition and state. For as we have said
before, the benefit of being sons simply, by begetting, or birth, or by
adoption, is the proper work of the Father: but to make us sons in the
condition and estate, belonging unto sons, is the proper work of the Son.
For we have no boldness to call the Father our Father, nor have we any access
unto him as unto our Father, but through Christ alone. Neither have we the
liberty of the sons of God, from sin, either by righteousness or
sanctification: nor any part of the glory of the sons of God, but from Christ
alone: in whom does all fulness dwell, and out of whose fulness, we all receyve:
and by whom only we come unto the Father. And this distinction of these two
works, of the Father, and of the Son, shines clearly in the words of the
Evangelist: when he says, that Christ did give prerogative to be the sons
of God, only to those who were borne of God: plainly distinguishinge the
Fathers work, in begetting us to be his sons, from the work of the son in
giving us the prerogative to be sons. which verifieth that to be a son by
birth, and to be a son by prerogative, are not to be taken in one sense, nor
for one benefit: but for two distinct actions, of the first two persons of the
Trinity. Which the same Apostle John seems plainly to confirm, 1. Epist.
chap. 3. verse. 1. 2. When he ascribes the benefit, of being called the sons
of God, unto the love of the Father, and the benefit of the being that which
the sons of God are, in prerogative and dignity, unto the Son: by whose
appearing unto us, we are made that, which the sons of God should be. And
therefore, in this life, according as he has appeared unto us, by the Fathers
work in our calling, bringing us unto him, illuminating our understanding
with the knowledge of him, and by faith making us one withhim: so have we
receyved the prerogative to be the sons of God, in righteousness and holiness,
with freedom and boldness to call his Father our Father: but because as yet
he is not manifested unto us in all the prerogatives of the sons of God,
therefore (although we be now, both sons by Adoption, and likewise in some
measure by prerogative and dignity,) yet it is not fully manifested what we
shall be: but when he shall appear in glory, then shall we appear like him,
in all things. In which likeness either in part, or in whole, accomplished in
us, stands the prerogative of the sons of God. For clearing of which point,
we are to observe that saying of the Apostle, 1. Cor. chap, 1. verse. 30. For
of him you are in Christ Jesus, who is made of God unto us, wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification and redemption. In these words two distinct
actions, are attributed unto the Father, which must needs preceed in order,
that action of the Son, whereby he gives us prerogative to be the sons of
God.

The first action of the Father is the making of Christ unto us, wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification and redemption: which are indeed the prerogatives
of the sons of God.

The second action of the Father is, the making us to be in Christ: to the end
that we may be pertakers of these blessings, which Christ is made of the
Father, unto us. Which action of making us to be in Christ, cannot be
distinguished from making of us sons and Adopting of us.

Upon which two works of the Father, follows the action of the Son: who
when we are by the Father, in him, he makes us pertakers of all his own
prerogatives, dignities and glory.

And after this work of the Son, follows the action of the holy Ghost:
sealing up in our hearts, both our Adoption or sonship, and the prerogatives
belonging to the sons of God.

Of this distinct consideration, of the distinct working, of the Father, Son
and the Holy Ghost, it may easily appear, that the work of the Son, is
mistaken in this place, when it is interpreted to be Adoption, or making of us
sons simply: whereas it is to be understood, of a benefit, succeeding our
being sons by Adoption, which is already accomplished, when we are begotten
and borne of God the Father: after which, it is the Sons part, to make us in
condition and estate the sons of God: by communicating with us, the
prerogative, and dignity, and authority which is proper to the sons of God.

Thus fare have we thought good to speak touching the order of the benefits of
God: in which point we have more largely insisted, because it is the special
ground, whereupon ryseth, not only the oversight of good men, but also diverse
heresies of wicked men, in this age. And we have further labored to clear that
place of John, which most misleades men in this matter: that thereby it may be
manifest, that by the Scriptures rightly understood, Adoption goes in order
before Justification.

CHAPTER XVIII.
HAVING finished the three first grounds, serving to clear the nature and
order of the saving benefits of God: Now it rests that we speak of the last:
which is touching the special distinction and difference of those benefits
amongst themselves. In which point, leaving all other opinions, we will follow
that which has the greatest warrant and cleerest evidence, in the truth of
God: which only in all such things, we are to follow, as our guide and
informer.

But before we begin this point, there are three things needful to be
considered of us.

The first is, the diverse manners wherein the spirit speaks of them in the
Scriptures.

The second is, what things they have common, in which they all agree and have
no difference.

The third is, the use that we are to make for our instruction of the
preceding point.

In these three things we will be shorter perhaps, then their nature
requires, setting them down in short propositions.

Touching the first, we are to mark that in the Scripture those benefits are
set down, two manner of ways: that is, either confusedly, or then distinctlie.

The confused manner of speech, is likewise two fold.

First, when as in respect of the inseparable conjunction of these blessings,
and presence infallible of all the rest, where one is, being all lincked
together, and every one imperting and impleying, all the rest: the Scripture
puts one for all.

The second manner is, when some one benefit, is putt for another: and these
two sorts of speeches are plain by these places. Romans chap. 8. verse. 23. 2
Cor. chap. 5. verse. 19. Ephesians. chap. 1. verse. 7. Col. chap. 1. verse. 14. Romans
chap. 5, verse. 9. 10. 11. etc.

The distinct manner of speech is, when these benefits are both in name and
signification specially distinguished, one from another: as namely, Romans chap.
8. verse. 30. 1 Cor. chap. 1. verse. 30.

This we thought good, first to mark, because there is great probability,
that in not consideration of the spirits different manner of speaking, is the
special ground and cause, of many men's mistaking of the special difference
and true order, of these saving benefits of God. As specially, when
Justification and Adoption are made parts of reconsiliation: which being
properly taken does in order, according to the Scriptures, succeed to them
both. As also when one benefit is defined, by the property of another: which
error many do fall in. We are therefore to take heed, that we put a special
difference betwixt one and the same benefit, according as it is used by the
spirit of God, in proper or improper manner of speech: when either it is put in
the own proper signification, or when it is put particularly, for another
benefit then it self, or generally for all.

Touching the second point, there be six special things, wherein all the saving
benefits of God agree.

The first is in their original, or efficient cause: which is God alone: for
he is the Father of lights, from whom comes down all good gifts and every
perfect donation, Iam. chap. 1. verse. 17. This may be confirmed by particular
testimonies of Scripture, touching every particular benefit, as of Faith,
Adoption, Justification, Peace or Reconciliation, Sanctification,
Glorification, and our whole Redemption. For they are neither bred in us by
nature, nor acquired by our industry, nor ministered by humane education, but
are all the gifts of God.

The second thing wherein they all agree, is the cause which moves God to give
them: which is nothing but his grace and good pleasure. For none of them is
obtained by our desert, or meritt. For as, says the Apostle, 2 Timothy chap. 1.
verse. 9. God has saved us and called us with an holy calling not according to
our works, but according to his own purpose and grace. and this likewise is
clear by particular testimonies of the Scriptures, touching every one of these
benefits.

The third thing wherein they all agree, is the means, through which God of his
grace does give them: which is Jesus Christ the Son: who is made of God unto
us all these blessings: For in him all fulness dwells, and out of his fulness,
we all receive grace. Which point also is most evident, throughout all the
Scriptures in every particular benefit.

The fourth thing wherein they all agree, is the instrument by the which God
makes us to apprehend them all in Christ, which is Faith only.

The fifth thing wherein they all agree, is that they are inseparable one from
another: so that none can have one of them, but he must needs have all: for
whom he calls, them he Justifies, and whom he Justifies them he glorifieth.
Romans chap. 8. verse. 30 And as says the Apostle: by the grace of God which is
given us in Christ Jesus, we are made rich in him, in all gifts: 1 Cor. cha.
1. ver. 4. 5. And the same Apostle gives thanks to God, because he has
blessed us with all blessings in Christ, Ephesians. chapter 1. ver. 3.

The last thing wherein they all agree, is that they are never taken away
again, from those that receive them: For the gifts and calling of God are
without repentance: Romans chapter 11. ver. 29. And whom Christ loved, he loves to
the end. John chap. 13. verse. 1.

Now follows the third thing to be considered of us, which is, touching the
use arising upon those former 6. points, which we are to mark, for our right
understanding of the nature of Gods saving benefits: and this use is six
fould.

The first is, that none of these blessings is in us by nature, nor from
nature, nor any power or faculty in nature, but are all the supernatural
gifts of God.

The second use is, that we are to acknowledge the good will of God and his
free grace, to be the only cause moving God to give these benefits. For by
his grace he has made us freely accepted in his beloved: so that even what in
Christ he gives us, he gives it freely of grace: so that all respects is
removed, why God should bestow his blessings in Christ, except his own grace
in himself. Which we are carefully to mark, that we may keep our selves from
the error of these, who confound either the subordinate mean, through which,
or the subordinate Instrument, by which God bestows his blessings, with the
cause moving God to bestow them: For although Christ be the mean through
which, and faith be the instrument by which, God gives all spiritual
blessings, yet the cause moving him to give all, is his grace. For he gives
Christ, and the righteousness that is in him, and faith, freely, to whom he
will, and withouldes them from whom he will.

Thus although the subordinate means, in and by which, God dispenses his
blessings, are not to be separate from his grace, yet they are never to be
confounded with it: but even Christ himself, and all blessings in him, and the
merit of his sufferings, and faith, by the which we apprehend all, are still
to be distinguished from the grace of God, which is the only cause, why either
Christ himself, or the meritt of his sufferings, or faith to apprehend it, is
given us of God. Therefore in Gods working, the Scriptures still join these
three together, to wit grace, Christ and faith. Faith, as the instrument
whereby we apprehend, and Christ as the subject in which we apprehend the
blessings of God, and the grace of God, as the only cause moving God, both to
give faith, and Christ by faith, and in Christ al these blessings. So that it
is a greevous sin against the grace of God (for the praise of the glory
whereof, the Lord does bestow upon us all spiritual blessings) when we spoil
it of this praise due to it alone: by making any other thing to be the moving
cause why God does bless us. As likewise it is a great sin, when separating
this grace, from the subordinate means, we do despise the means, and turn
the grace into wantonness.

The third use is, that no where, except in Christ alone, is any of the saving
blessings of God to be found. And therefore it never can be accounted to be
Gods Adoption, Gods Righteousness, Sanctificatian, Reconciliation or Redemption,
which is placed in any thing without Christ. Whereupon it must follow that they
err far from the truth, who place their righteousness, either in their
faith, or works: or who place reconciliation, in their own satisfaction.

For though Christ be the object of faith, yet it has the being of it, in man's
heart: and concerning works and our own satisfactions. It is clear that they
are not in Christ: who notwithstanding is all in all things, and fills all in
all things.

The fourth use is, that without faith, God by his grace, communicates noe
blessing in Christ, in ordinary dispensation. Therefore they must err, who
think that Christ and the blessings of God in him, may be apprehended, by the
external bodily action of man, in receyving the Sacraments: that is, as they
call it, by the very external work wrought. This likewise teaches us, to
perceive their error, who do make Faith, which is but the apprehending
instrument, to be the blessing it self, thereby apprehended in Christ. Of
which sort they all are, who place the matter of our righteousness, in the act
of our believing.

The fifth use is, to teach us to be wise, in judging of our selves, whether we
be truly in the state of grace or no: for he that is destitute of any one of
these saving blessings, he is destitute of them all: whatsoever foolish
confidence he have to the contrary. For as says the Apostle Peter, 2. Epi.
chap. 1. verse. 3. God through the knowledge of him that has called us, has
given unto us al things, that appertain to life and Godliness: And therefore
James shows that it profits nothing that a man say, he has faith, if he have
no works. And John 1. Ep. cha. 2. verse. 9. says, He that says he is in
the light, and hatetb his brother, is in darkness until this time. and chap. 3.
verse. 6. Who soever sins, has not seen Christ, neither has known him.

The sixth and last use is, to discover to us the error of those who prophainly
affirm, that the Saints effectually called, may fall from grace: which is a
blasphemous denying of Gods faithfulness, his righteousness, and the stablenes of
his counsel: upon which the Scriptures, so often build, the certayntie of the
saints persevering unto the end: Upon his faithfulness, 1. Cor. chap. 1. ver 8.
9. who also shall confirm you unto the end, for God is faithful, by who^ ye
are called. And 1 Thessalonians. chap. 5. ver. 24. Faithful is he who calls you
and will also do it. upon his righteousness. 2 Thessalonians. chap. 1. verse. 6. 7. For
it is a righteous thing with God, to render to you which are troubled, rest
with us in the revelation of the Lord Jesus from heaven. And Heb. chapter 6. ver.
9. 10. But we persuade our selves better things of you, and such as accompany
salvation, for God is not unrighteous, etc. and upon the stablenes of his
counsel in the 17. and 18. verses of the same chapter, saying: Wherein God
willing more abundantly to show unto the heirs of promise the
vnchaingeablenes of his counsel, did bind himself by an oath, that by two
immutable things, wherein it is impossible that God should lie, we might have
strong consolation, which have our refuge to lay hold upon the hope, that is
laid before us.

CHAPTER XIX.
THvs having spoken of these 3. points: it follows now that we speak of the
particular difference, whereby the blessings of God, are every one
distinguished from another.

The difference that is amongst these benefits, is of two sorts.

The first is more general, depending upon the different manner that we enjoy
them.

The second is more particular, rising upon the particular nature of every
benefit.

Touching the first, the benefits of God in Christ, are either such, as are
made ours only by imputation and Gods gracious account: the thing imputed,
remaining still in substance inherent in Christ, and not in us. for then they
are such, as (flowing from the virtue of Christ) do abide inherent in our
souls and bodies eternally.

Of the first sort, are Adoption and Justification, which never can be said
properly, to be inherent in us (Adoption, being taken in the proper sense,
whereby it is distinguished from the rest: and not in that general sense
mentioned before) for Christ alone, remains in himself, the only Son of
God, and only righteous without sin: we being sons and righteous, never
by any inhesion of these blessings in us, but only by the imputation of that
sonne-ship and righteousness which is Christ's alone, unto us. Therefore the
Scriptures, (touching these 2. benefits) does specially use this phrase: to
wit, that we are the sons of God in him, and that we are made the
righteousness of God in him.

Of the second sort, are these benefits, which necessarily follow, upon the two
former: as being the end wherefore we are Adopted and Justified. and these be
peace with God, or Reconciliation, joy in the holy Ghost, Sanctification and
Glorification, which is all one with Redemption: as it is taken in most
particular sense. Which all are so given us in Christ, that by the sense and
feeling of them inherent in us, they are made to us, sure tokens of our
effectual calling or Adoption and Justification. Which being blessings, not
perceyved by any sense of them selves, in substance inherent in us, are
confirmed in us by the others, as infallible effects following them.

For which cause the Apostle Peter wills us by them, to make our calling and
election sure. For in this are the children of God known, and the children of
the Devil: Who soever does not righteousness, is not of God, 1. John 3. 10.
And again, Know ye, that he that does righteously, is borne of him, 1. John
2. 29. And again, He that does righteousness, is righteous, as he is
righteous, 3. chap. verse. 7.

This difference, serves both to clear the order and nature of the benefits
of God. For these, which are ours by gracious account, remaining still inherent
in Christ only, they are both first in order, and are the grounds and
subordinate causes of all the rest of the benefits, inhesively bestowed upon us
in Christ. Therefore unto these two, that is Adoption and Justification, all
the rest, are attributed, as effects and infallible consequences, while it is
said: If we be sons, then are we also heirs, Romans cha. 8. ver. 17. And
again, Whosoever is borne of God, sins not, 1. John 3. 9. And again, The
son abides in the house for ever. John 8. 35. so touching righteousness it is
said, The just by faith shall live, Romans 1. 17. And again: Being justified by
faith, we have peace toward God, and rejoice in the hope of the glory of God,
Romans 5. 1. 2. And again: That, we being justified by his grace, should be made
heirs, etc. Tit. 3. 7.

The second difference, arises upon the different nature of the benefits:
which appear in the effects of every one toward us. Which effects may
generally be reduced to two.

The first is, the effect, of the making us the sons of God. Which is most
properly performed in us in the blessing of Adoption.

The second is, the making of us like to the Image of the son of God. Which
is performed by the rest of the blessings: that is our Justification,
Sanctification, and Redemption. Which albeit they serve to accomplish our
Adoption, by making us to be the sons of God by prerogative, dignity, etc.
yet we are sons, before they be accomplished in us. For as says John, 1.
Epist. 3. 2. We are now the sons of God, although it is not manifest what we
shall be.

So this general difference, of the nature of Gods benefits, is carefully to
be marked: that we may distinguish betwixt these benefits, by the which we are
properly made sons, and so of the seed: which only is Adoption. And these
benefits, by the which, we enjoy the promise, made unto the seed: where by
we are not properly said to be made sons, but only in respect of the
condition and estate, belonging to the sons. But properly by them we are made
like unto the Image of the son of God.

But although all these benefits agree in this point, and they all serve to
make us like unto the Image of the Son: yet they differ in nature, every one
from another, according to the difference of these things, wherein they make
us like unto the Son of GOD. For by Justification, the Lord makes us
righteous, and without sin: as Christ is righteous, and without sin. and
reconcileth us unto him self, making us one with him self, as the son is
one with him. For peace or reconciliation with God, is the effect and fruit of
Justification, as is clear Romans chap. 5. 1. In which we have to observe, that
as the Father, by Adoption, makes us one with the son: so by Justification,
he makes us one, with him self. Conform to the saying of the Apostle, 2. Corinthians. chapt. 5. verse. 19. For God was in Christ, reconciling the world unto
him self: by not imputing to them their sins: therefore is our peace and
reconciliation with GOD, attributed unto the Cross of Christ, by the which
says the Apostle, he kills hatred, Ephe. 2. 16. and also our liberty and
boldness, to enter into the most holy place, is attributed unto the blood of
JESUS, Heb. 10. 19.

Secondly, by sanctification, the Lord makes us like to his Son by purity, and
holiness of nature.

Thirdly by redemption, as it is particularly taken for glorification, the Lord
makes us like unto his Son, in immortality, glory* and power. This order and
difference, of these benifites, is clear, 1 Cor. chap. 1. verse. 30. where
wisdom, is put in the first place: which, specially answers to our calling,
wherein consists our Adoption. In the second place, righteousness. In the
third, sanctification: and in the fourth place, redemption. Which place, is
specially to be marked: for the right knowledge, both of the order and
difference that is amongst is benefits of God. For in other places of
Scripture, Redemption, as likewise Justification, and Reconciliation, are taken
in a larger sense: to signify the whole freedom of the sons of God, and
every part thereof in particular. And that because all liberty, peace and
reconciliation, whatsoever is given us of God, flows from the death of
Christ: in the which stands our righteousness, peace and redemption. For which
cause it is, that in the Scriptures, sometimes our Justification is ascribed to
the death of Christ: sometimes our Sanctification: sometimes our
Reconciliation: and sometimes our Redemption. Because, howsoever these
blessings, (as they are imparted unto us) differ both in order and nature: yet
they proceed all, from one fountain: and are all comprehended, only in that
one oblation, of Jesus Christ upon the Cross.

For clearing our judgments therefore, in this point: we are carefully to
mark these two senses, in the which, in the Scriptures, Redemption,
Justification, and Reconciliation, and Sanctification are taken.

Sometimes they are taken, for the action of God in Christ for his saints: when
as God, was in Christ, reconciling the world to himself: according to that
which he had purposed in Christ. which was, as says the Apostle, Ephesians. chap.
1. verse. 10. That in the fulness of time, he would gather together all things in
Christ Jesus, and as says the same Apostle, Coll. chap. 1. ver. 20. It pleased
the Father to reconcile all things to himself, by him: making peace by the
blood of his cross.

In this sense, God at one time, by the only one oblation of Jesus Christ, in
one work, once performed, did eternally redeem, Justify, Sanctify and
Reconcill to himself, all his ellect, that ever were, is, or shall be, until
the end of the world. For Christ bare all their persons, upon the Cross: and
God did lay upon him, the iniquity of them all: and did wound him, for their
transgressions, and break him for their iniquities: and did lay upon him, the
chastisment of their peace. Esa. 53. Therefore says the Apostle, Heb. 10.
that by that will of God we are sanctified even by the offringe of the body of
Jesus Christ once. And in the 9. chap. 12. verse, he says that Christ by his
own blood entered once in the most holy place, and abtayned eternal
redemption: and in that same Chapter ver. 28. it is said, that Christ was once
offered, to take away the sins of many.

Now in this sense, there is neither, difference of time, nor order, nor
distinction to be made: all being accomplished together and at once: by one
work, of one man, Jesus Christ the Lord.

Sometimes again, they are taken for the work of God in us, and toward us: in
his own time applying that, which he wrough in Christ for us, to every one of
us in particular: bringing us, by effectual calling, to the knowledge and
apprehension by faith, of our Redemption, Justification, and Reconciliation,
which God accomplished only in that day of Christ, which all the Fathers
desired to see: howsoever in diverse ages, and diverse times, they be applied,
by God, to these, who^ then, and in that day, by the death of his Son, he did
Redeem, Justify, and Reconcile unto him self. And in this sense, we speak
of these benefits, in this treatise: not as they were wrought by God, in
Christ, for us: but as in the dispensation of God, they are applied unto us,
for whom Christ dyed. In which sense the Apostle speaks of them, 1. Coll. 1.
21. 22. saying: And you also which were in time past strangers and enemies,
having your minds exercised in evil works, has he now reconciled in that
body of his flesh, by death.

And in this sense, it is, that both order and difference, is to be marked
amongst these benefits. In consideration whereof, how so ever Adoption, and
Justification agree, in this, that they both are benefits bestowed by
imputation, without inhesion in us: yet, as they differ in nature, so do they
in order: in respect of the grounds, whereupon they are builded, and whence
they flow. For Adoption, neither depends upon, nor flows from the death of
Christ: But from his personal property, of being the son of God. whereas
Justification, depends upon, and flows from his suffering. and therefore as
our communion with him in person goes before our communion with him in his
sufferings, so does our Adoption, in order go before our Justification.

CHAPTER XX.
HITHERTO have we spoken, of those grounds, whereby both the nature and order
of Gods saving benefits, are most clearly known. So that by these things,
which are already set down, a modest mind, only searching truth, and
abhorring contention, may sufficiently know, what Justification before God,
is. yet notwithstanding, for the further contentement of those of weaker
judgment, we will speak something more particularly of the benefit is self.

For the clearer understanding whereof, and discovering of the truth, which
now almost lies hid, by the manifold opinions of men: it were needful, that
we should speak of diverse things: as namely, of God him self, what place he
has in that work. 2. of his grace. 3. of Christ and his obedience. 4. of
faith. 5. of man him self, and of his works. and lastly of the Law and of
the Gospel. For all these points are called in controversy: and men's
judgments is diverse concerning every one of them, in the work of
Justification: but to eschew longsomnes, we will reduce all, that we are to
speak, into these few grounds.

The first, shall be touching the special diverse and several judgments of men,
concerning Justification.

The second, shall be touching the discussing of these points controverted,
which are of greatest moment.

The third, shall be concerning the work it self of Justification: according as
it is set down in the truth of God.

And entreating of these three, we shall touch by the way, every one of these
points mentioned. in doing whereof, if we shall insist somewhat more largely,
then shall seem expedient to riper judgments, yet we hope that herein we
shall easily be pardoned: seeing we take this pains, not for the instruction
of those, that are of greater judgment then our self, but for the help and
comfort of the simplest sort. Who in this main point of salvation, may
(through the diversity of opinions) be brought in danger of destruction. For
seeing there is no hope of life to any, but such as are justified by the
righteousness of God which is by the faith of Christ: it must follow, that this
Justice being taken away, and any other whatsoever put in the place thereof,
all ground and certeyntie of salvation, must needs be also taken away.

To come then to the first point. there be four principal different opinions:
beside the opinion of Osiander: which being odious to all, we need not to
speak of.

The first is of those, who devide the work of Justification betwixt God and
man: Christ's merit and man's merit: faith and works: grace and debt: the Law and
the Gospel: but in diverse respects and considerations. For in respect of that,
which they call the first righteousness (which they esteem nothing but a
preparation of a man, to justify himself, by a formal righteousness infounded
in us by grace). they give place to God, as the author and worker: and to his
grace, as the cause moving him: and unto Christ's sufferings, as the cause
meriting that grace: and unto faith as the benefit in founded into us by grace:
and unto the Gospel, as the instrument whereby this benefit is wrought in us.
Yet with God and his grace, they join man in this work: ascribing unto him,
freedom of will, so that God by his grace and man in his will concur in the
work. God by his grace, helping man's will to believe. But in respect of that,
which they call the second righteousness, wherein they place the merit of
eternal life, they seclude God from being the Iustifier: and ascribe
justification to man him self. they seclude grace and establish works of free
will, they seclude Christ, and the merit of his obedience, and place them
selves and the merit of their own works. they seclude believing, and
establish working: and for the Gospel, place the Law.

The second opinion is of those, who in justification, make God to be the
Iustifier, and that of his grace, and that by faith, but as our work, of our
free will: yet not of the Law, but of the Gospel. secluding Christ and his
obedience wholly from our righteousness: as likewise the Law and the works
thereof. So they give to God the work of Justifying: but the matter of their
righteousness, they wholly ascribe to their own work and act in believing. and
place grace in nothing, but in Gods gracious accepting of man's imperfect faith,
in place of the perfect righteousness of the Law. and attribute unto the merit
of Christ's obedience, this gracious acceptance of our faith: as though he
had dyed and suffered not for our Justification, but to merit and obtain at
Gods hand, that our own work of believing, should be graciously accepted as
perfect righteousness, albeit in it self imperfect. and where they may seem to
agree with the papist in asscribing righteousness to their own working, they
think that they do sufficiently purge them selves from that blott by this
subtle evasion: that they do not attribute their righteousness, to a work of
the Law, but to a work of the Gospel.

The third opinion, is of those; who attribute the work of Justification unto
God, but place their righteousness, partly in their faith, as their own work,
and partly in the obedience of Christ. and make two actions of God, in
Justifying. In the one whereof, they give place unto grace: in the other not.
The first action is the imputation of our imperfect faith, for righteousness.
and that by grace. The second action is the imputatio^ of Christ's perfect
obedience, for the supplying of that, which is wanting in our imperfect faith,
for righteousness, and that by Justice.

All these three opinions, do attribute Man's righteousness, either wholly or in
part to his own working, The first and last do join grace and merit
together in Justification. Which things are most contrary to the truth of God:
whether the works be of nature or of grace: of the Law, or of the Gospel.

The fourth and last opinion, is of those, who attribute the work of
Justification to God alone: and places our righteousness only in Christ's
obedience: and do acknowledge says to be nothing but the applying and
apprehending instrument of Christ's obedience: and the Gospel, to be the
instrument of faith: and all to be of grace. because God, gives Christ, to be
righteousness unto us, by grace: and imputes his obedience unto us, by grace:
and by grace, gives us faith, and unto faith the Gospel. so that they
attribute the whole praise of the Justification unto God: and place the whole
matter of righteousness, in the obedience of Christ: secluding all works of
men, either of the Law or of the Gospel: and acknowledge the grace of God to
be the only cause, moving God to justify us, by Christ's obedience: as
likewise of the giving of us faith, to apprehend it, and this opinion only
agrees with the truth.

CHAPTER XXI.
NOw we come to these things, wherein especially stands the chiefest
controversies, whereby the truth of Justification is most darkened. which we
will reduce all, to these four points.

The first shall be, touching the efficient cause of Justification.

The second shall be, touching the material cause of it.

The third shall be, touching the formal cause.

The fourth shall be, touching the subject, that is justified.

Under these four are comprehended the chief controversies touching this
matter. For touching the final cause, there is no great disagreement:
therefore we have no need to speak much of it: yet notwithstanding because it
serves to clear that which we have so much insisted in before, touching the
order of Adoption and Justification, we will speak something thereof, after
the other four.

First then, touching the efficient cause of Justification, the controversy is
only with the Papists: for in this point, albeit they agree with us in part,
or rather in show: yet they disagree from us, in the chiefest substance of this
question. For we say, that God only does Justify: but they, albeit they
grant the first Justification to God in part, yet they asscribe the second
Justification (wherein they place the merit of eternal life) wholly to man him
self. Now for discussing this controversy, we have three things that may
sufficiently clear our judgment therein.

The first is, the manner and form of the Scripture phrase, touching the
Justification of a man.

The second is, the testimony of the Scripture, declaring who it is, that
Iustifies a man.

The third is, the nature of the work it self.

Touching the first, the Scripture speaking of Justification, even whereas it
is supposed to be by the works of the Law, speaks passivelie of man, and
never activelie: to show it is a work which he him self does not, but which
is done unto him by another. as for example, Romans chapt. 3. verse. 20. by the
works of the Law, shall no flesh be justified. And again, Gal. chap. 2.
ver. 16. Knowing that a man is not Justified by the works of the Law. And
again, Gall. chap. 5. verse. 4. And ye are abolished from Christ, whosoever
are Justified by the Law. As likewise, when Justification is attributed unto
faith, the same passive form of speech is used, as Romans chapt. 3. verse. 28.
We conclude then, that a man is Justified by faith, without the works of the
Law. And again, Romans chap. 5. ver. 1. Being then Justified by faith, etc. And
Tit. chap. 3. ver. 7. That being Justified by his grace, etc.

Which form of speech is most clearly used, Matt. chap. 12. v. 37. For by thy
words, thou shall be justified: and by thy words, thou shale be condemned.
All these testimonies do show plainly, that the work of Justification is not
the work of man him self, but of some other: And therefore Christ, Luke chap,
16. 15. lays this to the Pharisees charge, as a special iniquity, saying: Ye
are those who justify your selves. And that this is to be understood, not
only of a man in judging him self, but also of one man in judging an other, it
is plain by the Apostles doctrine, Romans 14. 4. 10. 13. where he takes al power
from all men of judging one another, and to conclude this point, the Apostles
testimony touching him self, is sufficient, 1. Corint. cha. 4. ver. 3.
whereby he cleereth both these points, to wit, that no other man had power to
judge him: and that he had no power to judge him self, saying: I pass little
to be judged of you, or of man's judgment, no I judge not my own self. In
which places, all power of judging, as it is referred either to justifying or
condemning, in pardoning, or not pardoning sin, in the absolving or not
absolving from sin, is utterly taken from all men, whether in respect of them
selves or others.

Touching the second ground, which cleereth who it is that Iustifies: there is
nothing whereof the holy Scripture gives more clear testimony then of this:
still affirming, that is is God only, who Justifies: as is manifest, Romans
chap. 8. ver. 33. where expressly it is said: It is GOD that Justifies: and
in that same Chapter 30. verse, it is said: Those whom he has predestinate,
those he has called: and whom he has called, those also he has justified.
which place shows plainly, that it can belong to none but to God alone.
seeing that he who justifies, must be he who calls, and he who calls
must be he who predestinateth, which is only God. And again, the same Apostle
gives a clear testimony hereof, Romans chapt. 3. ver. 30. saying: For God is
one who shall justify circoncision of faith, and vncirconcision thorough
faith. The like testimony is contained, 1. Corinthians. cha. 4. verse. 4. where the
Apostle says: He that judges me is the Lord. Therefore says the same
Apostle, Romans chap. 14. ver. 12. That every one of us shall give account of him
self unto God.

Now we come to the third ground, which consists in the nature of
Justification it self: which is not (as some interpret it to be) the making
of us inhesively just, by renovation, or change of our nature: as though the
word Iustificare, that is to Justify, did signify, Iustum facere, that is, to
make just. By which opinion, our Justification, and our Sanctification, are
confounded, and made one thing. As though to Justify were the action of GOD,
in regeneratinge and recreatinge us: whereas it is the work of God in judging
us. so that Iustificar^ does signify Iustum pronuntiare, that is, to
pronounce righteous, which is manifest by two reasons.

The first is, because in Scripture. Justification is opposed to condemnation:
as is clear by the testimony cited before, Mat. 12. 37.

The second reason, is taken from the description of Justification, set down
in the Scriptures: where sometimes it is defined to consist, in the remission
of sins, sometimes in the forgiving of wickedness, in the covering of sin,
and not imputing of iniquity: sometime by the imputation of righteousness.
Which all do prove manifestly, that Justification is the Action of him, who is
the Judge of mankind, in absolving man from sin and the punishment thereof.

Of this it follows, that unto God only it belongs to Justify. and that
for two special reasons.

The first is, because the Lord is the only Judge of all, Hebr. 12. 23. And
therefore Acts 17. 31. it is said: He has appointed a day in the which he will
judge the world in righteousness. Of which day the Apostle also speaks, Romans
2. 5. 16. and the reason hereof is given by the Apostle, Romans 14. 7. 8. to
wit, because he is our only Lord, to whom we both live and die: and
therefore according as in that same place the Apostle concludes, We all shall
appear before the judgment seat of Christ, and every one of us shall give
account of him self to God. Whereby it is clear, seeing God is the only
Judge of the world, that to justify and to condemn, must only belong to him.

The second reason is: seeing Justification consistes in remission of sins,
and not imputing of iniquity: it follows, that not any, except God alone,
can justify: because none save God alone, can forgive sin, as is clear,
Mark. 2. 7. and Luke 5. 21. therefore does the Lord him self say, Esa. 43.
25. I, even I am he that puts away thy iniquities for mine own sake. And
again, 44. cha. verse 22. I have put away thy transgressions like a Cloud, and
thy sins as a mist. Likewise David does attribute the not imputing of
iniquity to the Lord, Psalm. 31. 2. saying: Blessed is the man to whom the Lord
imputes not iniquity. which also the Apostle clearly shows, 2. Corinthians. 5.
19. saying, That God was in Christ reconciling the world to him self, not
imputing to them their sins.

Now, whereas it might seem, that in treating of the efficient cause of
Justification, we should speak not only of God himself, but also of his
grace: yet because the question touching his grace, does also fitly belong to
the formal cause, therefore we refer it unto that place.

CHAPTER XXII.
NOw follows that we speak of the material cause. and in this point, out
of the former things, it may be easily gathered, that there be four
different opinions.

The first is, that the works of the Law done by man, are the matter of our
righteousness.

The second is, that the only act of man's heart in believing, is the matter of
it.

The third is, that partly faith, and partly Christ's obedience, is the matter
of our righteousness.

The fourth and last is, that only Christ, in his obedience, is the whole
matter of our righteousness.

The vanity of the first 3. opinions will more fully appear, when we speak
of the formal cause of justification, and when we shall treat of Justification
it self: as likewise when we shall clear the truth of the fourth opinion:
therefore we will speak the more shortly of them now.

Against all three, this ground generally serves, to wit, that no man is
justified before God, by any work inherent in himself, or done by him self,
whether it be of nature or of grace, or whether it be a work of the Law, or
of the Gospel. The reason is: If man be justified in any sort by works,
Justification can not be by grace, according as says the Apostle, Romans 11. 6.
If it be of grace, it is no more of works, else were grace no more grace: and
if it be of works* it is no more grace, else were work no more work. Thus
none of these three foremost opinions can stand: except we will destroy the
grace of God, and abolish it altogether from the work of Justification: for
grace and works, (even though they be of grace) can never stand together in
the work of our Justification. Which also manifests, the gross impiety of
all these three opinions, in placing faith either in whole, or in part, in our
righteousness, as it is our own work: seeing by no work of his own, can man
possibly be justified. For otherwise it cannot be, but Christ must have died in
vain.

Secondly, our righteousness consists not in Gods acceptance of any thing
that proceeds from us to Godward: but in Gods imputation of that that comes
from him to usward by his gift. as is clear, Romans 5. 15. 16. 17. where our
righteousness is still called the gift of God: and we are said to receyve
righteousness as a gift. Whereby it is most evident that no work of the Law,
nor faith, as it is the work of our heart, can possibly be our righteousness.
For our act of believing, is an action passing from us to Godward: and being
attributed (as it is by them) to man's free will, is no less the work of man,
then any other work of the Law what soever. But our righteousness is called in
the Scriptures, the righteousness of GOD, and not of man: because it goes not
from us toward him, but it comes from him to us.

Thirdly, it is manifest by the Scriptures, that no man is just in him self,
but in another. For among men there is none righteous, no not one, Psalm. 14.
But if that whereby he is justified, and which is the matter of his
righteousness be in him self, he must not only be just, but just in him
self: which both do plainly contradict the truth of God: which plainly
denies, that there is any man righteous, and that any man is made righteous in
him self: but whom soever God justifies, he justifies them in Christ, and
makes them the righteousness of God in him, 2. Corinthians. 5. 21.

Fourthly, the nature of Justification consisting in the remission of sin: it
can not possibly stand, in that, that is the direct contrary. But all these
three opinions makes it stand in the contrary, that is in Gods acceptance
of obedience. For whether the Lord justify us, for doing the works of the
Law, or for fulfilling the condition of the Gospel, required by God of us
unto Justification: it is always for and by our obedience that he justifies
us. so that Justification, shall never consist in pardoning of sin, and
covering of iniquity: but by the contrary, in the acceptance of obedience.
Which saying is so impious, that nothing can be devised more contrary to the
grace of God, and man's salvation.

These grounds serve generally to show the wickedness of all these three
opinions. Now we come to speak somewhat concerning the first alone. against
which these grounds contained in scripture, shall sufficiently serve: of which
diverse make against the rest also.

First, that which excludes not man's gloriation, can not have place in his
righteousness: for God will have no flesh to glory in his sight, in any thing
except in him alone: whereupon it follows, that no man can be justified by
the works of the Law. For as says the Apostle Romans chap. 3. verse. 27.
gloriation is not excluded by the law of works. For if Abraham was justified
by works, he has wherein to glory, Romans chap. 4. verse. 2. and the reason
here of is declared in the fourth verse, saying: That to him that works, the
wages is not compted by favor, but by debt. Whereupon it follows, that if
man be justified by works, he has wherein to glory: because he is not
justified by grace, but by deservinge: and Gods justifying of him, is not a
work of his favor, but a work, which he is indebted to do. And this is the
same very thing, which the Romish Church does mean by their merit ex
condigno. whereby Gods free grace iniustification is quite overthrowen.

Secondly, man can not be justified, by that, which makes the death of Christ
of none effect: but as says the Apostle Gallat. chapter 2. verse 21. If
righteousness be by the Law, then Christ has died without a cause. Which
place does evidently convince them all of error, and prove them all to be
enemies to the cross of Christ, and to his death, that make righteousness to
be by any other thing then by his death: for if Christ died without a cause,
if righteousness be by the Law: he must have much more died in vain, if it
be by any other thing. For righteousness is not to be found in any other thing,
but either in the Law of God, or Christ.

By this we may perceyve, that the opinion of those men, who place our
righteousness in faith properly taken, as it is the act of our heart: without
relation of it as an apprehending instrument unto Christ: is much more
pernicious, then the opinion of the Papists. and that by clear evidence of
both their doctrines compared together. For the Papist places his
righteousness, in that which conteynes in it self perfect righteousness in deed:
so that if their other ground could hold (wherein also the other sort does
agree with them) that is, that it were in man's power to fulfill the Law,
certaynlie they should be justified by the works of the Law. For the doers of
the Law shall be justified, Romans 2. 13. And if there had been a law given which
could have given life, surely righteousness should have been by the Law, says
the same Apostle, Gal. 3. 21. But these other men, do place their
righteousness, in that which they them selves confess to be imperfect, and not
to contain in it self, perfect righteousness. For when, faith is not
relatively or instrumentally taken in respect of Christ apprehended by it: it
can never contain perfect righteousness: and so the Lord can never justify us
by it: For the judgment of God is just, and according to truth, Romans 2. 2.
and 5. verses. and the Lord shall judge the world in righteousness, Acts 17. 31.
of which it follows, that there is much more iniquity, in these men's
opinion, then in the Papists: because they wittingly lay a ground to them
selves, touching justification: wherein it is impossible that Gods judgment
can be according to truth: seeing they make him to justify them, by that,
which in their own confession, is never answerable to the justice of God.

Thirdly, that can never justify a man, that causes wrath, and makes both
faith and the promise vain, and of none effect. and therefore righteousness can
never be by the Law. For as says the Apostle, Romans 4. 15. The Law causes
wrath. And again, Gal. 3. 10. Whosoever are of the works of the Law, are
under the curse. and that this opinion does make both faith and the promise of
none effect, it is manifest by the Apostle, Romans chap. 4. verse. 14. saying. For
if they which are of the Law be heirs, faith is made void, and the promise
is made of none effect. And again, Gall. chap. 3. verse. 18. For if the
inheritance be by the Law, it is no more by promise. By this may evidently
appear, the gross ignorance of the Papists, who do join faith and the
works of the Law together, in the work of our Justification: which two can
never more stand together, then grace and works. For to be by faith, and to
be by grace, is all one thing, according to the saying of the Apostle. Romans 4.
16. Therefore is it by faith, that it might be by grace.

Fourthly, that whereby comes the knowledge of sin, and which makes
transgression to abound, and which includes all men under sin, and which
stops all mouth, and makes all the world subject to the judgment of God:
can never serve to the Justification of a man. Now that all these are the
effects of the Law, it is manifest by these Testimonies of Scripture. Romans
chap. 7. verse. 7. I knew not sin but by the Law. And again, Romans 5. 20. The
Law entered in thereupon that the transgression might abound. And again,
Gall. 3. 22. But the Scripture has included all under sin. Whereby the word
Scripture, is understood the Law: as is clear by the testimony of the Apostle,
Romans chap. 3. verse. 19. Where he interpretes these Scriptures, by the which he
had convinced all, both Jews and Grecians, to be under sin: saying, We
know that whatsoever things the Law speaks, it says it to them, which are
under the Law, that every mouth may be stopped, and all the world be made
subject to the judgment of God. And that the strength of this reason may
appear to be uncontrollable: The 20. verse of that same 3. chap. shows it to
be the argument, of Gods own spirit: when as the Apostle concludes after this
manner. Therefore by the works of the Law, shall no flesh be justified before
him: for by the Law comes the knowledge of sin.

Lastly, this opinion fights directly, not only against the testimony of God
himself, but also against the testimony of the knowledge and conscience of
the chiefest saints of God. Touching Gods testimony, it is clear throughout
all the Scriptures: where he convinces all men of sin: saying, There is none
righteous no not one, etc. Romans 3. And the Apostle in the same chapter
witnesses: that by the works of the Law, shall no flesh be justified before
him. And expressly in the 4. chap. he says, that to him that works not, but
believes in him that justifies the ungodly, his faith is imputed unto
righteousness. And David places the righteousness of man in Gods imputing of
righteousness, without works. Romans 4. 6. And the Apostle Paul expressly
concludes. Gal. 5. 4. That they whosoever are justified by the Law, are
abolished from Christ, and are fallen from grace.

Now touching the knowledge and conscience, of the chief Saints of God: we
have clear testimonies from them. Esa. 64. 6. We have all been as an unclean
thing, and all our righteousness is as filthy clouts, etc. The like confession
and plain acknowledgment we have in Daniel, chap. 9. in the prayer that he
makes unto God. But most clearly in the Apostles speech, touching himself, and
Peter, and remanent Apostles, and all the faithful amongst the Jews, Gall. 2.
15. 16. where he says, We, who are by nature Jews, and not sinners of the
Gentiles, knowing that a man is not justified by the works of the Law, but only
by the faith of Jesus Christ: even we have believed in Jesus Christ, that we
might be justified by the faith of Christ, and not by the works of the Law:
For by the works of the Law, noe flesh shall be justified.

Therefore the same Apostle Paul, albeit he was unrebukable, touching the
righteousness which is in the Law: yet notwithstanding, he accounted that
righteousness, to be but loss unto him, and did cast it from him as filtie
dounge, that he might gain Christ, and be found in him: That is, (as himself
interprets) that he might be found, not having his own righteousness, which
is of the Law: but that which is through the faith of Christ: that is the
righteousness which is of God through faith. Phil. chap. 3.

Now to conclude this point, we will show, not only the vanity, but the
impossibility of this opinion, by this one ground, which is clear in
Scripture.

First, it is evident that the next and immediate end, of our justification is
our peace and reco^ciliation with God. For being justified, we have peace
toward God, says the Apostle, Romans 5. 1 And therefore peace is said to be
made by the blood of Christ. Collos. 1. 20. And the manner how God reconcileth,
is said to be by justifying, 2 Cor. 5. 19. For God was in Christ, reconciling
the world to himself, by not imputing to them their sins: which is all one,
as to say, that God was in Christ reconciling the world to himself, by
justifying them.

Secondly, it is evident, that there is no reconciliation betwixt God and us,
without a Mediator. Therefore the Law was not given, but by the hand of a
Mediator. Gall. 3. 19. Neither is the covenant of the Gospel confirmed,
without a Mediator.

And all confirmation of whatsoever covenant is by blood: because without
shedding of blood, there is no purgation, nor justification from sin: and
that by him who is Mediator. For then is the covenant of Peace, betwixt God and
man confirmed, when he, who is the Mediator of the covenant, has by the
sprinckling of blood, purged away all filthiness, and obtained full remission:
as is clear by the 9. to the Hebr. And therefore says the Apostle in the
same chapter verse 18. That even the first covenant, was not ordained without
blood. And Moses the Mediator of that covenant, when with that blood, he had
sprinkled all the people: he said, this is the blood of the Testament, which
God has appointed unto you. Exo. 24. 8. Heb. 9. 20.

Now it is plain, that Jesus Christ, in his blood, is our peace and
reconciliation with God: For no blood, save his blood alone, can purge us from
our iniquities, and justify us. And there is no Mediator betwixt God and us,
save he alone. For as says the Apostle, 1 Timoth. chap. 1. verse. 5. There is
but one Mediator betwixt God and Man, even Jesus Christ the Man. Whereby it is
plain, that none can make a firm and stable covenant of peace, betwixt God
and us, but he alone: neither can he make this covenant sure, by any other
mean, except his death and blood shedd: because no other thing in heaven or
earth, can purge us, and obtain remission of sins and justify us. Therefore
is it said, 1 Pet. chap. 3. verse. 18. That Christ once suffered for sins the
just for the unjust, that he might bring us to God. Upon which respect it is
that by him we are said to have access to the Father. Ephesians. 2. 18. and 3. 12.

Now upon all these grounds, we have to gather, of what covenant Christ is
Mediator: that is, whether of the covenant of works, or of the covenant of
grace, or (which is all one thing) whether of the covenant of the Law, or of
the Gospel. For God has never made any other covenant of Peace with man, then
these two. So that in one of these two must consist, both our Justification and
Peace with God: and of which soever of these covenants, he is Mediator, and
which of them soever he has confirmed by his death, in that only must consist
our righteousness and peace.

But it is manifest by the Scriptures, that he is not Mediator of the old, but
of the new Testam. as is clear by the Apostle, Heb. 9. 15. where he says,
For this cause is he also the Mediator of the new Testament. And again, Heb.
12. 24. and unto Jesus the Mediator of the new Testament. And this is confirmed
by the same Apostle, Heb. 7. from the nature of his Priesthood. For as the
Apostle there witnesses in the 12. verse, where the Priesthood is changed, of
necessity, the Law also must be changed. Therefore it must follow, that
Christ, being a Priest, not after the order of Aaron (under the which the Law
was given) but after the order of Melchisedech: that he cannot possibly be
the Mediator of the old Testament, that is of the covenant of the Law: and
therefore in that same chap. ver. 22. it is said, that Jesus is the Mediator of
a better Testament then the Law.

Hereupon follows this conclusion: that it is not only a vain opinion, but
also an impossible, that any flesh can ever be justified by the works of the
Law. For no covenant whereof Christ is not the Mediator, and which he has
never confirmed by his death, can ever possibly serve to our Justification: but
of the covenant of works or of the law, Jesus is no wise Mediator, neither
has he died and shed his blood to confirm it. Therefore by the covenant of
works no flesh shall ever be justified and have access unto God.

CHAPTER XXIII.
NOW for the second and third opinion, the discussing of them is coincident
with the points following, and especially in the next point: which concerns
the 4. opinion: that is, that only Christ is the matter of our righteousness.
Whereof now we are to speak, which being sufficiently cleared, is enough to
overthrow all other opinions whatsoever.

Now to make it manifest, that in Christ alone is the matter of our
righteousness, we are: first, to divide this point in two: and secondly to set
down the confirmations of both.

The two parts wherein this point is to be divided, be these: First, that
nothing in heaven or in earth, in man or without man, is the matter of man's
righteousness before God, except only Christ.

The second is, touching that, wherein in particular Christ is our righteousness.

Now for the confirmation of the first point, we have these six grounds shortly
to be considered.

First, nothing can be our righteousness, but that only which is made by God
righteousness unto us. For he is only righteous, and the only Author of all
righteousness. For as there is no man righteous, so there is no man that can
make any thing, to be righteousness, either to himself or to others. And
therefore we are to consider what it is, that God the Creator and ordayner of
all the righteousness of men, has ordained and made righteousness to us. Now in
all the truth of God, nothing is ever said to be made of God unto us
righteousness, except Jesus Christ alone: Neither is there any thing whatsoever,
that is called our righteousness, whereby we are justified by God, except
Christ alone, and his obedience. Whereupon it must follow, that he only must be
the matter of our righteousness. Therefore is it said by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 1.
30. that he is made of God unto us, Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and
Redemption. And in the Prophet Ierem. 23 6. This name is given him of God, as
the name by the which the children of God, shall call him: while it is said,
And this is the name whereby they shall call him: The Lord our righteousness.
And again, chapter 33. verse. 16. And he that shall call her, is the Lord ou^
righteousness.

Secondly, that only must be our righteousness, which only is all in all things,
and only fills all, in all things. For he that is unto us, all, in all
things, must needs be our only righteousness: and he that fills us all, in
all things, must needs fill us likewise in righteousness. Now Christ only in
the Scriptures of God, has both these attributed unto him. The first is shown
clearly. Collos. 3. 11. And the second is clearly shown, Ephesians. 1. 23. Therefore
is it, that the Apostle Peter, Act. chap. 4. verse. 12. says: That there is
not salvation in any other. For among men, there is given none other name under
heaven, whereby we must be saved. And for this same cause does the Apostle say,
That we are made the righteousness of God in him. 2 Corinthians. chap. 5. verse. 21.
As likewise, that in him we are made perfect or complete. Col. chap. 2. verse.
10. Therefore also does the Apostle bless God the Father, for blessing us
with all spiritual blessings in Christ, Ephesians. chap. 1. verse. 3. And if with
all blessings, then also undoubtedly, with righteous in him: except we will
deny righteousness to be one of the spiritual blessings of God. Therefore
the Scripture, admits nothing to be joined with him: neither has the
Father ordained any thing, to have part or place with him, in the matter of
our righteousness. For it has pleased the Father, that in him all fulness should
dwell: and that out of his fulness we should receyve, what soever grace we
receyve from God. And this is a part of that pre-eminence which Christ has in
all things: so that whosoever places the matter of his righteousness in any
thing but Christ, denies flatly, that he has pre-eminence in all things.

Thirdly, nothing can be the matter of our righteousness. which is not the
matter of our redemption. For as says the Apostle Romans chapt. 3. verse. 24.
We are justified freely by his grace, through the redemption that is in
Christ JESUS: Therefore is it that in the Scriptures, Redemption is so often
interpreted, to be remission of sins: which is in effect righteousness, as
Ephesians. chapt. 1. verse. 7. and Colos. chapt. 1. verse. 14. Thereby showing us,
that our righteousness, consists of that same, whereof consists our
Redemption. And it is clear and manifest throughout all the holy Scriptures,
that we have Redemption in Christ alone. Therefore in the same places, cited
before, the Redemption whereby we are justified, is said to be in Christ
JESUS: and we are said to have Redemption in him. Whereupon it must needs
follow, that seeing our Redemption is in him alone, our righteousness must also
be in him alone. For although in the holy Scriptures it be said, that we
are justified by faith, yet it is never said, that we are redeemed by faith:
or that our Redemption is in faith. Whereby it is most evident, that when the
spirit of God says, that we are justified by faith, or that God does
justify us through faith, or that he imputes faith unto righteousness: that
these speeches, are never to be understood of faith, materially: as though
faith properly taken were the matter of our righteousness before God: except we
will say likewise, that faith is the matter of our redemption: which no man is
so ignorant, as once to imagine. For nothing can be the matter of our
redemption, and so consequently of our righteousness, which is not made of God
sin for us, and a propitiation for sin.

For it is said expressly, that God made our Savior Christ sin for us, that
we might be made the righteousness of God in him. 2 Corinthians. chapter 5. verse
21. and Christ is said to have redeemed us from the curse of the Law, by
being made a curse and malediction for us. Gallath. chapter 3. verse 13. All
to show us that nothing can be the matter of our Righteousness, and of our
Redemption, which is not made both sin and the curse due to sinners for us.

Which two things were lively and openly shadowed in the Law.

The first Levit. chapt. 16. by the live Goat: where it is said, And Aaron
shall put both his hands upon the head of the live-Goat, and confess over him
all the iniquities of the Children of Israel, and all their trespasses in all
their sins, putting them upon the head of the Goat, and shall send him away
by the hand of a man appointed into the wilderness: so the Goat shall bear upon
him all their iniquities. And this the Prophet Esaias expresses plainly, when he
says that the Lord laid upon Christ the iniquities of us all: and that he
bare the sin of many. chap. 53. As also Peter, when he says, that Christ
himself bare our iniquities in his own body upon the tree. 1 Pet. 2. 24. The
second was shadowed unto us, in the ordinance of God concerning all offerings
for sin. In which, when the trespasser had laid his hand upon their head,
the Priest was commanded to kill them before the Lord, and to burn them with
fire. Levit. 4. Which also the Prophet Esaias expresses, when he says: that
he was wounded for our transgressions: he was broken for our iniquities: the
chastisement of our peace was upon him. chap. 53. As also Pet. when he says,
that he suffered for sins, the just for the unjust. Now there is no man so
foolish, as to think that these things can be attributed unto faith: or yet
to the works of the Law: or to any thing whatsoever except unto Jesus Christ
alone. Therefore nothing, save he alone, can possibly be the matter of our
righteousness: seeing, nothing, except he alone, was ever made of God for us,
either sin, or a propitiation for sin, by death.

Fourthly, nothing that is not the matter of our peace and reconciliation with
God, can possibly be the matter of our righteousness. For nothing can procure
peace unto us, but that only which justifies us, and covers our iniquities.
For there is no peace for the wicked says the Lord: and it is our iniquities
that seperates us from God. Esaias 57. 21. and 59. 2. Therefore the Apostle
says, Romans 5. 1. that being justified, we have peace toward God. For the
cleanging of us from sin, (which is the cause of hatred) makes us to be
reconciled unto God. Now the Lord Jesus only, in the Scriptures, is called our
peace: and in him only, God reconciled the world unto himself: and that by
justifying us, and this peace and reconciliation, is said to be made, by the
blood of his cross: because therein only, we have remission of sins: and
therein only is Christ ordained a propitiation for sin. Whereupon it
follows, that seeing nothing is our peace but Christ only: nothing can be
our righteousness but he only. For nothing but righteousness, makes peace betwixt
God and man.

Fiftlie, righteousness and life, are ordained to be brought into the world: as
sin and death were brought into the world: therefore is it that Adam (in
respect of the effects that come from him to all men) is said to be the Type
of Christ in the effects that flow from him to his members. For it is said,
that as by one man, sin entered into the world: so by one man, righteousness
shall be brought into the world. And as in Adam all die, so in Christ shall all
be made alive. According to which ground it is also said, That as we have
borne the Image of the earthly, so shall we bear the Image of the heavenly.
Whereupon it follows, that nothing in the world, except Christ, can be the
matter of our Righteousness: as none in the world, save only Adam, is the
Author of sin in us, otherwise the truth in Christ touching righteousness,
should never answer to the Type in Adam, concerning sin. Therefore as sin
comes from Adam alone unto us all, as he in whom we have all sinned: so from
Jesus Christ alone, comes righteousness to all, that are in him: as he, in
whom they have all satisfied the justice of God. In which comparison, (if we
had eyes to mark it) faith never has the place of our righteousness, but
answers in our participation of righteousness in Christ, to that, which is the
ground of our being partakers in the sin of Adam. For as we were one with
Adam, and in respect of origin and nature were in him, and so by being in him
and one with him, did all in him and with him, transgress the commandment of
God: even so, in respect of faith, whereby only we are united unto Christ* and
spiritually made one with him, and ingrafted in him: we all in him, and with
him, did satisfy the justice of God, in his death, and suffering. Thus, our
union with Christ, and means thereof, is always to be distinguished, from our
communion with him, in the participation of his righteousness, as the fruit
thereof. Like as our being in Adam, and one with him, is to be distinguished,
from the fruit thereof: which is, communion with him, in the participation of
his transgression. For clearing of this point, we have to mark carefully, the
words of the spirit of God unto Daniel, chap. 9. verse, 24. In the which, an
appeinted time is set down, for the finishing of wickedness, the sealing up of
sins, the reconciling of iniquity, and bringing in of everlasting
righteousness in the world. Thereby showing us, that it is impossible, that
faith can be the material righteousness of GOD, whereby we are justified. For
then, this everlasting righteousness, should have been in the world, before
Christ came into the world: and so should not have been brought in by him.
For faith was in the world, from the days of Adam. Therefore says the
spirit of GOD, that by it, our Flders obtained good report: and yet in that
same place, the spirit witnesses that they receyved not the promise,
distinguishing betwixt faith, and Christ apprehended by faith, as the matter of
the promise, and so consequently, of righteousness. The one whereof, that is
faith, they had receyved: the other, that is the promise, they had not
receyved: because Christ (in whom their blessedness was promised) was not
exhibited in their days.

For, albeit by faith, they apprehended Christ crucified, to come, and the
righteousness, which he was to bring unto the world at his coming: yet
notwithstanding, that righteousness, in the substance and matter of it, was
never brought into the world, unto the time, that Christ JESUS was brought
into the world. Therefore does the Lord use this phrase of speech: My
salvation is at hand to come, and my righteousness to be revealed, Esaias
chapter 56. verse 1. According unto which likewise, the Apostle Paul speaks,
That GOD had purposed in the dispensation of the fulness of time, to gather
together all things in Christ, Ephesians. chapter 1. ve. 10. Which the same Apostle
declares more cleerlie, Gallath. chap. 4. verse. 4. 5. saying: But when the
fulne: of time was come, God sent forth his Son, made of a Woman, and made
under the Law, that he might redeem them which were under the Law, etc. So
that the very designing of a precise time, for the bringing in of our
righteousness into the world, declares manifestly, that that righteousness, is
to be materially distinguished from faith, which was in the world in all
ages, before ever it was manifested. For faith could be in the world, and
apprehende righteousness, which was to be brought into the world, long before
it came: as well as now, long after that righteousness is performed, it can lay
hold upon it unto justification.

For, the faith of Gods Children, before the day of Christ, and the faith of
Gods Children, now after the day of Christ: did ever, and yet does apprehende
no righteousness, but that, which in that day was brought into the world. For
it is as easy to faith, to apprehende righteousness to come, as it is to faith,
to apprehende, by gone righteousness. Like as our faith, yet apprehends many
things to come. as specially our glorification, which is yet a thing no wise
manifested: neither shall be manifested, until Christ appear again in his
second coming in glory. This same ground serves to prove, that the Law and
works thereof, was never the matter of our righteousness: seeing the Law was
given long before Christ's coming into the world.

Lastly, that which does not make manifest, God to be just, and the Iustifier:
can never possibly be that righteousness, whereby we are justified. This ground
is clear by the Apostles words, Romans chap. 3. where he declares the end
wherefore God does manifest his righteousness, and to that end sets forth
Christ to be a Propitiation by faith in his blood: which is, that he may be
just, and the iustifier of him that is of the faith of JESUS. For the
rightousnes of GOD, whereby he justifies us, being manifested, must of
necessity, not only declare GOD to be merciful, but also just. And
therefore it is nor sufficient and enough, that grace do shine in our
justification, in respect of Gods grace and mercy toward us: but moreover,
it is necessary, that justice do shine in our justification in respect of GOD
him self: so that albeit we receyve remission of sins, without any merit,
or reason in our selves, but of Gods free grace toward us in Christ: yet
notwithstanding God in doing so, must still be just. For as says Abraham,
Genesis 18. Shall not the Judge of the world do right? Now this justice of God
in justifying, is perceyved by the fight of the righteousness of God, whereby he
iustifies. as is plain by that speech of the Apostle in Romans chap. 3. For to
this end does God show his righteousness, that he may be just. Now it is
certain, that if God should justify us, either by the works of the Law, or
by faith, as it is a work or habit in us: GOD could never be seen to be
just, in justifying of us, because there is no flesh that abides in every jot
that is written in the Law of God. Neither is there any that does it. And
concerning faith, the very Saints them selves in the scriptures have
acknowledged their faith to be imperfect. And they who now place faith for the
matter of our righteousness, does acknowledge that it is not answearable to the
justice of God: because it is not full and perfect righteousness. but Jesus
Christ whom God has made righteousness unto us, in his death, being manifested
unto us, in his satisfaction, does let us see a full and perfect righteousness,
answerable to the justice of God in all things: so that God is not unjust, in
justifying thereby. seeing in that justification, he justifies us, by that
which in it self is a righteousness, as full and perfect, as his justice does
require, and the conscience of this, has forced some of these men, who hold
our righteousness to consist in faith: to confess, that the obedience of Christ
must be imputed unto us, as well as our own faith. so making a double action
of God, in justifying. one gracious, in respect of faith: another just, in
respect of Christ's obedience.

Upon this ground it follows necessarily, that nothing can be our
righteousness, except Christ alone. seeing the Lord cannot be seen to be just,
in instifying us, by any thing, except by him alone.

CHAPTER XXIIII.
IT follows now that we speak of the second point: which concerns the
matter of our righteousness, that is, what is that thing, wherein Christ is made
of God righteousness unto us: and this in one word in the scripture, is said to
be his obedience, Romans chap. 5. verse. 19, Where it is said: For as by one man's
disobedience, many were made sinners: so also by the obedience of one man, many
shallbe made righteous: and this general is embraced of all, who acknowledge
Christ to be our righteousness: but yet in a threefolde different sense.

The first is, of those who by the obedience of Christ, understand the whole
work of his humiliation. in the which, they lay three grounds, wherein they
place the matter of our righteousness.

The first is, the work of Christ in taking upon him our Nature without sin.

The second is, his active obedience in fulfilling the Law of God, during the
whole course of his life.

The third is, his passive obedience in submitting him self to the death, and
that of the cross.

In the first of these actions, they place our justification from original
sin, and the inborne corruption of our nature.

In the second, they place our Justification from all our actual sins, both
of commission, and of omission.

In the third, they place our Justification and absolution from the punishment
due to our sins.

The second sense, wherein the obedience of Christ is taken, is when thereby
his active and passive obedience are only meant: without respect of the
integrity of his nature: and this twofold obedience, they esteem to be
necessary in our justification, against the two evils whereunto we are
subject through the fall of Adam.

The first is the evil of sin. From the which, they esteem us to be
justified, by the imputation of Christ's active obedience in fulfilling the Law.

The second is the evil of punishment. From the which they esteem us to be
justified, by the imputation of Christ's passive obedience in his death and
sufferings.

The third sense, wherein the obedience of Christ is taken in our
justification: is when thereby the passive obedience of Christ only in his
death, is understood, by the imputation whereof only, as that wherein Christ
only is made our righteousness: we are justified from all sin and punishment
thereof.

These three opinions, agreeing all in the main point: (that is, that only
Christ in his obedience, is our righteousness) may well (without any contention,
strife or scisme) be tolerated in the Church of God: if Christian modesty,
humblenes of mind, and meeknes did in that measure possess al, that they could
support one another in love: and study more to keep the unity of the spirit,
in the baunde of peace: then by controversies of disputations, to engender
strife. Especially seeing none of these opinions, overthrowe the foundation: or
yet contains in them, any impiety: or leads any man from the mark or
matter of his righteousness. seeing all three, exclude all things, except only
Christ's obedience, from our righteousness. Moreover, if we shall consider two
things distinctlie: we shall easily perceyve, that these three opinions, may
easily be reconciled, and made all to agree in one: and that none of them is
contrary to the truth of God.

The two things which are distinctly to be considered, are these.

The first is that wherein stands the righteousness it self, which is imputed
unto us.

The second is of these things, which are requisite in Christ, to the end that
in the other, he may be righteousness unto us.

For these two things are not to be confounded: that is, that wherein Christ
is made righteousness: and that whereby he is made meet, to be our
righteousness, in that wherein he is made righteousness unto us. Like as the
blood of the Lamb, (shadowing Christ's blood) is to be distinguished from
these things in the Lamb, which made the Lambs blood, to serve for a
propitiation for sin. For the properties of the beast which was to be
sacrifised for sin: are to be distinguished from the blood of the beast,
which only was carried in to the most holy place, to make expiation of sins
before the Lord.

This ground being considered, we shall easily perceyve, that although
Christ, be made righteousness unto us, in one particular thing: yet, before in
that thing, he can be our righteousness: all his perfections, both in nature
and action is required.

For clearing hereof yet more: we have to consider, that the matter of our
righteousness in it self, is not to be confunded, with the action of God in
justifying us thereby. unto the which, many things are required, that are no
part nor portion of the righteousness it self. so that, if we speak of the
action of our justification: all what soever is contained, in all these three
opinions, and more also, in Christ, is required thereto. but if we speak of
the matter of the righteousness it self, whereby we are justified: we are to
consider of them, otherwise. Therefore it shall be needful, that we consider
these two points severally: that is first, what it is wherein particularly
Christ is righteousness unto us.

Secondly, What things they are, that are required in him, to the end, that
in the other, he may be righteousness unto us.

Touching the first, The question or doubt seems chiefly to arise upon the
word Obedience: which in deed is oftentimes in the Scripture, referred to the
whole work of Christ's humiliation: even from his conception, to his
resurrection. So that all whatsoever he did in the world, is accounted
obedience unto the Father. Thus his very Incarnation, and taking upon him our
nature, and taking of it in the similitude of sinful flesh, his becoming
under the Law, his taking our sins and transgressions upon him, his
becoming a curse for us, his becoming our high Priest, his offering of him
self unto the Father, his doctrine, his actions, his sufferings and
resurrection, are all to be accounted obedience. For it was the Father that
sent him into the world: and he came into the world, not to do his own will,
but the will of the Father that sent him: therefore he witnesses him self,
that he spoke nothing, but according to the commandment which his Father had
given him, John chap. 12. verse. 49. the same he witnesses of his actions,
Ioh, chep. 14. verse. 31. as also of his death and resurrection, John chap. 10.
ver. 18. and yet there is no man, that will say, that all the particulars of
Christ's sayings and doings, are part and portion of the matter of our
righteousness: albeit every one of them be a part of his obedience.

Therefore we must needs take the name of Christ's obedience, in a more strict
sense: when we understand by it, the matter of our righteousness. and this
stricter sense, we are not to gather, out of our own conceyts and fantasies,
but out of the express word of God.

The word, every where, when it speaks of our righteousness, not under the
general word of Christ's obedience, but particularly, by those works of his
obedience, wherein our righteousness consists: does only mention his
sufferinge, death, or laying down of his life, or his blood, or his oblation,
or offering of him self, or his being made sin, or his bearinge the
chastisement of our peace, and such like phrases. Which all signify one thing:
that is, his suffering in the flesh. For no where in the Scriptures of God, is
our righteousness, particularly attributed to any other action of Christ.
Neither can it be collected, to consist in any other action, except out of the
general word of obedience. Neither is there any necessity (if the matter be
well waighed) to add any thing, to the sufferings of Christ, in the matter of
our righteousness. yea moreover, it would appear by diverse grounds of the
truth of God, that nothing can, or may be added thereunto, in the matter of
our righteousness.

Which grounds, we will shortiy touch, leaving them to every man's
consideration: intending no wise to stir up any strife in the Church of God,
for this matter. Neither minding, upon presumption of knowledge, to determine
or give sentence, in a matter of such weight but only to communicate the light
that God has given me, with others, for their help, and no ways for their
hinderance.

The first ground, which we mark in Scriptures, is this: we are not to
esteem Christ, to be our righteousness, in any thing, but in that only, wherein
God has purposed, and according to his purpose ordained, and according to his
ordaynance, set forth, Christ to be our righteousness and propitiation. Now the
purpose of God, is clearly set down by the Apostle, Col. chap, 1. ver. 19.
20. where it is said: It pleased the Father, that in him should all fulness
dwell: and by him to reconcile all things unto him self: making peace by the
blood of his cross. The ordinance of God, conform to his purpose, may be
received, 1. Pet. 1. 18. 19. 20. where it is said, that we are redeemed or
ransomed, by the precious blond of Christ, as of a Lamb undefiled and without
spot: ordained before the foundation of the world was. His setting him forth
according to his purpose and ordinance, is declared Romans chap. 3. ver. 25.
where it is said: whom God set forth before a propitiation, by faith, in his
blood: to show his righteousness. All which places, are in all appearance, to
be interpreted of the eternal purpose of God, concerning the matter of our
righteousness and peace: although our vulgar translations do interpret that
place of Peter, to be of Gods ordinance: and that place of the Romans to be, of
the Lords setting forth of Christ in the ceremonies of the Law. Yet all
serves to one purpose: that is, to declare that God has purposed and ordained
Christ, in his blood, to be our righteousness: as all these three places do
expreslie witness. And if we shall take the word (...) (which properly signifies
fore-purposed) in that signification wherein it is commonly rendered (that is
to set forth) we shall find nothing in all the ceremonies and types of Gods
Law, wherein Christ was set out or shadowed to be our propitiation and
attoneme^^ except only his death and blood. For without shedding of blood,
ther^ ^^ no remission: and according to the Law almost all things were purged
by blond, Hebr. chapt. 9. verse. 22. Therefore the Apostle attributes our
righteousness, unto his blood only, in many and diverse places. as Romans chapt.
5. verse. 9. Ephesians. chapt. 1. verse. 7. Colos. chap. 1. verse. 14. etc. And this
ground is made sure, by the Apostles reasoning, Heb. 6. and 10. chapt. giving
the reason, why those, who sin against the holy Ghost, can never receyve
grace, nor be renewed by repentance. Which is, because there remains no more
a sacrifice for sin: seeing Christ can die no more, neither be exposed any
more to ignominy and shame. Out of which speech, we may most surely gather,
that Christ is appointed our righteousness and peace, in nothing, but in his
death and blood of his cross. For if there were any other thing, whereby
remission of sins might be obtained, the Apostle would not have concluded
impossibility of remission of that sin, upon that only ground, that Christ
could be crucified no more.

This same is yet further confirmed, by those things wherein Adam as the Type
and figure, is compare unto Christ, in the matter of our righteousness, Romans
chapt. 5. For not only is one man, compared unto one man, and the sin and
transgresgression of one man, to the obedience of one man: but also, one
transgression of one man, committed but once, to one obedience, of one man,
performed but once. In which respect it is said in the holy Scriptures of God,
Hebr. chap. 9. verse. 14. That by one offeringe, he has consecrated us for
ever. And again. verse. 10. We are sanctified by the offeringe of JESUS Crist
once made. Even as Adam (albeit thereafter he committed many transgressions,
whereof none of his seed is guilty) did never transgress but once the
commandment of the forbidden fruit. Which one disobedience, once committed, is
the only sin and transgression of Adam, that makes us sinners in him: and
this Type, is a clear evidence, of Gods eternal purpose, touching our
righteousness in the obedience of Christ: as all Types whatsoever appointed of
God, are evidences of his mind, in that whereof they are appointed to be
Types. Now this Type, does show us the mind of God: (as witnesses the
Apostle plainly) touching our righteousness in four points.

First, that our righteousness should proceed from one man JESUS Christ: like
as sin entered into the world by one man Adam.

Secondly, that our righteousness should consist, in the obedience of that one
man, like as our commune sinfulnes, does consist in the disobedience of one man
Adam.

Thirdly, that our righteousness should consist, in one obedience only, of that
one man Christ: like as our sinfulnes does consist, in one only disobedience,
of that one man Adam.

Fourthly, that our righteousness should consist, in the only one obedience, of
that one man, once only performed: like as our sinfulnes, did consist, in that
only one disobedience, of that one man Adam, once only committed. Therefore
says the Apostle: As it is appointed unto men, that they shall once die: so
Christ was once offered to take away the sins of many, Heb. chapt. 9. verse.
27. 28.

Thus if God had given no other Type from the beginning: Adam alone is
sufficient, to teach us that GOD from the beginning, did neither purpose, nor
ordain, nor set forth Christ, to be a propitiation unto us, in any thing, but
in his death and blood.

The second ground in holy Scripture, which proves this assertion, to be
according to the mind of God: is the signs and seals of the righteousness
which is by faith. Which are, Baptism, and the Lords Supper. Which are called
the signs and seals of the righteousness which is by faith: because they do
first signify and represent unto us, what is the righteousness it self,
whereby (being apprehended by faith) we are justified. and secondly, because
they seal and confirm unto us, that righteousness is ours. so that they are
appointed unto us of God, as clear documents of his mind, wherein we may see
and perceyve most evidently, what is the matter and substance of our
righteousness before God.

Now in them, nothing but water and the washing thereby: and bread broken, and
wine poured out with eating and drinking thereof, is set before us, as either
the signs or seals of our righteousness. To teach us, that our righteousness
consists in nothing, but in Christ's blood shed, and sprinkled upon us, and in
his body broken upon the Cross, and his blood communicated unto us.

But it is most certain, that if there had been any other thing in his
obedience: in which had consisted any part or portion of our righteousness: he
would likewise have left it, in the seals of the covenant, to be remembered of
us, and used by us, for our instruction and comfort. For nothing is to be
esteemed, to be any part or portion of our righteousness in Christ: whereof
Christ himself has institute, neither sign nor seal.

This ground is confirmed further unto us, by diverse sentences of the holy
Ghost, touching Baptism: which being answerable unto circumcision, is most
properly, both the sign and seal of the righteousness which is by faith. In
which sentences, Baptism is made to have refere^ce to no part of Christ's
obedience except unto his death only. as is manifest Romans chap. 6. verse. 3.
Where it is said, know ye not that all we which have been baptized into
Jesus Christ, have been Baptized into his death. Therefore also, this same
Apostle, 1 Cor. chap. 1. verse. 13. takes his argument from no part of Christ's
obedience, but his death only, and from Baptism in the name of Christ, as the
sign and seal of our righteousness, in his death and suffering, to remove the
schisms and divisions, that were amongst the Corinthians, saying: Was Paul
crncified for you, or were ye Baptized in the name of Paul? For which cause
also, the Apostle to the Ephesians. chap. 5. verse. 25. 26. 27. does wholly attribute
the work of our justification and purgation from sin, unto Christ's giving
himself unto the death for us: the virtue whereof, he makes to be applied
unto us by the washing of water, through the word. And this point is most
clear, by the words of the Apostle Peter, who shows the verity hereof, in
the practice of God, toward his saints: both before the coming of Christ and
now after. For he affirms that Noach and these that were with him in the
Arck, were saved by water: and that now, we are saved by Baptism: as answering
in analogy, to the waters of the flood. Thereby expressly teaching us, that
from the beginning, Christ was crucified and set forth in nothing, but in his
death and blood, to be the matter our righteousness, as by the Apostle Peter in
the same place (interpreting the benefit that redounds unto us, by Baptism:
or rather defining what Baptism it self is, whereby we are saved) may easily
be gathered: when he says that this Baptism, is uot a putting away of their
filth of the flesh, but a confident demanding, which a good conscience makes
unto God. 1 Epi. chap. 3. verse. 20. and 21. Which description is nothing else in
effect but justification. Which the Apostle in another place calls, the
purging of our consciences from dead works, Heb. chap. 9. verse. 14. and the
sprinkling of our hearts from an evil conscience, Heb. chap. 10. verse. 22.
which by the Apostle Peter is discribed from the effect, which is our access
with confidence unto God, in calling upon him as our Father, upon the sense and
frelling of the remission of all our sins in the blood of Christ.

This same also is manifest touchinn the other seal of the covenant: which is
the Supper of the Lord: by the words of Christ himself, Luke chap. 22. verse.
19. 20. and of the Apostle, 1 Cor. chap. 11. verse. 24. 25. where expounding his
own mind, touching the bread and wine: he says, that the bread was his body
which was given, and as the Apostle says, which was broken for them, and that
the cup was the new Testament in his blood, which was shed for them, For Jesus
Christ flesh and his blood, are unto us no righteousness, until his body be
broken, and his blood shed upon the cross for us. For neither did he destroy
the Devil, but by his death: nor set us at liberty from our bondage, but by
his death. Heb. chap. 2. verse. 14. 15. Neither did he put away our sins, but
by the offering of himself. Heb. chap. 9. verse. 26. 28. And therefore says
Christ himself, Ioh. chap. 12. verse. 24. except the wheat corn fall into the
ground and die, it abides alone: but if it die, it brings forth many fruit.

Thus by the seals of the righteousness of faith, and by the phrase of the
spirit concerning them, and by the testimony of Christ himself, touching his
own death, it would evidently appear, that the matter of our righteousness,
consists in no part of his obedience, proceeding his death: but consists
wholly in the only one oblation of him self upon the cross.

The third ground in holy Scripture, confirminge this point: is builded upon
the testimony of Christ him self, and the Apostles interpretation of his
mind: set down, Hebr. chapt. 10. where first, out of the 40. Psalm, the
speech of Christ is cited: wherein he declares, what is the will of the
Father, touching the expiation of our sins in him. Which is by his obedience
unto the Father, in doing his will. Which will of the Father, is expounded by
the Apostle in the 10, verse, in these words: By the which will, we are
sanctified: even by the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once.

Now the obedience of Christ, in the matter of our righteousness, is not to be
esteemed of any larger extent, then is the will of GOD which he did obey, and
by which we are sanctified. Therefore seeing the will of GOD, in the matter of
our righteousness, is restrained only to the offeringe of Christ: Surely his
obedience, (as it is said to make us righteous) must be of no larger sense,
except we will be wise above that which is written.

If the Lords own interpretation, of his own mind touching his own will,
and obedience of his Son thereunto, whereby we are justified, will not serve
to satisfy men's minds: it is in vain to labor, by any other means, to give
contentement to those, who cannot be content with that which God him self has
revealed touching this point. Whose mind, must needs be best known to him
self: and in the which, we are to rest according as it is revealed.

And that this interpretation, set down in this same place, is the undoubted
mind of God him self: it may evidentlie appear, by the constant course of
his speech, set down thronghout all the New Testament. In the which still all
the parts of our Redemption, touching Justification, Reconciliation, and
Sanctification: are ever attributed unto the blood of Christ^ unto his death,
and unto his cross and sacrifice of him self. And the killinge of hatred, the
blotting out of the hand-writinge which was against us: the removinge of the
partition wall, and abolishinge of all Principalities and Powers, and all our
spiritual enemies: is still attributed unto his cross. And therefore, the
whole word of the Gospel, is called the word or preachinge of the Cross,
first Corinth. chapt. 1. verse. 18.

And the special thing which the Apostle respected, in preaching nothing but
Christ, and him crucified: and why Christ will not have the Gospel preached,
in wisdom of words, is: that the Cross of Christ, may not be made of none
effect, 1. Corinthians. chap. 1. verse. 17. Which should make us all, to take heed
unto our selves, in layinge down any other ground, except the death of
Christ: or joining any other thing unto the death of Christ, in the matter of
our righteousness: least we make his death and cross of none effect.

The fourth ground which seems cleerlie to confirm this point, is, the
argument which the Apostle uses, Hebr. chapter 10. ver. 18. contained in these
words: Where there is remission of sins, there is no more oblation for
sin. By which argument, he both proves, the ineffectuallnes of all the
sacrifices of the Law: and the eternal virtue of the death of Christ, unto the
remission of sins. By which argument of the Apostle, it seems necessarily
to follow, that in nothing which is in Christ himself, before his death,
consists the remission of our sins: and so consequently our righteousness.
For where remission of sins is, there is no more offeringe for sin.
Therefore if in Christ's actual obedience, or in his habitual righteousness,
there had been remission of sins, original and actual: (as it behoved to
be, if they be imputed to us for righteousness) surely the death of Christ is
needless. For to what end should Christ have been delivered to death, for our
sins, (as says the Apostle Romans chapt. 4. verse. 25) or to what end, should
he have been offered, for the taking away of sin, (as he is said to be,
Hebr. chap. 9. verse. 26. 28.) if so be that all our iniquities, both original
and actual, be pardoned in his preceding actual obediende. Surely it seems
that this opinion would have made Christ to die without a cause. For where it
is aledged, that he was offered to remove the punishment of our sin, it
seems to conteyne a double contradiction to Gods truth. For first, it is
manifest by the Scriptures, that he was offered not only to deliver us from the
curse and punishment, but also from sin it self.

Secondly, it seems to impugn the justice and righteousness of God: who never
punishes where guiltines is taken away. For death is the reward of sin.
Therefore where sins are removed, death can not be inflicted. For where
there is no sin, there is no death. And therefore says the spirit of God:
that where remission of sins is, there is no more sacrifice for sin.
According to which saying: either Christ's death and suffering upon the cross,
is no sacrifice for sin: or then there was no remission of sin before:
either in his habitual righteousness, or actual obedience, or any other thing
whatsoever.

Thus the very offering of Christ for sin, secludes all things preceding
whatsoever, from all virtue or efficacy of purging sin, and removing of
iniquity. For as witnesses the same Apostle, Heb. chap. 10. verse. 2. 3. Where
there is a new remembrance, again of sins, they have never been formerly
taken away. An therefore, seeing in Christ's death, there is a new remembrance
of sins again: it cannot be, that they were ever taken away, by any thing,
preceding his death. For otherwise, Christ should not have been offered:
Because that the offerers being once purged, have from that time forth, no
more conscience of sins, Heb. chap. 10. verse. 2.

The first ground, which serves to clear this point, is set down by 1. Ep.
Ioh. chap. 1. verse. 7. where he says, that the blood of Jesus Christ, purges
us from all sin: which words importe playnlie, that it is a needles and
vnnesseccary thing, to add any thing to the death of Christ, in the matter of
our righteousness. For if it alone, perform the whole work of our
justification: it is an idle curiosity, and a fruitles contention, when men
contend for any other thing, to be joined in this work, with it. But these
words of the Apostle do plainly manifest, that the blood of Christ alone,
accomplisheth our justification. For whatsoever purges us from all sin, must
needs accomplish our righteousness, and fully justify us, both from original
and actual sin. therefore it must needs hold, that in his blood consists
the full matter of our righteousness. For nothing, that contains not full and
perfect righteousness, can possibly cleanse us from all sin.

Moreover, by this sentence of John, it would appear that the opinion of those
men, who put a difference, betwixt an innocent man and a just man: has no
soliditie at all: nor any warrant in Gods truth: if we compare the said
sentence, with the words of David, Psalm. 32. repeated by the Apostle, Romans 4.
in the which, The man whose sins are pardoned, is pronounced to be blessed.
By which words it is manifest, that unto eternal blessedness, it is
sufficient, to have remission of sins: which could not be true, if after
remission of sins (which is alleged to be by imputatio^ of Christ's actual
obedience, and fulfilling of the Law) men should yet be in danger of
punishment, until Christ did die for the^. For how can he be blessed that
still is liable to punishment, and under the sentence of death. Therefore,
either remission of sins, makes not a man blessed, or then remission of
sins must only consist in the blood of Christ. seeing, as says the Apost.
Heb. chapter 2. ver. 15. we are not delivered from the fear of death, but by the
death of Christ only, by whose stripes only we are healed.

By the same reason it is evident, that by Christ's actual obedience, there can
be no remission of sins: seeing in the confession of those, that are of that
opinion, by that obedience, men are not exempt from punishment: and so cannot
be said to be blessed.

Besides, this opinion does flatly contradict the truth. For the Scriptures
places righteousness in the remission of sins: and unto life, it requires no
more but righteousness. For the just by faith shall live.

Moreeover, innocence before God, cannot preceede righteousness. For as the
Lord holds not the wicked innocent, so by the contrary, he holds him that
is righteous, to be innocent therefore, betwixt a sinner and a just man, there
can be no mid, dell estate and condition of a man, before God. Except we will
place a midst, betwixt righteousness and sin: and a middell condition,
betwixt heaven and hell, in the world to come. For as heaven is for just men,
and hell for wicked men: the same justice of God requires, that there be a
middell condition, for such as are betwixt both: seeing they are neither in the
state of the just, nor of the wicked. Men do not see, what a foundation this
opinion lays, for establishinge the Papists Limbus Patrum, and vainly
invented Purgatory. Furthermore, this opinion seems to imply a contradiction
in it self.

For first, it affirms, that the actual obedience of Christ, is imputed unto
us as righteousness: and yet they hold that it does not justify us from
punishment.

Secondly, they confess that it makes us innocent, and yet deny that it
makes us just. Which are things impossible. For whatsoever is imputed as
righteousness, must justify us, and whatsoever makes us innocent, must
necessarily make us just. For nothing, but righteousness, can make a man
innocent before God.

Therefore, seeing that sentence of John, asscribeth the purging of all sin
to the blood of Christ: be it original, or arctuall, it is the safest way for
us, (being warranted by the H. Ghost) to account it, only the matter of our
righteousness: and to beware, of adding any thing too it, Whereof we have not
the like express warrant.

And to make this ground yet more sure: we are to consider the nature of the
death and suffering of Christ. Which is manifest by the words of Christ him
self, Math. cha. 20. ver. 28. Mark cha. 10. ver. 45. where he says: The
son of man is not come to be served, but to serve, and to give his live a
ransom for many: therefore was he called Jesus, because he saved us from our
sins. And for the same cause, we are said, in his blood to have redemption,
and by the blood of his cross to be reconciled unto God. And for this same
cause, the Lord is said to have set him forth, a propitiation for sin, in
his blood: and to have wounded him, for our transgressions: to have broken him
for our iniquities: and to have made him, sin and a curse for us. All which
phrases import three things. The I. is, that Christ did pay by his death, a
price for us, to set us at liberty from sin. The II. is, that by his death
he reconciled us unto God, removing his wrath from us. The III. is, that God
did execute upon him, in his death, the judgment due to us, for our
iniquities. therefore is he said, not to have spared his own son. Upon the
which it follows, that both the whole price of our Redemption, the whole
matter of our peace, and the whoie satisfaction for our sins, consists in
the death of Christ. and so consequently of our full righteousness.

Now, as we have said before, the judgment of God is always according to
truth, so that in wounding his son for our transgressions, he behoved to have
chastised him, in proportion and measure, answerable to all our iniquities. So
that this satisfaction, by his death, being laid in balance, with the perfect
obedience of the Law, required of us: it behoved, in the justice of God, to be
of equal weight with it: and no less able, fully to answer, the justice of
God: then the full obedience of the Law. For the only just GOD, and Judge of
all the world, can not ordain a punishment and satisfaction to his justice
for sin, neither execute it, in greater or lesser measure or proportion of
justice, then the fault required.

Hereof it must follow: seeing Christ's death and blood, is the chastisement of
our peace, and punishment inflicted of God, for the sins of his elect: it
must contain in it, as full justice and righteousness, as the full
accomplishment: of the Law by us, should have done. therefore says Ioh. That
the blood of Jesus, purges us from all iniquities. to teach us, that his blood
being imputed unto us, as our righteousness, by God: does put us in the same
estate and case, (touching righteousness unto life, before God) wherein we should
have been, if we had performed the condition of the law. which is, do this, and
thou shall live: and therefore, it being equivalent in the justice of God to
that which was required of us, unto life: it is in vain to add anything unto
it, unto perfect righteousness.

This same is also clear, by the Apostles speech, Romans cha. 3. ver. 25. when
he shows, that God did set forth Christ, a propitiation in his blood: to
show his righteousness: to this end, that he might be just. For here two
things are to be observed, serving to this purpose. The first is, that only in
the blood of Jesus, the righteousness of God, whereby we are justified, is to be
seen. The second is, that by the sight thereof, God is known to be just, in
sparing his elect, and justifying them freely, by the redemption that is in
Christ. Whereupon it must follow, that Christ in his death must have, in most
full and perfect manner, answered the justice of God: no less, then our full
and perfect obedience, should have done. otherwise, it could never have shown
the righteousness of God: neither could he have been manifested just, in
justifying us thereby.

For the Law of God, is fulfilled: and the righteousness or justice of God
therein required, is accomplished two manner of ways. that is, either by
doing all things commanded therein: or else, by suffering such punishment, as
in the justice of God (for the transgression thereof) is in just proportion
answerable thereunto. so that, in either of these fully finished, the justice
of God, unto eternal life, is answered.

The sixth ground, is builded upon the law of the Priesthood, which was
ordained particularly of God, for this end, to make expiation of our sins,
and bring us unto God. Which two benefits, were shadowed in two actions, of
the Lev^ticall high Priest, in the day of expiation. The first was, in offering
sacrifice for the peoples sins, and sprinkeling the blood thereof, before the
Lord. The second was, the carrying of the names, of the Tribes of the Lord, into
the Sanctuary, engraven in the two stones upon his shoulders, and twelve upon
his breast: for a remembrance continually before the Lord, Exodus 28.

Now the Law of this Priesthood is, that none perform this office, before the
30. year of his age. as is manifest, Nomb 4. where all, that enter in the
assemble, to do the work, in the tabernacle of the congregation, are
commanded to be nombred, from 30. year old and above until 50. according to
which law, Christ him seife, who was the substance of all those shadows, did
not enter in that office, until he began the thirty year of his age. as is
clear, Luke chap. 3. verse. 21.

Hereof it must follow, that no action, performed by Christ before that time,
can be accounted the action of expiation of sin, or reconciliation of us unto
God. therefore the Scripture attributes our redemption, and reconciliation,
and particularly our justification, to no action preceding: but to his death,
thereafter following. and the action of bringing us unto God, is particularie
asscribed by the Apostle Peter, unto the death of Christ, 1. Epi. chap. 3.
verse. 18. And the Apostle declares, that our lib^rtie to enter into the most
holy place, that is, to come unto God, proceeds from the blood of Jesus,
Hebr. chap. 10. ver. 19. which summarily seems to be expressed by the Apostle
in that saying, Hebr. chap. 5. ver. 9. And being consecrate, he was made the
Author of eternal salavtion, etc. By which saying, it is manifest, that
Christ is not the Author of righteousness, or life to us but by his
consecration: that is by his death. For therein did his consecration consist.
as is manifest, Hebr. chap. 2. verse. 10. and therefore is he said, Hebr. chap.
10. ver. 14. to have consecrate us for ever by that one offering, wherein
consisted his own consecration. And for this same cause is it, that the
Apostle, Hebr. chap. 9. 17. says, That the Covenant, or Testament is
coufirmed when men are dead, and that it is yet of no force as long as he that
made it is alive. Thereby evidently witnessing, that no blessing promised of
God, in the covenant of grace, is made ours: but by the death of Christ. So
that whatsoever went before his death, could no wise make the Covenant of God,
of any force or effect unto us.

Thus, neither in respect of time, assigned of God unto the Priests, for
entering into their office: neither in respect of the Priestlie actions,
ordained to be accomplished by them for reconciliation of the people, and
expiation of sin: can any thing in Christ, before the 30. year of his age,
be accounted a Priestlie action of expiation: neither any action after, except
only the offering of him self, and enteringe with his own blood, into the
heavens for us all, whose names he carried in that action, before the Lord:
and whom, by virtue of his blood, he brings unto God.

Thus have we showed such things, as in the word of God, do seem to exclude
all things, from the matter of our righteousness, except the blood and death of
Christ alone: Of which opinion, it appears evidently, that Calvin was: if his
mind be well marked, in his own writings, in the third book of his
institutions. Chap. 11. Secti. 4. 11. 21. 22. Where 4. things are expreslie set
down by him, making all to this purpose.

The 1. is, That righteousness, is simply opposed unto guiltines. The 2. is,
That he affirms the manner of our reconciliation, to be expressed in the
words of the Apostle, when he says, That Christ, who knew no sin, was made
sin for us. 2. Cor. 5. 21.

The 3. is, That in that place, he affirms reconciliation, to signify
nothing but justification. The 4. is, Touching the place of David, Psalm. 32.
cited by the Apostle. Romans 4. In the which he plainiy affirms, that neither
David, nor the Apostle, does speak of one part only of our justification,
but of the whole. And therefore adds, that seeing the blessedness of a man
(which he takes to signify righteousness) is said by the Prophet and Apostle,
to consist in remission of sins: there is no reason why we should define it
otherwise. By which sentence, he plainly cuts away the ground of these men,
whereon they build their evasion, When they are urged out of that and such
other places, to acknowledge, that full righteousness, consists in remission of
sins only. For to maintain the imputation of Christ's, actual obedience,
they allege, that unto eternal life, it is not sufficient, to have all
iniquity pardoned. That is, (as they interpret it) to be innocent: but that
it is requisite, beside the remission of sins, to have righteousness. which
they account to come, by the imputation of Christ actual obedience. Therefore
when these places are aledged, wherein blessedness and justification is only
attributed to the death of Christ, and only placed in remission of sins: they
answer, that these places are synecdochically to be understood. As though a
part of righteousness, were put for the whole: in which, Calvin shows
himself plainly to disagree from them: by affirming the direct contrary. Thus,
they who seem to be followers of Calvin in this point, are deceyved.

CHAPTER XXV.
NOW it follows, that we speak of these things, which are required in
Christ, to the end, that in his blood, he may be righteousness unto us. For,
albeit without shedding of blood, there be no remission of sins: yet many
things are required, both in the blood that is shed, and in the action of
shedding it: before it can serve unto the remission of sins.

First them, to speak of the blood: it must needs be better then the blood
of Goats, of Lambs, of Bullocks, or all the sacrifices of the Law. For
although, the similitude of heavenly things be purified with the blood of such
sacrifices: yet heavenly things them selves, must be purified, with greater
and better sacrifices then these, Hebr. chap. 9. verse. 23. and that because the
blood of those sacrifices, which were offered according to the Law, can never
make holy, concerning the conscience, him that does the service.

To try then what blood it must be. First, the blood of a man, is better then
the blood of a beast. and that it must be the blood of a man, it is clear by
the holy scripture: For he which sanctified. and they which are sanctissed,
must be all of one, Heb. chap. 2. 11. And as by one man sin entered into the
world, so by one man, rigreousnes is brought in the world: therefore is it
said, that JESUS for a little space, was made lower then the Angels, that by
the grace of God he might taste of death for us all, Hebr. chap. 2. ver. 9.
for, the justice of God requires, that sin be punished in that nature, that
has committed it.

But yet this is not sufficient, to make that blood that is shed, righteousness
unto us. For the blood of a sinner ca^ never reco^cile a sinner unto God and he
that has need, to offer sacrifice for his own sin, ca^ never by his blood,
purge any other man from sin. therefore it is requisite, not only that it be
the blood of a man: but moreover, that it be the blood of a just man: in whom
there is no iniquity. And this is declared plainly by the types of the law: in
the which, no unclean thing could be offered for sin: neither behoved there
to be spott or wrinckle, or blemish in the Lamb: as is clearly seen in the
commandment of God, Levit. chap. 22. ver. 20. Ye shall not offer any thing
that has a blemish, for that shall not be acceptable for you. According to
which law, it is said of Christ, that he offered up him self without fault
unto God, Heb, chap. 9. verse. 14. And the Apostle Peter says, That Christ
suffered once for sin, the just for the unjust, 1. Epist. chap. 3. ver. 18
And again, That we are redeemed by the precious blood of Jesus Christ, as of a
Lamb undefiled and without spot.

Neither is this yet sufficient, to make the blood that is shed, to be
righteousness before God, but more is required in it, then that it be the blood
of a man, or yet of a just man. For no man, that is nothing more but a man, can
possibly redeem his brother: or give his ransom to God: that he may live
still for ever. So precious is the redemption of their souls and the
continuance for ever, says the Prophet, Psalm. 49. For the blood of no flesh,
can be able to satisfy the infinite justice of God. For he that lives not for
ever, can never be the cause of eternal life unto others. and he that is not
eternal, can never bring in, eternal righteousness. and no righteousness, but
that which is eternal, can possibly procure eternal life. For, all being
infinite, that is, the justice that we have transgressed infinite: our guiltines
in trasgressing infinite: the punishment of our guiltines infinite: as being
the just recompense of the transgression of an infinite justice: proceeding from
the just judgment, of an infinite God: it is impossible, that a finit creature,
can perform it: seeing he should never be able to loose the sorrows of death.
Therefore it is required, that the blood should be the blood of him, who is
eternal: to the end, that he should not be holden of death eternally, Act.
chap. 2. verse. 24. and that his blood, might be of an infinite value, and that
our righteousness might be eternal, and make us eternally righteous: therefore
is it said by the Apostle, that God has purchased his Church with his own
blood, Act. chap. 20. 28. thus, it is required in the blood, that justifies us
before God, that it be not only the blood of a man, and of a just man, but
also that it be the blood of him who is God blessed for ever. and all these
considerations are necessarily requisite in the blood unto our justification
thereby.

And as in the blood, so in the shedding of it, diverse things are required in
it, to the same end. Which that we may the more clearly perceyve, we are
first to consider, that the shedding of blood, must needs be by way of
oblation and sacrifice. Therefore Christ is said to have offered up him self,
a sacrifice, of a sweet smelling favor unto God, Ephe. chap. 5. verse. 2. and
also he is said to have bin made manifest once, to put awy sins, by the
sacrificing of him self, Heb. chapt. 9. verse. 26. and therefore also says the
Apostle, that Christ our Passover, is sacrificed for us, 1. Cor. chap. 5. ver.
7.

Now, the things requisite in the offering of this sacrifice, are partly to be
considered, in the nature of the sacrifice it self, and partly in those
things which are necessarily required, for the offering of a sacrifice.

Touching the sacrifice it self, besides that it must be by blood: because
without shedding of blood, there is no remission. it must needs be but one:
and of such nature, as never needs to be repeated. For the sacrifices that
are often repeated, can never sanctify the comers thereunto. And therefore it
is said, That we are sanctified by the offering of the body of Jesus Christ
once, Heb. chap. 10. ver. 10. And again, in that same Chap. verse 12. it is
said: But he having offered by one sacrifice for sin, sits for ever at
the right hand of God, Of which it is manifest, that this sacrifice alone,
without any other thing joined therewith, and without any iterating of it,
(contrary to the blasphemous doctrine of the papists) must needs make us
eternally righteous. according to which it is said by the Apostle: That Christ
is entered into heaven, not that he should offer him self often: because then
it behooved him to die often. But as it is appointed that men once die, and
thereafter comes the judgment, even so Christ also being once offered, to
take away the sins of many, he shall appear the second time without sin
etc* And this point is most cleerlie set down, Heb. cha. 10. ver. 14. where it
is said: For by one offering, he has consecrated for evermore, those which are
sanctified. Whereupon it must follow, seeing by one offering he has obtained
us eternal remission (according to the promise of God in his covenant: and
their finnes and their iniquities I will never remember any more) that there
remains no more sacrifices for sin. For according to the saying of the
Apostle, Where remission of sins is, there is no more sacrifice for sin,
Heb. chap. 10. verse. 18.

The things that are required for the offering of a propitiatory sacrifice
for sin, are especially three. The first is a Priest. For none but a
consecrate Priest, appointed by God and not by man, might ever offer sacrifice
for sin unto God.

The second is the Altar, upon which it must be offered.

The third is the Tabernacle or Sanctuary, wherein it must be offered.

The things to be considered in the Priest: concern partly the nature of the
Priesthood it self: and partly the actions to be performed by the Priest.

Touching the nature of the Priesthood: The first thing to be considered, is
that no man can take this office to him self: but he who is called of God,
Heb. cap. 5. ver. 4. 5. The second thing to be considered, is, that it must not
be according to the order of Aaron, but according to the order of
Melchisedeck. For there is no perfection by the Levitical Priesthood, Hebr.
chap. 7. ver. 11. and this, that he must be according to the order of
Melchisedeck, comprehends under it these particular points. First, that he
is not made a Priest by the Law, but according to the power of endless life.
For as we have said, if his Priesthood had been after the Law, it could never
have made us perfect. For the Law made nothing perfect, Hebr. chap. 7. ver.
19. And of this ground, follows other two consequences. The first is, that
seeing he is made a Priest, after the power of endless life, none save he
alone, can ever enjoy this Priesthood. For, as says the Apostle: Amongst
the Leviticall Priests, many were made Priests: because there were not
suffered to endure, by reason of death: but Christ, because he endures for
ever, has a Priesthood which can not pass from him to an other, Hebr chap. 7.
ver. 23. 24. The second consequence, is, as saves the Apostle, Hebr. chap. 7.
ver. 25. That he is able perfectly to save those that come to God by him:
seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them.

The third thing to be considered in the nature of the Priest is, as says
the same Apostle, That he be without sin: because such a High Priest, it
became us to have, as is holy, harmeles, undefiled, and separate from sinners,
Hebr. chapt. 7. 26. Which also was expreslie commanded in the Law, Levit.
chap. 21. where it is said: Who soever of the seed of Aaron, has any
blemish, he shall not come near to offer the sacrifices of the Lord: neither
shall he press to offer the bread of his God: neither shall he go in unto the
veil, nor come near the Altar: least he pollute my Sanctuary.

The fourth thing to be marked in the Priest, is, that he must not be upon the
earth. For if he were upon the earth, he were not a Priest, Heb chap. 8. verse
4.

Therefore is it said of him: After that he had offered one sacrifice for
sin, he sits for ever at the right hand of God, Hebr. chapt. 10. ver. 13.
as also, That the heavens must conteyne him unto the time that all things be
restored, Act. chap. 3. ver. 21.

The fifth thing to be considered in the Priest, is, that he behooved to be
subject to infirmities. that having experience of them, he might be a merciful
and faithful high Priest, Hebr. chap. 2. ver. 17. and chap. 4. ver. 15.

Now we come to the actions to be performed by the Priests. Which likewise
are of two sorts. The first sort are those, which are performed in offering
of the sacrifice. The second sort is, those which are to be performed, after
the oblation.

In the Sacrifice especially is to be considered. First, the Priests puttinge
all our iniquities and sinues upon the head of the offeringe: that he may
bear them all. According to which it is said of Christ, That he bare the
sin of many, Esaias 53. 12. And the Apostle Peter says: That he him self did
bear our sins in his body, upon the tree. For he was made sin for us. The
second action consists in killing of the offering before the Lord. according
to which, it is said of Christ, That he offered up him self by the eternal
spirit unto God. Hebr. 9. 14. And he is said to put away sin by the
sacrifice of him self, Hebr. 9. 26. And Christ him self says, I lay down
my life, that I might take it again, no man takes it from me, but I lay it
down of my self, John chapt. 10. verse. 17. 18. According to which also Esaias
says, That he p^wred out his soul unto death. Chap. 53. ver. 12.

The third action is, the offering of the sacrifice it self, by fire unto the
Lord. And al these actions are accomplished in the death of Christ. in the
which principally consists the matter of our righteousness. for therein was
he made both sin and a curse for us.

The actions following, are especially three. which all serve to our
justification by his death and blood: although they be no part nor portion of
the righteousness it self. The first is, his rising from the dead. The second
is, his sitting at the right hand of God in heaven. The third is, his making
intercession for us. Therefore the Apostle, in the 8. chap. to the Romans ver.
34. sets down these four actions of Christ, as the things whereby we are
saved from all condempnation. when he says: Who shall condemn, it is Christ
that has died, or rather, who is risen again: who also is at the right hand
of God: and who also makes intercession for us. Which saying is carefully to
be marked of us, for many weighty reasons. First, it shows us that as the
work of God in justifying us, does save us from all accusation: so the
grounds whereby we are saved from being condemned, of God, (that is by which
we are justified and absolved) are these four actions of Christ: whereof his
death is first. Secondly, it clears that point which we have in hand: to
wit, that many things serve to our justification, which are no part of our
righteousness. For his resurrection, his ascending into heaven, and sitting at
the right hand of God, and his interceding for us: are all necessarily
required to our justification: and yet none of them is any part of the matter
of that righteousness, which is imputed unto us. For his rysinge from the dead,
is not our righteousness, and yet except he had risen, we could not have bin
justified by his death. according to the saying of the Apostle, 1. Cor. chap.
15. ver. 17. If Christ be not raised, your faith is vain, ye are yet in your
sins. For so long as Christ was holden of death, under the guiltines of our
sins, we could never be absolved from sin and death, in the sight of God.
because, our satisfaction and redemption (although they were in doing) were
not fully performed, until Christ having utterly abolished sin, was raised
from the dead. but his suffering being finished, and he having loosed the
sorrows of death, our redemption and satisfaction for our sins, were fully
accomplished: and so our righteousness, full and complete in Gods sight. By the
imputation whereof, GOD then, might justly justify us. Therefore is it said by
the Apostle, Romans chap. 4. 25. that he was delivered to death for our
transgressions, and is risen again for our justification: Showing us, that as
the matter of our righteousness consists in Christ's death, (because he was
delivered thereunto, for our sins) so the justification of us by his death,
depends upon his resurrection. because therein, his death was ended: and so
the satisfaction for our sins, and our righteousness was fully and perfectly
finished.

Likewise, his entering into heaven, and sitting at the right hand of God: is
no part of the matter of our righteousness: and yet it is a necessary action
of his Priestlie office, required unto our justification by that, which is our
righteousness. For the high Priest once a year in the day of expiation, entered
into the most holy place, with the blood of the expiatorie sacrifice: to make
an atonement for the children of Israel. The true sanctuary, resembled by the
most holy place, is heaven: into which the blood of our sacrifice, must be
brought by Jesus Christ our high Priest: there to make our atonement.
Therefore is it said, That Christ being come a High Priest of good things to
come: entered once by his own blood in the most holy place, and obtained
eternal redemption, Hebr. chap. 9. ver. 11. 12. and therefore also is it
said, That if he were on the earth, he were not a Priest, Heb. chap. 8. verse.
4. For which cause, in that same place, the Apostle esteems this, to be the
chieff and principal point, of all that had been spoken of his Priesthood:
videlicet, that we have such a high Priest, that sits at the right hand of
the throne of the majesty in heaven, etc.

Thus howsoever the sacrifice of Christ in his death, or his blood: be the
matter of our righteousness, and that Christ in his blood, be ordained a
propitiation for us: yet, to the justifying us by that blood, this action of
our High Priest, even the entering with the blood into heaven, is necessarily
required.

Even so also concerning his intercession. albeit it be not the matter of our
righteousness: yet it serves to our justification by his blood. For all his
intercession, is by virtue thereof: that God by it, and for it, may pardon all
our iniquities, and justify us. For this action, is the end of the three
former: that is, of his death, resurrection, and ascending into heaven. For he
died, that by his death and sufferinge, havinge satisfied the justice of God,
for all our iniquities, he might have a sufficient ground and matter whereby to
make intercession.

And he rose again. thereby putting an end to his own death and suffering:
that the satisfaction being finished, and the ransom fully paid: it might be
answerable to the justice of God: and be sufficient for our justification. And
he ascended up to heaven, as unto the true Sanctuary: that he might bring into
the presence of God, the blood of our sacrifice: and there, (as the minister of
the Sanctuary, by his death, as the ransom of our iniquities, now full and
perfect by his resurrection, and brought in by him, as our high Priest into
heaven, and presented unto God) might make intercession for us. And as says
the Apostle, obtain eternal redemption for us, Heb. 9. 12. Therefore is it
said of him, in that same Chap. ver. 24. that Christ is not entered into the
holy places made with hands, which are similitudes of the true holy places:
but unto heaven it self, to appear now in the sight of God for us. And to
this same effect John the 1. Epi, cap. 2. ver. 1. it is said, If any man sin,
we have an Advocate with the Father Jesus Christ the just, and he him self is
the propitiation of our sins.

And so to conclude this point Christ's being a Priest: and many actions done by
him, as our high Priest: are no part of the matter of our righteousness. and yet
it is requisite, that he both be a Priest, and perform those actions, to our
justification: even as the Priests under the Law, were no part of the
atonement. For he that makes the atonement, and the actions done by him, in
making the atonement, are to be distinguished from the blood, in the which
only stands the atonement it self.

Now we come to speak of the Altar. which likewise is necessarily required,
for offering of our sacrifice, and yet is no part of our righteousness, but
serves to the qualification of the sacrifice, to be righetousnes unto us. And
as Christ is the Priest, and also the offering: so also, he alone is the Altar.
Which we shall easily perceyve, if we mark these two grounds. First, what is
the nature of our Priest, and of the sacrifice that he does offer, and of the
Sanctuary and Tabernacle wherein he must exercise his Priesthood: and of the
things which by this sacrifice are purged. Secondly, if we consider the use of
the Altar, whereunto it serves in sacrificing.

Touching the first, all are heavenly. The P^iest, the Lord from heaven. the
sacrifice, heavenly: the sanctuary, heaven it self: the the tabernacle, his
body not pight by man but by God: and the things that are to be purged, all
heavenly, Heb. 9. 11. 23. 24, Of which it must follow, that the Altar also must
be heave^ly. For a heavenly sacrifice, offered by a heavenly Priest, in a
heavenly tabernacle, for the purging of heavenly things, can not possibly be
offered, but upon a heavenly Altar.

This is manifest by the second point, which is touching the use of the Altar,
and that is to sanctify the offering: as is manifest by the words of Christ,
Mat. 23 19. of which it follows: according to Christ's reasoning in that
place: that the Altar must be greater then the offering. For that which
sanctifies, must be greater the^ that which is sanctified by it. Of which it
is manifest: that no Altar of earth, of wood, of stone, or any earthly thing,
ca^ possibly serve in this Priesthood, to sanctify Christ, who is the
offering. But as he him self is not of this building: so likewise the Altar
that sanctifies him, must not be of this building, therefore says he him
self: For their sakes do I sanctify my self: that they also may be
sanctified, Io 17. 19. to show us, that as he is the Priest, the sacrifice, and
tabernacle: so he only is the Altar. For he is the body of all the shadows in
the law. therefore, as he is said to have offered, by the eternal spirit, as the
Priest him self, as the sacrifice unto God: so is he to be understood by that
same eternal spirit, as by the Altar, to have sanctified him self, that is,
that body: by the offering whereof once, we are sanctified for evermore.

And we are to hold this truth most carefully: both to eschew the foolish
opinion of some, who esteem the cross to have bin the Altar, whereon Christ
was offered. as also to keep our selves from falling into that blasphemous
error: to think, that there is any thing greater then the Son of God* least
we pollute our selves, with the abominable idolatry of the Church of Rome.
who make their wood and stone, greater then Christ, and make their earthly
Priests, greater then both sacrifice and Altar. and give them Priestlie power,
being in the earth, and being of this building, and being laden with sin, in
an earthly tabernacle, upon an earthly and corruptible altar, to offer up, and
that often and many times, this heavenly sacrifice: which is never to be
repeated. As also, to give them power to sanctify a stock, or stone: and to
give it power, to sanctify Christ.

Now concerning the Sanctuary, which is the third thing requisite, for
offering the sacrifice: we have somewhat spoken thereof already, in his
action of sitting at the right hand of God. Neither is it necessary that we
speak much more of it: only we are to know, that this sacrifice, can not be
offered else where, but in the true Tabernacle, that is the body of his flesh.
Therefore does he call his body, the Temple, John chap. 2. verse 19. neither
could the blood thereof, be carried in, by our high Priest, els-where, but in
the true Sanctuary, that is Heaven it self.

By all these preceding things, we may perceyve, that there is a manifold
consideration to be had of Christ, in the work of our justification. First, as
he is our High Priest. in which point, we are to consider, both the Godhead,
and his Manhood, and the properties of his Manhood, qualifying him to be a
meet high Priest. Secondly, as he is the Altar that sanctifies the offering.
Thirdly, as he is the Tabernacle in which the offering is to be made. And
fourthly, as he is the offering and oblation itself. Now in all these, the
obedience of Christ to the Father, does manifestly shine. as likewise in all
the rest of his actions whatsoever. And all these, that we have spoken of, are
necessarily required in the work of our justification, but are not all to be
included in the matter of our righteousness. For as he is our Priest, Altar, and
Tabernacle, he cannot properly be called our righteousness, except it be
efficientlie: but no wise materiallie. For he is our righteousness materially
only as he is the sacrifice and offering.

Thus, if we shall distinguish Christ him self, in that thing, wherein he is
made our righteousness: from him self in these things, wherein he is made
beside, to serve unto our justification, by that, wherein he is made our
righteousness. And secondly, if we shall distinguish the matter of our
righteousness it self in Christ, from the action of God in justifying by it:
we shall perceyve evidently, that the matter of our righteousness, consists
only in the death and blood of Christ* and that all the rest of Christ's
obedience, does serve not as the material, but rather as the subordinate
efficient causes of our justification.

And so all the three former opinions, touching the obedience of Christ, may
well agree in one: when the question is, concerning the action of God in
justifying: and not concerning the particular matter of the righteousness, which
God imputes unto us unto justification. For, there is no part of Christ's
obedience, which is not (as it is said in the schools) causa sine qua non:
that is, a cause without the which, we cannot be justified. For if he had not
been a man, and a just man, and a Priest, and such a Priest as we have said:
yea if he had not risen from the dead, and ascended unto heaven, and made
intercession for us: his death and blood could never have justified us. And yet
still his death and blood is the only matter of our righteousness: but so, as it
is the blood, of such a sacrifice, offered by such a Priest: upon such an Altar:
in such a Tabernacle* carried in by the same Priest, after resurrection from
the dead, into the heavens. And as by virtue of the same blood, the same
Priest, sittinge at the right hand of God, makes intercession for us. Thus,
the matter is not of such moment (being rightly waighed, and charitablie
considered) that it needed ever to have bred, such bitter contention amongst
brethren in the Church of God.

CHAPTER XXVI.
HAving thus spoken of the material cause of our righteousness. it follows
now that we speak of the formal cause. In the which three things are
specially to be marked, for clearing unto us, how and in what manner we are
made the righteousness of God, by the death and blood of Jesus Christ our Lord.

The first is, Gods giving unto us.

The second is, Gods imputation of that which is given us.

The third is, the cause moving him both to give and impute. For God justifies
us by gift, by imputation, and by grace, Neither can the true form of our
justification be known of us a right, except we acknowledge all these three
in it. For man has no saving grace, which he has not receyved of God.
according to the saying of the Apostle, 1. Cor. chap. 4. ver. 7. For who has
separate thee, or what have thou that thou have not receyved: and if thou have
receyved it, why gloriest thou, as if thou had not receyved it. And to the
same purpose says I am. 1. chap. 17. All good giving, and every perfect gift
is from above. Therefore also our righteousness specially is called a gift, and
a gift by grace, Romans chapt. 5. ver. 15. 16. 17. as also Romans chap. 6. verse*
23. but the gift of God is eternal life. Where the word gift (if that place be
rightly understood) does signify righteousness given us of God.

Secondly, howsoever many confound, imputation and giving, as one thing: (as
in some sense they may both be taken for one) yet it is expedient for our
sounder knowledge, that we distinguish them. For howsoever nothing is imputed,
which is not given: yet many things are given, which are never said to be
imputed. Yea moreover: in which imputation has no place. Beside, the
imputation of a thing (if we shall rightly consider it) does always presuppone
the thing imputed to be in our possession, either by nature, working, or gift.
as by Gods grace we shall hear hereafter.

And therefore, in the form of our justification, Gods giving of a thing unto
us, is to be distinguished from his imputing of it. Specially if we mark one
thing: which is, flat contrary sayings, and yet of equal force, used by the
spirit of God, in the description of justification. For sometimes it is defined
by imputation of righteousness, and sometimes by not imputation of sin.

Thirdly, in the manner and form of our justification: grace is specially to
be considered: because both the givinge, and imputation of the thing given, is
of mere grace. Therefore are we said to be justified freely by grace. so
that the perfect form of our justification, consists in this: that is, in
Gods gracious givinge, and gracious imputinge of thing given, unto us: to be
our righteousness. So that whosoever make our justification, to consist, without
giving of righteousness. or without imputing the thing given, or esteem either
the matter of our righteousness, which is given us, to be given otherwise then
by grace: or to be imputed as righteousness unto us, otherwise then by grace,
do destroy the true form of the justification of a sinner before God.

And because this is a point of special moment: and brings great light, in
the matter of justification: we will speak severally of these three points.

And first, touching the action of Gods giving.

Secondly, of the action of Gods imputation.

Thirdly, of his grace, as the only cause of both.

Touching the first: there be two things which are given us of God unto
justification. The I. is faith. The II. is Christ. and both these gifts of
God, are necessary unto justification. as we shall see by Gods grace
hereafter, when we speak of justification it self. Therefore in this place we
will only speak of faith, as it is the gift of God. in which we have these
points to be marked.

First, what kind of gift it is.

Secondly, to whom it is given.

Thirdly, what faith it self is.

And fourthly, to what end and use it is given.

First then. that it is a gift, and the gift of God, it is clear in the
Scriptures. according as we have showen before, of all the saving graces of
God. and therefore it is called by the Apostle, Heb. chap. 7. verse. 4. a
heavenly gift. and in Ephe. chap. 2. ver. 8. it is expressly called the gift of
God. And the same Apostle, Phil. chap. 1. ver. 29. teaches us, that to believe
in Christ, is a gift given us. Therefore 1. Cor. chap. 12. It is uombred
amongst the gifts of God, by his spirit.

So that in this there is no great contradiction, but the special question is
what kind of gift it is. that is, whether it be a natural or a supernatural
gift. Depending either upon the natural power which God has created in man.
or upon the supernatural power of God.

For clearing hereof. We are to consider that, which in the scriptures is
spoken concerning faith.

First, touthing the ground and cause of our believing.

Secondly, touching the property, that is attributed unto faith, and which
still is in him, that believes.

And thirdly, touching certain effects attributed unto faith. Besides these
things which hereafter will show them selves, when we treat both to whom
faith is given, and what faith it self is, and what is the use and end of it.

Concerning the ground and cause of our believing: if we carefully mark the
scriptures of God, it is placed especially in three things.

The first is, the will of God, and his eternal Decree, according to his will.
as is clear, by Math. chapt. 11. verse. 26. where Christ attributed unto the
good will and pleasure of the Father, that some did believe, and some did not.
And Acts chap. 13. ver. 48. where it is expreslie said: That as many as were
ordained unto eternal life, beeleved. And this teaches us two things: First,
that faith is no work depending upon the will of man, nor any power in nature.
Secondly, that it is of the number of those blessings, not which God did
communicate in the first creation, but of those which were hid up in the
mystery of Gods, will, touching the dispensation of life, in, and through
Christ.

The second thing, wherein the ground and cause of believing, is placed in
Gods free gift, according to the saying of Christ him self, Ioh. chap. 6.
verse. 37. and 65. Which gift of God, is there also declared to be two fold.
The first, the giving of our persons unto Christ, according to these words:
All that the Father gives me, shall come to me. The second is, the giving
unto us grace to believe. According to that other saying: No man can come unto
me, except it be given him of my Father. For as says the Apostle, Romans chap.
11. verse. 32. God has shut up all men under unbelief, that he might show
mercy on all. And again, Gallat. chap. 3. verse. 22. The Scripture has
concluded all under sin, that the promise by the faith of Jesus Christ, might
be given to them that believe. And this ground is verified by the saying of
Ioh. chap. 12. ver. 39. 40. where he gives a reason, why the Jews for all his
miracles, not only believed not, but also why they could not believe in Christ.
saying: Therefore could they not believe, because that Esaias says, He has
blinded their eyes, etc.

The third thing wherein the ground and cause of our believing is placed, is
our spiritual birth. Therefore says John 1. Ep. chap. 5. 1. Whosoever
believes that Jesus is the Christ, is borne of God. Therefore the same John
describing, who they are that do believe in the Gospel, Chap. 1. verse. 13.
says: which are borne, not of blood, nor of the will of flesh, nor of the will
of man, but of God. By all these three grounds, it is evident, that faith is no
natural, but a supernatural gift. and therefore the praise of our believing,
is taken from us, and given wholly unto God. as is clear in the words of
Christ, to Peter, Math. chap. 16. ver. 17. Flesh and blood has not reveiled
that unto thee, but my Father which is in heaven.

Now we come to the property that is attributed to faith, and which through
faith is in every one that believes. and this property is the power of God,
according to the saying of the Apostle, Ephe. chap. 1. ver. 19. Where the
Apostle prays, that they might know what was, the exceeding greatness of the
power of God, in them that believe. and therefore is it, that faith is called,
the faith of the effectual working of God, Coll. chap. 2. ver. 12. and that
for two reasons.

First, because no power, nor working of any power, can ever work faith in our
hearts, except the power of God only: and therefore the Prophet Esaias does put
believing, and the having of the arm of the Lord revealed, for one thing,
Chapter 53. verse 1.

Secondly, because the power and the effectual working of faith in us, is
nothing but the very power, and the workinge of the power, of God him self.
Who, as says Peter, by his power, through faith, keeps us, 1. Epist. chap.
1. ver. 5. and for this cause, it is not only, that faith is compted, for the
chief piece of the armor of God, and of the might of his power, Ephesians. chap.
6. but also that to have Christ livinge in us, and to live by the faith of
Christ, are put for one thing, Gallat. chapt. 2. ver. 20. Thereby showing us,
that the power of faith, is not any thing but the power of GOD, and of Christ,
dwelling by faith in us. and that faith is the effectual instrument, whereby
Christ is powerful in us. Upon which ground it is, that the effects of
Christ him self, are often attributed unto faith. as in these sayings of
Christ: Thy Faith has made thee whole: Thy Faith has saved thee. And when we
are said to be saved by faith, to have our hearts purged by faith: to be
justified by faith, etc. A clear example of this we have, Acts, chap. 3. ver
16. where the Apostle indifferently attributes to the power of Christ, and to
faith, the healing of the Creeple man. Which place is carefully to be marked,
because it gives a marveillous light in the use of faith. For there it is
said: That through faith in his Name, his name had made the man sound. Which
saying does show us expreslie, that it was not faith it self, as it was the
work of that man, but the name of Christ, in which his faith was, that did
make him sound. so that the power of faith is nothing, but the power of Christ,
embrased by faith. and that the work of faith, is nothing but the work of
Christ, dwelling in our hearts by faith. Which does justify their opinion,
who affirm, that to be justified by faith, is always to be understood, to
be justified by Christ. For as by faith in his Name, his Name made the man
sound, even so by faith in his blood, his blood makes us righteous. Therefore
says the Apostle Romans chap. 3. verse. 25. That God has set Christ forth a
propitiation by faith in his blood. Where reconciling by faith, in his blood,
is to be understood, in the same sense, that making sound by faith in his name
is to be understood. in the other place, by which it is evident, that faith is
never rightly taken, in our justification, when it is taken for the thing,
wherein stands our righteousness, and not for the instrument, apprehending
that thing, which is our righteousness. Thus the power of God, working faith,
and the power of God, accompanying faith, does evidently show, faith to be a
supernatural gift, being wrought by a supernatural power, and possessing us
with a supernatural power of God him self.

This is cleerily verified, by the third point, touching these effects that
are attributed unto faith, in the book of God: when it is said, to do things
that are above the strength of all created nature: and when Saints are said
to have done by it, such things as are supernatural. Of these first sort are
those sayings, where in the justifying of us, the saving of us, and miraculous
healing of diseases, by nature incurable, are attributed unto says: as also
the keeping of us unto salvation. Of the other sort, are those sayings
wherein we are said by faith to overcome the Divill, to quench all his fiery
darts, 1. Pet. cha. 5. ver. 9. Ephe. chap. 6. verse 16. By faith we are said
to overcome the world, 1. John chap. 51 ver. 4. 5. and of these effects of
faith, there is a large rehearsal made, Hebr. chap. 11. by which it is
evident, that faith is a supernatural gift: seeing it produces such
supernatural effects. For nature never did yield or produce any thing, no
not in the integrity of it, whereby we could be able, in resisting to
overcome the Devil, and the world, or to perform such great things, and
endure such heavy torments, joyfully, as by faith we are made able to do,
and suffer. And this may well be verified, by the doleful experience, of the
fall, both of men and Angels, who by all the strength of nature, uncorrupted,
could not preserve them selves in their blessed estate, nor overcome their
temptations. Which shows us, that the power which accompanies faith in the
heart of the believer. is more strong and mighty, then any power, which God
placed by creation, in any nature whatsoever. Seeing it is able to save a man,
even now in his corrupted estate, and to preserve him, unto salvation. Whereas
all the power natural of man and Angels, could not keep them. Now being in
safety from falling from their felicity, as also, that thereby, a sinful
frail corrupted man, is able to overcome the Devil, whom man created in the
image of God, yet perfect and without sin, was not able to withstand. For
this cause it is, that the Apostle does so extol, and magnify, the exceeding
greatness of Gods power, which is in them that believe, Ephe. chap. 1. ver. 19.
By all this, it is evident, that faith is no work of nature, or the effect of
any power in nature, but a supernatural gift, flowinge from the
supernatural power of GOD. By the which GOD effectually works in us, and by
us, supernatural effects, as being the supernatural instrument, whereby his
power is effectual in us, as it was in Christ, when he raised him from the
dead, and crowned him with glory and with honor: and this gift of God comes
unto us, in ordinary dispensation, by hearing of the word, Romans chap. 10. For
there be three ordinary means, by which God uses to bestow faith upon us,
and whereby his spirit is effectual in us to that end.

The first is the Gospel. therefore is the Gospel called the power of God,
unto salvation, Romans chap. 1. ver. 16. as also, the gospel is said to be
written to this end, that we might bileeve, John chap. 20. ver. 31. and we are
said to be called unto the faith by the Gospel, 2 Thessalonians. cap. 2. ver. 14.
but the special part of the Gospel, unto faith, whereby we are called, is
the promise. For this cause, Abraham is said not to have doubted of the
promise: and we are said to be children of the promise, Gal. cha. 4. ver. 28.
Romans chap. 9. ver. 8.

The second ordinary mean, is the Sacraments, which are the signs and
seals, of the righteousness which is by faith.

The third instrument and mean is the Ministers of the Gospel, who therefore
are called, the ministers, by whom we believe.

CHAPTER XXVII.
NOW it follows that we speak of the second point, touching faith, that is,
to whom it is given, of which point, some what may be collected, out of these
three grounds, and causes, of believing, set down heretofore, therefore we
will be the shorter herein.

In handling this point, we have two things specially to be marked.

The first is, what persons they are amongst men, in whom the Lord does work
faith, that is, whether he works it in all men indifferently, or in some
certain number only.

The second is, in what part, power, or faculty, of man, faith is wrought.

Touching the first, The first ground or cause that we laid down, of
believing, may alone sufficiently clear this, seeing our believing depends
upon, the Lords ordayning us to eternal life, of his good will and pleasure.
It must follow, that God gives faith to no more, then he has Predestined,
and that faith is not indifferently given to all, it is manifest by experiences
in all ages, and by the testimony of Gods truth, Math. cha. 11. verse. 25.
Where Christ gives thanks unto the Father, because he had denied faith unto
the wise, and men of understanding, and had given it unto babes. And again,
Math. chap. 13. verse. 11. it is expressly said by Christ, that it was given to
his disciples to know the secrets of the Kingdom of heaven, but unto the rest
of the Jews it was not given. Therefore the Apostle, 2 These. chap. 3. verse. 2.
affirms plainly, that all men have not faith. Or rather (as the words seem
to importe) that faith belongs not to all men. And these testimonies preceding
do prove, that this is true: not only in respect of the action of man's will,
rejecting the means of knowledge and faith, offered by God, but in respect of
the action of God, in denying the means, yea which is more, in blinding their
eyes, that they shall not see. Esaias. 6. and Ioh. 12. and Romans 9. 18. Besides
this it is manifest by the description of those to whom faith is given.

First, they are described to be the sheep of Christ, Ioh. chap. 10. ver. 26.
and therefore says Christ to the Jews that believed not, but ye believe not
for ye are not of my sheep. Whereby it is manifest, that none (save they
which are Christ's sheep) do receyve faith: and that because Christ did lay
down his life, for none but for his sheep, John. chapt. 10. ver. 11. 15. For
none can have faith in the blood of Christ, for whom Christ never shed his
blood.

The second thing whereby they are described, is the Fathers giving of them to
Christ, and this is the ground of the former. For none are Christ's sheep, but
such as the Father gives him. and therefore he him self acknowledges, those
who are his sheep, to have been given him by the Father, John cha. 10. ver.
29. and 17. 6. etc. according to which ground, Christ speaks John chap. 6.
verse. 35. 36. 37. showing this to be the cause why the Jews believed not. to
wit, because the Father had not given them unto him, while he takes his
argument, from the contrary effect, in this manner: All that the Father gives
me, comes unto me. Upon the which it must follow, that of the contrary
effect, there must be a contrary cause. that is, that who do not come unto
him, must not be given of God unto him. For it is the will of the Father, that
sendes Christ, that he save those only whom he has given him, Ioh. chap. 6.
ver. 39. and 17. 2. For which cause Christ him self declares, that he did
manifest his Fathers Name, and give the words which his Father had given him,
and did pray unto the Father for none, but those that the Father had given him,
out of the world.

The third thing whereby they are described, is, that they are the elect of
God. therefore faith is called the faith of Gods elect, to show us that Gods
election limiteth faith, which is dispensed to no more but such, as God has
elected. as is manifest, Romans chap. 11. ver. 5. where the Apostle shows the
reason why, in the reiection of the Jews, in their infidelity, a remaynent of
faithful ones were reserved. saying: So also at this present time, there is a
remnant according to the election of grace. and this is the ground of the
former point: For as we are the sheep of Christ, because we are given him. so
we are given to Christ, because we are elected. Therefore we may boldly
conclude, that Gods Decree, according to his purpose, is not general, or
indefinite, but particular, and definite, of a certain number of persons.

For most sure and certain it is, that the office of Christ, as Prince of our
salvation, is of as large extent, in bringinge men to salvation, as is the
Fathers will, in ordayninge them to salvation, through CHRIST JESUS. For he
came to do the will of his Father. Seeing therefore, that Christ lays down
his life for none, and gives eternal life to none, and interceedeth for none,
but such as are his sheep. And seeing he accomptes none his sheep, but such
as his Father gives him: And seeinge the Father gives none unto him, but such
as he has elected in him: and seeinge he elected none in him, but such as
he had predestinate, to be adopted through him, Ephe. chapt. 1. ver. 4. 5. It
must needs follow, that Gods Decree is of a definit number, and that the
Redemption, and Intercession of Christ, are of no larger extent, then the
number of those that believe. And that faith is of no larger extent, then Gods
Decree, and his election following therevppon: neither by purpose, or intention
in God, or possibility in man. So that it is plain, by the holy Scriptures,
that none except those who are elected of God, do ever receyve the gift of
faith from God. For our election depends not upon our faith, but faith upon
our election. Therefore faith and the fruits of it are testimonies of our
election, as is clear by the Apostle, reasoning, 1. These. chap. 1.

Touching the part, power, or faculty, of Gods elect, wherein faith is
wrought by GOD, and receyved of us, the Apostle cleeres it to us, Romans chap.
10. ver. 10. saying: With the heart man believes unto righteousness. Thus it
is manifest, that the heart of man, is the part wherein faith is wrought, and
with the which man believes. Of which it will follow, that their opinion must
be erroneous, who do make Gods workinge in us, for the begetting and building
of faith in our hearts, to be only in our understanding, and not in our will,
and affection, except only by way of persuasion. Whereas notwithstanding in the
judgment of all men, the heart is chiefly taken for the will and affections,
which yet shall appear more evidently, when we shall see first that believing
is an action of the whole heart. Secondly, when we shall see, that in the
scriptures, by the heart is understood, not any one power only, or faculty of
the soul, but all the powers and faculties of it, even after the largest
manner, of the division thereof, which is, when it is divided in the
understanding, will, affection, and memory.

Touching the first, that faith is a work of the whole heart, it is manifest
by the words of Philip to the Eunuch, Acts 8. 37. saying: If thou beleevest
with thy whole heart, thou may be baptized.

The second also is manifest, that by the heart is understood, all the powers
of the soul. And first the understanding, Esa. cha. 6. and Math. chap. 13.
where it is said, That God had hardened their hearts, that they shoud not
understand with their hearts. And Solomon in the 1. of Kings, chap. 3. ver. 9.
asks of God, an understanding heart. And therefore the Apostle, the 2. Cor.
chap. 3. ver. 15. attributes the ignorance of the Jews, to the veil that is
laid over their hearts.

Secondly, touching the will and power of election, it is also attributed to
the heart, Acts chapt. 7. where it is said, that the Fathers would not obey
the Angel, but refused, and in their hearts turned back again to Egypt. And
acts 11. Barnabas exhorted all, that with purpose of heart, they would
continue in the Lord. And 1. Cor. chap. 7. it is said, He that stands firm
in his heart, that he has no need, but has power over his own will, etc. And
again, 2. Cor. chap. 9. ver. 7. As every man has fore-determined (or chosen)
with his heart.

Thirdly, touching the affections, it is a thing out of controversy, that they
belong to the heart. And the scripture witnesses the same, Math. chap. 6. ver.
21. where Christ says: Where your treasure is, there will your heart be also.
And Romans chap. 1. ver. 24. it is said, that God did give up the Gentiles, in
the lusts of their heatres, unto uncleanness. And in the 14. and 16. chap. of
John, Fear, sorrow, joy, are attributed unto the heart.

Fourthly, memory, and retayning in mind, is attributed unto the heart. Luke
chap. 1. ver. 66. All they that heard, did lay up all these words in their
heart. And Luke chap. 21. ver. 14. Christ says to his Disciples, Lay it up
therefore in your hearts. And for this same cause God says in his covenant,
That he will write his law in our hearts. For this cause does Christ
attribute unto man's heart, the treasure of man. Math. chap. 12. A good man out
of the good treasury of his heart, brings forth good things: And an evil
man, out of the evil treasury of his heart brings forth evil things.
Thus the power of retayning, and keeping in mind, and laying up in store
things both good, and evil, is attributed unto the heart of man.

Of this we may perceyve, that seeing believing, is an action of the whole
heart, that it must needs be wrought of God: and receyved by us in all the se
foresaid powers, of the soul: and that the action of our heart in believing,
is not an action of the will only, but of all the powers of the soul
co^iunctly. For seeing faith is the root of our regeneration, out of which
springs all good motion, and all the parts of the renewed man, in all the
powers of the soul. It is most necessarily requisite, that faith it self be
placed in them all: that by it, all may be purified, and all may be filled with
Christ: and all may live by the faith of the Son of God. For no more of the
soul of man is renewed, but so far of it, as is iudued with faith. Neither
is any more possessed with Christ, then is possessed with faith: nor can Christ
live in any more of our soul, then that which lives by the faith of CHRIST.

By this it may appear, how vngraciouslie they speak of Gods grace in the
work of faith, who make him effectually to renew, no more of man but his
understanding: leavinge the action of consenting, and embracing by faith the
things reveiled, to the will of man. as also how slenderly they speak of
faith, who place it in nothing, but in the wills assentinge to the truth of
God.

CHAPTER XXVIII.
NOw it follows, that we speak of faith it self, what it is. In which point
we will first entreat, of the diverse significations of Faith, in the word of
God. And secondly of the true signification and nature of it, in the wroke of
justification.

Touching the first, Faith is taken in four diverse significations in the
scriptures of God, besides that signification which it has in the work of
justification.

The first signification is, when faith is taken for fidelity and truth, as
Math. chap. 23. 32. Ye leave the waightier matter of the Law, as judgment,
mercy, and fidelity. Likewise, Romans chap. 3. ver. 3. Shall their unbelief
make the faith of God of none effect. and 1. Timoth. cha. 5. ver. 12. having
damnation, because they have broken their first faith.

Secondly, faith does signify the doctrine of the Gospel, because it is
begotten in us, by the Gospel, for faith comes by hearing, therefore faith
is called the faith of the Gospel, as also because the Gospel, preaches
salvation, to be no otherwise but by faith. and therefore the Gospel is called
the word of faith. Romans chap. 10. ver. 8. In this signification it is taken,
Gall. chap. 3. Receyved ye the spirit by the works of the Law, or by the
hearing of says. And again, Galla chap. 1. ver. 23. He which in time past
persecuted us. now preaches the faith, that he before destroyed. And Acts
chap. 6. ver. 7. And a great company of the Priests were obedient to the faith.

Thirdly, faith is taken for particular knowledge, Romans 14. 22. Have thou
faith, have it with thy self, etc. That which in this place the Apostle calls
faith, in the same question, matter, and purpose, he calls knowledge, 1. Cor.
chap. 8.

Fourthly, faith is sometimes put for Christ himself in the gospel. because all that ever faith in the gospel apprehends, is Christ, who is the only true
object of faith unto salvation. In this sense it is taken Gal. 3. 23. before
faith came, we were kept under the law, as under a garrison, shut up unto that
faith, which afterward should be reveiled. which words being compared with the
24. and 25. verses following and with the 19. verse preceding, it shall be
manifest, that by the name of faith, in that place, Christ the object of faith
is understood.

Thus much for these four diverse significations: wherein faith is taken in the
word of God. Now we come to the special signification and nature of it, as we
are said thereby to be justified. And when it is said to be imputed unto
righteousness. In which point there is greatest need of careful attention,
because upon the mistaking hereof, arises principally, the mistaking of
justification it self. Specially in that sentence where it is said, that
Faith is imputed unto righteousness. Concerning which there is a two-folde
controversy. The first is, whether faith in this place be taken in the own
proper signification, or in a borrowed sense. The second controversy is,
touching the proper signification, of faith what it is.

In the first controversy, these who take faith in a borrowed speech, do
expound that sentence Metonymically by faith understanding Christ crucified,
apprehended by faith, and so do esteem that faith, relatively, or
instrumentally taken, and not properly, is imputed unto us for righteousness.
And this opinion agrees with the truth of the matter it self. But there is
no necessity, why faith in that place, should be taken in a borrowed sense:
if the right mind and meaning of the holy Ghost, in this phrase, be gravely
and maturely considered, so that if they who take it properly, did not err,
either in the signification of it, or in the true sense of the imputation of
it, their opinion might well be allowed. For faith in this sentence, is in my
opinion, to be taken properly in that sense, whereby in it self it is
distinguished, both from the word, whereby it is begotten, and from the object
of it, in the word which is Christ. As also, from the naked knowledge of the
word, and Christ, therein reveyled: how soever it does comprehend knowledge.

For searching out therefore, the true signification of the word Faith, in this
sentence, we will first set down, the diverse significations wherein it is
taken. Secondly, we will speak of the true nature and signification of it in
this place, where it is said to be imputed unto righteousness.

Concerning the first, we are not to speak of that difference which in the
scriptures is warranted of historical faith, miraculous faith, and justifying
faith, but only of the different opinions of men, touching justifying faith.

In one thing all men do consent, and agree, that faith is an action of the
heart, consisting in judgment: but they differ in three sorts.

The first sort make this judgment of the heart, in believing, to be nothing
but a naked opinion. which is a doubtful inclination of an uncertain mind,
to the best part of the contradiction with fear of the contrary part, being
destitute of the knowledge of the true cause. As for example, in this
contradiction, Christ's death shall save us. and Christ's death shall not save
us: they have an opinion of the best, that is, that Christ's death, shall save
them, but no certain knowledge, because they are ignorant of the cause of that
effect: and therefore, fear that they shall not be saved, and in this opinion
they place faith.

The second sort, which are the wiser amongst the Papists, do make faith to
be an action of the heart, in judging, neither by way of opinion, nor yet by
way of certain knowledge, but by a middle way of judgment, betwixt opinion
and knowledge. Which participates of both, and yet is neither of them. For they
will not have it, a doubtful inclination of the mind, unto the best part,
with fear of the worst, upon ignorance of the cause. Neither will they have
it, a certain inclination of the mind, to the best, without all fear, of the
worst, upon certain knowledge of the cause, and necessary means. But will
have it middle conceyte of the mind, neither altogether contingent, neither
altogether necessary.

And now in these days, there is a sort of men, which agree with this second
sort, in substance, whatsoever deceitful show, their words do make to the
contrary. Therefore as touching this point, we make no several order of
them. For albeit in word they seem to admit, in believing, knowledge of the
thing believed: yea which is more, albeit they grant application, yet seeing
they make neither of the two, necessary, stable, or constant, but variable,
and subject to change, affirming that the Saints, may fall from saving grace,
they must needs agree with the former, touching the sense and meaning of the
word faith, as it is the action of our hearts in judging and apprehending of
our salvation.

The third sort are they, who esteem faith to signify, the assured
confidence of the heart, upon certain knowledge of the best part, without any
fear of the worst. And this opinion only agrees with Gods truth. For nothing
can be more contrary to the nature of faith, then an uncertain opinion:
seeing no demonstration, can ever make a surer conclusion then faith makes in
the heart of man, of all whatsoever it believes. So that justly we may say,
that salvation believed, and embrased by faith, is more sure and steadfast and
certain unto us by faith, then ever it was in the beginning to Adam, or
Angels, by possession. For he that believes, shall never perish, and the
gates of hell shall never prevail against him. For he that believes, is
persuaded that neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor
powers, nor thinget present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor
any other ereature, shall be able to separate him, from the love of GOD, which
is in Christ Jesus his Lord. And for confirmation hereof, we refer the
Reader to that which we have spoken before, touching the supernatural effects
of faith, and to that which hereafter follows, in the description of the
true nature of faith, unto the which we now come, leaving to speak of the
error concerning the imputation of faith, until we come to treat of
imputation it self.

We have heard already, that faith is the supernatural gift of God. And that
the means whereby the holy Ghost works it, is the Word, the Sacraments, and
the ministry. and that the persons to whom he gives it, are only his elect,
whom he has given to Christ, to be his sheep. And lastly, that the whole
heart of man, and the powers of his soul, are the subject wherein it is
wrought. So that now it rests to know, what it is that God works in our
souls, when he gives us faith. For in these things, that have already been
said, it differs nothing from the rest of Gods saving graces. For they are
all heavenly, spiritual, and supernatural gifts of God, wrought in the whole
heart of every one of Gods elect: either by the inward operation of the holy
Ghost, extraordinarily, or else in ordiraaie dispensation, by the effectual
revelation of the Gospel. Therefore seeing faith, has these things common
with all the rest, we are now to try the particular difference, whereby it
is distinguished in substance, and nature, from all the rest of Gods blessings.

The consideration of the nature of faith in it self, is twofolde.

First, faith is to be considered, as it is the gift of God, coming from him,
and wrought by him, in our hearts.

Secondly, faith is to be considered, as our hearts (having it not wrought in
them) work by it again, toward God, unto justification.

This twofold consideration of faith, is necessary for the right knowledge,
both of the nature and of the working of it. For faith passively taken,
signifies the effect of Gods working: framinge faith in our hearts: but
actively taken, it signifies the action of our hearts now believing, in laying
hold upon Jesus Christ, as he, who is made of God unto us, wisdom,
sanctification, and redemption.

First then we will speak of it, as it is the work of God in us. And next, as
our hearts works by it. And this we are carefully to consider, for hereupon
depends all our fellowship with God in Christ. and all participation of the
promise, and inheritance promised to the children of God. and all true
rejoicing, and gloriation, in God. and in this work of faith, consists all
the strength whereby we are made able, to stand against all powers of darkness,
and sin, and are vpholden to the end.

In the scriptures of God we find, that all blessings that come from Christ
unto us, are attributed unto faith: as also our being Christ's, and the
children of God in him, is likewise attributed unto faith. For there be two
special grounds in the which consists all our felicity.

The first is our becoming Christ's, that is when we are made his.

The second is, the infallible consequence of the former, when all that Christ
is made of God for us, is made ours. So that his death, his resurrection, his
ascension, his glorification, etc. are all made ours. And this follows upon
the former, for as says the Apostles, If ye be Christ's, then are ye
Abraham's seed, and heirs by promise, Gallat. chapt. 3. ver. 29. according to
which also the Apostle says, All things are yours, and ye Christ's, and
Christ Gods, 1. Cor. chap. 3. ver. 21. 32. 23. Now faith is the mean and
instrument, of both these points. For by faith we are made Christ's, and by
faith Christ is to us, wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption.

The first of these two is the fruit of faith, as God works it in our
hearts, or rather the work of God, by working faith in our hearts. The second
is the fruit of faith, now wrought in our hearts, or rather, the work of our
hearts by faith.

Thus faith is the mean, and effectual instrument of al our blessedness: both in
our union with Christ the son of God, and also of our communion with him,
both in his death, life, and glory: and therefore we are said both to be the
sons of God by faith in Christ, and to be justified by faith in him, and to
live by faith in him, and to be saved by faith in him, so that faith is the
supernatural gift of God, given us, for these supernatural ends, that by it
we may be in Christ, and Christ in us, for by faith he dwelles in our hearts,
and that in him, and by him, we may enjoy righteousness and life.

To speak then of the first, that is, of faith as God works it, it
consists specially in four things.

The first is, in Gods opening and illuminating of our understandings, making
our hearts in our understanding power, not only to know the promise in Christ,
and Christ to be the seed in whom blessedness is promised to all Nations, and in
whom all the promises of God are yea and amen: but also to judge and esteem
these things reveyled of God, to be a most undoubted and infallible truth. so
that by this first work of the Father, the heart of Gods elect is made to see,
and undoubtedly to acknowledge, that there is no blessedness unto man, but only
in Jesus Christ crucified. So that his eyes are open to see in him self,
nothing but just cause of condemnation: from the which there is not any help,
neither in him self, nor any creature, but in Jesus Christ alone. And
therefore is made of God, to determine with him self, to know nothing unto
life and salvation, but Christ and him crucified: and this work of the Father
(which is the beginning of all grace) is expressed in the Scriptures, by Gods
teachinge us: according as Christ says, John chap. 6. ver. 45. Every one that
has heard of the Farher, and has learned of him, comes unto me. Showing us
thereby, that the first cause of our believing, or rather the first part and
portion of the work of faith wrought in our hearts by God, consists in God
teaching of us: according to his promise made in his covenant, Esaias chap. 54.
ver. 13. And all thy children shall be taught of the Lord. And Ierem. chap. 31.
ver. 33. 34. I will put my law in their inward parts, and write it in their
hearts, and they shall teach no more every man his neighbor, and every man
his brother, saying, know the Lord: For they shall all know me from the
least of them, unto the greatest of them, says the Lord.

For it is true which Christ speaks, Math. chap. 11. ver. 27. No man knows
the Son, but the Father: neither knows any man the Father, but the Son:
and he to whom the Son will reveyle him. So that the knowledge of God, is a
secret belonging to God alone, which no flesh is everable to attain unto, by
any power of his own natural light and understanding: therefore says the
Apostle, that this is the wisdom of God hid in a mystery, which none of the
Princes of this world have ever known, 1. Cor. 2. For as he says in that
same chapter, The natural man, perceyveth not the things of the Spirit of
God. For they are foolishnes unto him: neither can he know them, because they
are spiritually discerned. And this he confirms by a strong argument, in that
same chapter, verse. 11. saying: For what man knows, the things of a man,
save the spirit of a man which is in him: even so the things of God, knows
no man, but the spirit of God. For which cause also, in that same place, he
attributes the cause of all our knowledge, unto God reveyling unto us by his
spirit, the things that are given us of God: according to which Christ says
unto Peter, when he did confess him to be the Christ the Son of the living
God, that flesh and blood had not reveiled that unto him, but his Father which
was in heaven, Math. cha. 16. ver. 17. thereby witnessing plainly, that no
natural light, nor information of man's own mind, can possibly make a man to
know Jesus, to be the Christ, and son of the living God: but that this
knowledge comes unto our hearts, by the supernatural gift, and revelation of
God by his spirit: according to which the Apostle says, 1. Cor. chap. 1. ver.
18. That the preaching of the cross, is to them that perish, foolishnes: but
unto us that are saved, it is the power of God. For God has cast away the
understanding of the prudent, and has made the wisdom of this world
foolishnes. For by that wisdom the world does not know God, therefore says
the Apostle in that same place: We preach Christ crucified, unto the Jews
even a stu^bling block: and unto the Graecians foolishnes: but unto them which
are called, both of the Jews, and Graecians, we preach Christ the power of
God, and the wisdom of God. Thus it is plain, that this wisdom and light
of the heart, whereby we know Christ crucified, to be our only Savior and
Son of God, is a gift supernaturally given us by God, when he calls us, and
therefore says Christ: That it is not given to every man to know the secrets
of heaven, Math. chap. 13. verse. 11. showing us thereby, that the power to
know these things, is give^ us of God. Which is yet more clear by the speech
of Christ, touching them to whom this gift is not given: when he says, that
seeing, they do not see, and hearing, they hear not, neither understand. And
this work of God in the scriptures, is signified, by opening of the eyes of
our understanding: Ephesians. chapt. 1. ver. 18. and sometimes, by opening of the
heart: Acts. chapt. 16. ver. 14. And in this first work of God, by his
grace, consists the chief foundation of our strength: as is showen by Ioh.
1. Epi. chap. 5. verse. 5. saying: Who is it that overcommeth the world: but
he that believes that Jesus is the son of God. As likewise this is the
seal of out Adoption, as witnesses the same Apostle, 1. Epi. chap. 5. saying:
Every one that believes that Jesus is the Christ: is borne of God. And
thirdly, on this depends our ereruall life: as witnesses Christ him self,
John chap. 17. ver. 3. This is eternal life, that they know thee the only
true God: and whom thou have sent Jesus Christ. and therefore, whosoever is
ignorant of this point (and so much more they that impugn it) shall never
inherit eternal life: according to Christ's own testimony, Ioh. ca. 8. ver.
24. Therefore I said unto you, that ye shall die in your sins: for except ye
believe that I am he, ye shall die in your sins.

To conclude this point then, the first action of God in man, and so the first
gift bestowed upon the heart of man unto life, is the power and faculty, of
conceyving, and knowing, God in Christ the Savior, as he is reveyled in the
word: according to the saying of John, Epi. 5. 20. But we know, that that
son of God, is come, and has given us a mind to know him that is true: and
we are in him that is true, that is, in that his Son Jesus Christ, this same
is that very true God, and that eternal life.

The second work of God wherein our faith consists, is in giving a will to
come to Christ, and to enjoy him, and to obey him according to the saying of
the Prophet, Psalm. 110. 3. Thy people shall come willingly, at the time of the
assemblinge of thine army in holy beauty.

For as the understanding power of man, is darkened, and al his wisdom, is but
foolishnes: so his will, is rebellious against Gods will, in all things. so
that as he cannot naturally perceyve, nor know, the things of God: so can he
not naturally will, nor desire, the things of God. and this oftentimes is
signified in scripture, by the hardness of man's heart that cannot repent: and by
his stiff-neckednes, and by resisting of the holy Ghost, according to the words
of God by the Prophet Esaias, ca. 65. ver. 2. and 3. I have spread my hands out
all the day, to a rebellious and gaine-saying people, etc. And this work of
God is expressed in scripture, by the phrase of Gods drawing us, Ion. 6. 44. No
man can come unto me, except the Father that has sent me, draw him. as
likewise is signified by the opening of the ear: as Esaias cha. 50. ver. 5. The
Lord GOD has opened mine ear, and I was not rebellious, neither turned I
back. This also is signified by the Lord, Ier. 32. when he promises, that he
would put his fear in their hearts, that they should not depart from him:
and most clearly, Eze. cap. 36. 26. 27. A new heart also will I give you, and
a new spirit will I put within you: and I will take away the stony heart out
of your body, and will give you a heart of flesh, and I will put my spirit
within you, and cause you to walk in my Statutes. For this cause it is, that
Christ calls them blessed, who honger and thirst for righteousness: For it is
most certain, that the earnest desire of the heart, to enjoy Christ and his
righteousness, etc. is an undoubted token of Gods saving grace, and of his
effectual calling, in the which he bestows this, as a supernatural gift,
upon the elect, as the second effect, of his working power, whereby he
changes our wills, which are of them selves rebellious, and makes them
willing to come unto Christ, and to obey his voice. Therefore is it said, That
God is the worker, both of the will, and of the deed, of his good pleasure in
us, Phil. cap. 2. 13. so this is the second part of that supernatural gift of
faith, when as our will makes choice of that which is the will of God, and we
submit our wills to his will in all things, which is most contrary to the
nature of flesh. For as says the Apostle, Romans chap. 8. ver. 7. The wisdom
of the flesh, is not subject to the Law of God, neither can be. Therefore
does the Prophet David say: That the man is blessed, whom the Lord chooses, and
causes to come, Psalm. 65. 4. It is for this same cause, that David prays so
often: that God would incline his heart to his statutes.

The third part of Gods workinge in givinge Faith unto us, is the
sanctification of our affections, to make us to love Christ above all things,
and that by the pouring of his love in our hearts by his holy Spirit: For as
he inclines our minds to mind heavenly things, by insinuatinge his mind
toward us in Christ Jesus into our minds, and as by the sense, and feelinge,
and proof of his good will toward us in all things, he draws out wills
unto his will: So by the sense of his love, in his giving his dear Son to
the death for us, while we were his enemies, he enflames our hearts with the
love of him again, so that with our affection, we are set upon Christ more
then all things, and are content to lose all things, that we may gain him.

Therefore says Christ, Math. cha. 10. ver. 37. He that loves father, or
mother, better then me: is not worthy of me, etc. And Luke chap. 14. ver. 26.
If any man come unto me, and hate not his Father, and Mother, and Wife, and
Children, and Brethren and Sisters, yea and his own life also: he can not be
my Disciple. Wherein it appears most plainly, that faith is a gift
supernatural: seeing it brings a supernatural love into the heart, which
overcommeth all the love and affection, which can be in nature: especally when
it overcommeth the love of man to him self, and his own life.

Fourthly, the Lord by working faith, does imprinte his knowledge, and his
will, and love to us, in our memories, working such a steadfast impression in
our hearts, of his mercy and grace, toward us in Christ, as can never be
defaced: therefore the wicked in the book of God are noted by this name, they
that forget God. whereas the children of God have him always before theit
eyes. Thus the Lord when he works faith in our hearts, he works it in all
the powers of our soul, filling the whole heart with such supernatural
virtue, and power, in all the faculties thereof, whereby the heart, which of it
self naturally could never be able to know, or to desire, or to love, or to
keep any heavenly thing belonging unto life and godliness: is made able both to
know, and to will, and to love, and with the will, and affection, to
apprehende, and to keep constantly the Lord Jesus, and all blessings in him
unto eternal life.

And all these points are wrought by God, in the heart of every one of his
elect, particularly, as in them selves so also concerning them selves, so that
their knowledge, and assurance of the truth of the things reveyled, touching
Christ, and redemption in him, is not a general notion, and persuasion of the
heart, that God has given his son to be a Redeemer to mankind, and that he
has performed redemption in his death: for such a faith not only the
reprobate, but Satan him self, has, but it is a particular sight, and
assurance of every man's own heart, concerning him self, that God has elected
him, and for him in particular has given Christ, to be a Redeemer, and has
made him particularly unto him wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and
redemption.

For it is not my faith-concerning the mind of God unto others, nor yet of the
mind of God conceyved generally toward all his elect, but the particular
knowledge, and assurance, of his mind concerning my self, that does save
me: For the just shall live by his own faith, Habac. chapt. 2. ver. 4. But
this will appear more clearly in the next point: while we consider Faith,
being new wrought in our hearts, how we are said with our heart to believe.

In this point we have to consider: First, that it is the man him self who
believes: Secondly, that it is his heart whereby he believes: And thirdly,
believing is the action which man performs with his heart.

As for the first, man is said to believe, because that this supernatural gift
is given him of God, and that in his heart it is effectual in him in all the
points forespoken: for by Gods enlightening of him, he sees, and by his
teaching, he understands, and by the Lords enclining of his will, he wills,
and by the Lords sanctifying of his affection, he loves, and by the Lords
imprinting, and writing, in his mind, and sealing by his spirit, whatsoever he
reveyleth unto him, he both possesses, retayneth, and keeps, Christ and all
the blessings promised in him: so that faith actively considered, is nothing
but the motion of man's heart, which is wrought in him by the spirit of God:
and therefore in substance, nothing else but the very action of GOD in man: but
considered in a diverse manner, that is, passively, as it is wrought by God in
him, and actively, as he by this working of God, in all the powers of his
soul, apprehends, and receyveth grace from God: so that the action of man in
believing with the heart, is nothing but his knowing, and acknowledging of
things, by Gods making him know, and acknowledge them, and his willing them, by
Gods making him to will them, and his loving, by Gods making him to love them,
and his apprehending and retayning them, by Gods making of him to apprehende
and reteyne them, GOD imprinting, writing, and sealing them in man's heart: This
work therefore of man, is likewise attributed unto God under these two
phrases. First, when it is said, that he gives us to come unto the son,
John chap. 6. ver. 65. Secondly, the Fathers giving us unto the son, John.
chap. 6. ver. 37. and 17. 6.

Thus the motion of man with his heart being moved of God, is called man's
believing with the heart, eve^ as a wheel which of it self cannot move, yet
being moved by an other, does move, whose motion therefore though it be but
one, yet is said to be the motion of two, that is of the manner, and of the
thing moved: and therefore is both actively, and passively to be considered: in
the one sense God is said to bring us unto Christ: in the other sense we are
said to come unto Christ. and this is carefnlly to be marked, least with a
great many we err, in esteeming faith to be man's own proper work, flowing
from the natural power of his own will, and so mistake the saying of the
Prophet, the just shall live by his own faith: as alfo Christ's form of
speech, when he says, thy faith has saved thee, for faith is called ours,
and our own, not in respect that we are the Authors, the cause, or workers of
it: but because we possess it, and are the special subjects of it, in the
which it is wrought by God, as also because it concerns onr selves in
particular, and what we believe, we believe it particularly touching our
selves, so that faith is called our own faith in the Scriptures of God, to
declare the particular nature of savinge faith in two particular things: The
first is, that it is not the faith that GOD works in another man's heart, but
the faith which he works in mine own heart, that saves me.

Secondly, it is not the faith which I have in mine own heart, concerning
others, but the faith that I have concerning my self in particular, that
saves me. So that this word used by the Spirit of God, saying: thy faith has
saved thee, and the just by his own faith shall live, is set down, not to
design the cause, but the subject, of savinge faith: and that in two
respects, that is, both in respect of him in whom it is wrought, and also in
respect of him concerning whom it is wrought: so that my faith that saves me,
must be wrought by GOD in my own heart: and what he makes me believe, he
must make me believe it concerning my self in particnlar.

If the Papists did rightly understand this, they would see that every
particnlar Christian, has a particular warrant, by particular revelation from
God, of the certainty of his own salvation: For when he said, to believe
with the heart: the same believing, includes in it a particular knowledge, by
the particular revelation of God in his heart concerning him self in
particular, that he is chosen and elected of God, that Christ is given for
him, that in him he is redeemed, that in him he has remission of his sins,
that through him, he shall be glorified.

Secondly, they should likewise know, and with them such as in the Church of
God, follow their opinion: that when it is said, that man with the heart
believes, the heart is not to be esteemed the cause of believing, as though
naturally of it self it could believe, but as a wheel moved by another, does
move: so our hearts action of believing, is nothing but the action of God
moving our hearts.

CHAPTER XXIX.
NOW it follows that we speak of the use, and end, wherefore this
supernatural gift is given unto man: this shortly we may reduce unto four
points.

The first is, faith is given for knowledge.

Secondly, faith is given for possession of the things known.

Thirdly, faith is given for keeping, and constant retayning, the things
possessed, and that during this life.

Fourthly, faith is given for practice.

We say, that it is given for these uses, during the time of this life:
because, that in the life to come, both knowledge, possession, and keeping, are
performed in us by another mean, that is by sight: For in this world we
walk by faith, and therefore do neither know, possess, nor keep but by
faith: but in the world to come, we shall walk by sight, for we shall see him
as he is: and therefore we shall both know, posses, and keep by sight.

Now concerning the first use and end of faith which is knowledge, we are to
remember the saying of the Apostle 1. Corinthians. chap. 2. ver 9. the things which
God has prepared for his elect, are such which the eyes of man has not seen,
and which the ear has not heard, and which has not entered in the heart of
man. Whereby the Apostle will declare unto us, that the things which God has
ordained for our glory, are such, as the heart of man can never possibly of it
self conceyve: therefore as says the Apostle John* God must needs give us a
mind to know them, before we ever can perceyve them, and this mind that God
gives is a believing heart: For the heart of man, is able by faith to know
things, to will, and affect things, to enjoy, and possess things, and to
keep and retain them, which of it self by all the power of reason, will.
etc. it never could, nor possibly can, be able, to know, possess, etc. Thus
we say by faith, that the world was made by the word of God: and that things
that are seen* were made of things which did not appear, Hebr. chapt. 11.
which all the Philosophers, and Princes of the world, by all the light of
nature, could never understand. For the things of God, are not naturally, but
spiritually, discerned: therefore the natural man, can not perceyve them. In
the same sense, Abraham is said to have seen the day of Christ, and to have
rejoiced: and by the virtue of our faith it is, that we know JESUS to be that
Christ, and the son of God: and by faith we know, that we are elected of
God: and by faith we know, that in Christ alone consists our adoption, our
righteousness, fanctification, and redemption: so that we know, that it is
impossible to any man, to be the son of God, or just, or holy, or free from
death, but in, and by Christ only: thus take me away faith from the heart, it
is impossible to all the wisdom of the wisest heart, ever to understand
these things, and to know them for undoubted verities: therefore it is (as we
have marked before) that Christ says to Peter: Flesh and blood has not
reveyled that unto thee: but my Father that is in heaven, Math. chap. 16. For
this cause Christ says unto the Jews: Except ye believe that I am be: ye
shall die in yonr sinn^^. Showing us by that speech, that there is no way to
know Christ to be the son of God, but by beleevinge only.

Now this knowledge that comes by faith, is not to be taken in that sense,
wherein sometimes the word knowledge is put: which is when it signrfieth the
naked, and bare understanding of things that are reveyled: but it is taken for
an infallible science, when as the heart knows God, and knows him
undoubtedly to be God: and when as it knows Christ* and knows him
undoubtedly to be the son of God: and when it knows Gods truth, and
knows it undoubtedly to be the truth of God: therefore says John the
Baptist, He that receyveth his testimony, has sealed that God is true, John
chap. 3. ver. 33 And again, John 1. Epi. chap. 5. ver. 10. He that heleeveth
not God, has made him a liar, because he believed not the record that God
witnessed of his soune.

Neither is this all which is meant by the knowledge of faith, but a third
thing is yet to be added for the full understanding thereof: For besides the
sight, and knowledge, of the things which are reveiled by God, and also
besides the knowledge of the undoubted verity, and truth of them, it is
required, that we know them to be reveyled by God unto us, and know the
undoubted truth, and verity, of them toward us in our particular person, that
is, that whatsoever God reveyle to us, he reveyleth it unto us as a thing which
he has appointed for us: and when he gives us the sight, and knowledge of the
undoubted verity of the things reveyled: he makes us assuredly to know,
that they shall be truly and verily accomplished in our persons, conform to
that ground which we have laid down before concerning faith: that is, that
what we believe, we must believe it concerning our selves in particular:
according as it is said of Abraham, that he believed God that he should be the
Father of many Nation^s: And as Job speaks of him self, chap. 19. verses 25.
26. 27. I am sure that my Redeemer lives: and I shall see God in my flesh,
whom I my self shall see, and my eyes shall behold, and none other for me.
According to which certainty, the Apostle Paul speaks also of him self,
Romans chap. 8. and for this manner of knowledge which comes by faith, the
Fathers do call faith, the eye whereby we see the invisible things of God, as
also the ingrave^ form of the sons of God: and for this same cause it is
called by the Apostle Heb. chap. 11. the evidence of things which are not
seen. where by the word evidence, is understood, that faith does not only
show them, but by evident demonstration confirm the undoubted verity of them,
and that to us in particular: so that it lets me not only see life eternal
in Christ, and this eternal life to belong to all that are in Chtist, but
particularly it lets me see my self in Christ, and this life to belong to
me in him: and that so certainly, as nothing in heaven nor earth, can be more
certain: and thus much for the first use of faith.

The second end wherefore faith is given is possession: and this confirms
evidently and plainly the former ground touching knowledge, that it is so to
be understood, as we have spoken: For the knowledge of faith is never without
possession, according to thar saying of Christ, Ioh. cha. 14. ver. 17. speaking
of the spirit, whow the world can not receyve, because it sees him not,
neither knows him: but ye know him, for he dwells with you, and shall be
in you. According to which ground it is, that Ioh. says: He that believes in
that son of GOD, has the witness in him self, 1. Epist. chap. 5. ver. 10.
Thus faith makes us to know nothing, but that which it also makes us to
possess: therefore does the Apostle pray to God for the Ephesians, that
Christ might dwell in their hearts by faith, chap. 3. verse. 27.

For as the heart of man, can never know Christ by it own light, but by the
supernatural light of faith: so it can never apprehend Christ, nor any
blessing in Christ, by any natural power that is in the will and affection
thereof. Therefore God gives to his elect the supernatural gift of faith in
their hearts, that his elect, whose hearts could never by any natural
strength, ever attain to the possession of Christ, nor ever desire to have
him, nor yet embrace him with unfeigned love, as their only treasure,
righteousness, and life, might chose him, and count all things but dunge to
gain him, forsaking them selves and their own righteousness, and to love him,
and embrace him, with such affection, that they prefer him to all things, eve^
to their own life: so that man by faith is not only made to know his redeemer:
but also to possess him, and all blessings in him. And for this cause is it,
that in the scriptures we are said, to be the children of God by faith in
Christ: to be justified by faith in him: to be saved by faith in him: and as
says the Apostle Peter, believing in him, we carry about with us the end of
our faith, the salvation of our souls, 1. Epist. 1. 9. And for this working of
faith, it is called by the Apostle the subsisting of things hoped for. Hebr.
11. 1. because it gives a certain being, and subsisting, unto things that are
yet invisible, and are yet only expected, and hoped for: and makes the^ to
subsist in our hearts: therefore says Christ, he that believes, is already
translated from death to life: and has everlasting life, Ioh. 5. 24.

Thus we see, that faith being taken away, the heart of man should never be
able to possess, nor apprehend Christ, nor righteousness, or any other
spiritual blessing in him.

Therefore, because it is the effectual instrument of Gods supernatural power
in our hearts, whereby we apprehende and possess Christ, and all blessings in
him: The Fathers do call it the hand of a Christian, as also the mouth of a
Christian, and likewise the bound of a Christian: because by faith, as by a
hand, we lay hold on him, and by faith, as by a mouth, we receyve him into
our hearts, and by faith, as by a band that never can be broken, we are so
united to him, and he, with all the benefits that are in him, unto us: that
we never can possibly be separated from him, nor he or his blessings from us:
for this cause is it, that Augustine says, Believe only, and thou have eaten
him.

And for clearing of this ground, it is that these phrases of speech are used,
to wit, that Christ is the end of the law unto righteousness, to all that
believe: that the promise is given to them, that faithfully believe: That the
Gospel is the power of GOD unto salvation, to every one that believes, etc.
all to teach us, that neither the Gospel can help us to salvation, neither is
the promise made ours, nor Christ's righteousness belongs unto us, except we
believe: because there is no mean to make any thing contained in the Gospel
(especially the promise, or Christ him self) to be ours: but faith only. And
for this same cause, our righteousness is said to be the righteousness of God,
which is by faith: and the righteousness which is through the faith of Christ,
Phil. chap. 3. ver. 9. And Christ is said, to be a reconciliation through
faith in his blood, Romans chap. 3. ver. 25. All serving to teach us, that faith
is not our righteousness it self: but only the mean by the which we attain to
that which is our righteousness, that is Christ in his blood: for in that sense
is righteousness faid to be through faith, and by faith.

Moreover, it is for this same cause, that faith is called in the Scriptures
the faith of Christ, Romans chap. 3. where righteousness is said to be, the
righteousness of God by the faith of Jesus. and that because the whole matter,
and substance, which by faith we either know, or apprehende unto
righteousness, is only Christ:

Sometimes it is called the faith of his name, Acts cha. 3. ver. 16. as also
the faith in his name, as Ioh. chap. 1. ver. 12. because all the virtue,
strength, and power, whereby we believe to be iustisied, is in Christ alone,
and in the virtue of his death, and resurrection: so that the virtue is not in
faith it self, but in Jesus apprehended by faith.

Sometimes again it is called the faith toward Christ, Act. chap. 20. ver.
21. because faith sets nothing before it as the object, but Christ alone:
for the Gospel which is the word of faith, propounds not any thing unto us,
but only Christ, as either promised, or given unto us of God, to be the
matter either of our righteousness, sanctification, or redemption.

Sometimes again it is called the faith in Christ, Gal. chap. 3. ver. 26. and
that for two causes. First, because that wherein by faith our hearts are
fastened, and in the which our hearts only setleth their full confidence of
righteousness, and remission of sins, is only Christ, in whom only, our
faith is, and we also by faith: for thereby we are made to be in him, and he
in us: and therefore in the scripturs to be in Christ, and to be in the faith,
are put indifferently, Romans cha. 8. verse. 10. compared with 2. Cor. cha. 13.
ver. 3. 5. And for this same respect, the proper effects of Christ him self,
are attributed unto faith. The second Reason is, because faith neither
suffers us to rest upon it, nor on our selves, nor on any other thing, nor
yet in any thing that is in faith, or in our selves, or in any thing except
Christ only, and that which is in him, as the ground of our confidence, or as
the matter of our righteousness or blessedness: therefore are we said in him to
have redemption, in him to be made righteousness, and in him to be circumcised.
For whatsoever we are made by Faith, we are made it in Christ: and what soever
faith makes to be ours, it is also in Christ: therefore faith makes not God
our God, but in Christ: nor us the children of God, but in Christ: nor
righteous but in Christ, etc. For whatsoever faith lays hold on, it finds
it in Christ: so that the heart of man, when it believes unto righteousness,
sends out faith, and fixes it in Christ, thereby laying hold upon him, and
his obedience unto righteousness: bringing him, and his obedience, with all the
virtue both of his death, and life, into our hearts to dwell in them.

Sometimes also it is called the faith by Christ: because he is the Author,
Fountain, and occasion of it, not so much because he with the Father, and holy
Ghost, does work it, as because he alone is the mean, and occasion of it:
For as the Father redeemeth us by Christ, and by him makes us his sons, and
righteousness, etc. so also he makes us to believe by Christ so that take me
away Christ, all ground and foundation of saving faith in God is taken away:
for God has laid the whole foundation of our belief in him alone. For which
cause Pet. 1. Epist. chap. 1 ver. 21. says: That by his means we believe in
G^d: and in that same place it is said. That God has raised him from the
dead, and given him glory, that our faith and hope might be in God. And to
this same effect the same Apostle says in the same chapter, ver. 3. That God
has begotten us again to a lively hope: by the resurrection of Jesus Christ
from the dead.

Upon which respect it is, that the Apostle Paul 1. Cor. chap. 15. ver. 17.
says expressly: If Christ be not raised, your faith is vain. Upon which we
may easily gather, that faith, is a vain fooilsh faith, whereby a man is made
to believe, or hope for any blessing from God, which makes it not first to be
performed by God in Christ. For our faith of our vnio^ with God arises upon
the knowledge of Christ his assuming in unity of person, our nature unto his:
the faith of our being the sons of God, arises upon Christ the man our
brother being the very son of GOD: our faith that God will make us
righteousness, arises upon this, that God has made Christ sin for us: and so
forth of the rest, the hope of our resurrection, is builded upon his
resurrection: the hope of our assention, upon his assention: the hope of our
glorification, upon his glorification: so that the Lord works in our hearts,
neither faith, nor hope in him, of any blessing whatsoever, whereof he does
not first reveyle unto us, a clear ground, and evident foundation in Jesus
Christ the son.

And therefore it may appear how detestable a doctrine that is (and execrable
be the teachers of it) that affirms, that a man may be saved without the
knowledge of Jesus Christ our Lord.

Thus by all these phrases concerning faith, the Lord would teach us, that
Christ is the matter, and he is the ground, of all whatsoever we believe: and
that there is nothing in Christ, which is not made ours by faith.

And for this same purpose in Scriptures it is sometimes called the faith in
the blood of Christ, Romans chap. 3. ver. 25. and that to teach us, what is the
particular thing in Christ, wherein God has made him our righteousness, and
whereby the Lord would have us to believe remission of sins in him: for
albeit Christ be vno us, all, and that in all things, and does fill us all in
all things: yet (as we have marked before) there is no benefit which we
apprehende by faith in Christ, but it has the own particular ground and
foundation whereupon it is builded: and therefore as his faith is but vain,
who expects his resurrection in Christ, if he do not know Christ to be risen
again: so his faith must be vain, who believes the remission of sins in
Christ, and yet knows not that Christ did shed his blood expressly for his
iniquities. For as God begettes us to the hope of life by the resurrection of
Ieses from the dead: so he begets us to the faith, and assurance of the
remission of our sins, by making him sin for us, and woundinge him for our
transgressions.

So to conclude this point, albeit all blessing be in Christ, and he be made
of God wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption: yet all this
shall be in vain to us, except we believe, because there is no means in the
world, whereby to obtain and possess Christ, or any blessing in him, except
faith only:

For as concerning the Word, and Sacraments, they are not so much the means of
our possessing Christ, as the means of our faith whereby we possess Christ.

The third use and end wherefore faith is given, is keeping, and preserving us
in the possession which it has brought unto us: and that both because through
faith we are kept unto salvation, as says Pet. 1. Epi. 1. 5. and also
because by it, we keep Christ and all his blessings in our heart. For which
cause the scriptures place our victory over Satan, sin and the world in our
faith, Ioh. 1. Epi. ca. 5. ver. 4. 5. and the Apost. Paul places the chief
strength of a Christlan in his faith, as that whereby we are made able to
quench all the fiery darts of the Devil, Ephesians. 6. 16. so that there is no
enemy of our salvation so great, neither any temptation so vehement and
fiery, which by faith we are not made able to overcome. Thus faith wrought in
our hearts by God, is of a stronger might, and power, then the Devil himself,
and all the powers and principalities of darkness, therefore Pet. 1. Ep. 5.
wills us to resist the devil, by being steadfast in the faith, thereby to
teach us, that in a steadfast faith, there is strength to overcome him. The
examples of the great power of God which is ^n them that believe, set down in
Heb 11. does su^^icie^tly clear the truth hereof, who only by faith are said to
have performed, and suffered so strange and wonderful things, as no power that
ever nature has given unto man, was able either to perform, or suffer. This
also is manifest, if we mark, another point, which is, the Saints recovering
of them selves, when they have appeared, to have been overthrowen by Satan in
sin: who notwithstanding have by the strength of faith, only recovered
victory over Satan and sin. So when as in our practice, and obedience to
God, we fall most fearfully: yet by faith we not only overcome our own
guilthines, but also all the fear of Gods just deserved wrath, for our
guilthines: so that our very sins cannot separate our hearts that believe,
from Christ, nor remove the favor of God from us. For whatsoever blessing we
have once obtained by faith, by that same says we are made able to hold it
fast to the end: and the faithful heart says, as Job chap, 27. ver. 6. I
will keep my righteousness, and will not forsake it, and my heart shall never
cast it away all my days. Upon this ground it is, that the Apostle wills
Timothy, to fight the good fight of faith, 1. Tim. chap. 6. verse. 12. because
indeed our faith has the greatest labor, in our spiriruall bataile. For when
all other grace fails us, yet faith must uphold us: otherwise we could not
possibly but perish: For what should have become of Pieter after his fearful
fall, if faith had not sustained him? This point is yet more clear, if we
mark the strength of faith in other two things.

The first is, if we shall consider the examples of the children of God, who
have drawn from God manifold great blessings by faith: as their incurable
diseases to be cured: their dead to be raised, etc. Of which a lively example
we have in Math. chap. 9. and Luke chap. 8. in the Woman that had an ishewe of
blood 12. years long: and in the words of Christ unto Iairus, Luke chap. 8.
ver. 50. where he says, Fear not, believe only, and she shall be saved.

The other thing to be considered of us, is, when God himself seems to set
him self against his children, and they are compelled to wrestle with God, as
with their own enemy, yet by faith they overcome and say with Job, 13. 15.
Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him. And this was lively shadowed in
the Lord his wrestling with Jacob, Genesis chap. 32. where it is said, of the
Lord, that when he saw that he could not prevail against Jacob, he touched
the hollow of his thigh, etc. therefore says the Prophet Hose, cap. 12. ver.
3. 4. By his strength, he had power with God, and had power over the Angel,
and prevayled. And this the Lord sets down expressly, to show us that the
power of God in him that believes, is able so to strengthen him, that nothing
is able to overthrow him.

To conclude this point, that which Angels by nature could not do in heaven,
and that which Adam could not do in Paradise, a poor frail wretch believing
in the Lord Jesus, is made able to do, by the power of God, which dwells in
his heart by faith: for the very weakness of God, is stronger then Men, and
Angels, and it pleases the Lord to magnify his strength, in our weakness,
that the excellency of this work, may be known to be of him, and not of us.

For this cause, as the Scripture calls faith our victory, and our shield,
so the Fathers likewise call it: and moreover the key whereby the treasures that
are in Christ, are opened unto us, and the ladder by the which we climb up
from earth to heaven.

Now the last use, and end, wherefore Faith is given, is practice, that is, to
make us able to do the will of the Lord, and obey his commandments: for man,
whose imaginations are nothing but vanity, and that continually, and is of no
strength of him self to perform any good work, neither is, nor can be
subject to the law of God, having his mind continually set on evil works,
and having no goodness at all dwelling in him, is by this supernatural gift of
faith, made able to do the will of the Lord from the heart: for thereby not
only is his darkened understanding illuminate, that he may know what is that
good, acceptable, and perfect will of God: but also his rebellious will
subdued, to will and to do, the will of the Lord, and his whole affections
sanctified to love the law of God, and to delight in it more then in all
treasures, and to esteem it more precious, then gold. For by faith he is
buried with Christ, and also he is raised up with Christ by the faith of the
effectual working of God, who raised Christ from the dead, Colos. chap. 2.
ver. 13. For which cause also the Apostle Paul to the Ephe. ca. 2. showing what
is the exceeding power of God in the^ that believe, says: That we that were
dead in sins, are through the grace of God by faith quickened, raised, and
made to sit together in heaven in Christ Jesus: therefore also says John 1.
Epist. 5. That the commandments of God, are not greevous to him that is borne
of God. And he adds this reason taken from the former ground, which is,
because by faith they overcome the world, and all things whatsoever within
them, or without them, opposes it self unto their obedience.

For this cause, the obedience of the Saints is called the obedience of faith,
Romans cha. 1. ver. 5. and obedience to the Gospel, is called obedience to the
faith, Acts cha. 6. ver. 7. And for the same reason, whatsoever is not of
faith, is said to be sin, Romans cha. 14. 23. as also That without faith, it is
impossible to please God. Heb. chap. 11. 6. which sentence shows clearly the
truth of this point, that there can be no strength in man's nature, to perform
any thing according to the will of God, of it self: but that all his strength
and ability, to do according to Gods mind, is from JESUS Christ dwelling in
his heart by faith. By whose help strengthening us, we are able to do all
things, as says the Apostle of him self, Phil. chap. 4. ver. 13. Upon the
same respect it is, that the Apostle interpretes his own saying, That Christ
lives in him, in this speech, The life that I now live in the flesh, I live
it by the faith which is of the son of God, Galat. chap. 2. ver. 20. showing
us that to have Christ living in us, and to live by the faith of Christ, is all
one thing, albeit in diverse considerations: for our life is the life of Christ
properly, because indeed from him alone flows al goodness, and in him is the
virtue of our well doing: but our life, is the life of faith not properly, but
because it is the mean, by the which only Christ (who is our life) dwells
in our hearts, and lives in us.

This thing it is, that makes one and the self same action, externally
performed (according to the commandment) by two diverse persons, to be
acceptable obedience to God in the one, and abominable wickedness and sin in
the other: according to the speech of the Apostle touching the sacrifices of
Cain and Abel, because the one did offer in faith, the other not.

Now in respect of this fruit and efficacy of faith, the Fathers do call
faith, the seal of our election, conform to that of Peter, 2. Epi. chap. 1.
who wills us by the virtue that is in our faith, to make our calling and
election sure: as also they call it the soul of our soul, because as our
soul quickens our bodies, so does faith our souls: also they call it the
root of a good life: by which all fruit is good, and without the which all
fruit is rotten and corrupted.

Of all these things which we have spoken of faith, we may easily perceive
that faith is neither a part, nor portion of any natural power, or faculty
in man: neither the effect, or work of any power or faculty natural in man,
neither serving for any natural use, in any natural thing unto man: but that
it is a gift supernatural, given freely by God, and wrought supernaturallie
above al natural power in our hearts, unto a supernatural end, that we might
be able to obtain, and to perform things which by nature it is impossible
that we either ca^ obtain or do.

And this supernatural gift is placed in our hearts by God, as the effectual
instrument and mean of his power: whereby to make us able to be capable of
heavenly and supernatural things, and to perform heavenly and supernatural
obedience to God.

Of which it is evident, that faith is the first blessing in order of all the
blessings of God, and also that no other blessing is either possessed by us, or
preserved in us, but by it alone: so that it is not so much any part of the
matter of our blessedness, as it is the mean and instrument of it: so that our
righteousness, life, and glory, does not consist in it, but rather subsisteth
in us by it.

Of these things we may collect what faith is, both as God works it in us,
and as our hearts works by it: as God works it in our hearts, it is a
supernatural gift, wrought by God of his free grace in all the powers of our
soul, to be the effectual instrument of his power in us, whereby our hearts
are made able both to perceyve, and to embrace, and constantly to keep Christ
and all spiritual blessings in him, belonging to life and godliness of life, as
also to be able to walk worthy of our heavenly calling.

As our heart works by it, faith is the very motion of all the powers of our
heart, wrought by the former working of God in them, whereby our hearts now
believing, lay hold upon the promise, and upon Christ crucified for us, and
upon righteousness, and life in him, and whereby all these are brought into our
hearts, and we possessed with them, and whereby the things possessed, are
kept in our hearts, in the midst of all temptation, overcomming all our
spiritual enemies, and whereby our hearts do serve God so, as to please him.

And upon this work of faith, follow these effects in our souls: First our
hearts rejoice, bo^^ in the sight of the salvation, and in the hope of the
glory of God, Psalm. 105. 4. 5. Romans chap. 5. ver. 2. Secondly, our hearts are
filled, with a confident boldness toward God, that we dare draw near unto
him confidentlie, and call him Abba Father, Romans chap. 8. ver, 15. Gal. chap.
5. ver. 6. Ephe. chap. 3. ver. 12. Heb. chapt. 4. ver. 16. and chap. 10. ver
16. Thirdly, our hearts are filled with the peace of God, and a good
conscience, Romans chapt. 5 ver. 1. John chap. 14 ver. 1. so that, in patience we
possess our souls, waiting for that blessed hope, and that appearing of the
glory of that mighty God, and of Jesus Christ our Savior, and this is the
first gift that God in justifying gives a man.

CHAPTER XXX.
NOW it follows, that we speak of the second gift, whereby we are
justified: and that is Christ Jesus himself. For God first gives us faith
unto righteousness, and then by faith he gives us Christ as our righteousness:
therefore is Christ also called the gift of God, and that in two respects.

First, in respect of Gods sending him into the world, to suffer the death of
the cross, and by his death to redeem us: in which respect, it is said, That
God so loved the world, that he has given his only begotten son, etc. John
chap. 3. ver. 16.

Secondly, in respect of Gods particular giving of Christ now crucified unto
the believing heart: according to which the Apostle speaks, Coll. chap. 2.
ver. 6. As therefore ye have receyved Ghrist Jesus the Lord, walk in him:
and Romans chap. 5. Our righteousness is called the gift of God. For which cause
also Christ is said to dwell in our hearts by faith: and of this gift it is
that in this place we speak: for howsoever by the Fathers givinge Christ unto
the death, the full redemption of all Gods elect was wrought: Yet in our
particular persons we enjoy it not, until we be called of God: therefore
Justification is placed after our calling, Romans chap. 8. and this giving of
Christ, is the cause why God first gives us faith: because before we receyve
faith, it is impossible to us to enjoy Christ, because we have neither hand,
heart, nor will to receyve him: and in this gift, as we have showen before,
stands the matter of our righteousness, and the form of our justification
consists in part in the giving of it: and this is needful to be marked of
us, for their cause that make our justification to consist in Gods gracious
acceptance of our faith, and not in his gracious giving of faith unto us, and
Christ by faith. Touching this second gift, which is Christ in his death and
blood, I will speak no more, the things preceding serving sufficiently to
clear it, and therefore we come to the next point, wherein we have said
consists the form of our justification.

CHAPTER XXXI.
THE second thing wherein consists the form of our justification, is the
Lords imputing of the things given unto us: that is both of faith, and
Christ's obedience: and for the observation of the imputation of both, we are
to mark these two phrases. First, where it is said that faith is imputed unto
righteousness, Romans cha. 4. ver. 5. 9. Secondly, where it is said, that
righteousness is imputed, Romans chapt. 4. ver. 11. For the one importes plainly
the imputation of faith: the oher importes the imputation of righteousness it
self, which is by faith. For we have already shown, that our faith is
neither our righteousness, nor called in the Scriptures our righteousness,
howsoever our righteousness be called the righteousness of the faith of Jesus, or
by the faith of Jesus: and it may be, that the not observing hereof, has made
some worthy and learned Divines, to deny al imputation of Christ's obedience,
and to maintain nothing to be imputed unto us but faith only, and that not
(unto) righteousness, but (as they interpret the word (...) (for) that is in
the place of righteousness.

For clearing of this point of Imputation, we will first speak of the word
imputation what it signifies.

Secondly, what sort of things are said to be imputed in the Scriptures:
whether things that are inherent in us, or things not inherent, or both.

Thirdly, we will speak of these things, which are said in scripture to be
imputed to us for our justification.

Concerning the first, the word it self signifies the sentence of our
judgment, or resolut opinion of his mind, and in this sense it is taken Romans
chap. 3. 28. as also Romans 6. 11. Secondly, it is referred to the reasoning of
the mind, and the disputing of the understanding, as Mark chap. 11. ver. 31.
Thirdly, it is referred to a man's purposing, or imagining, or plotting any
thing, as 1. Corint. chap. 13. ver. 5. Fourthly, it is referred to the
estimation, or account of the mind touching any thing, as Acts chap. 19. ver.
27. in which sense also it may be taken Mark, 15. 28. Luke chap. 22. ver. 37.
Fifthly, it is re^erred to the laying to a man's charge of any debt, or
guiltines, as 2. Timoth. chap. 4. ver. 16. Lastly, it is taken in a borrowed
sense, from accounts and reckonings, for accompting unto a man, or reputing
unto a man, and reckoning to a man any thing to be his, or to be good payement
and satisfaction from him in his accounts: and in this sense is it taken in the
matter of our justification, when as God either reckons that to be ours which
is not ours, or when he esteems and accompteth that sufficient, which he
gives us freely for our justification before him.

But in this sense it appears, that there is a three fold difference in men's
taking of the meaning of the word imputation.

The first is, when imputation is taken for naked acceptance of a thing
although in it self insufficient, as sufficient, by God: and this makes some
men to define our justification, to be nothing else, but a gracious acceptance
of our imperfect faith by God, in place of perfect righteousness: but to this
we have answered before, and certain and sure it is, that God receyves no
righteousness from us, but gives righteousness unto us.

The second meaning is, when imputation is taken, not simply for a naked
acceptance of a thing whether in it self perfect or imperfect: but for
accompting that which is perfect righteousness in it self, and yet is not ours,
to be ours.

The third sense is, when imputation is so taken, that it signifies, not only
the accompting or reckoning to us as ours the righteousness which is imputed,
but so reckons and reputeth it to us as done by our selves.

The first imports no more, but the Lords accompting: and holding of a thing
sufficient, which notwithstanding of it self is not sufficient, nor perfect
righteousness: which opinion can never be maintained with Gods honor.

The second, imports not only an accompting, and holding of a thing, which
in it self is sufficient righteousness, to be full and perfect: but also an
accomptinge of that perfect righteousness unto us as ours, howsoever it be
only Christ's: so that this opinion takes the word imputatio^ so, as when God
reckons to us that to be our righteousness, which in effect is not our
righteousness, but only by his account and imputation.

The third imports that same, that the second does, but in a more strict
sense, to wit, that God by imputing of Christ's obedience unto us, does not
only account it to be our righteousness, but also does account it as performed
and done by us: and this sentence though it seem hard, and to derogate
something to the honor of God, and praise of his grace, yet one word being
taken in a charitable (which also is a true) sense, there shall be no fault found
in the speech. The word is (as) when it is said that the Lord imputes
Christ's obedience to us, as if we had done it our selves: which word is not to
be taken, as though it imported, that God did impute unto us. that we had done
this: but oely is set down by similitude, to show the faithfulness, and truth
of Gods imputation: to wit, that GOD imputes Christ's righteousness, as truly
to be ours, and as effectually to justify us, as it should have done, if we
had in our own persons, actually performed it. and in that sense this speech
may well be approoved.

Moreover, it may be taken in good part, even although we take it in the
strictest sense spoken before: if we consider that Jesus Christ did bear all
our persons in his death, and therefore he is said in scriptures, to have died
for us: so that what he did bearing our persons even in the sight of God, and
dying for us even by the very appointement of God: that which he did for us,
and in our name, may not impertinentlie be said to be imputed by God unto us,
as done by us*

But for mine own judgment, I esteem the first interpretation of the word
(as) to be most sound, and agreeable to the truth, and being so taken,
there shall be no difference in substance, betwixt the second and third opinion,
only that which is not expressed in the second, but understood in the word
imputation, touching the truth and effectualnes of it, is by similitude
expressed in the third: and in this sense it is to be taken in the matter of
our justification, and it declares the form of our justification, importing
this much, that God justifies us by accompting unto us Christ's obedience,
which is in it self perfect righteousness: in such sort, as by this his
imputation, it is ours as truly, and does as truly clear us before God, as
if it were our own in deed, and we our selves in deed had performed it.

Thus we have need to take heed of two extremities, whereinto it is evident
that many men do fall, in this point: some taking imputation too slenderly,
and others taking it too strictly, each being to other the cause of others
stumbling.

Furthermore, we shall understand the more cleerlie the right meaning of the
word imputation, if we do consider it in the two contrary phrases, wherein
it is used al to one sense in the Scriptures. For sometimes our justification
is described negatively, by not imputing of sin: sometimes affirmatively, by
imputing of righteousness: For as the word imputation is taken in the negative
phrase, it must also be taken in the affirmative: now in the negative, we may
know how it is taken by the Apostle, 2. Cor. chap. 5. ver. 19. where it is
said: God was in Christ, reconciling the world to him self, not imputing to
them their sins. As likewise Psalm. 32. and Romans chap. 4. where it is said:
Blesied is the man to whom the Lord imputes not sin. In which places not
imputing of sin, signifies the not reckoning unto us sin nor iniquity,
and the not accompting of us to be unrighteous, and so the not laying guiltines
to our charge, nor exacting punishment of us for it: whereupon it follows,
that imputation of righteousness, must signify the reckoning of righteousness
unto us, and accompting of us to be righteous, and pronouncing of us
guiltless, and decerning life unto us.

For clearer understanding whereof, we are to know, that the word of
imputation, has always reference to some other thing, fo that it commonly
comes in betwixt two things, the one the thing which is imputed, the other
that whereunto it is imputed, so that imputation has relation unto both: and
to make this manifest, we shall consider these 3. phrases: The obedience of
Christ, is imputed unto justification, conform to the saying of the Apostle,
Romans chap. 5. ver. 19. By the obedience of one man, many shall be made righteous.
The second phrase is, Faith is imputed unto righteousness. And the third is,
Righteousness is imputed unto life. The equivalent whereof we have Romans chap. 4.
ver. 11. and 5. 17. 18. In the first phrase, imputation comes in betwixt
Christ's obedience, as the thing which is imputed, and justification, as the
end whereunto it is imputed, and it has reference to both. In the second
phrase, imputation comes in betwixt faith as the thing which is imputed. and
righteousness as the end whereunto it is imputed. In the last phrase, imputation
comes in betwixt righteousness it self, as the thing imputed, and life, as
the end whereunto it is imputed.

Thus we see, that imputation in the matter of justification, has always
reference to two things: and thus much concerning the meaning of the word.

Now we are to consider, what things they are which are said to be imputed,
concerning which, there are two extremities wherein men do commonly fall: the
one holding, that nothing inherent in us can possibly be imputed to us: the
other hold the contrary, that nothing is imputed to us, but that which is
inherent in us.

That opinion which is betwixt both, seems to agree most with Gods truth:
that is, that not only things inherent in us, but things that are not inherent
in us, are imputed to us: therefore imputation is used by the holy ghost, when
he speaks of justification by grace, and of justification by works, as Romans
cha. 4. and likewise, when he speaks of the accompting of us sinners, because
of our works and corruption inherent: And when he speaks of the accompting
of us righteous by grace, through the obedience of Christ, Romans chap. 4. this
same is clear by other examples of Scripture, as 2. Sam. chapt. 19. verse. 19.
where She^ei says to David, Let not my Lord impute wickedness unto me: and
Romans chap. 2. ver. 26. where it is said, His uncircumcision shall be imputed
unto circumcision. This same may be confirmed unto us, Psalm. 32. and 2. Cor.
chap. 5. and Romans chapt. 9, ver. 8. and 2. Cor. chap. 12. ver. 6. Gal. chap. 3.
ver. 6. and 2. Tim. chap. 4. 16.

And therfeore sometimes righteousness is said to be imputed by debt, and
sometimes by grace, Romans cha. 4. 4. For understanding whereof, we are not only
to distinguish betwixt things as they are inherent, or not inherent in us: but
also as they are our own or not our own. For somethings inherent are so in
us, that they are our own, because they consist in these things which are in
our nature, and are the effects and fruits of our natural powers: somethings
again are so in us, as they are no ways our own, being no part nor portion
of any natural power or quality, nor flowing from any power or faculty in
nature, but beside and above nature, coming to us from God, and wrought in us
by the power of his spirit: and therefore though they be in us, cannot be said
to be our own, because they are no part nor property of our nature, nor
effects produced by nature, such as is faith: for although we be said to
believe with the heart, yet neither is faith it self any natural power or
faculty in the heart, nor produced by any natural power or faculty of the
heart: neither do we believe with the heart naturally and by our own
strength, as though we might make our hearts to believe, or that faith or
beleevinge were our own work: but faith (as we have showen before) is an
instrument supernatural, and wrought, not by our hearts, but in our hearts,
by the supernaturail power of God: by the which, as by a supernatural mean
given us of God, we believe with our hearts, and so lay hold upon supernatural
things, and perform supernatural works.

According to this diverse consideration of things in us, or proceeding from
any power that is in us: so is there a distinction of imputation in the
scriptures. One is said to be by debt, another is said to be by grace.

Imputation by debt is, When the thing imputed, is a natural thing, consisting
either in the disposition and properties natural, which are in us: or then the
fruits and effects flowing from our own natural powers. And in this sense
is it, that the scripture says, That to him that works, the wages is not
imputed by grace, but by debt, Romans chap. 4. ver. 4.

Imputation by grace (touching things in us) is when the thing imputed, is not
natural, but a supernatural thing: being neither part nor portion of our
nature, nor of any power of faculty in nature: nor wrought by any power in us:
but supernaturally placed in us, by God: and given us above and beside all that
is by nature in us. and in this sense faith is said to be imputed to us.

For as a man can with his body, or a member of his body, use an instrument:
(such as a sword, a knife, an axe, or a saw, which are no part or power, nor
faculty of his body or hand) to perform things, which he could not otherwise
do, by his body or by his hand.

Even so the soul, and heart of a man, can use a spiritual instrument, (such
as is faith) albeit it be no part, power, or faculty of the heart, to
perform such things, as by it self it could never possibly have performed.
and therefore such a supernatural instrument whereby our hearts works, not
being any part nor power of us, nor any thing wrought in us by our selves, nor
acquired, nor purchased by us: but given us by God, and placed in our hearts
by him, can not properly be said to be ours, notwithstanding that it be in us,
neither can the work which it does, be properly said to be our work, except
by Gods gracious imputation only.

For this cause it is, that in the Scriptures, that which is by faith, is said
to be by grace, Romans chap. 4. ver. 16. as likewise, that the righteousness of
faith, is not our own righteousness, but the righteousness of God, Phill. chap.
3. ver. 9. Romans chap. 3. ver. 21. 22. and that not only in respect of the
righteousness it self which is given us of God: but also in respect of the
mean and instrument whereby we receyve it, which also is given us of GOD.

Now we come to speak of the third point, that is, concerning the things,
which are said to be imputed to us, in the work of our justification: and
these be two, according to the two gifts that God gives us, to this end that
we may be righteous.

The first is faith, which is the supernatural instrument given us of God, to
apprehend our righteousness.

The second is the righteousness it self apprehended by faith, that is Christ
crucified, or his blood shed for us: For although the Lord has given us faith,
and Christ Jesus his son: yet albeit we have them, we have them not as our
own, but by the imputation of God. So that Gods gift, makes possession: but
his imputation makes our right in propriety, in the thing possessed.

We say, that both faith, and Christ's obedience is imputed: because the
scriptures has these two phrases.

First, that faith is imputed unto righreousnes: and also, that righteousness is
imputed. Which two phrases, are not to be confounded: but for the clear
understanding of our justification, are still to be distinguished.

To make this manifest, we are first to consider that unto our justification,
we must first have righteousness, for God justifies no man, that has not
righteousness: For to justify the wicked, and condemn the righteous, are both
abomination unto the Lord, Prove. chap. 17. ver. 15. Esai. chap. 5. ver. 23.
therefore, before God justify us, we must have righteousness in our possession.

Secondly, there is but one of two righteousness that man can posses: that is,
either his own righteousness, or the righteousness of God: for no third
righteousness is set down in the book of God, whereby a man can be justified:
so that one of these two we must have, before God justify us. Both these
points are clear, in that one saying of the Apostle, Phil. chapt. 3. ver. 9.
Not having mine own righteousness which is of the Law: but that which is
through the faith of Christ, even the righteousness which is through GOD by
faith. Which sentence shows, first, that we must have righteousness: and
secondly, that there is but one of two to be had, that is, either our own, or
Gods.

Thirdly, this place shows us where these righteousness are: Our own
righteousness is contained in the Law: the righteousness of God, is contained in
Christ.

Lastly, not only this place, but diverse others of the scriptures shows us,
that as the righteousness contained in the Law, is obtained by our own doing
of the works of the Law, and that by our own strength: so the righteousness of
God, which is contained in Christ, is obtained by believing, and therefore in
the scriptures, justification is said either to be by works, or by faith: for
as working is the way, and mean, to attain to the righteousness of the Law:
so faith is the mean and instrument whereby we attain to the righteousness of
Christ.

And therefore, as the righteousness of the Law is called our own, because the
mean whereby we possess it (that is our working) is our own: so likewise,
the righteousness of Christ, is said not to be our own, because the mean and
instrument whereby we obtain it (which is faith) is not our own.

For both these righteousnesses have their own proper subjects wherein they
subsist, before we possess them: that is, the Law and Christ. For man's
righteousness is contained in Law, and Gods righteousness is contained in
Christ: and therefore man's righteousness is called the righteousness of the Law:
and Gods righteousness is called the righteousness of Christ: as also when man is
justified by his own righteousness, he is said to be justified by the law: and
when he is justified by the righteousness of God, he is said to be justified by
Christ.

And because man by working the things contained in the law, attayneth to the
righteousness of the law: therefore is he said to be justified by the works of
the law: even so, because by believing he attayneth to the righteousness of
Christ: therefore is he said to be justified by faith. Thus he that works,
and he that believes, is opposed, Romans chap. 4. ver. 5. in respect of the
opposite means whereby they attain to righteousness: the one of the law by
working, the other of Christ by beleving.

Whereupon the last point follows, that is, that the righteousness of the Law
is called man's own righteousness, because he attaynes to it by that which is
his own, that is, by his own natural power, doing of him self, and by the
strength that is in him self naturally, without any help of any supernatural
power, or mean given him to assist him to do the things contained in the
law. And the righteousness of Christ is said by the Apostle, not to be man's
own, but Gods: because it is not in the power of man, by all that he is
according to nature, ever to attain to the possession of it: but by that mean
and instrument supernatural, which is given him of God, to the end he may
attain to the possession of the righteousness of God.

Thus we see, that the mean whereby we possess the righteousness, is faith
only: and because faith is not our own, therefore the righteousness that we
posses by it, cannot be ours, until both be made ours: and this is only done,
and performed, by the Lords gracious imputation of both, that is, faith, and
the righteousness of Christ possessed by faith.

But first, and especially, faith must be imputed to us as our own, to the
intent, that the righteousness, that by it we possess, might be our own. For
as a man has right, to that which he possesses as his own, in equity and
justice, if by his own means he has obtained possession: but has no right
in equity and justice to it, although he have it in his possession, if by
another man's substance given him to be employed, he do acquire the
possession: even so, if we could attain to the possession of righteousness by
our own means, then should that righteousness in equity and justice be our
own: and therefore the Scripture admits debt in accompting wages to him
that works, Romans chap. 4. ver. 4. but because we do not attain to the
possession of righteousness, by our own means, but by the means of GOD, which
he has given us to use, that is by faith, therefore this righteousness in
equity and justice, is not our own, until the Lord do impute it unto us,
and account it our own.

So by imputinge faith unto us as our own the righteousness which we
possess by faith is made our own, so that faith being reckonned and
accounted ours, the righteousness of GOD which we possess by faith in Christ,
is also reckonned and accounted ours: and this is the cause why the holy
Scripture does offtner describe the manner, and form of our justification,
under the phrase of the imputation of faith, then under the phrase of the
imputation of the righteousness, because the right that is made us unto faith in
Christ, makes us to have right unto Christ him self, as our righteousness and
all blessings in him which by faith we possess.

Secondly, it is for this cause, that in the description of the form of our
justification, that the spirit of God uses this phrase, to wit, That to him
that believes: his faith is imputed unto righteousness. Which word (unto)
being commonly rendered (for) does much darken the true sense of the words,
and makes many to fall into dangerous error, thinking, that the very act of
beleevinge, is imputed for righteousness, that is, as they take it, in the very
same place, and as the very matter, of our righteousness, whereas the Greek
word (...) in this sentence, does declare the end whereunto faith is
imputed, that is, that the obedience of Christ, apprehended by faith, may be
righteousness unto the apprehender. For faith, and believing, ever imployeth the
possession of Christ, and his obedience in our hearts, and the imputation of
faith unto righteousness, is the thing that makes Christ possessed by faith, to
be our righteousness.

I say to be our righteousness, for Christ's obedience is righteousness in it
self: so that it is neither our faith, nor Gods imputation of our faith, that
makes his obedience to be righteousness: but imputation of faith to us, as
ours, makes the obedience of Christ possessed by faith (being righteousness in
it self) to be our righteousness: for as we have said before, the making
that, whereby we obtain possession to be ours, makes the thing possessed
also to be ours: so that imputation of faith, makes Christ's obedience to be
that unto us, which it is in it self, though it were never imputed unto us.

And that this phrase is so to be understood, it may clearly be perceyved by
that sentence of the Apostle, Romans chapt. 10. ver. 10. With the heart man
believes unto righteousness: and with the mouth he confesses unto salvation.
In which sentence, the greek word which is rendered (unto) can not be
rendered (for) without darking, and also perverting, the true sense and meaning
of that place: for we are said to believe with the heart, unto righteousness,
in that same sense, and meaning, wherein we are said to confess with the
mouth unto salvation.

But we cannot be said properly (at least clearly, without ambiguitie) to
confess for salvation: because neither is our confession the efficient cause
of our salvation, neither yet the matter or substance of our salvation, neither
can it be put in place of our salvation: but we confess to this end, that
we might attain to salvation. knowing, that he that confesses not Jesus
before men, shall not be saved. For he that is ashamed of him before men: he
will be ashamed of him before his heavenly Father, Luke chap. 9. ver. 26. And he
who shall deny him before men: him shall he deny before his Father which is
in heaven. And whosoever shall confess him before men: him shall he also
confess before his Father that is in heaven, Math. chap. 10. Luke chap. 12.
Therefore knowing, that without confession there is no salvation, seeing
confession is the way, and mean, whereby we attain unto the possession of
salvation, we do confess to this end that we may attain to salvation. And
therefore in the same sense, we must be said to believe with the heart unto
righteousness, that is because there is no mean to attain unto righteousness,
except we believe. (For Christ is righteousness unto every one that believes,
Romans chap. 10. ver. 4. therefore we believe to this end, that we may enjoy
righteousness: according to the saying of the Apostle, Gal. chap. 2. ver. 16.
We also have believed in Christ: that we may be justified by the faith of
Christ. In which place, that faith is understood only instrumentally, and not
materially, it is plain by the next verse following, where it is said, If
then while we seek to be made righteous by Christ, etc. Which words show
plainly, that Christ is the matter of our righteousness.

Now there is no reason why faith should be said to be imputed unto
righteousness, in any other sense, as concerning the word (unto) then we were
said to believe unto righteousness: but in all reason without contradiction,
the Greek word which we render unto, must in both these phrases be taken in
one and the same sense: that is, that as we believe with the heart, to this
end that we might by faith (as the only apt and meet instrument, and only
convenient and effectual mean whereby to apprehende and possess) attain to
the possession of the righteousness of God in Christ: even so the Lord our God
imputes faith to us as our own, to this end, that the righteousness which we
possess by it, may make us righteous before him, or be righteousness unto us in
his sight.

Thus this sentence rightly understood, gives no advanvantage, either to the
Papists to prove that by works we are justified, or yet unto others, who do
make the very act of our believing to be our righteousness: but rather does
evidently convince both these opinions of manifest etror.

The first, because faith is no work of ours, neither yet is the matter, but
the mean only of our righteousness.

The second, for the same foresaid reason, for it is not the act of believing,
but the thing purchased, and possessed by the act of believing, which is our
righteousness before God: And thus much concerning imputation.

CHAPTER XXXII.
NOW we come to the third point, touching the form and manner of our
justification, which consists in the grace of God: for we have said before,
that God justifies by gift, by imputation, and by grace: therefore giving, and
imputing, does not simply make the full form of our justification: but it is
further required, that both gift, and imputation, be by grace. Therefore are
we said to be justified freely by his grace, Romans chap. 3. ver. 24. Tit. chap.
3. ver. 7.

Now we are first to consider, what is meant by the name of grace: and
secondly, to consider how we are justified by grace.

Touching the name of grace, (leaving that general signification of grace,
whereby it is extended to all Creatures in respect of the goodness of God, in
some measure unto all) we will only treat of these two significations of
grace, where it is taken in the work of our salvation.

The first signification of grace, is when it signifies the free favor, love,
and good will of God, in God him self, and his good will toward man, which
from himself, and of him self, without any respect of any thing without him
self, moves him to make man gracious, and acceptable to him self: in which
sense it is taken Tit. chap. 2. ver. 11.* For that grace of God that brings
salvation to all men, has appeared. And Romans cha. 3. ver. 24. Being justified
freely by his grace. And Ephe. chap. 1. ver. 6. To the praise of the glory of
his grace, etc. And chap. 2. ver. 5. By whose grace ye are saved.

Secondly, the name of grace is taken for the benefits and gifts which God of
his grace does bestow upon us in Christ: in which sense it is taken 1. Pet.
cha. 4. ver. 10. Let every man as he has receyved the gift, minister the same
one to another, as good disposers of the manifold graces of God. In which
sense, our righteousness is called grace, Romans chap. 5. ve. 17. much more shall
they which receyve that abundance of grace, and of that gift of that
righteousness, etc. and not only righteousness, but all the remaynant blessings
which we receyve from God in Christ: and therefore they are all called (...),
that is gracious gifts, or gifts of grace, Romans chapt. 12. ver. 6. 1. Cor.
chap. 12. ver. 4. And as grace is taken in this sense, Christ him self, and
his death, and mediation, etc. may justly be accounted grace. Therefore is he
also him self called the gift of God: moreover, faith, love, hope, peace,
joy, patience, perseverance, life and salvation, are all comprehended under
the name of grace, as it is taken in this sense. In which sense, the foolish
Papists do call it gratia gratum faciens: that is, the grace that makes us
acceptable or gracious. whereas it is clear by scripture, that it is grace
taken in the first sense (whereof it evidently appears that the papists are
utterly ignorant) whereby we are made acceptable unto God, as Ephesians. cha. 1. ver.
6. To the praise of the glory of his grace, by the which he has made us
freely accepted in his beloved. And this is the grace, which only should be
called the first grace, because it goes before all other grace taken in the
second sense, yea before the gracious Decree, or Predestination of God, either
of us to adoption, or of Christ to be our Redeemer, as we have showen before:
But the ignorant Papist, calls the very gift of GOD, whereby a man's heart is
drawn back from evil, and stirred up to goodness, the first grace. Which
opinion, were not amiss in respect of the grace that is dispensed to us, if
he did acknowledge the particular love of God, and his grace remayninge, and
resident in him self toward his elect, to go before it, as the cause: but
the reason of his stumblinge is this, the foolish opinion of the universality
of grace: when as they esteem Gods grace generally to be extendede alike to
all, and have no light nor judgment to discern betwixt the general and
universal grace of God to all. Whereby he makes his Sun to arise upon the
evil, and the good, and sends rain upon the just and unjust, Math. chap. 5.
ver. 45. and that special grace and love of God which moves him to love Jacob
when he hated Esau, and of the same lump whereof he makes all mankind, to
make certain vessels unto honor, while as the rest are prepared for
dishonor.

This being shortly spoken of the signification of grace: we have next to
consider, in what sense we are said to be justified by grace.

First we are to mark, that we are not said to be justified by grace in the
second sense, wherein grace is taken: howsoever the thing whereby we are
justified be a grace, for in this phrase grace is not referred to any of the
things that are given us, and imputed to us unto righteousness: but unto the
manner, and form of Gods giving them, and imputing them. And that we may know
this more cleerlie, we are to understand that grace taken in the first
signification, has a three-folde place in the work of our justification.

First, it has place in the efficient cause: in which sense it is taken, 2.
Tim. cha. 9. Who has saved us, and has called us with a holy calling, not
according to our works, but according to his purpose and grace. For the grace
of God, is the cause moving God, to predestinate, call, justify, and glorify:
and of this we have spoken of at length before in the cause of Gods Decree.

Secondly, the grace of God has place in the formal cause: in which sense we
are said to be justified by grace.

Thirdly, it has place in the final cause: in which sense it is taken Ephe.
chap. 1. ver. 6. 12. where he is said to do all to us, Unto the praise of the
glory of his grace.

When it is referred to the manner of Gods justifying us, it is opposed
specially to two things: First, the word grace secludeth all price given by us
to God for justifying us.

Secondly, it secludeth all merit of ours from the work of our justification:
so that it imports as much, as that in our justification whatsoever God
does, he does it freely of his love, and gracious favor: Man neither any
ways deservinge it by his worthiness, nor paying any thing to God for it, and
that this is the meaning of the word, it is most evident by this other word
(...), which is indifferently put for grace, the one being sometimes
interpreted by the other, as Romans chap. 3. ver. 24. Being justified freely by
his grace: where the word which is rendered freely, is dorean, which word
secludeth both price and merit.

Concerning price, it is clear Math. chap. 10. ver. 8. Ye have receyved
freely, give freely. And 2 Thessalonians. chap. 3. ver. 8. Neither took we bread of
any man freely.

Concerning merit, it is likewise manifest, that this word secludeth it, by
Ioh. chap. 15. ver. 25. They hated me freely, that is, without cause, or
deserving: so that this word makes justification to be a work of God freely
done.

And this we mark, that we may know it secludeth not the merit of Christ,
although that merit be imputed to us by grace: and by this consideration, we
shall learn to reconcile two sayings of scripture, that seem to be repugnant.

The first is, Esaias chap. 52. ver. 3. Ye shall be redeemed without money. The
other is, 1. Cor. chap. 6. ver. 20. For ye are bought for a price: The one
seems to make our redemption free without price: the other seems to say the
contrary.

Yet both are true, for in respect of man him self, he has paid no price at
all to God for his redemption: but as concerning Christ, he has given a dear
price, even his life, and blood, for our redemption.

So the word Grace, secludeth not the merit of Christ, nor the price that he
has paid for us, nor ought else ordained of God by his grace, as causes and
means subordinate to his grace for our justification: but only secludeth
whatsoever thing is in man, or can proceed from man, who has nothing of him
self whereby to deserve righteousness, neither has any thing to give to God to
obtain righteousness: For who has given to God first: that he should
recompense him, Romans chap. 11. verse. 35.

And this third point of the form of our justification, is necessary to be
added to the other two.

First, for the right knowledge both of Gods giving, and imputing of faith, and
Christ to our justification.

Secondly, for preserving us from the errors of those, who mistake the true
meaning of the word grace in our justification.

Concerning the first, there is a distinction of the gifts of God, and also of
the imputation of God.

Touching the gifts, they be either such as are natuall given by God
indifferently to al, and are belonging to our natural life: or the^, they are
gifts supernatural, belonging to a supernatural life.

The first sort the Lord gives by natural means: as by procreation, by
natural generation, and by his general providence extended over all.

But the second, he gives not but by special grace, and by a special
providence, and particular love in the Lord JESUS: there being no ground nor
cause in them, to whom he gives them, why they should have the^, nor any
means in their power to procure them.

Thus faith, and Christ by faith, are given us of God, not for any worthiness in
us, nor for any thing given to God by us: but the Lord gives us both faith,
and Christ, unto justification, freely of his mere grace.

Secondly, touching imputation, there is an imputation by debt, and an
imputation by grace: therefore that it may be known, that neither faith, nor
Christ's merit, is imputed to us by debt: the scripture plainly shows, that
this imputatio^ is by grace. that is, first, that faith which is now give^ us:
and secondly, that Christ who is give^ us by faith, is ours, not by any right
that we have unto the^ by justice: and that accompting of them ours, is not by
debt, but of mere mercy and grace, so that our whole justification in all that
is either given us, or imputed unto us, to justify us, both in the giving, and
in the imputing, is of Gods free grace.

The second use of the knowledge hereof, is, to preserve us from their errors,
who take the name of grace in our justification, for the gifts of grace
inherent in us: be it faith, or sanctification, or the fruits of our
righteousness. And secondly, from their error, who take the name of grace, for a
gracious acceptatio^ of our imperfect faith: whereas grace in justification is
relative to the giving and imputing of faith: not to the accepting of it. For
in respect of faith given by grace, and imputed by grace: we are said to be
justified by grace, and not in respect of Gods accepting of it at our hands by
grace. And thus much concerning the form of our justification.

CHAPTER XXXIII.
IT olloweth that we now speak of the object of justification, that is, the
man whom the Lord does justify: who is two manner of ways to be confidered.

First as he is in him self by nature.

Secondly, what he is by grace, before he be justified.

As concerning him self, we have two places of scriptures, which do
manifestly instruct us what man is in him self, when God justifies him. The
first is, Romans 4. 5. where God is said to justify the ungodly: the other, Romans
5. 10. where God is said, to have justified us, while we were enemies. and this
shows the vanity of the Papists, who will have a man formalie just before he
be justified.

Touching that which he is by grace, it is in many parts of the scripture
evidently declared, that he must believe, before he be justified, that is, must
have faith wrought in his heart, in that sort that he may be justified: for
like as Acts 14. it is said, that Paul perceyving that the creeple man had
faith to be made whole, he did heal him: even so the Lord first gives us
faith to be made just, and then justifies us. For we are to consider, that
although faith be the instrument of Gods power, to make us able to apprehende
Christ, and all his blessings in him: yet in the work of justification, it is
particularly to be restrained, both as it is wrought by God in our hearts, and
as our hearts works by it: unto the particular benefit of righteousness in
Christ: like as in all the rest of the benefits, faith is always to be
particularly restrained, to every one of them in the particular apprehension of
them.

Moreover we see the truth of this same, in the order set down by the Apostle,
Romans 8. when he says, whom he has called: them he also has justified.
whereby it is evident, that God justifies not a man, until first he has
obtained, that degree of grace which God bestows upon a man when he calls
him: of which it follows, that he must have Christ reveyled unto him, and he
must likewise be come to Christ, and must have embrased him by faith, and that
not only as the son of God (for in that point of faith consists his
adoption) but also as the propitiation for sin in his blood, which is the
ground of Gods justifying him. For as God first opens our eyes to see Christ
to be the son of God, and by making us to believe that: makes us partakers
of adoption: so secondly, by opening our eyes to see him to be ordained by God
a propitiation for sin in his blood, and by making us to believe that: he
lays the foundation of our justification in our hearts, which is finished
and accomplished by his gracious and free imputation. For unto the
justification of a sinner by the obedience of Christ in his death, not only
faith, but also the imputation of faith, (and that by grace) must preceed,
before that Christ or his obedience can be our righteousness: not that there is
any defect, or insufficiency in Christ's obedience: but because neither faith,
he, nor his obedience, is justly ours, until that by the free imputation, and
account of GOD, they be made ours.

This we are carefully to consider, that we do not confound the sufficiency
of Christ's obedience, and our right thereunto, as many perverslie do in these
days: for the sufficiency which is in Christ, and his obedience unto
righteousness, is restrained according to Gods gracious giving, and imputinge
faith, and his obedience by faith, and his imputation, gift, and grace, are
restrained to his calling: for the promise of God, is restrained to his
calling, as is clear, Acts chap. 2. verse. 29. and all virtue in Christ unto
salvation, is likewise restrained unto his calling: as is clear, 1. Cor. chap.
1. ver. 24. and his calling, is restrained to his Decree, and his Decree, is
restrained to his purpose: of which it appears evidently, that all
sufficiency of Christ's merit, how great and infinite soever, is no larger in
right, and efficacy, then his calling, and so consequently then his Decree,
and purpose: For Gods promise, is no larger, then his calling, and his calling,
no larger then his Decree, and his Decree no larger then his purpose.

Heerevpon it follows, that Gods purpose is no larger, then his applying by
^ustifying, and glorifying: seeing his justification is as large, as his
calling, and his calling as large, as his Decree, and his Decree as large, as
his purpose.

This is yet more evident by his promise, which we have shown to be of no
larger extent, then his calling: of which it must follow, that his purpose can
be of no larger extent then his applying: because his calling, and applying
must be of equal extent, and his purpose of equal extent with his calling.

Of all these things, it is manifest, that the subject of Gods justification,
is the man endued with faith: and this is to be marked, against those who
esteem the believing man, in the foreknowledge of God to be the subject of
Gods Decree.

CHAPTER XXXIIII.
THE next point that we have to speak of, is touching the final cause of
justification, in the which we purpose to be short, seeing it is not a matter
controverted: but yet it serves to clear the truth of that going before,
concerning the ordet of Gods benefits. It is receyved universally of all,
that the final cause of righteousness, is life: for there is no way to attain
unto life, but by righteousness: and for this cause justification is called, The
justification of life, Romans chap. 5. vets. 18. and for the same cause it is
said, That they who receyve that abundance of grace, and of the gift of that
righteousness, shall reign in life, Romans chap. 5. ver. 17. therefore is
salvation called the end of our faith, Pet. 1. Epist. cha. 1. ver. 9. Carrying
about with you, the end of your faith, even the salvation of your souls. And
this is according to the plain speech of God, Ezekiel. chap. 18. If a man be
just, he shall surely live says the Lord: but the soul that sins, shall
die. And again in the same chapter, ver. 20. The righteousness of the righteous
shall be upon him: and the wickedness of the wicked, shall be upon him self. And
again, In his righteousness that he has done, he shall live.

By these testimonies it is plain, that the end of righteousness is life:
according to the saying of the Prophet Haba. The just shaell live by faith, in
the 2. chapter, ver. 4. and therefore eternal life is called the hope of
righteousness, Gall. chapt. 5. ver. 5. For we through the spirit, wait for the
hope of righteousness through faith.

And in this same sense is the saying of the Apostle to be taken, Romans chap.
8. ver. 23. We do sigh in our selves, waiting for our adoption, even the
redemption of our bodies. as may easily be perceyved by the words following,
wherein he gives the reason of this our waytinge, when he says, for by
hope we are saved, etc. where our Adoption is put for our salvation, or
glorification, or redemption, in that sense wherein redemption is taken, 1. Corinthians. chap. 1. ver. 30. and this is needful to be marked, to let us see
how diversely Adoption is taken in the holy scriptures of God.

And that we may see the truth of that which we have said before concerning
the difference betwixt being a son by faith, and by prerogative: for as
says John 1. Epist. chap. 3. ver. 2. we are now the sons of God: but it is
not made manifest yet what we shall be. where he plainly distinguishes,
betwixt being a son, and being a glorified son: for by faith we are the
sons of God, Gall. chap. 3. ver, 26. and yet by faith we are not the
glorified sons of God: but yet still wait for our Adoption, that is our
glorification.

And this diverse sense of Adoption, is evidently cleared by the diverse sense
of redemption, wherein it is taken in the Romans chap. 8, ver. 23. and Heb. chap.
9. ver. 15. For Romans chap. 8. it is taken in one sense with Adoption, that is,
for the glorification of our bodies: But in the 9. chap. to the Heb. it is
taken for justification: which place also confirms, eternal life to be the
end of our justification, while it is said, that Christ is the Mediator of the
New Testament for this cause, that through death, which was for the redemption
of the transgressions that were in the former testament, they which were called
might receyve the promise of eternal inheritance. And this same is made
manifest by the Apostles order set down Romans chap. 8. where he says, whom
he justifies, them also he glorifieth. For as calling is the fruit of
predestination: and justification, the fruit of calling, so glorification is
the fruit of justification.

CHAPTER XXXV.
THus we are brought to the conclusion of the maine point touching
justification what it is, which in the scriptures is described shortly and
succinctly. sometimes by the not imputatio^ of sin, sometimes by the remission
of sin, sometime by the covering and hiding of sin, sometime by the
imputation of righteousness, sometime by the imputation of faith unto
righteousness, sometime by the making of a man righteous by the obedience of
Christ, sometime by the making of Christ sin for us, and us the righteousness
of God in him, and sometime by healing of us by Christ his stripes: and all
these are to one effect, and the justified man is sometimes shortly described
in one word the just by faith, sometime in relation to the action of God, more
amply, he that has received the abundance of grace, and of the gift of that
righteousness, which is by one man Jesus Christ: sometime he whose sins are
remitted, to whom sin is not imputed, and whose sins are covered, etc. out of
which and the consideration of the points preceding, we may gather a more
full and clear definition of the action of justification in this manner.

Justification is that second gracious action of the free dispensation of GOD
in Christ, toward those whom according to his foreknowledge, and purpose, he
had predestined, to be Adopted through Christ, whom now he has adopted
through him, havinge effectually called them to the fellowship of Christ by
faith, by the which action he makes them, who in them selves are sinners, to
be righteous in Christ crucified, that is, whom albeit he knew no sin, he
had made sin for them: and that by the free imputation of Christ's obedience,
and satisfaction, unto them, as their own righteousness, even as they them
selves had performed it: and by the imputation of faith which he has given
unto them, as their own, to this end, that the righteousness of God which they
possess no ways but by faith, might be their own righteousness, and so they
might have remission of sins in his blood of Christ, whom God had not only
ordained, but also made a propitiation for them in his blood.

In this definition we call justification, first, the action of God, because it
is he only which justifies.

Secondly, we call it the action of his dispensation: to distinguish it from
the action of Predestination, or of Gods Decree in it self.

Thirdly, we call it the second action of his dispensation: to distinguish it
from the first action, which is our calling preceding it.

Fourthly, we call it a gracious and free action: because it is dispensed for
no merit or deserving of those which receyve it, neither for any thing given by
them to God before, whereof it should be the recompense, but is given freely of
his grace.

Fifthly, We call it the work of God in Christ, to distinguish it from the
Decree of God, which is a work of God in him self, and to show justification
to be a work of external dispensation, which wholly is performed by God in
Christ, in whom all the blessings of grace are comprehended: as our filiation,
or justification, and glorification, in whom, and through whom only, God makes
us his sons righteous and glorious, he, being made of God unto us wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification, and redemption. And these five points are to be
considered in the nature of this action.

The next thing that is to be considered, is the subject that is justified. And
this we make not simply to be a man foreknowne and fore-purposed, neither yet a
man simply predestinate, but moreover a man effectually called, and made one
with Christ by faith, and in that unity the son of God. For a man simply and
nakedly foreknowne, is the only object of Gods Decree and Predestination. For
those whom he foreknew, he predestinate, says the spirit of God. And a man
predestinate, is the only object of Gods calling according to his purpose: For
who^ he had predestinate, them also he called, says the spirit of God. And
the man now called effectually to the faith of Jesus as the son of God, and
promised seed, in the which all the nations of the world should be blessed, is
the only object of Gods justification, like as a justified man is the only
object of Gods glorification: Thus to go backward again, the Lord in
glorifying a man, has before him especially his righteousness, for none but the
just shall live: next, in justifying a man, he has particularly before his
eyes his union with Christ by faith, without the which not any man shall be
justified of God. And in giving this blessing, to be one with Christ by faith,
and so in that unity, the son of God; in which consists the calling of
God: He only has before his eyes the man predestinate, to be Adopted through
Christ, that is, the man whom he has ordained to call, that is, to Adopt, and
to make his son by faith in Christ. And in predestinating a man to this
blessinge, he had not any thing before his eyes, but his own foreknowledge of
the person of that man, his purpose, or the good pleasure of his will, which
are all one in substance, and different only in respect: The will of God,
which limiteth all the actions of his power (seeing he does all things
according to the counsel of his own will) being the highest and the first
cause of all things created and done by GOD in the world, of the which no
cause possibly can be given, and therefore it is in some respect the cause of
Gods purpose, or counsel, which therefore is called the counsel of his
will, although his will and his counsel in effect be both one: For his will
is his purpose, and his purpose is his will in all things, and especially in
the whole work of his grace toward the vessels of mercy, unto the which,
his purpose is especially restrained oftentimes in the book of God: which
purpose is nothing, save a setting of such persons before him from all
eternity, as he him self wills or pleases: which may cleerlie be
perceyved, by the holy bread set upon the Table in the Sanctuary, being twalfe
in number, representinge the twalfe Tribes of Israel, that is, the whole elect
of God, which are called the show bread in the vulgar translation, the word
being the same which is called the purpose of God, as is clear by Christ his
own words, Math. chap. 12. ver. 4. Luke chap. 6. ver. 4. that is the bread,
of the purpose of God, or of the setting before the face of God. And therefore
the action of the Priest in settinge those bread upon the table before the
Lord, is called by the Apostle Heb. chap. 9. ver. 2. Prothesis ton arton, that
is, the setting before or the presenting of bread: to show us, that by that
word which is commonly called the purpose of God, which was shadowed in that
type of the Law, is to be understood, the eternal action of God, in settinge
before himself, as in the sight of his own eyes, the persons of such as he
willed. And in the same sense the same word is referred unto Christ, Romans
chapt. 3. ver. 25. whether it be referred to Gods eternal purpose, touching
the humane nature of Jesus Christ, in setting it particularly before him, as
that which should be the only expiation of the sins of his elect in the
blood thereof, or whether it be referred to the action of God in ordayning the
ceremonies of the Law, As the sacrifices, and especially the propitiatory or
mercy seat* as the types of Christ: and setting them before his eyes, or
rather Christ in them, as the only propitiation for sin, of which action of
God in settinge the persons whom he willed, before his face, follows the
foreknowledge, which in effect is nothing but the purpose of God, and is not to
be referred to any thing but the persons foreknowen, and is only distinguished
in respect from the purpose for the clearer understanding. As the settinge of
a thing before our eyes, makes us to have the knowledge of it: so the Lord,
his setting of our persons, who^ he willed to be his, before his eyes,
includes the knowledge of our particular persons from all eternity, before
either the world or we were created, whose estate and condition both in
faith, righteousness, and life, are consequences of this particular purpose
and notice of GOD touching our persons, and of the Decree which the Lord
makes concerning us, of whose persons it pleased him, and it was his good will
and pleasure, to take such notice before we were. For those persons whom it
pleased him to know, before the world was, them he predestined, and decreed
to be adopted through Christ, that is, to believe, and by faith to be made
one with the son of God: so that the foreknowledge of God, as it is
distinguished in order from predestination, and made the distinction of the
object of predestination, can never properly be referred to any spiritual
gift, or grace, either decreed for the children of God, or in time given unto
them: but only unto their persons (which only are properly said to be
foreknowne, when as foreknowledge is distinguished as a several action in God
him self, from Gods Decree, as the effect of his foreknowledge) seeing the
gift of faith, and Adoption by faith, are the blessings decreed to them that
are foreknowne.

This distinct consideration of man, as the object of Gods gracious working,
either in decreeing blessedness through Christ, or dispensinge it in Christ,
or in his purpose or foreknowledge concerning both Decree and Dispensation,
serves much to clear our judgments in that question, so much now
controverted in the Church of GOD, touching man, as he is the object of Gods
predestination: for it appears by the order of the Apostles setting down
both the Decree and Dispensation of God, that in every distinct degree of his
grace, there is a distinct consideration to be had of man, as he is the
object of Gods favor: so that in his Decree man only in his essence, as being
purposed of God, and foreknowne of him, is set by the Lord before his eyes, in
ordayning him to Adoption through Christ: but in his adopting, and calling, he
has not simply, and nakedlie, the being, and subsisting of a man before his
eyes, but also his own Decree concerning that man, that is he sets him
before him self, as a man ordained by him self to be made his son through
Christ. And in his justifying of a man, he respects him not simply in
respect of his being, and subsistinge, neither yet as ordained of him to
Adoption: but rather as a man now effectually called to that estate, and
condition, that is, to be the son of God in Christ. And lastly, in
glorifying of a man, GOD sets before him a man not only as foreknowne in
his being, neither only as ordained to Adoption, nor as called unto that
blessinge by him: but also as now justified by the Redemption that is in Christ
Jesus, freely imputed unto him by grace. And this much is to be considered in
the object, that is in the man whom God justifies: in whom also this other
thing is to be marked, that he is in him self a sinner: for God is the God
that justifies the ungodly, Romans chapt. 4. neither is the faith which is given
him contrary unto this: For as says the Apostle in the same place: To him
that works not, but believes in God who justifies the ungodly, his faith is
compted for righteousness.

And therefore as sin is opposite to righteousness, and righteousness to sin:
so in the vessels of mercy, the consideration of their sins, and them as
sinners before God, is properly to be placed in the work of justification as
the first blessing, that belongs unto them that are made now the seed of
Abraham, and so the children of God.

Now in the work of justification it self, we say that he makes the^
righteous: by the which we understand not any chang of their nature, but of
their condition and estate in Gods sight only, being in themselves, and in
their own nature, the same that they were before, that is, sinners. For the
benefit of justification, is not only to be distinguished from the work of
our calling going before it, in the which not only the estate and condition,
but also the very inward disposition of our hearts, and quality of our
minds, are changed from darkness to light, from hatred to love, and from
infidelity to fidelity, etc. But also from the benefit of sanctification,
comprehended under glorification, following after our justification, in the
which sanctification, not so properly the estate and condition of our persons,
as the quality and constitution of our nature, is changed.

Secondly we say, that God makes us righteous in Christ: because the
righteousness whereby we are justified, is neither ours, nor in us, but in
Christ alone, by whose only obedience many are made righteous.

Thirdly, we say, that it is in Christ crucified, and made sin for us, that
we are made righteous: and that for two respects.

First, because Christ is made righteousness by God, not to any but to those
for whom first God made him sin, in delivering him to the death for them: in
which action, he is specially made our righteousness. For God had ordained him
to be a propitiation in his blood.

Secondly, because that the thing wherein faith does apprehend Christ as
righteousness, is specially his death, and suffering, which the believing heart
does apprehend, as done and performed for it in particular.

Thirdly, the way how he makes us righteous: we say, that it is by imputation
both of Christ's obedience unto us (as our own obedience or righteousness
indeed before GOD) and of faith, to this end that it might be ours, seeing we
possess it no otherwise, but by faith.

Lastly, we say, that by this imputation, we have remission of sins:
because the death of Christ imputed unto us, which was the punishment of our
iniquities, is a full and perfect satisfaction of the justice of God for our
iniquities.

Thus we have so plainly, and sensibly as we could, opened up that part of
the great mystery of godliness, touching the justification of a sinner:
following not any thing but the simple truth set down in Gods word,
according to the measure of light, which it has pleases the Lord to impart
unto me: whom we heartily beseech to bless all our labors, to the glory of
his Name, and comfort of his Saints, Amen.

FINIS.
Faults escaped,
Cha. Page Lin. Faul. Correction. 1. 2. 25. thse four. these four. 8. 24. 19. we
only. we may. 10. 31. 30. vntn unto. 12. 38. 3. Ephe. chap. 1. ver. 15. 1. Ep.
4. 15. 13. 40. 35. iustifictaion, justification. 15. 49. 16. the mediate fruit
we call. the immediate fruit we call. 18. 60. 26. imperting. importing. 27.
impleying implying. 19. 65. 19. for then. or then. 23. 86. 20. with righteous
in him. with righteousness in him. 24. 97. 14. may be received. may be perceived
99. 29. that righteousness is ours, that that righteousness is ours. 101. 1.
Christ was crucified. Christ was signified. 7. their filth. the filth. 14.
frelling feiling. 16. touchinh. touching. 23. Christ flesh. Christ's flesh. 31.
many fruit. much fruit. 104. 2. obediende. obedience. 23. an therefore. and
therefore. 29. the first ground. the fifth ground. 25. 113. 22. offered by one.
offered up one. 26. 123. 12. of thing given. of the thing given. 124. 36.
believing, is placed in Gods free gift. believing, is placed, is Gods free
gift. 127. 17. vof those first sort ar those sayings, wherein. of the first fort
ar those sayings wherein. 128. 28. ^to fafth, whereby w^e are called. whereby
we are called unto faith, 28. 136. 28. will have it middle conceyte. will have
it a middle conceyte. 138. 4. ordirarie. ordinary. 15 not wrought. now wrought.
140. 12. in God teaching. in Gods teaching. 145. 7. new wrought. now wrought.
146. 8, of the manner. of the mover. 147. 6. when he faide. when he is said:
29. 150. 22. whow the wordle. whom the wordle. 151. 25. the bound of a
Christian. the band of a Christian. 31. 35 that faithfully believe. that
believe. 161. 31. oher. other. 162. 16. of his mind. of the mind. 169. 17.
which is through God. which is of God. 170. 5. contained in law. contained in
the law. 171. 15. imputation of the righteousness. imputation of righteousness.
36. in the very same place in the very place. 172. 5. imployeth the
possession. implies the possession. 32. 174. 21. where it is taken. wherein it
is taken. 176. 22. and of this we have spoken of at lenth. and of this we have
spoken at length.

FINIS.

