A SERMON PREACHED AT CONSTANTINOPLE, in the Vines of PERAH, at the Funeral of
the virtuous and admired Lady ANNE GLOVER, sometime Wife to the Honorable
Knight Sir THOMAS GLOVER, and then Ambassador ordinary for his Majesty of
GREAT BRITAIN, in the Port of the Great Turk. By WILLIAM FORDE Bachelour in
Divinity, and lately Preacher to the right Honorable Ambassador, and the
rest of the English Nation resident there.

Of Death. Of Tears. Of Pilgrimage. Of The Grave.
LONDON, Printed by EDWARD GRIFFIN for Francis Constable, and are to be sold
at his shop at the white Lion, over against the great North door of Saint
Paul's. Anno Dom. 1616.

TO THE MOST HONORED ACCOMPLISHED AND VIRTUOUS beautified Lady the Lady
WENTVVORTH, Wife to the most noble and most worthy of all honors, and all
titles, LORD, the Lord WENTVVORTH.
THis Sermon The Turk permits Christ's Gospel to be preached; the Pope
conde^neth it to the rack and inquisition; who is the better man?
(most virtuous and honor: Lady) conceived at first in the Vines of Perah,
adjoining to renowned Constantinople, the stamboll or great City of the great
Turk; and there delivered (instead of a fair Temple) in a pleasant Garden,
under a lofty Cypress A Tree fit for such assemblies for the Ancients were
wont to bear the branches thereof in their Funerals.
tree, in a goodly assembly of diverse Nations There were present of most
Nations under the Sun, English, French, Dutch, Germain, Italian, Popish,
Hungarian, Tra^siluanian, Molda: Wallachian, Russes, Greeks, Armenians,
Beddowines, Turks, Jones, etc.
, after long travail through many and strange Countries, is now at length by
the propitious favor of the Almighty, footed in Great Britain; where
thinking to have reposed it is wearied limbs, is by gentle entreaty moved, and
forcible importunity ouer-ruled, to begin a new travail, to undertake a new
journey, visit many Cities, enter many houses, pass through many hands, offer
it self to many quicke-sighted eyes, submit to many censorious heads. As
therefore in her first birth she had to shadow her from the Suns scorching
beams, a beautiful and umbriferous Tree; so she needs some pleasing
Canopie, some refreshing vmbrello to shadow her still. And under whose wings may
she better sustain and maintain her self (most virtuous and honor: Lady)
then under yours? you were the Patroness of the Lady whom she honors, whose
life she relates, whose death she lamenteth, whofe Funeral she celebrateth;
you, together with your honorable and religious The Lady Croft.
Mother, gave that Lady her breeding, communicated unto her your virtues,
advanced her to her honors; so that the best of her life, her education, her
virtues, her honors, she derived (next under God) from you: and therefore
being dead, her wandering obsequies have recourse unto you for protection,
presuming that for love you bare unto the living, Ruth 2.20.
you will not cease to do good unto the dead; the good you shall do her is to
daigne that your honorable name (as it was a Sanctuary unto her self while
she lived) so it may patronage her Funerals being dead. It is not I, for what
am I unknown to you, or my deseruings? but she, or because she is not, I for
her, or rather her living virtues for her dead self, that imploreth this
gracious favor at your gentle hands. Your tender breast will not deny so humble
a suter; your old love will bid you yield to a desire so zealous. In full
confidence whereof I have ventured to prefixe your honorable name, which, if
it find (as it fervently desires) acceptance favorable, it shall perhaps
encourage me to second it with some more pleasing and delightful subject,
which mine own experience has gathered from no less painful then far
foreign observations. In the mean season my devoted heart shall devoutly
pray for length of days, redoubled honors, graces happiness, to descend and
rest upon your virtuous head, and after this life the eternal crown of a
better life.

Your Honors in the most humble desire, and tender of his service and
observance, WILLIAM FORDE.

EPITAPHIVM.
VIator siste paululum, hic manes te monent vt maneas, haec citus lege, ac
tacitus luge; si iussa obibis mea, domum demum tui memor abibis: In hoc tumulo,
terrae cumulo, omni virtute cumulata, tumulata iacet Anna imo potius Agna (hoc
ei enim nomen vt and omen etiam fata dederunt) Anna Lamb, manna dulcior, Agna
mitior and amicior, in Anglico solo concepta, nunc in Caelum and Angelicum
chorum recepta; quae illustrissimo Domino Thomae Glouer, apud hanc Ottamannoru^
portam Magnae Britaniae, etc. Legato regio nupta, se tam mite^ ei Comitem
praebuit, vt cum eo tanquam luna solemn suum sequens, and cursum suum varijs
terra marique erroribus flatibus and fluctibus inuicta, non communi sed
coelesti ordine persiciens, ab occidente in Orientem, lata, ecclipsim, terra
hac (vt vides) interposita, passa sit, breui lucem suam receptura, non perit
enim, quae meliorem vitam reperit: Sed du^ Libitinae libet, quotquot adsumus,
absumus. Nos humiles imo humus ac fumus coelos nil caelare possumus, and natura
nimis interdum matura quod boni offert, cito aufert, quamuis alias longior
etiam mora mori alios non vedat. Haec volui a te meme volui, in quibus si te
recte agnosces, mihi certe paucula haec ignosces, Vale. Etperge.

Genesis 23. ver. 2.3.4. 2. Then Sara died in Kiriatharba the same is Hebron in
the land of Canaan. And Abraham came to mourn for her, and to weep for her.

3. Then Abraham rose up from the sight of his Corpse and talked with the
Hittites saying.

4. I am a stranger and a forrener among you, give me a possession of burial
with you that I may bury my dead out of my sight


FOr a sorrowful meeting, what more meet, then words, and songs, and sobs, and
sighs of sorrow? speech with matter, matter with action, action with
affection, affection with occasion should sympathize together. We have here
before our eyes a sad spectacle, a hearse covered with Sable weeds, a coffin
filled with worms and ashes; fitting for which object, we have singled out a
doleful text, which does entreat of naught but woes and sorrows, of death, of
tears, of pilgrimage, of the grave. Of death, by the power of sin triumphing
over life; of tears, as the fruits of sin weeping at the power of death; of
pilgrimage, as the lot of life traveling unto death, of the grave, as the home
of pilgrims and the house of death.

Then Sarah died. Here is the power of death triumphing over life? And Abraham
came to mourn for her and to weep for her, here are the fruits of sin
weeping at the power of death. Then Abraham rising up, said unto the Hittites,
I am a stranger and a forrenner among you, here is the lotte of life, which is
a pilgrimage unto death. Give me a possession of burial with you, here is the
home of pilgrims and the house of death

Then Sarah died. Thence observe, the general condition of mankind, even that
which the Apostle has confirmed Heb. 9.
It is appointed unto men that they shall once die. And Abraham came to mourn
and weep for her, thence observe, that natural affection toward the dead is
commendable in all, Then Abraham said I am a stranger and a forrenner among
you. Thence observe, that all men are but strangers and pilgrims here on earth.

Give me a possession of burial with you. Thence observe, that the dead are to
be honored with burial and a grave.

That all men must once die, that natural affection toward the dead is
commendable in all, that all are but pilgrims and strangers here on earth, that
all after death are to be honored with burial and a grave, are the four sad
several subjects, of my ensuing sad discourse, which whiles I apply to this
sad spectacle, apply you your hearts to sorrow, your eyes to tears, if not
for her that is dead and gone (for she is blessed and rests from her labors)
yet for your own sins, which will cause you (will you nill you) God knows
how soon, look you how well, to follow after her, we will by Gods assistance
and your much desired patience, trauish the same ground we have began to tread,
tracing the steps, and following the method in the self same order we have
propounded it.

Then Sarah died. Was Sarah the first that died; was not mother Eve with her
daughters and her daughters daughters dead long before: if dead, and why not
mentioned? what was rare and singular in Sarahs death, that she alone above
all other women, above Eve her self should deserve to have the first
memorial, then Sarah died: surely I know no other reason but this, that as
Abraham was the father so Sarah was the mother of the faithful, and therefore
the holy Ghost vouchsafes unto her, that which he denied to other women
before her, an honorable mention both of her age, how long she lived and of
the time of her death, when she died, when Sarah was an hundredth twenty and
seven years old, so long lived she, then Sarah died Sarah though the mother
of the faithful, though a holy and religious matrone, though a Saint of God
yet then Sarah died.

Whence we observe the general condition of mankind.

It is appointed unto men that they shall once die, all must drink of Sarahs
cup, the cup is full of one and the same liquour, the liquour is drawn from
one and the same fountain, the fountain it self is poisned, and if the
fountain be unclean the streams will be troubled too, if the root be cankred
the branches will wither also, if the head be diseased, the members will be
distempered too, Now the head, the root, the fountain, as of Sarah so of all
mankind, was father Adam, as therefore Adam by rushing against the law like a
pitcher that dasheth against the wall, sinned not only in his own person, but
in his humane nature, not only in himself but in his descent, so he purchased
the punishment of sin which is death, not only unto himself, unto his own
person, but unto others, unto his humane nature, of which we all partake. For
as by one man says the Apostle, (by one Adam and one Eve, two in sex, but one
in nature, one in marriage, one in sinning, the woman seduced by the Serpent,
the man induced by the woman, (sin entered into the world, and death by
sin, so by the sin of one man, death went over all men, in whom all men had
sinned, Romans 5.12.
But how did sin enter by one into the world; not by propagation of kind
only, as Socinus the heretic auerreth, but by participation of the fault
also, and by imputation of the guilt; And how did death enter by sin? even as
an effect that follows yts cause, or as a shadow that accompanies a body
in the sun. And how went death over all; as a plague grassantis in domo,
depopulating the city or a house where it enters: or like an enemy
pervagantis, vastantis, sternentis, raging ranging, destroying, all that he
meets with, or like a hidden, poison that diffuseth it is venom, unto every
member, and penetrateth unto all and every part, not only unto a few sick
weaklings, and poor staruelings, but generally unto all, high and low, rich
and poor, bond and free, of what age, sex, condition, degree soever; all, men
and women, young and old, great and little, strong and weak, are subject to
deaths stroke whence the poet cries out.

Heu mortem invisam quaesola vltricibus armis,
Elatos fraenas animos, communia toti
Genti sceptra tenens, aeternaque faedera seruans,
Quae magnos parvosque teris, quae fortibus aequas
Imbelles, populisque duces, seniumque iuventae. Maphaeus,

True it is indeed that which Saint Austen taught long ago, God at first
created man as a mean between Angels and beasts, that if he obeyed the Lord
his true creator and kept his hestes, he might be transported to the Angels
society, but if he became perverse in will, and offended the Lord his God,
then that he might be cast unto death like a bruit beast; And to this end he
placed him in the garden of Eden, the paradise of God, stored with matchless
variety, of whatsoever delights heart could desire, especially garnished
begnets hacaim, with the tree of life, and begnets haddagneth the tree of
knowledge, which two trees he appointed him for two Sacraments, by the tree of
life mystically importing that if he continued his obedience, he should surely
enjoy life, never feel nor fear hunger, thirst, sickness, age, or death, by
the tree of knowledge that if he transgressed the commandment, ipso facto In
the very act Genesis 2.
moth tamuth dyinge dye. he should most certainly die, or he should die a
double death, the death of the body, and the death of the soul which
accordingly happened, as had been threatened, for in the same hour he began to
eat, he began to die, not only a spiritual death, which is a separation of
man from God, who is the life of man and the length of Deuteronomy. 30.
days, unto which and unto which only the heretic Socinus restrains it,
conceating the death of the body to be a sequel, not of sin but of nature,
even of of nature uncorrupted, so that the body should have died though man had
never sinned, but also and not only (as Ambrose erroneouslie thinks) a
corporal death, which is the dissolution of nature, and the souls last
farewell until the general resurrection unto the body which actual
dissolution though instantly it followed not, yet was to be seared every
moment, for as in civil judgments and Iuridicall proceedings among men, a man
condemned to death, though after his condemnation he be committed unto the
Iaylour, by him cast again into the dungeon, and there linger for a long time
a dying life, yet in common esteem he is rather reckoned among the dead, then
the living, and we are wount to say of him sentence is past, he is a dead man:
In the same manner Adam, from the very day and hour he received his sentence
of mortality gnaphar attah, vel gnaphar thashubh, earth thou art, and into the
earth thou shall return, though after this, the line of his life were long
extended, yet the nature of his life was but a death, because he was dead in
doom, for he that makes himself liable unto punishment, is under punishment
si non re, tamen sententia if not in deed yet in doom. And in this respect
says Saint Ambrose, Adam from the very act of his eating the forbidden
fruit, may be rightly said to have died instantly, because he never after
lived one day, hour, or moment, wherein he was not obnoxious unto death, we
commonly say of them that have sucked in some strong and violent poison, actum
est, he is a dead man, because though as yet he breath, yet stay a little and
lo he is stone dead: So may we say of Adam, and as of Adam, so of every son
of Adam, who have all sinned in the sin of Adam, hic mortuus est, he is a
dead man, because though as yet he live, yet having drank his deadly bane he
must surely die.

For ever since the sin of Adam, as soon as man begins to live, he begins
a perpetual journey unto death, And there is none says Saint Austen but is
nearer death at the years end, then he was at the beginning, to morrow then
to day, to day then yesterday, by and by then just now, and now then a little
before, each part of time (if time have parts) that we pass, cuts of so much
from our life, and the remainder still decreaseth, Austen in Psalm. 127.
veniente pueritia says Saint Austen moritur infantia, veniente adolescencia
moritur pueritia, veniente iuventute moritur adolescentia, veniente senectute
moritur iuventus, veniente morte moritur omnis aetas, when childhood comes
on, infancy dies, when adolescencie comes childhood dies, when youth
comes adolescencie dies, when old age comes youth dies, when death
comes all and every age dies, so that look how many degrees of ages we
desire to live so many degrees of death we desire to die, ask an old man
where is his infancy where is his childehood? where is his adoloscencie? where
is his youth? shall he not say true if he answer, alas all these are dead and
gone, what speak I of ages? every year, month, day hour, of our life that
we have lived, is dead to us, and we are dead with them, what therefore else is
our whole life, but a long death. what is every day thereof but as Lib. 1.
Epist. 5.
Petrarch says a degree unto death, what is every moment thereof but a motion
unto death? whence it is that In registro.
Gregory compares the life of man unto a Saylour in a ship, for as he that
sayleth whether he stand or sit, or lie or walk, is always wafted onwards by
the motion of the ship: so it is with us, whether we wake or whether we
sleep, whether we walk or whether we talk, whether we sit or whether we lie,
whether we will or whether we nill, by times moments we are carried forewardes
unto our end, and as Lib. 3. Epist. 24.
Seneca says quo tidie morimur we die every day; for every day we loose part
of our life, and tunc quoque cum crescimus vita decrescit and our life, even
then decreaseth when it increases Parallel with that of Cap. 2. lib. Solil.
Saint Austen vita mea qua^to magis crescit, tanto magis decrescit, and quanto
magis procedit tanto magis ad morte^ accedit, my life the more it increases
the more it decreaseth the more it is lengthened the more it is shortened, and
the longer I live the nearer I approach unto death, For all our life indeed is
but a living death, or to make the best of it, it is no better then a
continual passage unto death, wherein one can neither stay nor slake his pace,
but all run in one and the same manner, with one and the same speed, for the
short liver runs his race no faster then he that lives long, both run
alike, both make speed alike, the difference is, the first has not so far
to run as the later. It is one thing to run further, another to run
faster, he that lives long runs further, but not a moment faster, every man
hasteneth unto death alike though one have a lesser way to go then the other.

And hence it is that though all men make equal have yet all have not the same
arrival unto death, but some in the morning, others in the noontide, others in
the evening of their age, yet all in some one hour or other. For howsoever
there may be some difference of time, yet there is no uncertainty of the end,
but sooner or later it is certain all shall come to an end. Job. 30.23.
I know assuredly, says holy Job, thou will bring me unto death, which is the
house appointed for all the living, as a haven for all shipping. It may be when
a ship is come to the mouth of the haven, a blast drives it back again: but
thither it will arrive at the last, so must we, all of us, at the gates of
death, Omnes (says the Poet) vna manet mors, and calcanda semel via laethi,
Death is the end of al, and once the way of death is to be troad of all. For
as all stars move from the East to the West, and all the rivers run into
one Sea so all men travel unto one home, the house of death, which therefore
the 1. King. 2 Josh. 23.14
Prophet in a prouerbiall manner calls the way of all the earth. And as all
trees have their death, either they fall through the tempests of winds, or
rend in sunder through the violence of thunder, or wither away through the
length of time: Isa. 51.6.
so all on earth are mortal. All flesh, says the Prophet, waxes old as a
garment; a garment whether it be worn or whether it lie folded in a chest,
perishes at length, if it be not worn it will soon be motheaten, if worn,
it will soon into rags. And as the leaves on a thick tree, some fall, and
some grow: so is the generation of flesh and blood, one is borne, and another
dies: which the Heathen Poet well saw, Homer.
though he himself were blind, in that verse of his, which Pyrrhus Eleensis
above all other verses so much commended:

(...). Tale genus est hominum quale est folioru^, such is the generation of
men as of leafes, so one perishes and comes to his end, and another rises
up in his place. And as the leaf buddeth, springs, florisheth, waxes old
and withers away: so man is borne, grows, florisheth, waxes old, and
vanishes away; and as many leafes are nipped in the bud: so many men are cut
of in their youth, tale quidem genus est hominum quale est foliorum. So then
such as a leaf is, such is a man; there is no leaf but at length withers,
and there is no man but at length dies; the wind blows, and the leaf
fades, death with his pestiferous breath approaches, and man dies. Who can
stopp the wind that it blow not? who can hinder death that it come not?

What one writes wittily of the Grammarian is true of every son of Adam,
that being able to decline all other nounes in every case, could decline death
in no case. there was never Orator so eloquent that could persuade death to
spare him, never Gibber so mighty nor monarch so potent, that could withstand
him. Nerus the fair Therscites the foul, Selym the cruel, Solomon the
magnificent, Crassus the rich, Irus the poor, Damaetas the peasant, Agamemnon
the Prince, all fall down at deaths feet, if he command, we must away, no
tears, no prayers, no threatenings, no intreatings will serve the turn: so
stiff, so dease, so inexorable is death.

There are means to tame the most fierce and savage beasts, means to break
the hard marble, and to mollify the Adamant, but not any one thing to
mittigate deaths rage, Resistitur, says Saint Austen, ignibus, vndis, ferro,
resistitur regibus, resistitur Imperijs Aug. Psa. 121.
venit vna mors and quis ei resistit? Fire, water, the sword, may be resisted,
and Kings and Kingdoms may be resisted, but when death comes who can resist
it? non miseretur inopum (says Ber. de conu. cler.
Saint Bernard) non reueretur diuitas, Death pitieth not the poor, regards
not the rich, fears not the mighty, spares not any.

It is in man's power indeed to say unto death, Polydor.
as sometime King Canutus said unto the Sea, when it began to flow. Sea I
command thee that thou touch not my feet: but his command was bootlesse, for he
had no sooner spoke the word, but the surging wave dashed him: So may man say
unto death when it approaches, Death I command thee not to come near me: but
no force, death will strike him, and no more power has man to keep back
death that it strike not, then the mightiest King on earth to keep back the
Sea that it dash not. The Sea will have his flux, and death will have his
course, antiquum obtinent, they both keep their old wont, since the first
division of waters, the Sea has been accustomed to ebb and flow, who has
ever hindered it? and since the first corruption of nature, death has been
accustomed to slay and destroy, who has resisted it? Other customs have and
may be abolished, a King may command, and it is done; but what Monarch so
absolute? what Emperor so potent, that could abrogate in his dominions this
custom of dying? It was a custom among the Carthaginians to sacrifice humane
flesh, but this custom is abolished. It was a custom also among the Indians
to eat man's flesh, but this custom is abolished too, many other inhumane and
unnatural customs in the world have been, but they are or may be abolished.
But this custom of dying, there was never yet any Prince, seen, read, or
heard of, that could abolish. For this condition which the Wiseman says,
Eccl. 14.
is the condition of all times remains still, Thou shall die the death, no
man, no means can abolish it.

No not length of days, nor wisdom, nor riches, nor honor, nor beauty, nor
strength, no not that excellent grace and gift of holiness and piety. The
Ancient, Fathers and Patriarchs before the flood lived very long, some 700.
some 800. some 900. years and more, and yet at length of all and every one the
conclusion is, he died. Solomon was a wise King, the wisest that ever was, he
knew the nature of all simples, from the very Hysope to the Cedar, and
therefore if any, surely he above others could have preserved himself from
death, and yet of him it is said in the end, he died.

Sampson was endued with extraordinary strength, at one time he slew a
thousand with the iaw bone of an Ass, and yet he dyed. David was a man after
Gods own heart, and yet he died. Moses saw God face to face, and yet he died.
The Prophets were endued with a great measure of sanctification, yet the
Prophet Zach. 1.5
Zachary ioines them all together in one state of mortality, your Fathers where
are they? and do the Prophets live for ever? What say I the Prophets? Christ
Jesus himself the Son of God, the only son, the Son in whom he was
well pleased, more wise then Solomon, more mighty then Samson, more holy then
David, and all the Prophets, though he knew no sin in himself, yet for
taking on him the burden of our sins, became subject to the same condition
of mortality with us, and he dyed also. And that I go no further, but come
home unto my Text, Sara who lived a hundred twenty and seven years, and was as
the Hebrews mystically expound the numbers, so chaste and innocent at twenty
years old, as she was at seven, and so fair at a hundred years old, as she
was at twenty; yet neither her wisdom, not her beauty, nor her chastity,
could ought avail her: but here you see the conclusion is, Then Sarah died.

If any shall object, but Enoch and Elias died not, I answer, we know not, I
rather think they did, and that Elias in his fiery Chariot had his body
burnt, and Enoch who in his years matched the days of the sun 365. was
without pain dissolved when God took his soul to heaven, or if they died
not, yet as Origin says, the general is not therefore false, because GOD has
dispensed in some particulars, though one or two died not, yet this is an
universal truth of all men to be received and duly pondered. It is appointed
unto men that they shall once die.

And is it indeed Heb. 9.
appointed unto men that they shall once die? Is there but one way for all the
earth to go, one door, deaths 1. Kin. 22
door, for all the living to turn into? how nearly then does it concern us,
to bethink our selves of this way, to fit our selves for this journey, and
even in this life, to take care for another life, a better life, eternal life.
A man that knows for certain he must resign his dwelling house, within a
month, or a week, or a day, is very silly and simple, if he take no order for
procuring some other habitation, Job 30.23
that when he is put out of his own house, he may have another to cover his
head in: so will it be with us, who inhabit these houses of clay, whose
foundation is the dust, Job. 4.
we know for certain we shall leave them, how soon we know not, perhaps to
morrow, perhaps to day, perhaps this very hour, we are silly then and
improvident, if we take no care for providing other houses. What said Ser. 2.
dedi. Eccl.
Saint Bernard to his soul, Ad huc domum quidem habes (O anima) sed certa
esto, quoniam in breui ((...)) casura est domus tua, and nisitu prouideris
aliam, eris pluviae, vento, and frigori exponenda. O my soul thou have yet a
house to dwell in, but be assured thy house will shortly fall and moudre, and
unless thou provide thee before hand of some other house, caytiue, forelorne
and naked shall thou be exposed unto the wind, the rain, and the cold: alas,
who can stand in presence of this stormy tempest; happy therefore, thrice happy
shall thou be my soul, if then thy conscience tell thee, thou can say unto
thy self in faith and full assurance I know that if my earthly house of this
Tabernacle be destroyed, I have a building given of God, that is, an house not
made with hands, but eternal in the heavens, 2. Cor. 5.

Again, is it appointed unto men that they must once die? Oh that we could
every one of us (as we ought) seriously consider this, and daily and duly
ponder with our selves, of this theme, We must die. Doubtless this would
cause us to fear God while we live, that we might find favor at his
hands when we die. For who so fears the Lord, it shall go well with him
at the last, and he shall find favor at the day of his death Eccl. 1.
.

2. It would move us to embrace the good, and refuse the evil, remembering that
as Precious is the death of the Saints in the sight of the Lord: so evil is
the death of sinners Psalm. 34.
.

3. It would abate in us the plumes of our pride, and humble us far below the
Ninevites, and Ahab, considering that Earth we are, and into earth we shall
return again, and why art thou proud O earth and ashes Eccl. 10.
.

4. It would work in us a true remorse and sorrow for our sins, laying
before our eyes the saying of our Savior, Unless you repent also you shall
likewise perish Luke 13.
.

5. It would breed in us a distaste and dislike of earthly things, Facile enim
contemnit omnia, says Saint Jerome, qui se cogitat moriturum, as Esau when he
was ready to die for hunger contemned his birthright, En morior quid mihi
proderunt primogenita, Ge. 25.32
Lo I am almost dead, what is then this birthright to me? whereas
contrariwise, they that dream of a long life treasure up to themselves in
earth Luke 12.


6. It would expel out of our hearts rancor and hatred, procure love and
amity, reunite and reconcile us to our brethren, whiles we are in the way Mat.
5
seeing agreement will be too late when we are once delivered to the Iaylor.

7. It would make us watchful of our ways, and learn us David's prayer: Lord,
let me know mine end, and measure of my days what it is, Psalm. 39.
let me know how long I have to live, and why would he know this? That he
might apply his heart to wisdom, for in the grave there is none, O Lord, that
remembers thee Psalm. 6.
.

8. Lastly, this consideration that we must once die, would be a good motive
unto us to learn by time how to die, for that which at length we must
necessarily do, we will if we be wise learn by time how to do, among all
other works which we are to do: to die, though it be the last, is not the
least. Euripides and Seneca.
Yet miserable (say two learned Hethens) a thing it is in the hour of death
not to know how to die.

Let us therefore, Christian brethren, above al things labor for this
knowledge, whiles we live let us learn how to die, that so when death shall
spread his pale color over our faces, we may intertaine it not in horror; but
in honor, not as a loss; but an advantage, as a door opening to salvation,
not a gate leading to destruction. Now if you shall ask me, but how must we
learn to die? I will lead you to another of your own profession, to an
ancient Hermit for an answer. It happened that a Merchant man (like your
selves) traveling through a Forest, espied near a little Cell, an old
Hermit of whom he was inquisitiue to know what he made there? The Hermit
answered, My son I learn to die.

Mar. What needs that, seeing whether thou will or no thou must shortly die?
Her. And this is that troubles me, seeing I must shortly die, and yet I know
not how to die. Mar. But what is it to know how to die? Her. To know how to die
is to eschew evil, and do good, according to that of the Psalmist, Declina a
malo and fac bonum. Mar. Father, what do thou eat that thou art so long
lived? Her. I eat the best meat. Mar. But who prepares it? Her. The best
Cook, hunger. Mer. What are thy meditations and discourses? Her. I call to
mind the time past, consider in the bitterness of my soul, how I have spent my
former years, and where I find that I have done well I thank my God, where
ill, I sorrow and repent Mer. Art thou rich? Her. I have more then I would, to
wit, this body of mine. Mer. What then, would thou die? Her. I would
willingly die well that I might obtain eternal life. Mar. Can thou instruct
me how to die well, and to live eternally? Her. I can, what is thy profession?
Mer. I am a Merchant. Her. If thou vvilt play the true Merchant, and buy the
greater for the less, the better for the worse, look up to heaven, behold it
is better and greater then the whole earth, sell all and buy that; sell thy
sins, sell thy pleasures, sell thy profits, buy this one Jewel, and to this
end, cast thy bread upon the waters, make thee friends of the unrighteous
Mammon, by doing good: now the good which the Lord requires of thee is (as
the Mica. 6.
Prophet witnesses) To do judgment, to love mercy, and walk with the Lord
our God, this do and thou shall have eternal life. Mer. So may I live as I
follow thy counsel: Farewell. Her. Go in peace.

These and the like good fruits, good motions, good affections, the
consideration of our end and dissolution would engender in us, and happy, yea
thrice happy, are they that thus consider. And to set you forward herein,
consider I beseech you, consider with your selves what you are? what your
life is? What you are, the Poet tells us, (...). Man is a shadow, a dream,
or a dreaming shadow. What your life is, daily experience shows, Iam. 4.14
It is a vapor that soon vanishes, a dry lease carried with every wind, a
sleep fed with imaginary dreams, a Tragedy of transitory things, it
passes away like a post in the night, like a ship in the Sea, like a Bird in
the air, whose tract the air closes: concerning the shortness thereof, the
Heathen Poet could say, A man is but a man of a day old, the kingly Prophet
said, it was but a span long; Moses and Solomon say, It is a life of days;
Job, Esaias, Paul, compare it to a bubble, a sleep, a booth, a shepherds tent,
which every day is renewed: yea, they come so far at length, that they
compare it to a thought, whereof there may be a thousand in one day. But what
need we these resemblances, since we can turn our selves no way, but
something there is which may put us in mind of our mortality. Can you enter
your Counting houses, and cast eye upon your houre-glasse, and not consider
that as the hour passes, so does our life? Can you sit in your chaires by the
fire side, and see a great quantity of vvood turned into smoke and ashes, and
not consider with the Poet, Sic in non hominem vertitur omnis homo, So man, no
man will suddenly become? Can you walk forth into the fields, and see how
some grass is coming, some newly withered, some already come, and not
consider with the Esa. 40.6
Prophet, That all flesh is grass, and all the grass thereof is as the flower
of the field? Can you feel the air move and the wind beat in your faces, and
not consider the breath of man is in his nostrils, stop his Esa. 2.22
nostrils, and his breath is gone, and that the strongest tenure of your life
is but by a puff of vvinde? Can you sit on the rivers bank, and not consider
that as the river runs, and not returns, so does your life? Can you shoot
in the fields, and not consider, that as the arrow flies in the air, so
swiftly do your days pass? Or if we be like Horse and Mule without
understanding to consider this, yet I am sure we cannot be so senseless, as
not to consider that which every days light presents to our view.

To day our superiors, to morrow our inferiors, next day our equals, one
while our friends, another while our foes are taken from us, and life from
them. And may not the same happen unto any one, or every one of us, which
happens unto them, are we more free then they? It is a good comparison of one
who likeneth death unto an Archer that shootes sometime beyond us, not sparing
our superiors, sometime short of us striking our inferiors, sometime at our
right hand depriving us of our friends, sometime at our left hand hitting our
foes, and now and then it hits the mark it self, and we are dead as well as
others.

And surely if we go no further then our own selves, and consider how many
diseases we continually carry about us, what aches affect our bones, what
heaviness our bodies, what dimnesse our eyes, what deafness our ears, what
trembling our hands, what rottenness our teeth, what balnesse our head, what
grains our hairs. All and every one of these, as so many loud alarums would
sound unto us, Death is near: or if none of these did affect us within, yet
how many thou sand dangers do daily threaten us without, and seem to show us
present death? Go into the ship, Calvin.
there is but a foots thickness between thee and death. Sit on horseback in
the slipping of one foot, thy life is in danger: go through the streets of the
City, even how many tiles are upon the houses, to so many perils art thou
subject: If there be an Iron tool in thy hand or thy friends, the harm is
ready prepared: how many wild beasts thou see, they are all armed to thy
destruction. If thou mean to shut up thy self in a garden, well senced,
where may appear nothing but pleasantness of air and ground, there sometime
lurketh a Serpent: The house which is subject to winds and storms, does
continually threaten thee with falling on thy head, I speak not of poysonings,
treasons, robberies, open violence, of which part do besiege us at home, and
part do follow us abroad, examples tending to this purpose are infinite,
whereof I will produce a few, thereby to put us in mind that the same things
may happen unto our selves, for which cause hardly should a moment of our life
time be spent, without due and entire consideration of our death. If then we
ascend the theater of man's life, and look about, we shall see some to have
perished with sudden death Ananias and Sap.
, others with grief Eli.
, others with joy Rhodius Diagoras.
, others with gluttony Domit. Afer.
, others with drunkenness Attila King of Hunnes.
, others with hunger Cleanthes.
, others with thirst Thales milesius.
, others in their lascivious dalliances Corneiius Gal.
, others with ouerwatching M. Attilius.
, others with poison Phocio^ Henric. 7. Emp. in a feast by a Mounke.
: some by fire from heaven The Sodomites, Anastatius the Emperor an Euty
chia^haer.
, some by waters M. Marcellus.
, some by earthquakes Ephrasius bish of Antioch.
, some swallowed up quick Coran, Dathan and Abiron.
, some stifled with smoke and vapors Catulus.
, some choked with flies Adrian the Pope, 1159.
, some with a fall, and sliding off their foot Nestorius the haer.
, some at the disburdening of nature Arrius haer.
, some with a sudden fall from their horse Philip K. of France. Judge
Glanuil of Tanestock in Deuo^
, others killed and torn asunder by Dogs Heraclitus Lucian the Apost.
, Horses Hippolitus
, Lions Licus Em.
, Bears 40. Child.
, Boares Ancaeus K. of Samos.
, Rats Hato bish. of Menas. Trag. 3. act 1.
, and the like. I forbear to speak of other strange and unfortunate deaths,
as that of Milo Crotoniates by the stock of an Oak which he had desired to
tear asunder, but his strength failing him, and the clift suddenly closing,
was so fast held by the hands, that he became a prey to the beasts of the
field. And that of Poet Aeschylus, who uncovering his bald pate in the warm
sun, had his brain pan broken by the blow of a Tortuise, which an Eagle,
taking his head for a white Marble stone, let fall to break, that afterward
she might devour it. And that of Charles King of Navarre, who for the curing
of some aches, having his body wrapped about with a linen cloth, that first,
had been well steeped in Aqua vitae, was suddenly and unfortunately burnt by a
candle, which his Physician having sowed the cloth about him, and wanting a
knife to cut the thread, took to burn asunder, and the thread flaming to the
cloth, caught such a sudden hold of the same, and Aqua vitae, that before any
means could be applied, the King in this flame was burnt to death. I speak
nothing of others who have untimely perished: some by one means, some by
another. I conclude all with that saying of * Seneca, Eripere vitam nemo non
homini potest, at nemo mortem, mill ad hanc aditus patent.

What shall I say then? do so many things within us, so many things without
us, so many things about us, threaten a continual death unto us? Miser homo
cur te ad mortem non componis, cum sis pro certo moriturus, Then vvretched man
thou art, that do not prepare thy self for death, seeing thou must
certainly die.

But alas the devil does so deaf us, the world does so blind us, and the
sensuality of the flesh makes us so extremely senseless, that we neither
hear, nor see, nor feel what is every minute likely to befall us. If we be
young, we fear not death at our backs, if old, we look a squint and see
not death before our eyes. But hearken O young man and learn, as the old man
can not live long, so the young man may die quickly: certain it is thou shall
die, uncertain when, beause thou should always live ready to die. But if
it were so that in thy youth thou had a lease of thy life till age, granted
by the Father of heaven, ratified by his Son, and sealed unto thee by the
whole Trinity, then perchance there might be some pretense of thy
carelessenesse. But now seeing every hour may be the last unto thee, since
every moment may dissolve this earthly Tabernacle, since a thousand chances
may at all times take thee unawares, and bereave thee of thy soul: who but
more then mad would not consider of his end, and follow the Prophet Esaies
counsel, to seek the Lord in time, and Salomons precept, to learn wisdom
in his youth.

In like manner the old man, he will not think of death, until the time of
his death, thinking to become a sudden Saint, who has all his life time lived
a wicked worldling. But hearken thou old man, and learn by the rich man in the
Gospel, so he had also cast up his rest, he was settled rich and joyful, and
deferred to be godly till he saw occasion, but what says the Spirit of God: O
fool this night shall they take thy soul from thee, this night in midst of
thy ioylitie, in the security of thy sleep, suddenly, unwittingly shall thou
die. O miserable case (says Saint Austen) when suddenly the senses fail, the
body languisheth, death ready to burst in sunder the heart strings, the
conscience heavy with sin, the devil ready to entertain thee. Who in this
plight would not value a minute of repentance, to a Monarchy of wealth, and yet
we banish away, days, and months, and years, not regarding the casualtie in
the end. I vvish therefore, that old men as they have a privilege of years,
so also they had the privilege of foresight herein; that as they see their
bodies bending toward the earth, so they learn to send their souls toward
heaven, and if they should not vvish for their dissolution with Paul, yet they
should wait all the days of their life for their changing with Job.

Finally, all men almost, both young and old, rich and poor, of all fashions,
and of all degrees, put off this consideraon of death, and never think or
prepare to die, till they find and feel they can no longer live. But, O let
me beseech you all that here me this day, to exempt your selves from this
supine and ox like security. You know for certain you must die, you are
every moment subject unto death, a thousand thousand chances may every day
bereave you of your life? why then esteem of every present day, as the day
of your death, and make such conscience of all your ways, words and works, as
if you were presently to give an account of your life. Qui considerat qualiter
erit in morte pauidus and prouidus erit in operatione, He that thinks always
of dying will be circumspect in his doing.

Think therefore, O think, and bethink your selves of this, and in the depth
of these thoughts, prepare your selves for death. Set your houses, yea set your
hearts in order, call your souls to account, turn your selves as 2. Kin. 20
Ezechias did to the wall, that is, from the world to God; weep, weep, and
bewail your sins past, keep a narrow watch over your heart for the time to
come, Psa. 38.
pray with David, Lord remember not the sins of my youth, and with Saint
Ambrose, Lord forgive me my faults here, where I have sinned, for else where I
cannot be relieved, except I have my pardon here; It is in vain to expect the
restfull comfort of forgiveness hereafter. 2. cor. 6.2
Now is the acceptable time, as Saint Paul speaks, now is the day of
salvation: This world is for thy repentance, the other for thy recompense, Hic
locus luctae, ille coronae, hoc cunaeorum tempus est illud coronatorum, as
Saint Chrysostom speaks, This is the place and time of combating, that of
crowning, this of working, that of rewarding, this for thy mourning, that for
thy comforting Now God is helping unto all men, seek ye therefore the Isa. 55.
Lord whiles he is near, and post not off till to morrow, for you know not
what a day may bring forth. It is certain death will come, but it comes
for the most part like a thief stealing, and creeping without any warning,
take heed you be not taken unawares. You see the stroke thereof is
universal, for if the reverence of old age, could have discountenanced it,
Methushaleth had not died. If strength of body could have resisted it, Sampson
had not died. If majesty could have terrified it, if counsel could have
persuaded it, if riches could have bribed it: Nor Solomon, nor Achitophel, nor
Dives had died. But Methushaleth is dead, and Samson is dead, and Solomon, and
Achitophel, and Dives are dead, and what is it can free a man from death? Nay,
if youth, if beauty, if virtue, if piety, could work any relent in death,
from embracing his cruel hands in mortal blood: see where youth, where
beauty, where virtue, where piety lie enshrined, wholly now defaced,
obscured, eclipsed, and ouershadowed in death. O death, how irrelenting is thy
heart! how bloody are thy hands! how impartial is thy stroke! how general is
thy arrest! oh that the living would consider this. And let this suffice, to be
spoken of the universality of deaths stroke. Then Sara died.

And Abraham came to mourn for Sarah and to weep for her.

Whether Sara died in absence of Abraham; because Abraham is here said to come
to mourn for her, as the Jews affirm she did, and to this end feign, that when
Abraham was on mount Moriah to sacrifice his son Isaac, the devil to make it
a real tragedy, represented the manner of Isaacs offering up unto Sarah,
whereupon, say they, she took a conceit and died: and so Abraham returning
from the mount, and finding his wife dead, is said to come to mourn and to
weep for her. But Josephus has sufficiently refuted this fancy: For, if
Isaac were 25. years old at the time he should have been sacrificed, and
Sarah after that lived 12. years, how then died Sarah presently, when she
heard from the devil her son was sacrificed. Or whether he came from burying
his father Therah, as some think, whom the Jesuit Pererius would have to die
but two years before, but the truth is that he was dead 62. years before,
for Abraham was now 137. years old, who was borne in the 70. year of
Therahs age, who lived 205. years in all: so Abraham was 75. years old, when
his father died, to that add 62. so shall we have Abraham's age of 137. Genesis
12.5


Or whether he be said to come because he went out of his tent, and entered into
Sarahs tent, which is most probable: for though they soiourned together, yet
their tents were asunder, as appears out of the last verse of the 24.
Chapter, as the manner of those Countries was, the men to have their tents by
themselves apart, and the women their tents apart, as here, among whom we
soiourne: we see at this day the Turks have their houses and their rooms
apart, half for themselves, and the other half for their wives and women
slaves: or howsoever it was, we will not so much inquire from whence he came,
as the end of his coming: which was to mourn and weep for Sara, whence we
observe.

That natural affection is commendable in all: In Abraham, therefore in
others, and that not every light touch of affection, but a mourning and
weeping, an inward affection, and an outward action, sorrow within, and
sadness without, the hearts grief, and the eye tears must go together. For
weeping and tears without, are tokens of love within. As the Jews gather from
the tears of Christ, which he shed for the death of Lazarus, John 11.
Behold how he loved him, how appears that, even from this, And Jesus wept,
for then said the Jews, when they saw him weep, Behold how he loved him.

Where love is, tears are, if extremity of grief suppress not the passion of
love. And therefore, God has made men as living, so loving creatures, to the
end that they should not be as stocks and stones (...), senseless and void of
affection, but that living and loving together, the love of the one should not
end with the life of the other; but in token that he loved while he lived,
the suruiuer should accompany the dead to the grave with his tears, and
weep that they two can no longer live and love together.

Therefore the custom of some nations, to weep at their childrens birth, and
to laugh at their death, I hold unnatural: for very nature it self (as also
Euripides a mere naturalist could tell us) seems to have ingraffed and
inacted this desire into every one: yea though he dye (for some foul offense)
a shameful death, to have yet his kindred and his friends to celebrate his
funeral, with their tears and lamentations, and the saying of Solon was more
natural and humane:

Mors mea ne careat lachrymis, linquamus amicis,
Maerorem, vt celebrent funera cum gemitu.
Then that proud and ambitious vaunt of Ennius, which yet Tully much commends:

Nemo me lachrymis decoret, nec funera fletu,
Faxit, cur! volito viua per ora virum.
It is all one as if he had said, Let no man love me: for where love is grief
will surely be, if the thing beloved be taken away. And therefore Abraham wept
for Sara here, and Joseph and his brethren wept for their father Jacob, and
Joseph's brethren wept for Joseph. Thus the Israelites wept for Aaron, and Moses
for Samuel: thus all Judah and Jerusalem mourned, and made sorrowful songs and
lamentations for Josiah, and Jeremiah the Prophet himself lamented Josiah, and
all singing men and women mourned for Josiah, and behold this is written in the
lamentations. Thus the Disciples wept for Stephen, thus Marie and Martha wept
for Lazarus, thus others though never so godly, never so learned, never so
wise, have wept, neither could they forbear, nempe homines, for they are men,
and to weep is humane, M. Antonius the Emperor we find was a wise man, his
surname was Philosophus the Philosopher, and yet he could not refrain to
lament and weep bitterly at the death of his Tutor, which when some
reprehended in him, as unbeseeming both the majesty of an Emperor, and
gravity of a Philosopher, Antonius Pius excusing him, said unto them, Sinite
vt homo sit, neque enim imperium, aut Philosophia, hominem ex homine tollit,
neque humanis sensibus and affectibus hominem exuit: Let him alone he does but
his own, for neither Soueraignetie nor Philosophy, can take from him the
nature of a man, nor exempt him from humane passions and affections. In
likewise 26. Sermon. in Cant.
Saint Bernard we all know was a holy and devout man, yet he could not but
weep for his brother Gerardus, and yields the reason: For if one Ox, says
he, finding another Ox dead, low and roar for it, and in his kind celebrate
a funeral for the dead: what should man do for man, whom reason teaches and
affection draws? Saint Ambrose also was a grave godly man, and yet he weeps
for his dead brother, and why not, says he, bos bouem requirit? does one Ox
low for another if he want his mate with whom he was wont to be coupled? Et
ego te frater non requiram, and shall not I desire thee again my brother?
shall not I weep for thee, shall I ever forget thee with whom I have lived so
long? No, no, my brother I will remember thee, I will shed tears for thee, and
let no man condemn me; for if we shed some few tears, which run softly like
the waters of Siloh, no force, Erunt non doloris ilices sed indices amoris,
they will not bewray in us any want of faith, but only testify an abundance
of love. Therefore the Wiseman exhorts us, saying; My son power forth
tears over the dead, and begin to mourn as if thou had suffered great harm
thy self: and then cover his body, according to his appointment, and neglect
not his burial, make a grievous lamentation, Ecc. 28.16
and be earnest in mourning, and use lamentation as he is worthy, and that a
day or two least thou be evil spoken of.

But here by the way let us observe and learn, that if we may not be
senseless as Stoics, but ought to mourn and weep for those that die a
corporal death, what are we to do! how are we to grieve! what tears should
we power forth? for those that die a spiritual death? so Luke 15.
as did the prodigal son, so as did many of the Corinthians whom 2. Cor. 12
21.
Paul bewailed, so as did those pleasure-mungers, who though they lived, yet as
the Tim. 5.6.
Apostle says, were dead. So as do too many among us, who neither regard the
word of God, which is the life of our souls, nor our own souls, which are
the life of our selves. Oh that my head were full of water, and mine eyes a
fountain of tears, that I might weep day and night for this supine, foolish,
and retchlesse security Ecc. 22.12
Seven days says the Wiseman, do men mourn for him that is dead, but the
lamentation for the fool and the ungodly, should endure all the days of their
life: and why for the dead, he is at rest, but the life of the fool and the
ungodly is worse then death. Let us therefore do that says Saint Chrysostom
for our souls, which we do for men's bodies, let us bewail the loss of our
salvation, and let us lament the death of our souls: for greater is the loss,
says Saint Austen, of one soul, then of a thousand bodies. In so much that
the whole world, says Saint Bernard, is not of value enough for the price of
one soul. But who is more dead, says he, then him that carries fire in his
bosom, sin in his soul, and neither feels it, nor fears it, nor flies from
it? And such is every ungodly man: for him therefore, whether it be our selves
or others, we are specially to mourn and weep.

And yet in both these, there is a golden mean, which we must warily
observe and keep, to wit, a mean in weeping for our sins, and a mean in
weeping for our friends; in weeping for our sins, that we weep in faith
and not despair, in weeping for our friends, that we weep in love and not
as without hope. Elegant, to which purpose are those verses of his, whosoever
were the author. Deflendi sunt mortui, sed temperant ius,
Nam mortui non sunt, eandem sed viam,
Quam cogit omnes ingredi necessitas,
Praemuniere nobis, nos in posterum
Idem sequemur ipsos in confortium,
Communis and vita fruemur patriae.
Which will us to weep for the dead, but yet to observe a measure in weeping,
because dead they are, not whom we call dead; but only gone before us the way
unto eternal life, which we must follow after. The Prophet Abraham kept this
measure in weeping for Sarah here: for when he had wept and mourned for her,
(i.) when he thought he had wept enough; then he arose from the sight of his
corpse, (i.) he left weeping for her body, and took care for her burial: he
was not senseless at her death, for he did that for her, which he did not
when he was to sacrifice his own and only son Isaac: he wept for her, he
wept not for him, but he kept a mean in his weeping, and therefore he rose up
and went away from her wherein he showed himself not void of affection, but
obseruant of a moderation, and this (...), is it which the Lord commends, and
it is (...) not (...) which the Apostle condemns. 1. These. 4.
I would not brethren, says he, have you ignorant concerning them which are
asleep, that ye sorrow not even as other which have no hope: How did other
sorrow? even excessiuely, vnmeasurably, immoderately; without mean, measure,
or moderation? Some cutting and slashing their faces, some renting and tearing
their locks, their beards, their hair, their attire; some shauing their
heads, in token of sorrow: so did the Alex. ab. Alex. lib. 3. cap. 7.
Egyptians, Amorites, Milesians and Persians: and do not our own eyes witness
the same in the Greeks, at every solemn funeral? how do the silly women
dishiuer their golden traces? how do they disfigure their amiable faces? what
buffets do they give their gentle breasts? what pitiful shriekings? what
hideous howlings? what heart bleeding sobs? what blouddrawing sighs do they
utter? and all for outward manifestation, of their inward contristation: and
this excessive, vnmeafurable, immoderate lamentation the Apostle condemns;
and good reasons there are why we should not sorrow beyond a measure whereof
the first may be.

First, Diuina voluntas the divine will, unto which humane will must submit
and conform it self. Now nothing is done without the divine will, without
it a Mat. 10.
Sparrow falls not to the ground, much less a man: why then O base man,
do thou strive against the pleasure of the most high God? Eccl. 41.
why rather say thou not with Christ, Not as I will, but as thou vvilt my
Father. Has a master power of his servant, says Saint De fide resur.
Ambrose, to lead him whether he will? and has not God over man? Placeat
ergo homini, says the Heathen In Epist. ad Lucullu^
Seneca, quicquid Deo placet, therefore let man be pleased with the divine will
and pleasure, and thus resolve with himself, that God always calls him out
of this life when he is at his best, if he be good that he turn not evil; if
evil, that he wax not worse.

Secondly, Diuina aequitas, divine right and equity; it is reason and equity
that what is received upon bare lending should be restored at demanding, Job. 1.
as the holy man Job confessed. It is lawful for every one to require his
own; now, all that we have, our very life and being is not our own, Psalm. 100
but Gods: he made us, and not we our selves, he may with good equity recall
us when he pleases. We see how patiently the greatest Basha, either in Port
or abroad, yields his neck to the Bow-string at the hatmaum and command of
his King, whether it be right or wrong; for why (says he) I am his slave, my
life was long ago at his dispose; it is through his clemency that I lived
until now. And shall we be less obedient unto our good God, whose slaves we
are, whose call is ever just? Nay, rather let us be thankful unto him that he
has lent us our life so long. So was Saint Bernard, who after his mourning for
his brother Satirus, comforts himself, and breaks forth into this
acknowledgement, Ingratus diuinitati esse non possum, I may not be unthankful
to the divine Majesty, I am rather to rejoice that I had such a brother, then
to sorrow that I lost him, for that was but a gift, this was a debt.

Thirdly, Fraterna vtilitas, the benefit of the departed, for from how many
evils is he freed that dies in the Romans 7. Phil. 1. Apoc. 14.
Lord? How great the benefit is, Christ shows, where he says, if you John 14
loved me you would rejoice because I go to my Father: and if we love our
friend indeed, we would rather rejoice then too much grieve at his death, for
he is departed from us, he is gone out of the world, he has left the earth;
but he is gone unto Christ, he is entered the City of God, the celestial
Jerusalem; Non ergo amissi sed praemissi, says Fulgentius, therefore the godly
deceased are not lost forever, but left for a time, not gone away finally from
us, but only gone to God before us.

Fourthly, Fletus inutilitas, the unprofitableness of excessive weeping, for as
a moth the garment, a worm the wood, so too much sorrow hurts the heart;
Pro. 25.
therefore the wise man as he exhorts to weep for the dead; so he
counsels to comfort our selves again for our heaviness, for of heaviness
comes death, and the heanesse of the heart breaks the strength. Eccl. 18.19.


The last is, Resurrectio generalis, the general Resurection, we put not off
our apparall says Lud. Viues, unwillingly because we think to put them on
again; so neither let us be unwilling to lay aside our body which after a
while we shall resume again. And as we greiue not at the setting of the Sun,
because we know it will rise again. So let us not sorrow at the departure of a
soul, which we know will return again. For why (says Tertul in lib. de
pati.
Tertullian) should thou too impatiently greiue at the departure of him
vvith-vvhome thou beleeuest shortly to meet again! He is not to be
lamented, who is gone before, he is only vvanted for a time, and his want is
with patience to be borne. Cur enim immoderate feras abijsse quem mox
subsequeris? For why should thou immoderately lament his absence, whom thou
thy self must soon follow after? and all of us shall surely meet again at
the general resurrection. We may indeed, says S. Jerome, wish for them,
because we want them, but we must not weep out of measure for them, because
they are with God. Love I grant compells us to weep, but faith forbids us to
weep immoderately, and therefore Paulinus says, that we may, notwithstanding
our faith, perform to the dead the duties of love; yet we must first,
notwithstanding the duties of love, afford to our selves the comforts of faith.
And thus Abraham wept for Sarah here, love enforced him to weep, but faith
restrained him from exceeding the bounds of moderate lamentation.

You see then that we are to weep for the death of our godly friends
departed, but withal you see how sparinge we ought to be in weepinge,
considering our good hope that are alive, and their good hap that are dead. And
this that dead body, or rather that Cadauer, that Caro data vermibus, for her
flesh and bones by this time are turned into dust and ashes, which is the
present spectacle and object of our eyes, and which some of you perhaps even at
this instant, so seriously think of, others so much lament for. If it, I say,
should receive again her soul, untie her winding knots, break through her
Coffin, and stand up before you, she would preach and say the same unto you;
weep, if you please, for my departure, for this shall be a token of your
affection; but weep not too immoderately, for this will argue your
indiscretion: for know, that though I be departed, yet I am not perished, but
am rather perfected. I am now in the state of perfection, where I feel no
infirmity, where I am not tempted unto sin, but sing a continual Halleluiah
to the Lord. I am now where I behold the glorious Majesty of the Trinity,
where I look on the amiable countenance of my Savior, where I enjoy the sweet
society of Saints and Angels, where I have saciety without loathsomeness; love,
without hatred; peace, without discord; joy, without sorrow; eternal bliss,
without end or intermission: and therefore spare tears for me, weep not too
much, for the more you weep, the more you disquiet and disturb me. This would
the soul of this dead body say, if it should return again: but she is past
speaking, and her soul returning, until the general return of all. We will
therefore leave her to her happiness, and pass to the third subject of our
sad discourse, which is, the Lot of humane Life; and that is a pilgrimage on
earth. The life of man is a pilgrimage on earth.

Now Man may be said to be a stranger and a pilgrim on earth, either in
respect of his soul, which is not of the earth, but by divine infusion; or in
respect of the whole man, which was sometime the Citizen of Paradise, but now a
vvanderer upon the face of the whole earth; or most properly in respect of the
heavenly Jerusalem, from whence, as also from the Lord, the faithful here on
earth (whose conversation is in Phil. 3.
Heaven) are strangers as long as they are in the 2. Cor. 5.
body. Whence Saint Augustine infers, Omnis homo est aduena nascendo, and
incola viuendo, quia compellitur migrare moriendo: Every man is a forreiner by
birth, and a stranger by life, because he is compelled to depart hence by
death. Therefore said Abraham unto the Hittites, I am a stranger and a
forreiner among you; among them! yea, on the whole earth, for his whole life
was a pilgrimage on earth, as his gra^dchild Jacob calls both it and his
own; The whole course of my pilgrimage (says he unto Pharaoh) is an
hundred and thirty years, few and evil have the days of my life been, and
I have not attained unto the years of the life of my fathers, in the days of
their pilgrimage. Genesis 47. Heb. 11. verse. 13.
And Paul, bringing in a whole Catalogue of pilgrims in the eleauenth to the
Hebrews, Abel, Enoch, Noah, Abraham, and the rest, at length concludes of
all; All these died in faith, and confessed that they were strangers and
pilgrims on the earth, upon which Saint Augustine inserreth, Ipse est
Christianus, he alone is a Christian, that in his own house, and in his own
Country, acknowledges himself to be a pilgrim. Our Country is above, there
we shall be no strangers, but here every man is a stranger, even in his own
house. Let no man deceive himself, he is a stranger, Velit nolit hospes est,
whether he will or no he is a stranger. Now if this were the lot of Gods
dearest children in old time, we may not look for a permanent City here.

We see then where we must make the beginning of all godliness, even in
denying this world, and acknowledging our selves to be but pilgrims in the
same Consider, says the Prophet Isay, Isai 51.2.
Abraham your father, and Sarah that bare you; consider that Abraham was a
stranger and a pilgrim on earth, he had not so much land where he lived as
might suffice for the burial of his dead, for in hope of future things he
despised the present, and in certain expectation of greater good in the life
to come, he little reckoned the good of this present life, a shame to us that
live under grace, if we come short of him that lived before the law. You would
think him an untoward son, that being sent by his father into foreign
Countries, with this charge, to learn the tongues, to observe the manners, and
to hearken after the state of the Land, and be provided always to return when
he shall call him back; yet notwithstanding being out of sight plays out of
mind, and sits down, and even surfets upon the diversity of pleasures, is
inamoured with the beauty of Italy, delighted with the pride of Spain,
France must fit him with fine stuffes, England must fit him with new fashions,
India must guilt him with gold, Arabia perfume him with sweet smells, as though
the world were made to be his minion, but least of any is his Father remembered,
and worst of all is his charge of obseruancy performed, what other then can we
think of our selves beloved, whom God our heavenly father has set abroad in
this world, as in a foreign Country to observe the Heavens, which is the
Book, and the stars which are so many golden Characters of his glory, to
view the earth which is a large table, and the ornaments thereof so many
footesteps of his power; and out of all these to learn unto our selves, that
we may be able to declare unto others the goodness of God, and in the end to
be willing to return unto him again when he calls. Yet for all this we
can no sooner be out of kenning, but out of caring too, and even glut our
selves with vvorldly vanities, as if earth, not heaven were our eternal
home. This my beloved is a great negligence, a madness, a foolish frenzy, I
know not what to call it, but even a lulling of our selves asleep in the
cradle of this worlds security.

Again, if we be pilgrims here on earth, we must learn to do as
pilgrims do. Quis non, says Saint Cyprian, peregre constitutus properet in
patriam regredi, What pilgrim does not make speed to return home into his
own Country, who hastening to sail homewards, does not wish for a prosperous
wind, that he may speedily embrace his long desired friends and parents? and
what are we but pilgrims on earth? what is our country, but Paradise?
who are our parents? but the Patriarchs? why make we not have? why run
we not unto them, that we may see our country, salute our parents? an
infinite number of acquaintance expect us there: our parents, our brethren and
sisters, our children, our kindred, our friends, that are already secure of
their own immortality, but yet sollicitous for our safety, what joy, what
comfort will it be to see, to embrace them. What celestial pleasures are there
without all fear of dying? and with certain eternity of living? there is the
glorious quire of the Angels, the exultant number of the Prophets, the blessed
company of the Apostles, the crowned troop of Martyrs, the triumphant society
of the Saints: who whiles they lived here as out of their own country were
contemned; no men more, but are now heirs to a crown, and sit upon a throne
blessed for ever.

Thirdly, are we pilgrims on earth? Let me beseech you then beloved as the 1.
Pet. 2.11.
Apostle besought his beloved, Dearly beloved I beseech you as strangers and
pilgrims, abstain from fleshly lusts which fight against the soul. For a
pilgrim will keep on still the Kings high way, and never turn to by paths:
if he sees some quarrelling he stays not to hearken to them; if he meet a
wedding, he turns not to accompany them: but keeps on his way still because
he is a pilgrim, Ad patriam suspirat, ad patria^ tendit, he sigheth after his
own country, and hasteneth unto his own home, he carries nothing but his
food and his apparel, he will not trouble himself with any other burden,
Retinet quod alimentum, reijcit quod impedimentum, he vouchsafes only says
Plurarch, to carry his food, but casts off al other things as hindra^ces.
Let the voluptuous man who turns aside out of the way unto dalliance, let the
covetous man, who has ever a great sack at his back remember this.

Lastly, if we be pilgrims here on earth, we have but few friends and many
foes, let us be then careful to procure God to be our friend, so assure we our
selves, our enemies though they hate us, shall never have the power to hurt us,
our God whom we serve will protect us.

And now from this subject of pilgrimage, let me lead you to the home of
pilgrims, and the house of death; this is the grave, which as it is the end of
all our pilgrimage, so shall it be the period and end of my discourse.

And Abraham said, give me a possession of burial with you, that I may bury my
dead out of my sight. Whence observe,

That the bodies of the dead are to be solemnly buried, and honored with a
grave. The iniunction hereof by God himself, was as ancient within a little as
Adam: for even in Paradise, presently upon the fall, the Lord said unto him,
From earth were thou taken, and into earth shall thou return again. And the
God of nature seems to have impressed this sense in all the living, for
burial of the dead, thereby testifying their hope of the future resurrection
and life. For the burying of bodies is like the sowing of seed, which men
commit to the earth, but with certain hope that after it is once corrupted it
will rise again. And therefore burial among most men (I speak not of
Canibals nor Antropophagi: who are rather beasts then men, for their guts are
their grave) has ever been solemnly and religiously practiced.

True it is if we look into the volumes of old heathenish Philosophers, and
read songs of Poets, we shall find that they generally contemned the respect
of burial. Among Philosophers look upon Diogenes the Cynicke, that bad his
dead body should be cast to the dogs and fowls of the air, and being answered
by his friends, that so it should be rent and torn; he in scoff, why then
set a staff by me and I will beat them away with it: tush (say they) you your
self shall be senseless: why then, quoth he, what need I fear tearing? of
his humor was Memppus and most of the Cynicks. Tullie in his questions
Tusculane, records this answer of Theodorus of Cyrene unto Lysimachus, that
threatened him the cross. Let thy Courtiers fear that, said he, but as for me
I care not whether I rot in the air, or in the earth: so also said Socrates in
Platoes Dialogue called Phaedo. And as for Poets, Lucan in his seventh Book of
the Pharsalian war, speaking of the dead that Caesar forbad should be buried
or burned, after he had delivered (as his custom is) many worthy and grave
sentences concerning this matter: at length he speaks unto Caesar thus:

Nil agis hac ira, tabesue cadauera soluat,
An rogus haud refert, placido natura receptat Cuncta sinu.
In this thy wrath is worthless, all is one
Whether by fire or putrefaction,
Their carcasses dissolve, kind nature still,
Takes all into her bosom.
And a little after,

-- Capit omnia tellus
Quae genuit, caelo tegitur qui non habet vrnam.
Earths offspring still
returns into earths womb,
Who wants a grave,
heaven serves for his tomb.
And so the declaimer in Seneca, Nature gives every man a grave, to the
shipwrackt, the water wherein he is lost, the bodies of the crucified drop
from their crosses unto their graves, those that are burned quick, their very
punishment entombs them. And Virgil who appoints a place in hell for the
unburied: Yet in Anchises, his words show how small the loss of a grave is.

Nec tumulum curo, sepelit natura relictos.
I weigh no tomb,
nature intombes the meanest.
And hence it is that the heathens obsequious unto these Philosophers and
Poets, as unto so many Prophets and Oracles, have no more esteemed the bodies
of the dead, then of the carcass of an Ass: but some of them have thrown
their dead bodies unto the fowls of the air, to be devoured, as the Parthians
and Iberians: others unto dogs, as the Massagites and Hircanians: others unto
fishes, as the Lotophagoi and the Ichthyophagoi: others unto men themselves and
of bodies of men, have made tombs of men, as the Indians, Padeans,
Issedonians, and those of Scythia.

Yet we Christians should be no imitatours of their barbarous inhumanitie, nor
contemn and cast away the bodies of our dead, chiefly of the righteous and
faithful, whom the holy Ghost, says Saint Austen, used as organes and
instruments unto all good works. For if the Law will us, says Saint Ciuitate
Dei. cap. 13. and ad Paulinum. Lib. Tob. ca. 1.
Ambrose, to cover the naked: how much rather ought we to interre the dead; and
if love and kindness move us to accompany our friends some part of the way, when
they set forwards to travel into far Countries, how much sooner in their
journey unto the celestial mansions, whence they shall never return again?
And if the garment or ring of ones father, as Saint Austen says, be so much
the more esteemed of his posterity, by how much they held him dear in
affection, then are not our bodies to be despised, seeing we wear them more
near unto our selves, then any ring or attire whatsoever. And therefore the
funerals of the righteous in time of old, were performed with a zealous care,
their funerals celebrated, and their monuments provided, and they themselves in
their life time would lay a charge upon their children and acquaintance,
concerning the burying or translating of their bodies. Jacob at his death
charged his son Joseph, to carry his body unto the Sepulcher of his Elders,
and not to leave it in Genesis 47
Egypt, and Joseph himself commanded his brethren that they should remember,
and tell their posterity that when they went away into the Land of Promise,
they should carry his bones thither with them. Genesis vlt.
Tob. 2.
Tobie in burying the dead well pleased the Lord, as the Angel testified. And
the Lord himself being to rise again the third day, commended the good work
of that religious woman, Mat. 26
Marie Magdalen, who powered the precious ointment upon his head and body, and
did it to bury him. And the John 19
Gospel has crowned Joseph of Arimathaea, and Nicodemus with eternal praise,
that took down his body from the cross, and gave it honest and honorable
burial. And what think you, might Jacob deserve but for burying Rachel, and
Abraham for burying Sara here.

Nay the very Gentiles in old time bare such respect and reverence toward the
dead, For at Venice, our English have no burial place allowed them but only
the Sea, nor at Zant, but are carried up into the Morea among Turks, and at
Ligornes and other places in Italy, an Englishman dying without Confession, is
thrown into some ditch and made a prey for the fowls.
that they denied not their very enemies the honor of a burial, the humanity
of Alexander unto Darius, of Hanniball unto Marcellus, of Caesar unto Pompey
sufficiently witness the same, and at this day we our selves find the like
respect among the Turks, though they hold us base and hate us living, yet
(herein more kind then Papists) they neither hinder our burials, nor violate
our graves, a hidden sense and natural humanity moves them to this, and what
an uncouth thing is it to see a Turk kind, and a Christian cruel. But yet
these and the like authorities, prove not any sense to be in the dead
carcasses themselves, but signify that the providence of God extends even
unto the very bodies of the dead (for he is pleased with such good deeds)
and do build up the belief of the resurrection. We do not accompany or bury
honorably a dead Ass, or a dead Ox, because they shall not rise again, but
this office we perform unto dead men to signify that there is one condition
of beasts, another of men: for men shall rise again with their bodies unto
everlasting life, a beast shall perish and vanish into nothing. To which
purpose the custom was in ancient time, as Origin observes, that the Priests
and the Laiety yearly upon certain days, did assemble at the graves and
tombs of their Parents and friends, and there render thanks unto God for the
dead that had departed in faith, and pray not for the dead, nor offer any
sacrifice for them) but for the like godly and peaceable departure unto
themselves which was well accepted of God.

Where by the way we may learn this profitable lesson, how great the reward of
almesdeeds done unto the living may be, seeing this duty and favor showed
unto the dead is not forgotten of God. And if they were worthily praised and
blessed by 2. Sam. 2.
David the king, that showed mercy unto the dry bones of Saul and Jonathan,
how much more praise shall they deserve, and how shall they be blessed, that
for Christ's sake, show mercy unto the living bodies of his members? they shall
be sure to here the sweet voice of their Savior, saying unto them, Mat. 25.
Come ye blessed of my Father, take the inheritance of the kingdom prepared
for you from the foundation of the world: for I was a hungry and ye gave me
meat, I thirsted, and ye gave me drink, I was a stranger and ye took me
unto you, I was naked and ye clothed me, I was sick, and ye visited me, I
was in prison, and ye came unto me: In as much as you have done it unto one
of the least of these my brethren; verily, I say unto you, you have done it
unto me: Come therefore, I say, take the inheritance of the kingdom prepared
for you from the foundation of the world.

Into the inheritance of which blessed kingdom there is no doubt, but this
worshipful person, I mean the meek and virtuous Lady, Anne Glouer (whose
funeral we here celebrate) is by the free mercy of God entered and advanced:
for why, as she lived, so she died; she lived a Saint, and died a Saint: and
precious we know, in the sight of the Lord is the death of the Saints. In her
life she loved and served God, and now being dead she lives and reigns
with the Lord. Of whom I might say much, and of whom I can say little: much
what I have heard, little, yea nothing what I have seen. For it was not my hap
(which I count a great part of my unhappiness) either to see her living or to
hear of her life, before I heard of her death. Her life procured love, her
death, fame: whose swift wings, more swift then the wings of love, possessed a
great part of the world with her death, before it knew of her life. But who
could hear of her death, that did not presently inquire of her life; and who
having been informed of her life, did not weep and mourn for her death: so
that the hearing of her death, and the hearing of her life, and the weeping and
mourning for her death; as in me, so in many met together. Sparing therefore
to speak much of her of whom I knew so little, and yet willing to speak all
good of her of whom I have heard so much, I will so temper my speech, that I
will neither speak too much, nor too little: not too much, because I knew so
little; not too little, because I have heard so much.

To begin then where her life began: England, little England, yet far and
greatly renowned England; happy weight to be borne in so renowned a Country,
At Padley.
and happy Country to bring forth so renowned a weight. Of England in that
fruitful and rich shire of Suffolk, rich indeed, in affording the world so
rich a treasure: but yet again most poor in the loss and want of it. Shall I
tell you of her Lineage? ancient and worshipful, of her education? virtuous and
religious: partly under a virtuous mother, but for the most part under an
honorable and religious Lady. Shall I tell you of her bodily form and outward
feature, so full of grace and beauty, that she procured many worthy lovers.
Of her external carriage and behavior, so loving, so lowly, so innocent; that
we may rightly say of her, such was her name, such was her nature; a Lamb in
name, and a Lamb in nature Conueniunt rebus nomina saepe suis, so name, so
nature, oftentimes agree. And yet again in greatest dangers, perils and
fears; in dangers of the Sea, in perils of shipwreck, in fears of men of
war, when (as sometimes it happened) all others in her company were all at
their wits ends, and knew not which way to resolve to sink or swim, to fight
or to yield: she alone a woman and therefore by sex feeble, by nature
fearful; yet far beyond both her nature and her sex, remained so constant,
so bold, Daughter to M. Lamb of Padley in Suffolk.
so courageous, that such as were present in admiration of her stoutnes have
confessed she rather resembled a Lio^ then a Lamb. But all this is nothing to
the internal virtues and endowments of her mind, these alone would require a
Panegerical Oration, and of these I may say, as S. Jerome upon the like
occasion said of the holy and religious Matron Paula, Si cuncta corporis mei
me^bra verterentur in linguas, and omnes artus humana voce resonarent, nihil
vtique dignu^ sacrae ac venerabilis Paulae virtutibus dicerem: So may I say of
this virtuous and religious Lady: If all the members of my body, if my eyes, my
ears, my hands, my feet, were turned into tongues; and every arct, vein,
nerve, muscle, that I have could utter humane language, I should come far
short of Annes worthily deserved commendations. Therefore leaving this to
others who can speak better of them, upon their own knowledge then my self, I
come from the manner of her life, to acquaint you with the manner of her death.

Of which I again remember you, that what I speak, I speak not from my
self, but from the mouth of such who being eye and ear witnesses of her
actions and speeches, I presume have informed me nothing but the truth. From
the time then of her arrival into this Country, some of you know, and others
may understand, that it is now full 5. years and somewhat more, whereof wanting
but a little, she lived with the right worshipful and worthy Knight her
husband, Sir Thomas Glouer, then Ordinary Ambassador in this Port for his
Majesty of Great Britain, in such great joy, honor and happiness; that the
greatness of her contentment oftentimes procured her grief; knowing that
after a great calm their arises a great storm, and excess of joy, for the
most part ends in grief and dolor. And so indeed it happened as she
suspected; her joy soon turned into sorrow, and her health suddenly changed
into sickness. The Saturday she eat, she drank, she was merry and pleasant,
the Sunday morning being the thirtieth of October, Anno. 1608. she sickened;
the Wensday following, being the second of November, she dyed one week, yea a
day, yea an hour, is enough to turn the world vpside-downe.

The soul of man says the Orator, before its departure from the body, does
oftentimes divine, and it may be well thought that the soul of this blessed
Lady, in her last sickness had by divine inspiration a foreknowledge of her
death, in that presently she delivered the keys of her Jewels and the rings
from her fingers, which in more suspected dangers she was never wont to pull
off, she bespake mourning garments, and took care for her funeral, before
her Physicians doubted any thing at all of her death, she prefixed a time
wherein she should depart out of this life, speaking very strangely that
Wensday of her death, before the ordinary hour of supper: which time
approaching she desired her honorable husband to pray to God with her, and for
her, which he did according to the institution ordained for the sick; which
ended, she made a most divine and heavenly prayer her self, wherein she
disclosed the hidden flames of divine love, the evident tokens of a lively
faith, the firm hold of our Saviors passion, for her souls redemption with
such zeal and feruencie of spirit, uttered in words so full of divinity, and
confirmed with action of eyes, hands, and shrilnes of voice, that it gave
admirable comfort to all that were present: upon which her Physician requesting
her then Lord and husband to retire himself a while, and to leave her to her
heavenly preparation which otherwise by the view of his grievous passions might
perhaps be disturbed, which he having done, her Physician still remaining, she
said unto him, My heart is at ease, but I can take no rest, and therewithal
pulling forth her hand, bid him feel her pulse; which he told her he found
weak, but God was strong and able, if he pleased to restore her to her former
health. O no, quoth she, I feel it pleases his divine Majesty to dispose
otherwise of me, he demanded what she did feel, or where her pain was that
he might administer some remedy, I feel no pain: no pain at all said she,
but with great joy I go cheerfully to my Lord and Savior Christ Jesus: and
therewithal earnestly called for her Lord, where is he? where is my sweet
heart? where is he? call him quickly, that I may kiss him before I die: I pray
God almighty give him much joy, prosperity and happiness. His honor being
come, and judging by her perfect voice, speech and memory, that she was not
near her death, began to comfort her with trust in almighty God, that she
should have good remedy and be restored to her former strength. O no sweet
heart, said she, I draw on to a better world, and do desire to go to my Lord
and Savior Christ Jesus, into whose blessed hands I commend my soul. And then
she prayed and required prayers for her again: which ended, after many
redoublings and repeatings, Into thy hands, O Lord, I do commend my soul;
Into thy hands, O Lord, I do commend my soul, without any groan or sigh,
gently breathing, yielded up the ghost.

And thus dyed Anna, as dyed Sarah; Sarah in her old age, and yet so beautiful
at a hundred years old, as she was at twenty, so say the Jewish Rabbis, and
Anna in her young age; and yet so wise and virtuous at twenty years, as if
she had lived an hundredth. Sarah dyed in a strange Country, far from her
kindred and parents: So did Anna from hers. Sarah in Kiriatharba, whose
founder was Arba, and Anna in Constantinople, whose chief founder was
Constantine. Sara among the Hittites, and Anna among the Turks. Then Sarahs
husband came to mourn and weep for her, and Annahs husband is come to mourn
and weep for her. Then Sarahs husband rose up from the sight of his corpse, he
left off weeping, and so should Annahs husband too. And Sarahs husband provided
a place of burial for her, and so has Annahs husband done for her. What
remains now: but as Sarahs was honorably buried, so Annah should be buried
too. Up let us be going.

FINIS.

