THE WONDERFVL DISCOVERY OF THE Witchcrafts of Margaret and Phillip Flower,
daughters of Joan Flower near Beuer Castle: Executed at Lincoln, March 11.
1618. Who were specially arraigned and condemned before Sir Henry Hobart, and
Sir Edward Bromley, Judges of Assise, for confessing themselves actors in the
destruction of Henry Lord Rosse, with their damnable practices against others
the Children of the Right Honorable FRANCIS Earl of Rutland. Together with
the several Examinations and Confessions of Anne Baker, Joan Willimot, and
Ellen Green, Witches in Leicestershire.



THE WONDERFVLL DISCOVERY OF THE Witch-craftes of Margraet and Phillip Flower*
Daughters of Joan Flower, by BEAVER CASTLE, and executed at LINCOLN the 11. of
March. 1618.
MY meaning is not to make any contentious Arguments about the discourses,
distinction or definition of Witchcraft, the power of Devils, the nature of
Spirits, the force of Charms, the secrets of Incantation, and such like;
because the Scriptures are full of prohibitions to this purpose, and proclaims
death to the presumptuous attempters of the same: Besides both Princes (yea our
own learned and most judicious King) Philosophers, Poets, Chronologers,
Historiographers, and many worthy Writers, have concurred and concluded in
this; that diverse impious and facinorous mischiefs have been effectuated
through the instruments of the Devil, by permission of God, so that the actors
of the same have carried away the opinion of the world, to do that which they
did by Witchcraft, or at least to be esteemed Witches, for bringing such and
such things to pass: For howsoever the learned have charactred delinquents in
this kind by titles of sundry sorts, and most significant attributes; as
Pythonissae dealing with artificial Charms; Magi anciently reputed so, for
extraordinary wisdom and knowledge in the secrets of simples and herbs;
Chaldei, famous for Astronomy and Astrology; Necromancers for practicing to
raise dead bodies, and by them to foretell events of the earth; Geomantici, for
conuersing with Spirits, and using Inchantations; Genethliaci, for presuming on
the calculating of Natiuities, or if you will, assuming the credit of
Figure-casting; Ventriloqui, for speaking with hollow voices as if they were
possessed with Devils; Venefici, for dealing with Poison, and either killing
or curing that way: For you must understand howeuer the Professors aforesaid
practice murder and mischief, yet many times they Pretend cures and
preservation; with many others, carrying the show of great learning and admired
knowledge; yet have they all but one familier term with us in English called
Witches. As for the conceit of wisemen or wise women, they are all merely
coseners and deceivers; so that if they make you believe that by their means
you shall hear of things lost or stolen, it is either done by Confederacy, or
put off by protraction to deceive you of your money.

Only (as I said before) there be certain men and women grown in years, and
ouer-growne with Melancholy and Atheism, who out of a malicious disposition
against their betters, or others thriuing by them; but most times from a
heart-burning desire of revenge, having entertained some impression of
displeasure, and unkindness, study nothing but mischief and exoticke
practices of loathsome Arts and Sciences: yet I must needs say, that
sometimes the fained reputation of wisdom, cunning, and to be reputed a
dangerous and skillful person, has so prevailed with diverse, that they have
taken upon them indeed to know more then God ever afforded any creature, and to
perform no less then the Creator both of Heaven and earth; making you believe
with Medea, that they can raise tempests, turn the Sun into blood, pull the
Moon out of her Sphere, and sail over the Sea in a cockle shell, according
to the Poet.

Flectere si nequeam Superos, Acheronta mouebo.
If Art do fail to move the Gods
consent unto my mind:
I will the Devils raise, to do
what they can in their kind.
But howsoever special persons are transported with an opinion of their own
worth, and prevailing in this kind, yet by lamentable experience we know too
well, what monstrous effects have been produced, even to the horror of the
hearers, and damnation of their own souls by such kind of people: For as it
is in the tale of the envious man, that put out one of his eyes to have his
companion loose both; so fares it with them and worse, to give away their
souls to be revenged of their adversaries bodies, wherein the monstrous
subtilty of the Devil is so apparent, that it is wonderful one way to relate,
and lamentable another way to observe the same. For no sooner shall such
motives poison the inward conceit or apprehension of such damnable Caitiffes:
But then steppeth forth the Devil, and not only shows them the way, but
prescribes the manner of effecting the same, with facility and easiness,
assuring that he himself will attend them in some familiar shape of Rat, Cat,
Toad, Bird, Cricket, etc: yea effectuate whatsoever they shall demand or
desire, and for their better assurance and corroboration of their credulity,
they shall have palpable and forcible touches of sucking, pinching, kissing,
closing, colling and such like: whereupon, without any fear of God or Man,
knowledge of Christ, hope of redemption, confidence of mercy, or true belief
that there is any other thing to be looked after but this present World;
according to that Athiesticall position of Epicurus.

Ede, bibe, lude, post mortem nulla voluptas.
Eat, drink, sport, play and take thy pleasures rest:
For after death, who knows what shall be best.
They admit of those execrable conditions of commutation of souls for the
entertaining of the spirits, and so fall to their abominable practices,
continuing in the same till God laugh them to scorn, and will by no means
suffer them to abuse his holy name nor deceive others by their profane lives
any longer: Witness for the general those infinite Treatises of many of them
convinced by Law, and condemned to death, to the fearful example of all
carnal and hypocritical Christians: but more especially you may ouer-looke
(if you please) that learned Discourse of Daemonologie, composed in form of a
Dialogue, by the High and mighty Prince, JAMES by the grace of God, King of
England, Scotland, France and Ireland, etc. and printed (as I take it)
according to the copy of Edinburgh, 1603. As also a Treatise of Witchcraft
made by that learned Mr. Alexander Roberts Preacher at Kings-Line in Norfolk,
1615. upon the discovery of the Witch-crafts of Mary Smith, wife of Henry Smith
Glouer, with her vocal contract between the Devil and her self, in sollemne
terms, and such like imposturing filthiness: with many hurts and mischiefs
which thereby she procured: As also a certain discovery 1611. made by John
Cotta Doctor of Physic in Northampton of Empericks, women about sick
persons: Quacksaluers, and fugitives, which seem to work iuggling wonders,
Surgeons, Apothecaries, practisers by spells, the true discovery of
Witchcraft, especially in the sick with many instances in that kind, Wisards,
and servants, of Physicians, who may be called ministering helpers: To this he
has added the Methodian learned deceiuer, or heretic Physician, Astrologers,
Ephemerides-maisters, Coniecters by urine, Travelers, and last of all, the
true Artist his right description and election. As also a Dialogue concerning
Witches and Witchcraft, composed by George Gifford, Minister of Gods word in
Maldon, 1603. Wherein the cunning of the Devil is discovered, both concerning
the deceiving of witches, and seducing of others into many great errors: As
also an ancient discourse of the fearful practices of four notorious French
Witches, with the manner of their strange execution. As also the several and
damnable practices of Mother Sutton of Milton Miles in the County of Bedford,
and Mary Sutton her Daughter, who were arraigned, condemned, and executed for
the same: As also 1612. the wonderful discovery of Witches in Lancashire,
being 19. in number, notorious for many infamed actions, and convicted before
Sr. James Altham, and S. Edward Bromley, Barons of the Exchequer, together with
the arraignment and trial of Iennet Preston, at York, with her fearful
execution for the murdering of Mr. Lisker by Witchcraft; with infinite other
relations concerning the general conviction of Witches, and their practices,
and condemnation of the particular opinion of some men, who suppose there be
none at all, or at least that they do not personally or truly effect such
things as are imputed unto them, and which out of some dangerous impression of
melancholy, vaineglory, or some other diseased operation, they assume to
themselves by reason of a former contract with the Devil. And so much for the
certainty of Story, and fearfulness of the truth concerning the damnable
practices of Witches and cunning of the Devil to deceive them.

But yet because the mind of man may be carried away with many idle
conjectures, either that women confessed these things by extreami^y of
torture, or that ancient examples are by this time forgotten (although the
particulars are upon record, for the benefit of all posterity:) Or that they
were besides themselves, or subject to some weak devise or other, rather to
bring in question the integrity of Justice; then to make odious the lives of
such horrible offenders. I have presumed to present on the Stage of verity for
the good of my Country and the love of truth, the late woeful Tragedy of the
destruction of the Right Honorable the Earl of Rutlands Children, who to his
eternal praise proceeded yet both religiously and charitably against the
offenders, leaving their prosecution to the law and submitting himself, and
deplorable case to the providence of God, who afflicts his best servants with
punishments, and many times, sends extraordinary vengeance as well on the
innocent, as the bad deseruer, to manifest his glory: Therefore by way of
Caution I advise thee (gentle Reader) whosoever thou art, to take heed how
thou do either despise the power of God in his Creatures, or vilipend the
subtilty and fury of the Devil, as Gods instrument of vengeance, considering
that truth in despite of gain sayers will prevail, according to that
principle: Magna est veritas and preualebit.

The Story follows.
AFter the Right Honorable Sr. Francis Manners succeeded his Brother in the
Earldom of Rutland: and so not only took possession of Beauer Castle, but
of all other his demeanes, Lordships, Towns, Manors, Lands, and Reuennues
appropriate to the same Earldom: he proceeded so honorably in the course of
his life, as neither displacing Tenants, discharging servants, denying the
access of the poor, welcoming of strangers, and performing all the duties of
a noble Lord, that he fastened as it were unto himself the love and good
opinion of the Country wherein he walked the more cheerfully and remarkable,
because his honorable Countess marched arm in arm with him in the same
race; so that Beauer Castle was a continual Palace of entertainment, and a
daily receptacle for all sorts both rich and poor, especially such ancient
people as neighboured the same; amongst whom one Ioane Flower, with her
Daughters Margaret and Phillp were not only relieved at the first from thence,
but quickly entertained as Chair-women, and Margaret admitted as a continual
dweller in the Castle, looking both to the poultrey abroad and the wash-house
within doors: In which life they continued with equal correspondency, till
something was discovered to the noble Lady, which concerned the misdemeanour of
these women. And although such honorable persons shall not want of all sorts
of people, either to bring the^ news, tales, reports, or to serve their turn
in all offices whatsoever; so that it may well be said of them, as it is of
great Kings and Princes, that they have large hands, wide ears, and piercing
sights to discover the unswept corners of their remotest confines, to reach
even to their furthest borders, and to understand the secrets of their meanest
subjects: yet in this matter, neither were they busybodies, flatterers,
malicious politians, underminers, nor supplanters one of another good fortune;
but went simply to work, as regarding the honor of the Earl and his Lady, and
so by degrees gave light to their understanding to apprehend their complaints.
First, that Ioane Flower the Mother was a monstrous malicious woman, full of
oaths, curses, and imprecations irreligious, and for any thing they saw by
her, a plain Atheist; besides of late days her very countenance was
estranged, her eyes were fiery and hollow, her speech fell and envious, her
de^eanour strange and exoticke, and her conversation sequestered; so that the
whole course of her life gave great suspicion that she was a notorious Witch,
yea some of her neighbors dared to affirm that she dealt with familiar
spirits, and terrified them all with curses and threatening of revenge, if there
were never so little cause of displeasure and unkindness. Concerning Margaret,
that she often resorted from the Castle to her Mother, bringing such provision
as they thought was unbefitting for a servant to purloyne, and coming at such
unseasonable hours, that they could not but conjecture some mischief between
them, and that their extraordinary riot and expenses, tended both to rob the
Lady, and to maintain certain deboist and base company which frequented this
Ioane Flowers house the mother, and especially her youngest Daughter.
Concerning Phillip, that she was lewdly transported with the love of one Th:
Simpson, who presumed to say, that she had bewitched him: for he had no power
to leave her, and was as he supposed maruellously altered both in m^^de and
body, since her acquainted company: these complaints began many years before
either their conviction, or public apprehension: Notwithstanding such was the
honor of this Earl and his Lady; such was the cunning of this monstrous woman
in observation toward them; such was the subtilty of the Devil to bring his
purposes to pass; such was the pleasure of God to make trial of his servants;
and such was the effect of a damnable woman's wit and malicious envy, that all
things were carried away in the smooth Channel of liking and good
entertainment on every side, until the Earl by degrees conceived some mislike
against her; and so, peradventure estranged himself from that familiarity and
accustomed conferrences he was wont to have with her: until one Peate offered
her some wrong; against whom she complained, but found that my Lord did not
affect her clamours, and malicious information, until one Mr. Vauasor
abandoned her company, as either suspicious of her lewd life, or distasted with
his own misliking of such base and poor Creatures, whom no body loved but the
Earls household; until the Countess misconceiuing of her daughter Margaret,
and discovering some vndecencies both in her life and neglect of her business,
discharged her from lying any more in the Castle, yet gave her 40. s. a
bolster, and a mattresse of wool: commanding her to go home, until the
slacknesse of her repayring to the Castle, as she was wont, did turn her love
and liking toward this honorable Earl and his family into hate and rancor:
whereupon despighted to be so neglected, and exprobrated by her neighbors for
her Daughters casting out of doors, and other conceived displeasures, she grew
past all shame and Woman-hood, and many times cursed them all that were the
cause of this coffeehouse, and made her so loathsome to her former familiar
friends, and beneficial acquaintance.

When the Devil perceived the inficious disposition of this wretch, and that
she and her Daughters might easily be made instruments to enlarge his
Kingdom, and be as it were the executioners of his vengeance; not caring
whether it lighted upon innocents or no, he came more nearer unto them, and in
plain terms to come quickly to the purpose, offered them his service, and
that in such a manner, as they might easily command what they pleased: For he
would attend you in such pretty forms of dog, cat, or Rat, that they should
neither be terrified, nor any body else suspicious of the matter. Upon this
they agree, and (as it should seem) give away their souls for the service of
such spirits, as he had promised them; which filthy conditions were ratified
with abominable kisses, and an odious sacrifice of blood, not leaving out
certain charms and coniurations with which the Devil deceived them, as
though nothing could be done without ceremony, and a solemnity of orderly
ratification. By this time does Satan triumph, and goes away satisfied to
have caught such fish in the net of his illusions: By this time are these women
Devils incarnate, and grow proud again in their cunning and artificial power,
to do what mischief they listed* By this time they have learnt the manner of
inchantations, Spells and Charms: By this time they kill what Cattle they
list, and under the covert of flattery and familiar entertainment, keep hidden
the stinging serpent of malice, and a venomous inclination to mischief: By
this time is the Earl and his family threatened, and must feel the burden
of a terrible tempest, which from these women's Devilish devises fell upon
him, he neither suspecting nor understanding the same: By this time both
himself and his honorable Countess, are many times subject to sickness and
extraordinary conuulsions, which they taking as gentle corrections from the
hand of God, submit with quietness to his mercy, and study nothing more, then
to glorify their Creator in heaven, and bear his crosses on earth.

At last, as malice increased in these damnable Women; so his family felt the
smart of their revenge and inficious disposition. For his eldest Son Henry
Lord Rosse sickened very strangely, and after a while died: his next named
Francis Lord Rosse accordingly, was severely tormented by them, and most
barbarously and inhumanely tortured by a strange sickness; not long after the
Lady Katherine was set upon by their dangerous and devilish practices, and
many times in great danger of life, through extreme maladies and unusual
fits, nay (as it should seem, and they afterward confessed) both the Earl
and his Countess were brought into their snares as they imagined, and indeed
determined to keep them from having any more children. Oh unheard of
wickedness and mischievous damnation? Notwithstanding all this did the noble
Earl attend his Majesty, both at New Market before Christmas, and at Christmas
at Whitehall; bearing the loss of his Children most nobly, and little
suspecting that they had miscarried by Witchcraft, or such like inventions of
the Devil, until it pleased God to discover the villainous practices of these
Women, and to command the Devil from executing any further vengeance on
innocents, but leave them to their shames, and the hands of Justice, that they
might not only be confounded for their villainous practices, but remain as a
notorious example to all ages of his judgment and fury. Thus were they
apprehended about Christmas, and carried to Lincoln Iayle, after due
examination, before sufficient Justices of the Peace, and discreet
Maiestrates, who wondered at their audacious wickedness, but Ioane Flow^r the
Mother before conviction, (as they say) called for Bread and Butter, and wished
it might never go through her if she were guilty of that whereupon she was
examined; so mumbling it in her mouth, never spoke more words after, but fell
down and dyed as she was carried to Lincoln Goal, with a horrible
excruciation of soul and body, and was buried at Ancaster.

When the Earl heard of their apprehension, he hasted down with his brother
Sr. George, and sometimes examining them himself, and sometimes sending them to
others; at last left them to the trial of Law, before the Judges of assise at
Lincoln; and so they were convicted of murder and executed accordingly, about
the 11. of March, to the terror of all the beholders, and example of such
dissolute and abominable Creatures, and because you shall have both cause to
glorify God for this discovery, and occasion to apprehend the strangeness of
their lives, and truth of their proceedings: I thought it both meet and
convenient to lay open their own Examinations and Evidences against one
another, with such apparrant circumstances, as do not only show the cause of
their mislike and distasting against the Earl and his family; but the manner
of their proceedings and reuenges, with other particulars belonging to the true
and plain discovery of their villainy and Witchcraft.

The Examinations of Anne Baker, Ioane Willimot, and Ellen Green; as
follows, etc.
Anne Baker. Ioane Willimot. Ellen Green.


THE EXAMINATION of Anne Baker of Bottesford in the County of Leicester
Spinster, taken March, 1. 1618. by the Right Honorable, Francis Earl of
Rutland, Sir George Manners Knight, two of his Majesty's Justices of the peace
for the County of Lincoln, and Samuel Fleming Doctor of Divinity, one of his
Majesty's Justices of the peace for the County of Leicester aforesaid.
SHE says that there are four colors of Planets, Black, Yellow, Green, and
Blew, and that Black is always death, and that she saw the Blew Plannet
strike Thomas Fairebarne, the eldest son unto William Fairebarne of
Bottesford aforesaid by the Pinfold there, within the which time the said
William Faire-barne did beat her and break her head, whereupon the said
Thomas Faire-barne, did mend. And being asked who did send that Planet?
answered it was not I.

Further she says, that she saw a hand appear unto her, and that she heard
a voice in the air said unto her: Anne Baker, save thy self, for to morrow
thou and thy master must be slain: and the next day her master and she were
in a Cart together; and suddenly she saw a flash of fire, and said her
prayers, and the fire went away, and shortly after a Crow came and picked upon
her clothes, and she said her prayers again, and bad the Crow go to whom he
was sent, and the Crow went unto her Master, and did beat him to death, and
she with her prayers recovered him to life; but he was sick a fortnight
after, and says, that if she had not had more knowledge then her master,
both he and she and all the Cattle had been slain.

Being examined concerning a Child of Anne Stannidge, which she was suspected
to have bewitched to death; says, the said Anne Stannidge did deliver her
child into her hands, and that she did lay it upon her skirt, but did no
harm unto it; And being charged by the Mother of the child, that upon the
burning of the hair and the paring of the nails of the said child, the said
Anne Baker came in and set her down, and for one hours space could speak
nothing; confesses she came into the house of the said Anne Stannidge in
great pain, but did not know of the burning of the hair and nails of the
said Child; but said she was so sick that she did not know whither she went.

Being charged that she bewitched Elizabeth Hough, the wife of William Hough
to death, for that she angered her in giving her alms of her second bread;
confesses that she was angry with her and said she might have given her of her
better bread, for she had gone too often on her errands, but more she says not.

This Examinat confesses that she came to Ioane Gylles house, her child being
sick, and that she entreated this Examinat to look on the Child, and to tell
her whether it was forspoken or no, and this Examinate said it was forspoken;
but when the said child died she cannot tell.

And being asked concerning Nortley carrying of his Child home unto his own
house, where the said Anne Baker was, she asked him, who gave the said Child
that loaf, he told her Anthony Gill, to whom this Examinate said, he might
have had a Child of his own if he would have sought in time for it; which
words she confessed she did speak.

Being blamed by Henry Milles in this sort: A fire set on you, I have had two
or three ill nights; to whom she made answer, you should have let me alone
then, which she confesses.

The said Anne Baker, March 2. 1618. confessed before Samuel Fleming Doctor of
Divinity, that about 3. years ago, she went into Northamptonshire, and that
at her coming back again, one Peakes wife and Dennis his wife of Beluoyre
told her that my young Lord Henry was dead, and that there was a glove of the
said Lord buried in the ground; and as that glove did rot and wast, so did the
liver of the said Lord rot and wast.

Further she said, March 3. 1618. before S r. George Manners Knight, and
Samuel Fleming Doctor of Divinity, that she has a Spirit which has the shape
of a white Dog, which she calls her good Spirit.

Samuel Fleming test.

The Examination of Joan Willimot, taken the 28. of February, in the 16. year
of the reign of our Sovereign Lord, JAMES, over England King etc. and over
Scotland the 52. before Alexander Amcotts Esquire, one of his Majesty's
Justices of the peace of the said parts and County.
THis Examinat says, that Ioane Flower told her that my Lord of Rutland had
dealt badly with her and that they had put away her Daughter, and that although
she could not have her will of my Lord himself, yet she had spied my Lords
Son and had stricken him to the heart. And she says, that my Lords Son was
stricken with a white Spirit, and that she can cure some that send unto her,
and that some reward her for her pains, and of some she takes nothing.

She further says, that upon Friday night last, her Spirit came to her and
told her that there was a bad woman at Deeping who had given her soul to the
Devil: and that her said Spirit did then appear unto her in a more ugly form
then it had formerly done, and that it urged her much to give it something,
although it were but a piece of her Girdle, and told her that it had taken
great pains for her, but she says that she would give it nothing, and told it
that she had sent it to no place but only to see how my Lord Rosse did, and
that her Spirit told her that he should do well.

The Examination of the said Joan Willimott, taken the second day of March in
the year abouesaid, before the said Alexander Amcots.
THis Examinate says, That she has a Spirit which she calls Pretty, which
was given unto her by William Berry of Langholme in Rutlandshire, whom she
served three years; and that her Master when he gave it unto her, willed her
to open her mouth, and he would blow into her a Fairy which should do her
good; and that she opened her mouth, and he did blow into her mouth; and that
presently after his blowing, there came out of her mouth a Spirit, which stood
upon the ground in the the shape and form of a Woman, which Spirit did ask of
her her Soul, which she then promised unto it, being willed thereunto by her
Master. She further confesses, that she never hurt any body, but did help
diverse that sent for her, which were stricken or fore-spoken: and that her
Spirit came weekly to her, and would tell her of diverse persons that were
stricken and forespoken. And she says, that the use which she had of the
Spirit, was to know how those did which she had undertaken to amend; and that
she did help them by certain prayers which she used, and not by her own
Spirit; neither did she employ her Spirit in any thing, but only to bring word
how those did which she had undertaken to cure.

And she further says, that her Spirit came unto her this last night (as she
thought) in the form of a woman, mumbling, but she could not understand what
it said. And being asked whether she were not in a dream or slumber when she
thought she saw it, she said no, and that she was as waking as at this
present.

Alexander Amcots. Thomas Robinson test.


The Examination of Ioane Willimot of Goadby in the County of Leicester Widow,
taken the 17. of March, 1618* by Sir Henry Hastings Knight, and Samuel Fleming
Doctor of Divinity, two of his Majesty's Justices of the Peace of the said
County of Leicester.
SHe says that she told one Cooks wife of Stathorne in the said County
Labourer, that John Patchett might have had his Child alive, if he would have
sought forth for it in time, and if it were not death stricken in her ways,
and that Patchets wife had an evil thing within her, which should make an end
of her, and that she knew by her Girdle.

She says further, that Gamaliel Greet of Waltham in the said County
Shepherd, had a Spirit like a white Mouse put into him in his swearing; and
that if he did look upon any thing with an intent to hurt, it should be hurt,
and that he had a mark on his left arm, which was cut away; and that her own
spirit did tell her all this before it went from her.

Further she says, that Ioane Flower, Margaret Flower and she, did meet about
a week before Ioane Flowers apprehension, in Blackborrow-hill, and went from
thence home to the said Joan Flowers house, and there she saw two spirits, one
like a Rat, and the other like an Owl; and one of them did suck under her
right ear, as she thought: and the said Joan told her, that her spirits did
say that she should neither be hanged nor burnt.

Further she says, that the said Joan Flower did take up some earth and spet
upon it, and did work it with her finger, and put it up into her purse, and
said though she could not hurt the Lord himself, yet she had sped his Son,
which is dead.

H. Hastings. Samuel Fleming.


The Examination of Ellen Green of Stathorne in the County of Leicester, taken
the 17. of March 1618. by Sir Henry Hastings Knight: and Samuel Fleming D. of
Divinity, two of his Majesty's Justices of the Peace of his said County.
She says, that one Joan Willimot of Goadby came about six years since to
her in the Wowlds, and persuaded this Examinate to forsake God, and betake her
to the devil, and she would give her two spirits, to which she gave her
consent, and thereupon the said Joan Willimot called two spirits, one in the
likeness of a Kitlin, and the other of a Moldiwarp: the first the said
Willimot called pusse, the other hiffe, hiffe, and they presently came to her,
and she departing left them with this Examinate, and they leapt on her
shoulder, and the kitlin sucked under her right ear on her neck, and the
Moldiwarp on the left side in the like place. After they had sucked her, she
sent the Kitlin to a Baker of that Town, whose name she remembers not, who
had called her Witch and stricken her; and bad her said spirit go and bewitch
him to death: the Moldiwarpe she then bad go to Anne Dawse of the same town
and bewitch her to death, because she had called this examinate witch, whore,
jade, etc. and within one fortnight after they both dyed.

And further this Examinate says, that she sent both her spirits to Stonesby,
to one Willison a husbandman, and Robert Williman a husbandmans son, and bad
the Kitlin go to Willison and bewitch him to death, and the Moldywarp to the
other, and bewitch him to death, which they did; and within ten days they
dyed. These four were bewitched while this Examinate dwelt at Waltham
aforesaid.

About three years since, this Examinate removed thence to Stathorne, where
she now dwelt: upon a difference between the said Willimot and the wife of
John Patchet of the said Stathorne Yeoman, she the said Willimot called her
this Examinate to go and touch the said John Patchets Wife and her Child,
which she did, touching the said John Patchets wife in her bed, and the child
in the Grace-wifes arms, and then sent her said spirits to bewitch them to
death, which they did, and so the woman lay languishing by the space of a
month and more, for then she dyed; the child dyed the next day after she
touched it.

And she further says, that the said Ioane Willimot had a spirit sucking on
her, under the left flank, in the likeness of a little white Dog, which
this Examinate says, that she saw the same sucking in Barley-haruest last,
being then at the house of the said Joan Willimot.

And for her self, this Examinate further says, that she gave her soul to
the Devil to have these spirits at her command; for a confirmation whereof,
she suffered them to suck her always as aforesaid about the change and full of
the Moon.

H. Hastings. Samuel Fleming.


The Examination of Phillip Flower, Sister of Margaret Flower, and Daughters of
Ioane Flower, before Sr William Pelham, and Mr. Butler, Justices of the Peace,
Febr. 4. 1618. Which was brought in at the Assizes as evidence against her
Sister Margaret.
SHe says, that her mother and her sister maliced the Earl of Rutland, his
Countess, and their Children, because her Sister Margaret, was put out of the
Ladies service of Laundry, and exempted from other services about the house,
whereupon her said sister, by the commandment of her mother, brought from the
Castle the right hand glove of the Lord Henry Rosse, which she delivered to her
Mother; who presently rubd it on the back of her Spirit Rutterkin, and then
put it into hot boiling water, afterward she pricked it often, and buried it
in the yard, wishing the Lord Rosse might never thrive, and so her Sister
Margaret continued with her mother, where she often saw the cat Rutterkin
leap on her shoulder, and suck her neck.

She further confessed, that she heard her mother often curse the Earl and
his Lady, and thereupon would boil feathers and blood together, using many
Devilish speeches and strange gestures.

The Examination of Margaret Flower, Sister of Phillip Flower* etc. about the
22. of January. 1618.
SHe says and confesses, that about four or five year since her Mother sent
her for the right hand glove of Henry Lord Rosse, afterward that her mother
bade her go again into the Castle of Beauer, and bring down the glove or
some other thing of Henry Lord Rosse, and she asked what to do? Her Mother
replied to hurt my Lord Rosse: whereupon she brought down a glove, and
delivered the same to her Mother, who stroked Rutterkin her Cat with it, after
it was dipped in hot water, and so pricked it often, after which Henry Lord Rosse
fell sick within a week, and was much tormented with the same.

She further says, that finding a glove about two or three years since of
Francis Lord Rosse, on a dunghill, she delivered it to her mother, who put it
into hot water, and after took it out and rubd it on Rutterkin the Cat, and
bad him go upwards, and after her mother buried it in the yard, and said a
mischief light on him, but he will mend again.

She further says, that her Mother and she, and her Sister agreed together
to bewitch the Earl and his Lady, that they might have no more children: and
being demanded the cause of this their malice and ill will; she says, that
about four years since the Countess (growing into some mislike with her)
gave her forty shillings, a bolster, and a mattresse, and bad her lie at home,
and come no more to dwell at the Castle; which she not only took in ill part,
but grudged at it exceedingly, swearing in her heart to be revenged. After
this, her Mother complained to the Earl against one Peake, who had offered her
some wrong, wherein she conceived that the Earl took not her part, as she
expected, which dislike with the rest, exasperated her displeasure against him,
and so she watched an opportunity to be revenged: whereupon she took wool
out of the said mattresse, and a pair of gloves, which were given her by Mr.
Vauasor, and put them into warm water, mingling them with some blood, and
stirring it together, then she took the wool and gloves out of the water, and
rubd them on the belly of Rutterkin her Cat, saying the Lord and the Lady
should have more Children, but it would be long first.

She further confesses, that by her mothers commandment, she brought to her
a piece of a handkercher of the Lady Katherine the Earls daughter, and her
mother put it into hot water, and then taking it out, rubd it on Rutterkin,
bidding him fly, and go; whereupon Rutterkin whined and cried Mew: whereupon
she said, that Rutterkin had no power over the Lady Katherine to hurt her.

The Examination of Phillip Flower, the 25. of February, 1618. before Francis
Earl of Rutland, Francis Lord Willoughby of Ersby, Sr. George Manners, and Sr.
William Pelham.
She confesses and says, that she has a Spirit sucking on her in the form
of a white Rat, which keeps her left breast, and has so done for three or
four years, and concerning the agreement betwixt her Spirit and her self,
she confesses and says, that when it came first unto her, she gave her Soul
to it, and it promised to do her good, and cause Thomas Simpson to love her,
if she would suffer it to suck her, which she agreed unto; and so the last
time it sucked was on Tuesday at night, the 23. of February.

The Examination of Margaret Flower, at the same time, etc.
She confesses, that she has two familiar Spirits sucking on her, the one
white, the other black spotted; the white sucked under her left breast, and the
black spotted within the inward parts of her secrets. When she first
entertained them she promised them her soul, and they couenanted to do all
things which she commanded them* etc.

She further says, that about the 30. of January, last past, being Saturday,
four Devils appeared unto her in Lincoln layle, at eleauen or twelve a
clock at midnight: The one stood at her beds feet, with a black head like an
Ape, and spoke unto her; but what, she cannot well remember, at which she was
very angry because he would speak no plainer, or let her understand his
meaning: the other three were Rutterkin, Little Robin, and Spirit; but she
never mistrusted them, nor suspected her self, till then.

There is another Examination of the said Margaret Flower, taken the fourth of
February, 1618. tending to this effect.
THat being asked what she knows concerning the bewitching of the Earl of
Rutland, his wife, and children, she says, that it is true, that her self,
her mother, and sister were all displeased with him, especially with the
Countess, for turning her out of service, whereupon some four year since,
her mother commanded her to go up to the Castle, and bring her the right hand
glove of the Lord Henry Rosse, the Earls eldest son; which glove she found
on the rushes in the Nurcery, and delivered the same to her Mother, who put it
into hot water, pricked it often with her knife, then took it out of the water,
and rubd it upon Rutterkin, bidding him height and go, and do some hurt to
Henry Lord Rosse, whereupon he fell sick, and shortly after dyed, which her
Mother hearing of, said it was well: but after she had rubd the glove on the
Spirit Rutterkin, she threw it into the fire and burnt it, etc.

THese Examinations and some others were taken and charily preserved for the
contriuing of sufficient evidences against them, and when the Judges of Assise
came down to Lincoln about the first week of March, being Sr. Henry Hobert,
Lord chief Justice of the Common Pleas, and Sr. Ed: Bromley one of the Barons
of the Exchequer, they were presented unto them, who not only wondered at the
wickedness of these persons, but were amazed at their practices and horrible
contracts with the Devil to damn their own souls: And although the Right
Honorable Earl had sufficient grief for the loss of his Children; yet no
doubt it was the greater to consider the manner, and how it pleased God to
inflict on him such a fashion of visitation: Besides, as it amazed the hearers
to understand the particulars, and the circumstances of this devilish
contract, so was it as wonderful to see their desperate impenitency, and
horrible distraction, according to the rest of that sort, exclaiming against
the Devil for deluding them, and now breaking promise with them, when they
stood in most need of his help.

Notwithstanding all these aggrauations, such was the unparalleled magnanimity,
wisdom, and patience of this generous Nobleman, that he urged nothing
against them more then their own confessions, and so quietly left them to
judicial trial, desiring of God mercy for their souls, and of men charity to
censure them in their condemnation: but God is not mocked, and so gave them
over to judgment, nor man so reformed, but for the Earls sake, they cursed
them to that place which they themselves long before had bargained for.

What now remains (gentle Reader) but for thee to make use of so wonderful a
Story, and remarkable an accident, out of which, to draw to a conclusion, thou
may collect these particulars. First, that God is the supreme commander of
all things, and permits wonderful actions in the World, for the trial of
the godly, the punishment of the wicked, and his own glory: of which man shall
never attain to know the reason or occasion. Secondly, that the Devil is the
mere servant and agent of God, to prosecute whatsoever he shall command
rather then give leave unto; limiting him yet thus far in his own nature,
that he can go no further then the bounds within which he is hedged. Thirdly,
that this God has punishments, ad correctionem, that is to say, chasticements
of the godly, and ad rui^^m, Videlicet, Judgments against the wicked, wherein
yet man must disclaim any knowledge, and forsake preiudicate opinions. For the
very just shall be tried like gold, and no man exempted from castigation whom
God does love. Fourthly, that this Devil, though he be Gods Instrument, yet
works altogether by deceit: for as he was a liar from the beginning; so let
no man trust him, because he aymeth at the confusion of all Mankind. Fifthly,
that the wicked, (howeuer they may thrive and prosper for a time) yet in the
end are sure to be paid home, either with punishment in this life or in the
life to come, or both, as a final reward of monstrous impiety. Sixthly, that
Man in his frailty must not presume of prosperity; but prepare a kind of
stooping under the hand of God, when it pleases him to strike or punish us.
Seauenthly, that there is no murmuring nor repining against God, but quietly to
tolerate his inflictings, whenever they chance, of which this worthy Earl is
a memorable example to all men and Ages. Eighthly, that the punishments of the
wicked are so many warnings to all irregular sinners to amend their lives, and
avoid the judgment to come, by penitency and newness of life. Ninthly, that
though man could be content to pass over blasphemies and offenses against the
Statutes of Princes, yet God will overtake them in their own walks, and pull
them back by the sleeue into a slaughterhouse, as here you know the evidences
against these people took life and power from their own Confessions. Tenthly,
and last of all, that private opinion cannot prevail against public
censures: for here you see the learned and religious Judges cried out with our
Savior, Ex ore tuo. Therefore though it were so, that neither Witch nor Devil
could do these things, yet Let not a Witch live, says God, and Let them dye
(says the Law of England) that have conversation with spirits, and presume to
blaspheme the name of God with spells and incantation. O then you sons of men,
take warning by these examples, and either divert your steps from the broad way
of destruction, and inrecouerable gulf of damnation, or with Iosuahs counsel
to Achan, bless God for the discovery of wickedness, and take thy death
patiently, as the prevention of thy future judgment, and saving innocents from
punishment, who otherwise may be suspected without a cause.

Vtinam tam facile vera inuenire possem, quam falsa conuincere. FINIS.

