FEVDIGRAPHIA.

THE SYNOPSIS OR EPITOME OF SVRVEYING METHODIZED.

Anatomizing the whole Corpse of the Faculty; Viz.

The Material, Mathematical, Mechanical and Legal Parts,

Intimating all the Incidents to Fees and Possessions, and whatsoever may be
comprised under their Matter, Form, Propriety, and Valuation.

Very pertinent to be perused of all those, whom the Right, Reuenewe,
Estimation, Farming, Occupation, Manurance, Subduing, Preparing and Employing
of Arable, Meadow, Pasture, and all other Plots do concern.

And no less remarkable for all Vnder-takers in the Plantation of Ireland or
Virginia, for all Trauailers for Discoueries of foreign Countries, and for
Purchasers, Exchangers, or Sellers of Land, and for every other Interesse in
the Profits or Practice derived from the complete SVRVEY Of Manours, Lands,
Tenements, Edifices, Woods, Waters, Titles, Tenures, Evidences, etc.

Composed in a compendious Digest by W. FOLKINGHAM. G.

Quae prosunt singula, multa iuvant.

LONDON Printed for Richard Moore, and are to be sold at his shop in Saint
Dunstanes Churchyard in Fleete-streete, 1610.

The Contents of the four Sections of the Art of Surueying.
The first Section.
Entreats of the Materials of Possessions, of the diversities of Earthes,
Waters, Quarries, Mines, of the Crusts and Investures of Grounds with their
peculiar Subduing, Manuring and Employing, of fitting several sorts of Grain,
Herbs, Roots, Plants with Plots of Convenient Temper and appropriate Layer,
of the Natures and kinds of Marle and Compost, of Ground-Plots, and Edifices.

The second Section.
Shows the Situation, Residence and lying of Grounds suiting their several
Tempers, their Boundage and Neighbourage, with markeable observations arising
from the same; the Measuring, Calculation, Plotting and Proiection of Lines,
Figures, Bodies, Buildings, the Tricking of Plots and Maps with Colors,
Characters, Charts, and other Complements.

The third Section.
Intimates the Natures and Proprieties of Possessions, Tenures, Services,
Titles, Rights, Fees, Immunities, Discents, and other Incidents.

The fourth Section.
Demonstrateth how Lands and Possessions are valueable in respect of their
several Issues, Rents, Perquisites, Privileges and other Accrewments, and
Reuenueables, duly regarding their Reprises.

The Marshalling and digesting of the whole Survey, contriuing of Field-Entries
in Rough-books, Engrossing of the Exemplificatio^s, the Surueying and
abbreuiating of Deeds, Composing of Terrars, Rentals, Particulars, etc.

To the Right Honorable and most Noble Lord, WILLIAM Lord Compton, Baron of
Compton, Nestors years, with the felicity of both Worlds.
TO derive my inducements (Right Honorable) of Dedicating these shallow
Deseignes unto a Mecaenas of such Supereminence, from Presidents of worthy
wits and particular Obligees to eminent Patrons, my Fortunes have not so
auspiciously endeared me their happy Favorite. But the Universal concurrence
of good Hearts with hearty zeal (from the Verge of a vaste extent) in the
Center of true affectionated praise of your worth, and prayers for your weal,
has hasted and haled-on the whole Current of my affections to run with the
General Concurse of unfeigned welwillers, to congratulate your Lordships
hopeful and happy Consolidations: For such and so manifold are those worthy
Attributes of accomplished Amplitude and magnified Merits dimayning from the
sacred Source of true Nobility, that they have even winged my fervent Desires,
(more animated with self-approument of deuote sincerity then amazed with
myrrors of Magnificence) to the consecrating of these my pressed Deseigneme^ts to
your Honorable Patrocinie. But if such Motives be incompetent to give due
Color of excuse to Intrusions so exorbitant, I beseech your Lordship give me
leave to flee to the prostrate Plea of praying your gracious Indulgence for my
rude Presume in daring from the remote Nadir of obscurity, to eleuate the
flaggie Wing of so weak a Pineon toward the Zenith of Perfection, the mark
and Pitch for Skie-towring Faulcons, whose Quills imped with strong Sarcells of
the Grace of Greatness, are inlisened and inhabled to transcende and
climbe-aboue the mistie Vapors that cloud and Eclipse all Flights which
pierce not to the Welkin of the Worthies. For who sees not that Heroes (Gods
Vicegerents) can dignifie even the inglorious Groom, and give such Gloss,
and Tincture to home-made Statuaes, as shall attract the Eye of wonder to
magnify the potent Artists for refining and remoulding their (now) new
creatures, as well as with the Touchstone of refined knowledge detrud and
banish all Deseignes, disfurnisht of true and due self-worth, from the Confines
of high Repute? But least in laboring, with invulgar Ingredients, to palate an
ill seasoned Service, I should by tedious and vnrelished Terms, impart a
worse distaste, I will screw-vp this Key with the prostrate sacring of my self
and my poor Endeauours at the Shrine of your gracious Clemency. And so ever
wishing unto your Honor the happy fruition of vnconfined Felicity. I rest,
now and ever,

London at the White Heart in Cheape-side, Iunij. 6. 1610. Your Lordships humbly
devoted. W. Folkingham.

To the Beneuolent and judicious READER.
SHould I insist upon tedious Appologies for due approuement of the Faculty of
Surueying impugned by the vulgar and shallow Disputes of refractorie Opposites,
which absurdly transferring their hard Imputations against it, from the faulty
and defective Abuse, to the just and lawful Use of the same, do most
injuriously, and unjustly traduce and scandalize this unblameable Art and all
her Agents, it is hazard but I should hear of Mindaes Cynical Memento, if I
incurred no harder a Censure. It is a World to see the sottish pressures urged
against the admeasuring of land, yet the Use of Ponderous and Concaue Measures
(both Dry and Liquid) are no less commendable than Common in venting of Wares
and Merchandise, and what greater iniquity in the using admeasurements in
Grounds than in Grain? Cloth and Stuffes were retailed by the yard, when a
sumptuous Potentate might be hosed for 3 shillings, which now will scarce hose
a frugall Peasant. Bilanx est arbiter aequus; the Hand may fail in certainty
of Poize, and the Eye in Randon sans Rule, but the Beam and Chain balke no
Truths, nor blaunch Vn-truthes; the Empirick or the Methodist, which is the
better Phisician? Take away Number, Weight, Measure, you exile Justice, and
reduce and haile-vp from Hell the old and odious Chaos of Confusion. Private
Intelligencers, intimating (by their roaued Aims at Quantities and Qualities)
underhand and sinister informations, abuse the Lessor and wrong the Lessee,
where the just and judicious Feudigrapher (who aims at competent Improuements
sans pressure of the Feudatarie, or oppressure of the Fermor) duly and
discreetly observing all particulars incident to the Plot, certifies a true
Relation, by the Leuel-draught of whose impartial Parallels, may be produced
that Mean in Rating of Estimates, which the due Port of men of Place and
Eminence (no way supportable ( Rebus sic stantibus) with Revenues of former
Ages) does most justly challenge. What should I speak of scanted Estimates of
Acres exacted from ouer-awed Tenants, or rated by positive Will? of the
Ouertures of scandal raised against Surueyors by the Owners concealing of
failing Contents, or vouching of Validities and Extents above the Feudigraphia
impostura fit Pseudographia.
Record? of letting by Port-saile advanced by prepared out-bidding Competitors?
of parcelling forth engrossed lands to Vnder-tenants at intolerable Terms? of
Riot, Pride, Plenty of People and Coin (though confined to a few Cofers) with
high-enhaunced Rates of all Commodities? who is so Owle-eyed that sees not,
that the extending of Rents does necessarily dimaine from these and the like
causes? Yet Tenancies (I cannot gainsay) are too often tendered to too-Racking
Valuations, the Reciprocal Regard (in some) is Choice to take by Rack, or
leave a Pack, and it is so ordinary with too many Landlords (like absolute
Lords and Allodists of their Lands (within the Verge at least) a superis ad
inferos) Fundum hastae subijcere, the frequencie of the practice grows
familiar. And for Feudataries, who sees not how much they fail of true
agnizing their due dependence upon Mesne Lords, Dwarenus.
since Feudum (comprehending Fealty (at least) which obliges Per sacramentu^ sub
pena foris facturae Feodi) is Res Clientelaris, and never deuolues to the
Successor sans original Burdens imposed by him which had Nouel Fee, howsoever
they now slight their Lords and amoundre their Obligence. Sed haec parerga; and
to Rectify such irregularities, the Field requires a better Champion, in the
mean time let every one for his own particular propose unto himself the
entertainment of a good conscience. For this Tractate, I am not so arrogant to
magnify, nor so unnatural to vilify my own issue, though I could retriue
Centuries of Defects, but leave it to thy favorable Censure, craving (withal)
thy courteous tolleration of my new-coyning of some Words, with the Reviving of
the obsolete and Endenizing of Foreign, since without such privilege, an
indigested Chaos of Principles and Conclusions cannot ( ex nouo and ex facili)
be concisely contrived into a Methodicall Art. For any vainglorious
Geodetor, which makes base Detraction the Trumpet to rumor, and emblason his
selfe-boasted perfections, so with facility to purchase (or rather fore-stall)
the Palm of Repute, Ore and Dente petat, and naso suspenso huiusmodi effundat
Scommata: Quam lepide lexeis compostae vt tesserulae, omnes
Art pauimento atque Emblemate vermiculato?
What curious-quaint Emellishments diffuse?
Musaick-Mazes-Marquetrizing Muse?


Susque deque fero; who can be secured from base carping Blatancie? But
whereunto tendes this precise particularizing of Plots, Layers, Pregnances,
Productions, etc. when an Arte-lesse Agent can (by famed Name, and absolute
power to dispose) with the bare vouch of the general goodness of the Ground
(sans ground of Reason or Possibility) hail on the poor Pesant to Farm and
Fine according to the brave boast of his roauing Esteems and absurd
Ostentations, which he daignes not (nor dare they urge) by any rational
instances to make probable? I aim not at the Rack nor the Slack, the
qualified Mean is the Maine of my Mark; and to extunde and beat-out this true
Proportion, I observe the Circumstances proiected: let peremptory Agents balke
instance, bar Reply, and Rack sans Rule and Reason, it behoues an honest and
faithful Feudigrapher, by infallible Principles and warrantable
Demonstrations, to approve himself, an intelligent and diligent-Improuer, not
a senseless and arrogant Impostor; and what warrant more current than
Knowledge founded upon the industrious search and serious observations
intimated (or rather glaunced at) in this Epitome? But least too large Gates
should promise a fair Plat-forme of a spacious Town, having thus borrowed
leave to wade into the shallow Foordes of the Faculty, I will leave the
Profundities to be sounded with a Plumbe-line of more Poize and Fadomes.

Helpringham near to Folkingham the second of February, 1609. Velle pro
Posse. Thine W. F.

The Author to his Feudigraphia.
WHen thus I had (by peice-meale pains) compilde
Of diverse Elements thy slender Bulkes,
I deem'de to have (too ominously) stylde
Thy Name so near the Pheud of Border-Hulkes,
That thy abortiue Limbs I rather chose
In close concealment from this captious Age
To smoother ay, than rashly thus t'expose
To Pheudists Theonine thy Pusilage;
But a great Monarch has those dire Combines
Hatched in the Heart by Savage Enion,
Calm'de with a Fame that happily Confines
All Opposites, to sacred Union:
So were thou Patroniz'de by Celsitude,
The Cryticke-Coale should not thy Brows ybrand
For Dis-analogies strange, strained, rude,
Nor Deviations curious-ill-scande;
Gain then, O gain (in Lieu of self demerit)
By heart-free Tender with true zeal repleate,
His grac'de Aspect, who truly does inherit.
A splendid Fame for worthynes Complete,
To daigne the Patronage I (humble) crave
Of Worthy Comptons Noble Family,
Whose iustly-honourd Names Shield from Deprave,
Couch rabid Blatants, silence Surquedry:
Then Carping Momus will be euer-mute,
And rather Burst with Spleen, than vent his Gall,
The Mainger-Curre nil bawle (how-euer brute)
But crouching fawn, or leering void the Stall;
Such Grace dimaines from sacred Eminence
Ay to suppress insulting Insolence.
Et habent sua Fata Libelli.
THE SYNOPSIS OR EPITOME OF SVRVEY METHODIZED.
SECTION.I.
Of the Materials of Possessions, the several kinds of Earths, Waters, Stones,
Minerals: the Crusts and increase of Grounds, the peculiar ordering, mastering,
manuring and employing of several Soyles, the due bestowing of Grain, Herbs,
Plants; with the diversity of Ground-plots and Edifices.

CHAP. I.
SVruey in general is an Art whereby the view and trutinate intimation of a
subject, from Center to Circumference is rectified.

The Survey of Possessions (the subject of this Treatise) is the Art by which
their Graphicall Description is particularized.

This Survey is Symbolized and distinguished into Active and Passive.

Active.
The Active may be referred to the Feudigrapher, and consists in Operation and
Estimation.

The Operation is Mathematical and Mechanical.

Mathematical.
Mathematical Operation is a part of Survey by which the dimensions of the
Plots propounded are performed.

Mechanical.
Mechanical Operation is the Manual acting and proiecting of the works.

The Estimation of Possessions is Material and Legal.

Material.
The Material part is conversant in Estimating the valuations incident to the
subject, by relation to the Materials, and Elementarie parts of the Plot.

Legal.
The Legal part prescribes Methodicall and Iuridiciall confines to the whole
course of Survey: and comprehends the Symboliographie or Clarke-ship, and
penning of the Survey with the Rectifying of Evidences and Records.

The several functions of these parts are diffused thorough the whole
Process ensuing.

And so much for the Active part.

CHAP. II.
Passive.
The Passive part of Survey, has reference to Possessions, as they consist of
parts Essential and Accidental.

Essential.
The Essential parts comprehend the matter and form coincident to Possessions.

Matter.
The Matter comprises the Elementarie composition and constitution of
Possessions: and in discussure thereof, the Material part is most conversant.

The Matter is either Natural, whose state has admitted of no substantial
alteration, other then the hand of Nature has impressed therein: or
Artificial, transformed and changed from the Native and Original Habit by
humane industry.

Natural matter may be divided into Appropriate and Communicate. Natural.


Appropriate is that which is peculiar and proper to some certain person,
place, or other particular limitation; and has reference here to Earth and
Water.

In the Earth the Quality and Composure thereof are to be considered. Earth.


In the first the Species and Habitude require to be iudiciously observed.

The Species of the Earth is either Vulgar or Precious. Species.


The Vulgar is either Simple, as Clay, Moulde, Vulgar.
Moore, Gravel, Sand: Or Commixt; as Creachie, Claulkie, Clayie, Sandy Earth.

Precious Earth is that which consists of a middle Nature twixt Stones and
Metals; Precious.
and all sorts thereof are Friable and conuertible to Powder: And these are
either Liquable or Not-Meltable. Liquable.


The first are Juices Concrete; as Salt, Alume, Bitumen, Vitrioll.

Salt (Natural) is found either in the Earth or Water. Of the first kind is
Salt Armoniake, Sal-gem, Salt.
Sal-niter, and Indian Salt.

The other sort is dug up in Fountains, Rivers, Washes, Salt-Meeres,
Sea-shoares.

Alume is either white or black, Alume.
The first (and best) is either Liquid or Compact.

Liquid Alume is the soft, fat and limpid Roch (or Red) Alume.

The Compact is either Sugar like, or Shiuering.

The black is a kind of Alume wherewith gold is purged and purified.

Bitumen is either hard, as Asphaltus, Pissasphaltus, Bitumen.
Rosin; Or Liquid, as Naphta, Petroleum, Amber, Vitriol, Coppras.

Not-meltable.
The Precious Earths, which are not Meltable, nor indurated into Stones nor
Metals, are Stibium, Azure, Auripigmentum or Arsenicke, Sandaracha, Calx,
Plaster, Chaulke, Coal, Canole, Marle, Oker, Terra-sigillata, or Lemnia,
Armenia, Germanica, etc. Tuckers or Fullers Earth, Argilla or clay for Pots,
Gallie and Thacke Tiles, Brick, Water and Tobacco Pipes, Purslaine.

And thus much for the Species.

CHAP. III.
Habitude.
THe Habitude of the Earth dependes upon the inherent disposition and
temperature of the same in Heat, Cold, Moisture and Dryness. For although in
regard of the Cold and Dry substance and Nature, whereof the Earth generally
consists, it may be said to be of one temperature; yet upon occasion of the
diversity of Situations, Affinity, Intercourse and participation it has with
things of repugnant quality, it purchases and acquireth contrary qualities.

And therefore it would be also peruestigated, whether it be light,, loose,
soft, fatt, oily, slipperie, mouldring, cleaving, tough, stiff, moorie,
lean, barren, fertile, water-swallowed, soale bound, constipated, or what
other due or undue poize and proportion of temper predominates.

Composure.
The Composure of the Earth comprises the Base and upper Crust of the same.

Base. Pregnance.
The Base of the Earth offers due observation to peruestigate the Pregnance
wherewith the Earth is imbowelled, whether it be Prime; as in the precedent
Species; or Concrete, as in Quarries and Mines.

In the first discover, what Ragge, Freestone, Quarries.
Millstone, Grind-stone, Syth-stone, Emeril-stones, Sanguinin-stones, Hones,
Tutch, Ieate, Slude, Slate: What Marbles, as Alablasters, Ophites, Porphyris,
etc. Also what Gemmes, as hard Adamants, viz. the Cenchros, Macedonicke,
Cypricke, Siderite: the flammid Carbuncle, purple Amethist, green Emeraulde,
and Opall Paderas, with their Trineuned luster: the vyolet Hyacinth,
Skie-coloured Sapphire, Lustrie Diamonde, shining Topaz, starrie Calchedonie,
sparkling Rubie, golden Chrysolite, splendid Asterite, various Achate, horny
Corneol, green Jasper, pellucid Onyx, cerule Tarqueis, candid Crystal, hard
Boodstone, attracting Loade-stone, white yellow and Falerne Agate.

For the second note, what Metals or Minerals, Mines.
are therein generated? whether Pure as Gold, Silver; or impure as Lead,
Tin, Brass, Iron, Steel, Lattin, Copper, Coperas, Quicksiluer, Stibium,
Antimonie, Chrysocolla or Boras, Minium or Vermilon natural, Sandaracha,
Verdigreece, Salt, Allome, Brimstone.

Also Coal, Canole, Colors amongst the Mineral Oar of Gold and Silver, as
Sil, Azure.

The upper Crust is the Soil or Seal of the Earth through which the
irradiation of the Sun penetrating, Crust.
corroborates and cheeres up the Native heat with temperate calefaction, which
together with the infusion of moderate showers and moistures, soaked from
soilings enlifens the radical humor, and does so foment and ferment the whole
Mass of Moulde, that Dame Vesta is invited and extimulated to inuest her self
in her richest Roabes of painted bravery, and to produce and power forth her
Cornu-copia of selected plenties.

The Crassitude.
The Crassitude of the Soale, is diuersified in several Plots, and particular
Modulets, as from 3. foot, to foot more or less, and is distinguishable from
the Base by compacture, by quality, by color, by extention of the roots and
fibers of grass, herbs, plants. And upon this Crassitude of the Crust,
together with the Quality and Habitude of the same, does the production
principally depend (although the estate of the Base (by reason of the imparture
of the innate faculty) be not utterly excluded all importance of fertility)
and offers due observation, what Trees, Plants, Shrubs, Grain, Grass, Herbs,
Weeds, Moss, and other Vegitables are in each Plot voluntarily or plentifully
produced.

Inuesture.
And hence dimaines the Inuesture of the earth, which gives consideration of the
Grouth and Repletion of productions, both Vegetant and Animal.

Grouth
In Grouth, the thriuage, verdure, fruitage, prematurance etc. of particular
Vegetables are regardable; as the boaling, spreading, arming, timbring and
tapering of trees, braunching and bearing of Plants, Bushing of Shrubs,
prolation and seedage of roots and herbs, depth and color of grass, etc. For
thereby (sans further search) the Species and Habitude of the ground, wherein
they grow, are ingeniously intimated.

Soils known by their productions.
For if they prosper and thrive in burgening, sappines, flowers, fruit and the
like, according to their several kinds, in extraordinary good proportion, it
implies that either the ground is very fertile in general, or that they are
implanted in Plots Sympathizing with their Natures.

As the high timbring Oak dilating mighty arms in large extent, denotates a
rich and battle soil; where on the contrary, the knurly, crooked and crabbed
hard sparing starueling, bewraies his barren and hungry bed.

The large and loose grained timber of the red Oak and frusshie Ash shows a
light, moist, rich and deep soil: the like does the largeness and
waterishnesse of roots and fruit.

But the firm and solid grain of the white Oak and tough Ash, signifies a
more fast and close ground.

High grounds produce wood of a more beautifull-featherd and better grain,
than the low, except in Apple trees and Pear trees.

Rest-harrowes growing rank and rooting far abroad, intimate a fat,
fruitful, and long lasting soil.

The low stubbed Heath, argues a barren grauellie cold ground, the rank and
high shows it to be a more warm and tillable; and commonly the white flowred
Heath has better layer, than the purple.

Diuels-bit, Eyebright and yarrow by plenty in repletion, and mean in
proportion, point forth a Sandy earth, of moderate heat and moisture, and a
sweet shallow and wel-swoorded Crust: and thus are these herbs frequent in the
Irish Soil.

Grounswell, Thistles, Nettles, and other weeds by their rankenesse show a
rich tilth.

Blackish, misliking and unkind herbs show a lean hungry and bitter, or
sour ground.

Burnt and scorched herbs, and harsh, reddish, bluish spirie and prie-grasse
bewray a cold, unkind, rough, starued and baked, or soaked soil.

Base herbs, and rough sandy stone, denotate a lean greety sandy or grauelly
ground, according to the Poet: Nam Ieiuna quidem cliuosi glarea ruris
Vix humiles apibus casias roremque ministrat,
Et tophus scaber etc.


Juniper demonstrates a chalky, dry and mean seat.

The knagged Moss mattes and clothes the barrennest Mountains with horned
shoots, but promises that the Minerals of Iron, Lead, Tin and Coal, shall
Counteruaile the infertiltie of Soil with the rich Ballaste enwombing the
intrals of his spacious Base.

And thus much for the observations to be collected from the grouth of
Vegetables.

CHAP. IIII.
Animalia.
THe quality of the Soil is also not obscurely intimated by consideration of
the breedage of the Animals therein produced: for it is commonly seen that
Cattle, Foul, Fish, and other living Creatures do differ and vary in color,
Bone, proportion and other peculiar attributes according to their places of
Breed.

The large limbed Neat, Horse and Sheep betoken that they had their breeding
in fat and rich soiles. But the small and sound Sheep, clean limbed Horse and
Beast of mean bigness bewraies a hard Country and shallow Crust.

In Ireland, where the soil is not deeply rank, but moderately fertile,
both in tillage and forage, their Cattle and all other living Creatures (Men
and Greyhounds only excepted) are of a mean and middle stature and
proportion, suitable to the soilage.

Yet the Sheep of Cotswolde ( quamuis situs sit and collinus and gracilis) are
of great bone, large Necks and square Bulkes.

But according to the Nature of the Countries, diverse Animals are famoused for
peculier parts: so Virgil says.

-- Virosaque Pontus
Castorea, Eliadum palmas Epeiros equarum;
Continuo has leges aeternaque foedera certis
Imposuit Natura locis etc.
So we have the Ripon Colt, Northern Bilder, Scotch and Welsh Nags, Irish
Hobbie, Spanish Iennet.

The English and Frizeland Steedes, Barbarian-Coursers, Cappadocian Hunters.

The Sicilian Horse is praised for swiftness as are also the breed of Libia
and Siculia, the Moorian for valor and courage, the Dutch Mare is in request
for the Caroach, and Thessalonian Mares for battle.

The Parthian Horse is famed for nimblenesse and dexterity in running: The
Median is exceeding fair and great: the Sardinian fair and nimble: the
Misseean is goodly, shapie, easy and submissiue.

The Marsh and Holland Ox is preferred for draught, the Lancashire and
Darbyshire for tallow, hide and horn, and these are short legged, of square
bulk and black hair, the other are tall, and (for the most part)
party-colored.

The Methol Rabbet is famed for fatness and fleshinesse: the Cotswould weather
for large body, deep, fine, white, and soft fleece: Norffolke Mutton for
sweetness, but Lemster Ore merits the pre-eminence (though it be short) for a
purely-fine, soft and crisped Staple.

The Goats of Angori are hung with shag ground-deepe, but those of Morroco
have their hair of ordinary length and refined smallnes.

English For bigness, strength, and fierceness.
Mastiffes, Gase Hounds (or Lurchers) and Tu^blers, are in special request: so
Westphalian Bacon.

Russia breeds white Bears and black Foxes, and Island white Partridges,
Phesants, Faulcons, and Hares. Pegu carries the Palm for Parrets, and
Muske-Cats, and Ceiland (nigh Calicut) for Elephants.

The Vandall Trout is held in high esteem, and we approve Wytham and Ancam,
this for Eeles, and that for Pikes, English Pikes, and Oysters.

So the Barbary and Pembrokeshire Faulcons, and Tercell-gentles, Island
Ierfalcon and Ierkin, Irish Merline, Goose-hawlke, and Cock of the wood,
English Hobbie, and Sparrow-hawlkes.

And in regard of such diversities coincident to many creatures, by reason of
their Countries of breed, it is remarkable to observe the several
particulars peculiar unto them: as in Horses their stature, courage, cleanness
of limbs, soundness and serviceableness; in sheep their bulk, depth and
purity of Staple; in Neat their bone, hide, and hair, in Rabbets their furre
and fatness: and the like of other things according to their kind.

And thus much of earth appropriate.

CHAP. V.
WAter Appropriate is either Commorant, viz. confined within the plot. Waters.
Or Current, not terminated within the limits thereof.

Comorant. Stagnant.
The first is either Stagnant, as standing Pooles, Ponds, Lakes, Loughes,
Meeres: Or stillant, viz: Springing or bursting forth of the bowels of the
earth, as Wels, Fountains, Bathes, etc.

Fluent. Current.
The second is either Fluent, as Rils, Brooks, Rivers, springing, and appearing
with their first source within the bounds of the Plot: Influent.
Or Influent, viz: dimayning from elsewhere, and flowing or passing by or
through the precincts and confines of the Plot. And to this place may also be
referred all sweeping or floating Waters, which flit and fleet to and fro with
wind-catches, Floating.
such as be the Waters falling and descending from Vplandish countries by
land-floods surrounding Fens, and other Flats.

And both these sorts of Current Waters, though they pass through, and beyond
both the plot and Privilege of the same, yet so far forth as they may be
prescribed and entitled to the bounds or liberties thereof, they are thereunto
appropriate. So much for Matter Appropriate: Communicate follows.

CHAP VI.
COmmunicate Matter is that which is participable to the Plot together with
other Places, Matter communicate.
and may be referred to Water Transient and to the Climate.

Waters Transient are Rivers, Brooks, Waters Transient.
Floods (whence so ever dimayning) which passing beyond the extention and
privilege of the Plot are communicably imparted to it, and to some other.

The Climate may also not improperly be admitted as Communicate, Climate.
in regard it may be said to be the same (and in some sort not immateriall, by
reason of the inseperabilitie thereof) sans manifest change, in a greater
circuit then the limits of one Lordship, or an ordinary Plot, do usually
extend unto, yet in the Survey of whole Continents and vast Countries the
Climate is not excluded from Appropriates: Latitude.
But howsoever you distinguish, it is not impertinent perticularly to be penned
down, viz: in what degree of longitude and latitude the Plot is situate, and
also in what Air, as Pellucid, mild, subtle, clear, sweet, persant, soon
hot and cold, healthful: Or gross, close, foggie, sharp, Air.
fenny, vaporous, unwholesome: in what proportion of heat, cold, moisture,
dryness: what winds, storms, gusts, are most remarkable: what ordinary
effects and accidents, are usually observed to ensue, and succeed upon
immoderate falls of wet, or long continuance of drowth: And what Diseases as
Catarrhes, Feuers-Fluxes, etc. are most frequent and common. And the like for
Cattle.

And besides these and the former observations and distinctions, Nature of
Waters.
there is a peculiar intimation to be made of the nature and goodness of
Waters.

Clay-waters are sweet, thick, fat, and potable, requiring the least proportion
of Malt for Brewing.

Waters which have a stony and grittie Current, do by strayning thorough the
same become cooler, pure, sweet, wholesome, and light of disgesture.

Springs dimayning from thick sand, and slender gravel, quickly gather mudde,
and they are not durable, pibbles and gross gravel afford good and pleasant
waters, were they of continuance.

The Marle gravel, stony sand, and read stones produce best Waters.

The red stones with Pliny carry chief pre-eminence for everlasting Springs,
and water, cool and simply the best.

But the particular notifying of the Natures of ordinary Waters, may be with
facility effected by the exact knowledge of the peculiar attributes, and
properties of good Water.

Cognizance of good Water.
The best Waters are those that derive their Sources, and Originals from Rocks,
or stony Fountains irradiated with the Orient-Sunne, sliding in channels of
hard and compact gravel or sand, repleat with read stones, or black and
burnt carbuncle stones, of limpid cleerenesse, light in poize and disgestion,
quick in conversion of heat and coldness, cooler in Summer then in Winter,
sans taste, smell, and color, yet readily taking tinctures and qualities
infused, leaving no discolored spots by standing simple in a clean vessel,
nor excrements by decoction, by imparting neat and pure complexions, sound
breasts, and clear voices to the native Inhabitants.

Aquae Calidae.
Besides these ordinary waters, there be Aquae Calidae, other waters endued with
medicinable qualities acquired by virtue of some Mineral, from whence they
dimaine: as Bathes, Wels, Fountains, springing from Mines of Nitre, Sulphur,
Allome, Bitumen, etc.

There be also Waters both upon the Coast and within the land (as at the
Namptwich, etc,) of so brackish a Brynage, that they will be converted to Salt
by boiling. Brynage.


Other waters tho they be not conuertable in approved measure and goodness to
Salt, yet they have virtue to augment and refine salt which is boiled in them:
so the Zeelanders boil Spanish salt in Seawater, to the increase of 45. in
the hundred, that of Portingale 35, and that of Brouage 25.

Some Fountains cream with a liquid Bitumen, like to the lake Asphaltus, as
at Pitchford in the County of Salop.

Now for Repletion, Repletion.
it intimates how and wherewith the Plot is fraught, stored and replenished
both with Vegetants, and Animals: viz.

For woods, how peruiable, how penetrable, how enterlaced, as Timber with
Tinsell, Coppice, or underwood: what Trees, Plants, Shrubs: what Fruitage,
Mastage, Gummage: what Hawlkes, Foul, Venery, etc. are therein found and
produced.

For Pasture, and Meadow; how and with what Herbage the Crust or Sword is
matted, mantled and swarthed: what decrement by Moss, Weeds, Water, Stones,
etc.

So in Waters, the kinds, goodness, and store of Fish, and Foul, both
peculiar and common, would be recorded.

And thus much may suffice for the Natural Matter; It follows to entreat of
the Artificial.

CAP. VII.
THe matter may also be said to be Artificial, Matter Artificial.
in respect of labor and industry conferred upon or about the Subject and
Adiunct of the Plot.

These incidents to the Subject are comprehended under Tillage, and ground
Plots.

Tillage.
Tillage generally taken may comprehend all manner of husbandings of grounds, but
it is here limited to Vertilage and Fertilage.

Vertilage.
Vertilage consists in Deluage and Fictilage.

Deluage.
Deluage is applied about preparing, and putrefying of the Earth by stirring,
tossing and turning of the same, according to the Poet.

Et cui putre solum, namque hoc imitamur arando: viz. Vt arando solum sit
putre: Neque enim (inquit Columella) aliud est colere quam soluere and
fermentare terram.

And this Deluage is distinguishable into Caruage and Scaphage.

Caruage.
Caruage comprehends all sorts of plowing of Grounds, as well ordinary, viz.
for Grain, Hemp, Line, etc. As Extraordinary, viz. for Woods, Woade,
Dyers-weede, Rapes, Cole, Saffron, Mill, Millet, Panick, Scaphiage.
Amilcorne, Spelt-corn, Garences, Dewgrasse, Iobs-teares, Comin-seede,
Annise-seede, Worme-seede, Cotton-seede, Canarie-seede, etc.

Scaphage is the digging, deluing, and preparing of the Soil with Spades or
other handie-tooles for the sowing, setting, planting, and propagating of
Seeds, Herbs, Plants, Trees, etc. and is most conversant in Gardens,
Hort-yards, Hop-yards, Vine-yards.

And here it is expedient to animaduert what choice, selected, and endenized
Herbs, Plants, Fruits and Physical Simples be implanted and bestowed, with
their Growth, Repletion, Fruitage, Fecunditie, with Contriuage both of Plots
and Plants.

Fictilage.
Fictilage is the forming and transforming of ye Matter in form or substance; as
in making of Tile (for thack, roof, crest, gutter, pauing) Brick, Pots,
Tabaccopipes, To^nel or Conduit-pipes, Glass, Purslane, and other Plasmature.
If therefore the Plot do afford any Earth or Clay, which may be accommodated
to such purposes, it behooues to record the same.

CHAP. VIII.
FErtilage consists in the enriching of the Soil, Fertilage.
and the Rectifying of the Production. And in pursuit of this practice,
diligent consideration must be had of the variation of the Plot, from the due
Habitude of a rich and battle ground; to the like and equal condition,
whereof, it must be endeavored by appropriate means to reduce the same, or at
least to correct and qualify the undue Habitude in the eminentest exorbitance.

And it shall not be amiss to particularize the Natures and qualities both of
good and badde soyles, to the end their distinctions may be facilized.

The Nature and goodness of ground is diverse ways be-tout and manifested; as
by the mixture, temperature, The Nature of grounds how known.
color, compacture, touch, weight, taste, smell, etc. together with the
voluntary Production and Repletion of the Plot.

Such a diffused mixture of Clay and Sand, Mixture.
moisture and dries, heat and cold as confounds their distinctions of deriuing
appellation, from the eminent predominance of any particular quality inherent
in the soil, carries a general approouement of goodness.

Virgill infers the best layer for Tillage to be an Earth which is blackish and
dark, not too compact, Black.
of a deep crust, viz. fat under the share, though it go a deep pitch, well
putrified and resolved, etc. Nigra fere and presso pinguis sub vomere terra
Optima frumentis etc.


And Mancinellus says, it must be neither moist nor dry, waxing black after
the plow, easy to be tilled, and where Rooks run fluttering after the share
at the very heels of the holder, and that not of rank, but moderate
fruitfulness, with which the deprecation of the Poet, does not unfitly
concur, where he shows that moist layers, are known by rank and abundant
grass.

Humida maiores herbas alit, ipsaque iusto
Laetior: ah nimium ne sit mihi fertilis illa,
Neu se praeualidam primis ostentat aristis.
But notwithstanding the pre-eminence given to the black and dark color, Red.
some are induced to prefer the red layer, and so much the rather for that
Adam (who was immediately created of Earth) imports Earth of a red or ruddy
color: And experience also gives instance of diverse such soyles (though not so
frequent to confirm every man in the same opinion) of wondrous worth and
fertility, amongst which the Territories of the Town of Armagh in Ireland,
are famoused for lasting and perpetual battlenes, as having time out of mind,
as appears partly by their vaste dung-hils, pestering both yards and streets,
without any kind of manuring, yielded plentiful increase of grass and
grain, howsoever the Natives attribute this continuing richness of the soil
to the special benediction of their Sainted Patron Saint Patricke.

Compacture found by the stowage.
Some let not to conclude in commendation of the Soil upon the bare experiment
laid down by Virgil for distinguishing between open and rare soyles, and such
as are condense and close, where he wills to sink a pit in some solid place,
and to take out, and break the earth, and after to tread it in again, and if
it swell above the former height, they judge it rich according to the
proportion of the supereminence, if it prove even and flat, they esteem it
mean, if it settle under, in^ertile. But the Poet commends that which is rare,
and not condense, for producing of grass and plants fit for broouage, and
browsage of sheep, and for Vines; and that which by filling the Fosse appears
to be compact and dense, he intimates to yield large and tough furrows, and
destinates it to Tillage.

Rara sit, an supra morem sit densa requiras,
Altera frumentis quoniam fauet, altera Baccho,
Densa magis Cereri, rarissima quaeque Lyaeo;
Ante locum capies oculis, alteque iubebis
In solido puteum demitti, omnemque repones
Rursus humu^, and pedibus summas aequabis arenas:
Si deerunt, rarum; pecorique and vitibus almis
Aptius vber erit: sin in sua posse negabunt
Ire loca, and scrobibus superabit terra repletis
Spissus ager; glebas cunctanteis crassaque terga
Expecta, and validis terram proscinde Iuuencis.
And the fat soil he says, dissolues not, Moulding.
being labored in the hands, but becomes clammy, coheres, and cleaues to the
fingers: and that Earth that by moulding in the hand does clift and cleave, and
resolve into powder, or moulde, argues a barren, and lean layer.

Pinguis item quae sit tellus, hoc denique pacto
Discimus; haud vnquam manibus iactata fatiscit,
Sed picis in morem ad digitos lentescit habendo.
The poize and color (says the Poet) are evident, Weight.
but the scorched and noisome chillness of the soil is bewrayed by the
voluntary growth of Pitch-trees, Ewes and black Iuie: -- At sceleratum
exquirere frigus
Difficile est; piceae tantum taxique nocentes
Interdum, aut hederae pandunr vestigia nigrae. Taste.



For deprehending and finding out the taste of the Earth, Virgil prescribes a
general Specimen in his conclusion for trial of salt and bitter soyles; viz.
to fill close wicker baskets with the earth and water, and then to run and
strain through the water by treading or pressing, and so by the taste of the
water to judge of the Earth by the quality imparted: -- tu spisso vimine
quallos
Colaque praelorum fumosis diripe tectis;
Huc ager ille malus dulcesque a fontibus vndae
Ad plenum calcentur, aqua eluctabitur omnis
Scilicet, and grandes ibunt per vimina guttae,
At sapor indicium faciet manifestus, and ora
Tristia tentantum sensu torquebit amaror.


Ponticke Worme-wood bewraies a bitter and barren soil, according to Ovid:
Turpia deformes gignunt absinthia campi,
Terraque de fructu, quam sit amara docet.


Smell.
If somewhat before Sunne-set in the first rain-fall ensuing a drought, or in
earing, the Earth shall breath forth an aromaticall odor and sweet savor, it
is held an infallible sign of a temperate fertility: And that ground which
exhailes and breathes-forth exile and fumie vapors quickly vanishing, which
attracts humors and selfely expels them, which inuests and clothes it self
with a close sword of fresh-greene grass is parabile, gentle, and plyant for
the plowe, good for grain, Elmes, Vine-yards, and Oliuets.

Quae tenuem exhalat nebulam, fumosque volucreis,
Et bibit humorem, and cum vult ex se ipsa remittit,
Quaeque suo viridi semper se gramine vestit,
Nec scabie and salsa etc.
Cato in two significant Epithites ( sed per transennam) comprehends the
several attributes, Pulla and Cariosa.
both of a good and bad soil, viz: Pulla and Cariosa.

Pliny disentrauerses the meaning of Pulla to imply a blackish, gentle,
mellow, and tender soil, and such a one (says he) is determined to be best,
both for Tillage, and work, because by Tenera is intended a soft and pliable
earth.

Production.
And amongst other signs of a good soil, he enumerates Wall-wort, Skeg-trees,
Brambles, the little wild bulbous Crow-toes, (called our Ladies Cow-slip)
Clauer-gras, Trefoile, Melilot, Oaks, Wild Peare-trees, and Wildings, to
betoken a temper appropriate for Wheat and White-Corne. And this is the more
probable, if they be plentiful in number, and rank in growth. And both he and
Virgil, commend the soil to be singular good for Corn, where woods have been
lately stocked up: Aut vnde iratus siluam deuexit arator,
Et nemora euertit multos ignaua per annos:


The qualities of a badde soil are employed in the Epithet Cariosa, Barren
layer.
which Pliny explaines to import a Wood-like rottenness, viz: dry,
spungeous, full of holes, rugged, hoarie, old, and hollow.

And Virgil affirms, that the barren ground waxes pallid and whitish after
the plowing: At rudis enituit impulso vomere campus.

To these may be added salt, bitter, chauning, burnt, parched, soale-bound,
choked, cold, and wet spewing grounds.

To conclude: Characters of rich soyles.
Out of the premises it may be colected, that the best soil in general,
consists in a wel-seasoned mixture of a blackish moulde which is light,
deepe-fat, sweet in taste and odor, murling, pliable, mellow, of moderate
warmth, not stowable in the primer continent, shining black after the share,
dulcique vligine laeta, and rich in radical humor.

So much for the knowledge of ground.

CHAP. IX.
THe Nature and quality of Grounds thus laid down, Enriching.
and the present state and Habitude duly considered, the means befitting for
the Enriching of the Soil will be more evident.

The enriching of Grounds does consist in Clearing and Chearing.

The clearing of the Ground is conversant in disburthening the Soil from
encumbrances and annoyances, as Water, Stones, Weeds, etc.

Surroundings.
Surrounded grounds may be won by Sewing them with competent Draines, Tonnels,
Goats, Sluices, and such like, if the Water-fall be sufficient; otherwise some
Enginarie aid must be assistant to mount the water by Screwes, Pullies,
Poizes, by causing Vacuums, or reinforcing of Spirits into narrow straights and
Cylinders.

And to retriue the difference twixt the line of Leuel, and the Circular or
Water-leuel; to the Earths Semi-diameter ( viz: 3436 4/11 Italian Miles)
squared, add the square of the distance propounded, from the square root of
their Total take 3436 4/11: the Remainder is the difference.

Bogges.
Spungy and boggy grounds must be intertraced (corresponding to the Current or
Descent) with Trenches of some eighteen inches breadth both at top and
bottom, and where the toughness of the swarth or turffe will permit some spare
spaces, may be under mined; but to preserve all the sweard, you may couch good
coggles, al-alongst the Trenches a competent height, and the soddes upon them,
so the water will soake and draine through: And this practice is most
approouable and peculiar in mildring Clay, which otherwise by shooting and
melting down into open Trenches, would choke up the water-passages.

Stones.
For Coggles, Flint, Pibbles, Shingles, and other stones hindering the earing,
and oppressing the grain or grass, the conceit (in Ajax) of setting hable
Vagrants to earne their Alms, is not unworthy imitation, whether to the
Lime-kill, house, highway, ponde, foord, or other use.

For Vegetable impediments, as Bushes, Shrubs, Bushes. Broom.
Briars, Furs, Whynnes, Broom, etc. they being once rooted up by dogging or
grubbing, the Plot must be well plied with the Plow, and sewen some Crops
successively after: to which earing if well-soyling with good Marle, and
Stall-dung be added, they will be utterly extinguished, though they be rooted
in a barren, hot and dry soil, their proper element; but the cause being
removed ( vt supra) the effects of producing these bad burdens must needs
surcease by consequence.

The infusion of Lupine flowers in Hemlocke juice cast upon Shrubbe roots, is
said to kill them; but this is too curious.

Linge, Heath or Hather, in salt, sandy, Heath.
dry and barren soyles will die and decay, if the distemper inherent be
reformed by manurings with fat marle, rich and rotten moulde, etc.

If they grow in grauelly cold Earth, they require Stable dung, but in
grauelly cold Clay drenched with black water, Lime and Chalk work best
effects, by soaking up the superfluous Water, killing the Heath and comforting
the Earth.

Brakes Brakin or Fern, Fern.
though it cannot be cured with avulsion, by reason of the rank power of
regerminating or increase, retained in every particle of their roots, which
are so recurued as they are not possible to be plucked up without some
Remainders: Yet being cut down in their infancy, and cast upon their own
roots, they will suffocate and destroy themselves, especially if they be
therewithal Sheepe-folded and ground-fedde with ruminant Cattle.

Flags, Sedge, Rushes, Flags.
and other weeds abounding in boggie and spungie grounds, do wither and waste
away, by the superfluous moisture which breeds and feeds them, being drawn
forth by draynage; but if the Plot be pestered with Alders, you labor in vain
to euacuate the wet before the Trees or Bushes be eradicated, for their roots
do naturally attract so much moisture for their nutriment, that all the ground
adjacent will be eft-soones choked with a continual cold wet.

Thistles.
But the former weeds with Thistles, Hemlocks, and all sappie weeds cut down
in Wood-seare, and often mowne again whilst they are tender, their roots will
putrify and rotte ouer-burthened with affluent juice wanting due and woonted
passage for growth: and the Thistle stalk, must not be permitted to rest
green near to the earth, for by the euaporation thereof, it will adder-like
revive and root again.

Burres
Rich Grounds pestered with Burs, Hemlocks, Nettles, and rank weeds are
commodiously disburthened by sowing them with Hemp, Line, Mustard-seede, etc.

Rushes.
Rushes, rank sower grass, Pry and Quitch-grasse, Moss, Weeds, etc. In
waterie cold Clay, are destroyed with Marle, Lime, Chalk, Vraic, Soote,
Cole-dust, Soape and other Ashes, Shauings of Horn, Burning of Beat.

Moss.
Moss generally is destroyed with Doves and Hens-dung, and it putrifies being
turned-in with the Plow: But Bushes, and Shrubs, must be also removed, for by
their oft-droppings of wette retained after showers, mists and deawes, the
swarth or turffe is so infrigidated and chilled, that being continued for or
converted to meadowe, or grazing, it eft-soones reassumes his mossie habit,
though the Plot be not naturally prone and inclining thereto.

But a scurffie hungry Moss and small Lung-wort, dispersed over an hot, dry,
and heartlesse ground, is best destroyed with a slimie, and oily Marle.

Ant-Hils.
Where Moss, Ant-hils, and Mole-hils do abound, it is excellent husbandry to
ear it, and sow certain Crops of Oats, for they prepare all lay-grounds,
especially if they be sower and soaked with wet.

And for Ant-hils I have observed a rich increase of Oats (in an indifferent
soil) sown in the very mould of the hills (being many and great) castabroad
and well harrowed without plowing-vp the plain turffe, the summer season
proouing not too dry.

The quartering of the sweard of Ant-hils, casting their ballas't, and playning
their Plots for pasture, are so frequent and approved, as there needs no
demonstration.

Wild Oats pestering and pilling of Tilthes, are best destroyed by Summer
fallowings. Oats.


And so much for Clearing of Grounds.

CHAP. X.
THe Chearing of Grounds consists in the curing of their infirmities, Chearing.
inherent naturally or by acquisition, and in the refection, and refreshing
their weak and languishing virtues.

Clayes and all grounds distempered with cold and moisture, are cured and
cherished with stable-dung, Cold and moist.
Doues-dung, folding, burning, lime, soote, iron sinders of the furnace beat
small and sown thin, and with Coal, Fern, and Soape-Ashes.

Barren hot sandy-soyles, and hot dry Earth producing parched grass and
dwarffie Moss, Hot and dry.
do crave stal-dung, street-soyle, pond-mudde, rich mould, fat marle, Mawme or
Riuer-slubbe, scowrings of hedge-rowd Ditches, slimie or moorish earth or
Murgeon to help all defects.

And Virgil says, -- Arida tantum
Ne saturare fimo pingui pudeat sola:


Nor is the sheepe-folding and foddering, and the Compost of putrified Henbane,
Hemlockes, leaves of Apple Trees, willowes, etc. of less efficacy.

Brittle and fickle Mould of mean temperature twixt hot and cold, Brittle
Mould.
is best soyled with well rotted horse-dung.

Spewing.
Spewing grounds ouer-soaked with sower moisture are well relieved by being
sown with Oats, for by their arifying and drying quality they suck out and
consume that noisome humor.

Boggie.
Boggie and spungie grounds are not a little settled, fastened and firmed by
frequent ouer-flowing them with Fords or Land-flouds, A Paradox.
affording a fat and slimie substance or slubbe.

Stiffe-Clay.
The stiff cold Clay craves Ashes, especially of roots stocked up, Chaulke,
Sea-sand, Malt dust sown thin on the tilth, lime incorporated with
Stable-dung, salt.

Soal-bound.
Crust-clung and Soale-bound soyles crave Caruage for pressed and peculiar Jail
delivery, this lightens and loses the soil, and enlarges and prepares way
to the operation of the radical humor, and consequently serves in lieu of
Compost.

Chapping.
Chapping grounds, chinking, or chauming with Cranies are cured, and stiffe-cold
spuing grounds, are admirably relieved and fertilized, by burning the stubble,
fegge, or turffe; whether that by closing up the Chinks, it auerts the
extremities of wet, wind, frost, and Sun, whereby the seed might be
suffocated, blasted, starued or parched, or the soil distempered; Or that it
exhales and purges forth, and euaporates al hurtful and pernicious humors; Or
that it pinguifies the soil, and imparts to the seed some secret nutrimentiue
power; Or that by stirring up the native heat of the Earth, it reuiues the
radical and vliginque humor, and by opening and enlarging the obstructed
passages, and veins, gives entrance to the airie spirit, and juice that
quickens the grain: Saepe etiam sterileis incendere profuit agros,
Atque leuem stipulam crepitantibus vrere flammis:
Sieve inde occultas vires, and pabula terrae
Pinguia concipiunt; sieve illis omne per ignem
Excoquitur vitium, atque exudat inutilis humor;
Seu plureis calor ille vias, et caeca relaxat
Spiramenta, nouas veniet qua succus in herbas:
Seu durat magis, and venas adstringit hianteis,
Ne tenues pluuiae, rapidiue potentia Solis
Acrior, aut Boreae penetrabile frigus adurat.


But generally all grounds, be they never so barren, are much bettered by
burning the dried heaps of the turffe or swarth delued, howed, pared, or
plowed up and dried, and after spread all over the excoriated Tilth, whether it
work as aforesaid, or that according to Pliny, it burns up and destroies the
Seminary of grass and weeds, which would rob and deprive the soil of the
rich Juices and virtues which should feed the grain.

And the excellent effects derived from this Beat-burning, Denshiring.
have brought the same into such approoueable request in Devonshire, that of
the frequent use and fruitful practice thereof in those parts, the name of
Denshiring deduceth the original. Meddowe


Sommer-cating does greatly enhearten weak Meadows, and restore their decaying
heat and vigor impeached by yearly mowing.

In the North of Ireland, Kreatings.
they do with much conuenience, by kreating and shifting their Boolies from
seed-fur til harvest be inned, both depasture and soil their grounds, and
preserve their grain from destruction by their cattle, and them from the
Wolf and Wood-kerne.

And the sowing of the seed of Trefoyle, or Clauers, Sowing of Seeds.
Melilot, Prunel, Milfoyle, Ribwort, Septfoile, Cinquefoyle, etc. Mixed with
Murling Mould, does much enrich Meddowes and Pastures both in Forage and
Fenage.

Sea-sand diffused amongst infertile Tilthes, Sea-sand.
infuses animal power of such efficacy, that it produces Crops equivalent to
burdens of very battle Glebes.

And Rest to a mean layer, serves no less in lieu of Compost: Nec nulla in
terra est inaratae gratia terrae:

Also, Alternis item tonsas cessare noualeis
Ashes.
Et segnem patiere situ durescere campum.


And all Emacerated Soyles are much amended with fat Ashes: -- Neue
Effetos cinerem immundum iactare per agros.


And there is so much attributed to Rest and Ashes for enriching of soyles,
that they are numbered amongst the three things serving to increase productio^s
of Crops: Laetas faciunt segetes stercoratio, intermissio and cinerum sparsio.

Of diverse Ashes we have before (and shall hereafter) upon special occasions,
made mention for their approved efficacy in several distempers. And Pliny
reports that Ashes are in such request, for soylings near unto Po, that they
burn their Horse-dung to make them; but we are too wise, holding it
ridiculous to innouate, nay to imitate any thing not approved by continual
practice, howsoever we have authenticke records from antiquities to animate us
thereunto.

Rich Soyles.
We willingly wish the fruition of soiles parallel to the Territories of
Bi^acium in Affricke, which is so pliable to the Plow, that after a good ground
shower, a sorry Ass and a silly old Trot, may roundly trot away with the
Teeme, and so plentiful in production, that it yeeldes increase one hundred
and fifty fold, but we would grudge at the stubbornness of the ground in a
dry season, when we found it scarce tillable with a strong Teeme of Oxen.

Or we could plausibly approve the light and easy Tilage, and rich Graynage,
by Winterton in Norfolk: the Austrian soil tilled with a single horse; the
fruitful Plains of Podolia where they sow but every other year (the shaked
corn serving (like Rapes) for the second seedage) the Hungarian treble
harvest, the fertile Meddowes of Komora (Iled with Danubius) which produces
grass man-high, yet far short of the Meade under a Bourne near to
Salisbury, where the production extendes to sixteen foot.

The Meades of Interamna, yielding yearly four Mathes of Hay, etc. but we
would not with like alacrity imitate the industrious pains of the ingenious
Chimists, who by their diligent and intentive husbanding their fertile fields,
support their strangely populous Territories in far greater wealth and
plenty, then can be derived from their trebled fruitage and afluent vintage,
without their own extraordinary industry and diligence.

In rich soyles we are slack and supine, never practicing any new or invulgar
invention (how probable soever) to help Nature and fertilize our fields, but
we plod-on in the common Road of habituated husbandry, and so oftentimes come
short of that proportion which good husbands reap in a far meaner layer.

In barren and hard Countries, 1. Lime.
we are force perforce urged to some industry more then ordinary: As in the
Countries of Salop, Denbigh, Flint, etc. they fetch Lime stone four or five
miles, to burn for battleing, and Sea-sand six miles to scatter on their
Tilthes, in Cornwall, Deuon, Somerset, etc. And in some parts of
Hartfordshire (not to defraude the industrious of any praise due to diligent
devoires) they fetch Mault-dust further, and shauing of Horn above twenty
miles, Mault-dust. Horne-shauings.
to strew upon their Arable (though it be a good soil of it self) to kill the
weeds, and cheer the soil, and thereby do much increase their Crops.

In Denbighshire, and else where, they plow up the Crust of barren soyles in
thin Turffes, with a broad winged share, then dry it in round heaps, and
about September, Burning of Beat
burn in and disperse the Ashes all over the bared and Excoriated grounds,
and thereby refresh their faint and hungry sterility, to an incredible
production of Oats.

In Flintshire, they soil their sandy layers (both black and red) being
seckie, 2. Lime.
tough and wet, with lime made of a dunny gray stone, hewed forth of the Rocks
and broken with iron malls (though the smooth hard beach on the Sea-shoares
burns to a purer white) and after burning, lay it thick upon the layer,
leaving it to be slecked with the next shower, by which being dissolved and
then intermedled by the plow with the soil, it puffie-lights and party colors
the same, and produces diverse rich Crops; The use thereof is also well approved
for their Claies in thinner quantity: but they teasil their perring wild sand
with stall dung.

Slecked Lime.
About Workensope in Nottinghamshire, their best Compost is slecked Lime (six
quarters to an Acre) sown upon the Tilth, for two Crops, for Winter corn in
Summer, the other contrary, and this gives good increase, not so much through
the imparture of any fastening faculty, as by fastening the wild loose sand
of their light, hot, and red layers: And though the small show of winter
verdure gives wanne hope, yet his fair May-florish reviues the drooping
spirits of the doubtful and wavering experimenter, with full assurance of a rich
vesture for harvest.

The quantity of Compost.
And generally for the quantity of dung, it is held best to Manure often and
little, for over dunging burns away the heart of the soil.

The better the soyles are, the less Compost they crave, but grounds not
dunged grow cold and weak, howsoever some are so battle in fertility, that
their ranckenes cannot with continued tillage be sufficiently abated; as the
Territories of Tacape mentioned by Pliny.

But, to speak somewhat of the qualities of Compost, there are diverse kinds
of dung, The quality.
and sundry opinions touching their goodness and efficacy.

Marcus Varro attributes the chief esteem to the dung found in the Bartons of
mewed Blacke-birdes, Birds.
both for tillage and forage.

Pullen and Landfowle are commended for their dung, but all water foul
rejected. Poultry.


Columella commends Pidgens dung, Doves.
and with us it carries chief pre-eminence for due prizall of worth.

Many give the first place to man's excrements (the Ballast of Ajax) but the
excessive heat thereof would be qualified and abated with the sweepings,
parings, Ajax.
and filth of house floares.

Some prefer men's Urine, when hide-haire has been soaked therein, with Lime
in a Tanne-fat, others commend the Urine mixed with water.

Diverse affirm the Asses dung to be best, most prepared, Ass.
and presently fit for the earth (whereas other dungs require time to putrify)
but Pliny is contradictory.

But for general approouement, the Treddles of Sheep and Goats may pass for
current. Sheep.


Next follows the dung of Neat, Neat and Horses.
then of Horses and Mules.

The Ordure of Swine is current with some for good Compost, but it seems by
Columella, Swine.
that it best fits the Asse-pasture, whose forage is Burres, and worse
baggage, but doubtless the immoderate heat thereof burns up the radical
humor of the soil. Lime


For Lime I have spoken sufficiently before of the Modern use thereof, nor was
it in less request amongst the Heduans and Pictones for fertilizing their
fields.

Cato prescribes an Artificial Compost of Litter, Compost. Artificial.
Lupines, Chafe, Bean stalks, Leaves and Branches of Mast-holme, and Oaks
laid to putrify.

Optimum Stercus.
But as Oculus Domini saginat equum, so daily experience approoues Domini
Vestigia to be Stercus optimum.

Vegetables.
Dane-wort, Hemlocks, dead-leaues, ranck-weedes, Fern mowne in August,
Sea-weedes etc. withered, cast on Tilthes and foulded with sheep, do very
much profit. And no less being cast into the Cratch-yard all Winter, and
bestowed on the fallowes next September and October.

Vraic.
And Vraic or Orewood, ( Alga Marina) is diversely applied for soyling. In
Ireland they rot it in great heaps, from Summer to Summer, and then cast it on
their Tilthes for two or three Crops.

In Anglesey, they plow it in without putrefying for two Crops in any soil.

In the I Will of Gersey, they dry the weed for fuel, and with Ashes fertilize
their fallowes no less then with Marle.

In Cornewal they use both Orewood, Sea-sand, and Sea-flubbe for soylings,

Sata.
The very fruits of the earth being sown do serve well for batling, as
Buck-wheat or Brancke, Pease, Vetches, Beans, Fasells, Madder.

Sic quoque mutatis requiescunt faetibus arua. And Columella says, Medica
agrum Stercorat.

Lupines.
The sowing of Lupines is no less approved for bettering the Tilth, but
especially if they be turned in with the Plowe, and so left to putrify, about
their flowring.

And because white corn is commonly a soaker of the soil, the Poet counsels
to sow it after Pulse and fatning grain.

Aut ibi flaua seres mutato sidere farra
Vnde prius laetum siliqua quassante legumen,
Aut tenueis faetus viciae, tristisque lupini
Sustuleris fragiles calamos, Syluamque sonantem.
Saffron.
Nor is Saffron inferior to fatning grain, insomuch as their bulbous roots do
so enrich the ground, that after three years continuing the same with Saffron,
(as Master Camden affirms) at the rate of eighty or one hundred pounds new
(but twenty dried) upon an Acre, the soil about Saffron Walden, produces great
store of Barley, for some eighteen years without Compost, and then again
refuses not his former fruit. Pillars of the soil.


But Wheat, Barley, Woade, Vetches, Fenigreeke and all Pulses, plucked up by
the roots, are great impairers and soakers of the soil: And Line, Poppy, and
Oats do burn and pill the Tilth. Solo virus Ciceris and Lini; the one with
his salt, and the other with his hot quality. Tremelius. The Poet.

Vrit enim lini campum seges, vrit auena,
Vrunt lethaeo perfusa papauera somno.
And Theophrastus says, that Oats by their dryness and multiplicity of
roots, do arifie and extenuate all Soyles.

And in this place it shall not be impertinent, Marle.
to make some mention of Marle, since the good approoument both of the ancient
and modern use thereof is such, as may justly challenge to be had in no mean
esteem for manurings.

Pliny affirms that there are but two kinds of Marle in Nature, viz. either
hard and churlish, Two sorts of Marle.
or gentle and fat, and these are tried by the hand: and both for grain and
grass (though we say Marle kills both weeds and grass in arable) held in
good request.

And the various sorts of Marles, found out by inuentiue wits, do all of them
fall under the two former kinds, whether they be white, red, Columbine, stony,
Sandy, Clay-soyle, etc. or what others. Leucargilla.


The white Clay or Marle is fat, sharp and mordant and yet the best. It is
used for moist cold grounds in Magara, as our Chaulke with us.

And the white Chaulkie Clay, Tripela.
used by Gold-smithes lies deep in Britain, and lasts for soyling eighty
years.

The Fullers Chaulky Clay mixed with a viscous and fattish Earth, Gliscomargon.
is another white Marle, and is better for grain then for grass, yet,
howsoever it suppresses weeds and grass in corn (as all Marles do) the
Tilthe, after harvest be inned, grows so growthsome that it yeeldes an
after-math, for Crowen Hay.

This Marle continues the soil in good plight thirty years, but if it be
laid on over thick it choketh the ground.

Capnumargos.
The light red Marle intermingled with some stony gritte full of Sand,
fertilizeth both Tillage and Forage for fifty years.

In Anglesey they approved red Marle, and in some places white, to refresh and
give life to the spent and tired Glebes.

Columbine or Pidgeon Marle, lies in lumpes and cloddes, Pelias.
but with Sun and Frost, it resolves and cleaues into thin slakes or
flakes, and serves both for corn and Hay.

In some parts of Ches-shire, they bestow forty loades of Doue-discoloured
Marle upon an Acre, The quantity.
and this being Frost-mellowed and spread abroad, dissolues and incorporates
with the Glebe, and so fattens the Sandy and hungry Soil, that it repaires the
charge of three or four pound, with rich increase for twelve or sixteen
years. Insomuch, as to farm this wel-nigh worthless ground, they will Marle,
Till, and Seed it for half the increase: And they let and set such Marled
grounds, under twenty years at an incredible rate of moneys in hand.

Stony Marls.
Stony and Grauelly white Marle, found amongst Springs and Fountains, causes
infinite fruitfulness though it be rough, but if it be laid on too thick, it
parches the very ground.

And Sandy Marle serves (for want of other) chiefly in cold moist and weely
grounds. Sandy Marle.


The dry Marle sorts with moist Soyles, and fatty Marle hits the dry and lean.

For Soyles of middle temperature it skils not whether you use the White
Gold-smithes Chaulke, or the Columbine Marle.

But generally most Marles, (says Pliny) crave to follow the Plow, that their
medicinable virtues and substance may the sooner and more greedily be attracted
and received: and a medly of dung were not amiss, to correct the ouer-rough
hardness of maine Marles.

The Vbians enrich most fertile grounds, with any earth dug from three foot
depth, and lay it foote-thick for ten years.

At Chatmosse in Lancashire, their vliginous and soaked Mosses do recompense
their mean air with unctious Turffes, Wood for work, fuel and Candel and
fat Marle to manure their Soyles.

And were we as judicious in invention, or industrious in imitation of the
diligent, as we are supersticious in plodding in habituated and accustomed
courses of husbandry, we would endeavor (all idle pretenses abandoned) to make
several Soyles serve interchangeably, Intersoilings
each to other in true validity of Compost, by inter-soyling or seasoning the
one with the other.

As Gravel and Chaulke, Clay and Sand, So light and sad, tough and friable,
hot and cold, battle and barren, etc. -- Yet Pliny says it is a mere folly
and wast expense to lay fat earth upon lean and hungry, or dry light and
thirsty upon over moist and fat.

But land-flouds, Waterings.
fat Rivers and Gusts of water participating of a slimie and muddy substance,
induced and brought into Meddowes and pastures in the spring by draines, dams,
inuersions from town ditches, sewers, ways, streets Tilthes, do very much
comfort and revive them.

So Virgill: -- Huc summis liquuntur rupibus amnes
Faelicemque trahunt limum.


Also, Et cum exustus ager morientibus aestuat herbis
Ecce supercilio cliuosi tramitis vndam
Elicet: illa cadens raucum per leuia murmur
Saxa ciet, scatebrisque arentia temperat arua.


The River. Nilus.
So the Egyptian Soil (though it be a black and battle layer) deriues the
abundant fruitfulness from the River Nile, whose inundation supplies the want
of rain, and feeds and fattes the Earth with the slime and mud left behind it.

But I shall be taxed for this tedious penning of those petty experciments, and
therefore I will omit to speak of the parti^ular bestowing of Salt, Soote,
Ashes and Powder of Horns, Oistershels, etc. the infusion of Lupine flowers,
Wine Lees, and the like, and so much the rather because their cost or scarcity
derogates from their goodness in efficacy.

This may therefore serve for chearing of grounds, and consequently for
enriching of the soil.

CAP. XI.
Rectifying.
THe Rectifying of Production, is accomplished by bestowing the grounds to
purposes, suiting their appropriate Natures with due regard to the Sympathy
and Antipathie, between Seeds and Soyles, Plants and Plottes.

Sand.
The great fast Yellow Sand, is not unfit for Grain The close Sand with some
earthy mixture is good for Grazing; The White and dry for Woods and Wild
fruits; But a loose and light Sant swords slow and thin, yet with rest and
lecking summers it yields good Corn:

More particularly:

Wheat craves a fat Clay (and dry to make it hard and compact) and durty
Seedage. Grain.


Barley loves a mellow Clay and a dustie March. Barley.


Rye suits with a Sandy soil and drownes in the hopper. Rye.


Beans look for a strong moist Clay, Beans.
if you expect stiff ware and great Burdens.

Pease press for a putryfied Clayie mould of mean strength.

Vetches are fruitful in Creachie Countries.

Lentills like well of a lean and vntilde Sandy Soil and a dry season.

Lupines love dry Sand and Gravel and need no Plow.

Oats do well in a lean dry Clay, though they peele a better and prepare a
moist.

But for rough dry and barren soyles Buck-wheate is best to fill the measure
and manure the field.

Spelt-corne in a fat moist layer degenerats from bad to better viz. in three
years space to Wheat.

Tare, Cich and Mill love moisture, this with looseness, that with fatness,
the first with leanness.

Pannicke is pleased with a lean grauelly or stony Earth, so it be light and
moist.

Medica in putri solo hyeme decocto and stercorato vno satu amplius trecentis
annis durat. Plinius.

Rice requires to be sown in a fennye and waterish layer.

Saffron joys in a free Chaulkie or red sandy soil, indifferently husbanded,
but manured with Neats and Doves dung.

Woad and Blaunch would have a strong ground, and this brooks well the
roughness, yea in the coldest clime, but the other must have it in good plight.

Commin couets a layer that is fat, hot and putrified.

Hollie, Worme-wood or Wormeseede, loves both labor and a hot clime.

Caruwaies crave a good clean and manured ground.

Anni-seede must have a black rich mellow-mould, or a battle and well-dunged
earth: and those and other early sown seeds, do need a thin strowing of
Horse dung to rebate the force of frostie coldes.

Mustard multiplies well in a plot repleat with grauelly rubbish, but it would
be moist and battle; and well tilde also for the whitish seed.

Rapes require a broken-vp lay and a rich layer.

Hemp looks for a fat moist labored land plowed plain and deep.

Line loves a mean depth, but a very fine light, gentle and fat mould, yet a
lean layer refines it, and Pliny commends Gravel.

Roots.
Roots require fat, clean, loose and light grounds, as Potatoes, Earth-nuts,
Turnips; and this in sandy layers, grows more sound, firm and delicious.

But clay produces sound, dry, delicate and large-Parseneps, and enlarges the
Parslies Root.

Onyons, Chiballs and Chiues thrive well in a red short, murly and moistish
earth.

Garlic delights in a dry vndunged but labored ground.

Sowbread likes both labor and Compost: so does Teasell with flattes two foot
and an half deep.

But large and long-rootes must also have their layer deep and well dunged in
the bottom, if you would enlarge their growth: as for these Meateable Roots,
Parsnep, Carrot, Skirrot, Radish, Goates-beard, Caruwaies, Mirrhis.

And the like for Medicinable Roots, as Endive, Succory, Scammony,
Aristolachia.

But if you intent a plot for seedage, let their beds be incorporated in a
medley of mould and dung.

Liquerice runs down with straight smooth roots in a light loose battle and
clean labored bed of 4. or 5. foot depth and breadth well manured
withstal-dung and Columbine Marle.

Madder respects not so much the strength of the ground so it be light moist
sandy free well-dunged and dug 6. foot deep and broad.

Eringoes shoot forth long roots to a large but shallow extent, in a rough
dry sandy and stony shore.

But generally strong and long roots never Sympathize with firm hard and
solid soyles; nor the fibrous and flender with light and loose layers.

Artichokes, Beetes, Beans of Egypt prove best in fat moist and labored
plots. Olera.


The fat Ground for Phaselles or Kidney Beans and Carduus Benedictus, with
moderate warmth for Corianders Mandrake and Balm, with labor for Spikenarde,
with moistness and lightness for Lettice and Purslaine, with spunginesse and
cleanness for Asparagus, with closeness for Basil.

The Coley-florey, Rape-cole, Muske-melon, Cucumber, Gourd, Pumpion,
Thorne-Apple, Apples of Love, Spinnage, Arach, Sun-flower, etc. must have
horsedung labor and a fat layer.

Leekes look for a loose, plain and battle plot.

The meanly fat with dunging and digging, for Cole-worts, and Cabbage.

Sage is suited with cold clayie Earth.

The lean layer for Asarabacca, Time, Cammamile and dry for all, stony for two
last, with rubbish for Capers and Orobus.

The stony gravel gratifies Fennel.

Rubbish with fine dry earth is a repast of best relish for the Rose, if rough
brickie and hot, for Rue. Herbs.


The rough dry and barren for Plowmans Spikenard.

Rough lean layers suite both Sauouries.

The Chalice or Chin-cough Moss creeps along the barren dry grauelly ditch
banckes.

The dry earth for Peionie, with sand for Paunces, sand and stones for
ground-Pines, Mullein, Egrimony and (if grauelly yellow) for Neuewes.

Dry stony layers are destinate to white Saxifrage, Bugle, Lauender.

Rosemary and Iesamines rampe up in a rotten earth, mixed with rubbish or broken
tiles and bricks.

The moist layer for Conuall-lillie, Peruincle, Bistorte, Orpon, Pimpernel and
meanly fat for Mints and Calamint, with compost for Chiruill and (if old) for
Margerom, if battlef or Dragons, and Liuerwort, if stony for Hart's-tongue, if
labored for Peniroyall, if light for Endive and Succory, if cool for Muncks
Reubarb, and Betony, if stony and sandy for Parsley, according to the Etymology.

The Fenny waterish Soil by lakes and Pooles fits Comfrey, Tornesele,
Butter-Burre, Marsh-Mallow, Clownes Wound-worke.

The Boggie, Sandy and Sunny plot, suits with Sun-dewe, Marsh Whorts.

Spungie low grounds are good for Hops (so is a crumbling fenny layer)
vntrencht and wet for the Ozier-Hope which will parrallell the profit of the
best Wheat in a rich soil of equal extention.

The Knot-berries and Cloud-berries climb and clad the tops of Moutanous fells.

Marigolds, Clary, Melilot, Spoone-wort content neither for place, clime or
layer.

Trees.
And all soyles are acceptable to Burrage, Buglosse, Violet.

The Apple asks a fat moist mould, black and Ashcolored.

Pears, Peaches, Wardens, a good clay.

Plumbes press for a loose layer,

The Apricot, a hot sand, the Cherry a cooel and moist with some mixture of
clay.

The moist plot fits the Ash, Agnus Castus, Tamariske Quince, Service.

The Gravel if moist is best (and sand not amiss) for the Elm, if ston for
the Almond.

The Chaulke layer for Juniper and Yew, though this brook a light barren soil.

Knee-holme thriues in a rough, dry barren earth.

The stony solid Clay is for Fig Trees.

The black soft soil for Chestnuts.

Philberds, love dankish places, but Walnuts hate them, and wish a hot soil
though mean in fatnes.

The Medlar and Corneill contend for a sand and fat crust.

The sandy nitrous soil serves best for Dates: Sandy, light, lean and brittle
for Mirrh and Myrtle: but these brook no cold Regions.

Pome-granates, press for Compost and hot Countries.

The Bay and Mulbery, beg a temperate air, and this earnes after fat
manurings, the other rests satisfied with a lean layer, so that it be solid.

The mountanous hills, delight the Almond, Service, Fur, Larch.

The Quince joys in the Plains, so does Beech, though Birches keep the
Hills.

But the Indian Moly replenishes the lowly Vales. Sun.


Diverse Plants covet to bath in Sunny rays, as the Fig, Apricot, Peach,
Plumbe, Quince, Cherry.

All whcih produce more delicate fruits being spread upon a South wall, to
shield them from Northern injuries, and reflect the Sunne-beames.

Nor do many Herbs with less pursuit of affection, press for the Suns
enlifening comfort, as the Peiony, Goates-bearde, Sothernewood, Rue, Fennel,
Lauender, Isope, Mints, Saffron, Carnations, Pinkes: Also Roses, Hoppes, Time,
Spikenerd, Sage, the great Sun flower and the Ozier.

But Turnesol with opposite eager eye al daylong gazes in Titans face nere
daunted with his eye-dazing luster according to the Poet: Herba velut Clitie
semper petit obuia solemn: contrary to the Pudifetan which droops by day, etc.

In aprico quide^ aere multa faelicius viv unt, quae densa et crassa consistunt
substantia, quoniam sole, ad calore^ lentum suum excitandum, and adducendum
indigent. But the shady reposure refreshes the Bay, Tamariske, Red Winter
Cherrie, Liuerworte, Hart's-tongue Betony, Shade.
Margerom, Smallage, Asarabacca, Sowbread, Auens, Dragons, Mandrake, Peruincle,
Orpin, Pimpernell, Basil, Strawberries, Louage, Spreading Time, Garden
Cresses, Cum multis alijs quorum tenuis and subtilis facultas nimia aeris
tenuitate dissipatur and disperditur, ideoque denso optime gaudent aere.

Yet Vegetables Sympathize with plots differing in temperature from their
Natures. Sympathies.


The hot and dry subtle Cedar crowns the tops of the stony and snowie-cold
Mountains.

And hot and dry Herbs are produced in cold moist soyles; as Pennie-royall,
Margerom, Betony, Landcresses, English Saxifrage, Marsh-mallow, hedge Hyssop.

The dry Adders-tongue, Cowslip, Prime-Rose, and Teasill, joy in moist and
dankish places.

The hot and dry Smallage, Bitter-sweet, and Clownes Wound-worte, delight in
cold and moist ditches.

Nor can the grauelly cold of rilling fountains, extinguish the hot and dry
temperatures of the water Cresse, Becabunga, Agnus Castus, Butter-Burre, Gaul.

The Bog-berry retains his cold and dry astringence, and Rosa-Solis his hot
and dry causticke quality, maulger the loose moistures of their layers.

Calamus Aromaticus hot and dry craves a moarish couch.

The dry (though cold) and astringent Queen of the Meddowes replenisheth the
watery moist plains.

The White Poppy cold and moist, couets a hot and dry place.

The cold Mandrake and Sycomore covet hot Regions.

The Cucumber, Gourd, Melon cold by nature covet hot stable-dung.

So Apples of Love, of Aethiopia, of Peru and Mad Apples relinquish not their
cold and moist temperature, notwithstanding their hot regions and Horse-dung.

Peculiar Composts are also requisite for refreshing of several vegetables.
Composts, Peculiar.


Rue and Sage do battle with bucke or other Ashes.

Rosemary requires Sheepes-dung, horne-shauings brickie rubble, Tartaror Wine
lees.

Liquerice loves Stall-dung, and Saffron the same, and Doves dung.

Fresh mould meddled with horne-shauings, is the best bed for the Vine.

Lime-stones fertilize both Vine and Olives, and the drooping Vine reuiues with
the own Ashes.

In planting of trees it is good to mix Sand-stones and old shells with the
mould and dung, the reason is rendered by the Poet.

-- Quaecunque premes virgulta per agros
Sparge fimo pingui and multa memor occule terra: Spiritus Intrabit and
Seminaria Plantarum erigent vigorem suum.

Aut lapide^ bibulu^, aut squalenteis infode conchas;
Inter enim labentur aquae, tenuisque subibit
Halitus, atque animos tollent sata: Iamque reperti
Qui saxo super atque ingentis pondere testae
Vrgerent: hoc effusos munimen ad imbreis:
Hoc, vbi hiulca siti findit Canis aestifer arua.
Nitre and Oil do make Beans great, tender and sooner sod.

Semina vidi equidem multos medicare serenteis
Et nitro prius et nigra perfundere amurca,
Grandior vt faetus siliquis fallacibus esset,
Et, quamuis igni exiguo, properata maderent.
Quidam si (faba) triduo ante satum vrina et aqua maceretur praecipue
adolescere putant. Vino semina perfusa minus aegrotare existimant.

Antipathies.
But as there is affinity between Plants and Plots, so is there a kind of
Enmity and natural repugnance.

The Rose and Colewort abhor gravel and sand; nor do the Chestnut and Fennel
brook too sandy a layer.

And dung it self is an enemy to Pennyroyal, Rue, Fern, Garlic,
Flower-de-luce, Plumbe, Cherry, Vine.

Neither does Isope or Sage delight in dung or fat soyles.

And although diverse Vegetables are indifferently bestowed in soyles aires and
climes, not so precisely suitting their propper exigence and that with good
success; yet could Plots of peculiar temper be conveniently contrived, no
doubt their productions would be much bettered either in quantity or quality.
Chief Productions.


And hence it comes that we have in chief request the Heston Wheat, Fulham
Parsenep, Hackeney Turnips, Sandich Carrot, Walsingham Saffron, Workensop
Liquerice, Birtport Hemp, Kirton Pippin, Cambridgeshire Pearemane, English
Hops, Honey and Juniper, Halliwel Moss, Teukesbury Mustard, Droitwich Salt.

So foreign fruits, drugs, simples. etc, are as far famed as fetched, for
pre-eminence in meliority, acquired by appropriate air and layer; as Candy
Oil, Olives, Cipres, Zeilan Cloves, Palestine Dates, Arabian Mirrh, Banda
Nutmegs, Malauar Cinnamon, and Pepper, Stagonian Frankencense, Iaua Saunders,
Persian Bezar, Canarie Sackes and Sugers, Oruieto Muscatell, Cracus Tobacco,
China Rice, Ruber be and China-Rootes, Quito Mechoacan, Italian Sowbread,
Chauchinchina Purcelain, Prussian Amber, Venice Turpentine, Spanish Cordoua,
Malta Cottonwool, Camba Turbith, Syrian Scammonie, Norway Firres, Apulian and
Tarentinian Wool, Apulian Barley, Oats, Herbs, Melons, Lemons, Civil
Orenges, Indian Ebony and Iuory,

So Masticke of Chios, Seen of Alexandria, Potatos of Virginia, Zarza parilla
of Peru, Lacer of Syrene.

Hic segetes, illic veniunt faelicius Vuae,
Arboreifaetus alibi, etc.
Nec vero terrae far omnes omnia possunt.
Experience also shows that the Change of Soyles for Seed, is not the least
point of Fertilage; Change of Seed.
as to bestow Clay Corn in sandy soyles and contrary.

So the lean Vine is best fitted with a fertile soil, and the fertile with a
lean.

The thick and rank braunching Vine, must be restrained from immoderate
spreading with a solid and compact layer: the thin brauncher needs a battle
soil to enlarge the Dilation.

And Pliny says that in Venafrano their Vines are best fitted with a glareous
soil, viz. dry, lean and creachy; but in Betica the fattest layer is fittest.

But the exact and full knowledge of several soyles with their due and
peculiar mastering, subduing, preparing, compassing and employing, with their
several orders and seasons for fallowing, twifallowing, trifallowing and
seed-furre; as breaking-vp, stirring, crushing, setting-vp, casting-downe,
requires more copious handling in some peculiar volume. It shall suffice in
this Compendium, to have given only this superficial toutch or taste,
relinquishing the pervestigation of the secrets of Agriculture to more capable
and ingenious spirits.

And hitherto of Tillage; Ground-plots succeed.

CHAP. XII.
GRound-plots are proiectures, eleuations, and all fundamental contriuances,
Ground Plotts.
destinated and accomodated to some special and proposed end. And they are
either Internal as Vaults, Cellers, Caves, Sincks:

Or External, as Groves, Arbours, Bowers, Cabinets, Allies, Ambulatories,
Mounts, Mazes, Snailes, Cocke-Pittes, Bowling-Greenes, Moates, Pondes, Stews,
Draines, Dammes, Sluices, Iitties.

To these may be added Rampers, Counter-scarpes, Rauelins, Forts, Flanckers,
Vammures, Curtins, Parapets, Sconces, Caualires, Pallisadoes, Bulwarks,
Bastions and such like fortifications.

But I have been too prolixe in the Subject: I will be more compendious in the
Adiunct.

CHAP. XIII.
Adiunct.
Labor and Art employed about the Adiunct comprehends the Leuying and Erecting
of Edifices, and Engines, in or upon the Subject or Plot.

Edifices.
Edifices are either Principal; as Minsters, Monasteries, Churches, Chappells,
Palaces, Courts, Castles, Manor and Mansion Howses, Mesuages, Watch-Towers,
Lodges, Cottages;

Or Collateral, as Darie-howses, Conduit-howses, Stables, Barnes, Granaries,
Maltings, Mil-howses, Doue-Coates.

Also buildings of Pleasure and prospect; as Tenniscourts, Banquet-howses,
Towers, Theaters, Amphitheaters.

And buildings of Monument, as Piramides, Laberinthes, Obeliskes, Statuaes,
Tombs.

Engines are either Military; as Battering-Rams, Engines.
Sowes, Horses, Tortuses, Trepanes, Briccols, Towers, etc,

Or Civil, as Mills, for Siewing of surrounded grounds, sawing of Timber and
Board, beating of Hemp, Iron-Mils, Blomaries or Finaries and Hammer Forges,
Grist-milles, Gunpowder mils, Papermils, Fulling-mils, Shere-mils,
Turne-broach-milles, Oyle-mills, Barke-mills, Madder-mills, whether they go
with wind, water, hand, or horse.

Likewise Cranes, Pumpes, Aquaducts, Conduits, Goats, Sluices, Tonnells.

And thus have I passed thorrow the Matter, being the first Essential part of
Possessions: It follows to speak of the Form.

THE SYNOPSIS OR EPITOME OF SVRVEY METHODIZED.
SECTION.II.
Discoursing of the Residence and laying of Grounds, their increase, Boundage,
and Neighbourage; and of the admeasuring, calculating and proiecting of lines,
surfaces, bodies, Edifices, composing and tricking of Plottes.

CHAP. I.
THe Form Consists in Situation and Proportion of the Subject, Form.
and Adiunct; and in the practice thereof, the Mathematical, and Mechanical
parts are most perspicuous.

Situation, Situation.
may be said to be Resident, and Respicient.

Resident Site depends upon the settling, Primarie.
laying and lying of the grounds, and is either Primarie viz. the Maine Form
and proiecture of the Base and Body of the Soil, wherein it is remarkable to
observe, how it is proiected in Plains, elevated and lifted-vp into Hills and
Mountains, debased into Dales and Valleys, or wauing in moderate swellings and
fallings, ascents and descents, etc.

Secundarie.
Or Secundary bearing reference to a further residence of the Soil, especially
if it be arable; And then we are to consider whether it be laid in due and
appropriate position suitable to the quality and exigence of the Habitude.

Selio est terra elata inter duos sulcos.

Ridges. Flats.


Arable grounds are eared in Selions and that either Flats or Ridges.

The first is necessarily required in light and lean land, to the end it may
the better retain any enforced virtue, against the washing away by showers.

The second are either laid in lands or Ridges large and high or round; or in
Stitches.

The lands or Ridges are fittest in fat strong and fertile grounds that be
tough, stiff, binding cold and wet, least the fatnes should suffocate the
seed, or the soaking cold obtunde and dull the native heat and confound the
vigor thereof: and in such soyles it were frugall providence to spare from the
plow a grasse-balke of some competent breadth.

Stitches.
But small Ridges or Stitches are accomodated to cold and stiff ground
inclining to barrenness, to prevent constipation and binding together of the
soil, whereby the seed would sooner burst with swelling, than get free passage
for sprowting. And these Stitches are common in Norfolk and Suffolk, even in
their light grounds, and in Hartfordshire where the Tilthes are rich: and
though the Irish soil be neither immoderately cold, stiff nor barren, yet
their tillage is generally eared in small Stitches, peradventure for that the
soil is so apt to fast-matting and swoording.

Pliny approoues the best Situation for a rich Plot to be a plain declining
into the South from the foot of a Hill: so the Poet. -- Quique editus Austro.
The best Site


CAP. II.
REspicient Situation has dependence upon Boundage and Neighbourage. Boundage.


Boundage is the compassing and describing of Plots with their buttalls, metes,
bounds and Coastage.

Boundage is either contiguall or Remote.

Contiguall Boundage prescribes and limits-forth the extention of lands, by
immediate and selfe-continuance of the confining Boundaries; and is either
simple or compound, both which may be either Active, intimating that the
sensing or enclosing of the Plot appertains to the Possident; Or Passive
inferring that it is enclosed or laid in seueraltie by the adjacent.

Simple Boundage is Confrontage and Collaterage, both which with all other
Boundages are capable of diverse peculiar variations deriuable from the
diversity of the causes and occurrents observed in perambulation.

Confrontage Active may enter the Plot with these or the like Epithetons,
Abutting, Heading, facing, fronting, Confrontage
steighing, etc. Or Passive headed, faced, etc.

Collaterage Active, as siding, surrowing, balking, Collaterage
dyling, haying, hedging or shawing, immounding, impayling, immuring, skirting,
Girding, verging, mazing, couruing, recouruing, bordering, confining; also
lying, Bounding, extending between: Or Passive.

Compound Contiguall Boundage is more significant, as side-haying,
head-shawing, etc. Compound.
likewise bounded, limited, prescribed, compassed, included, terminated,
determinated, collaterally, triangularly, quarterly, circularly, irregularly,
or as the Agent. Or more particularly, as with some angle, point, corner, or
stripe pointing, shooting, running, extending upon, etc.

And sometimes this Compound Boundage implies a mutual property or duty
participable to the Conterminants, as bancking, balking, dyking, drayning,
sewing, sewaging, rilling, brooking, riuaging, foording, always confining the
conterminants with the particle Cum: And yet more specially, as head-diking,
side-sewing, etc. and the like Passiuely: and any of these may be admitted into
the rough-booke.

Remote.
Remote Boundage is requisite for retriuing and manifesting the local
proiection of Plots in supply of the defect of memory and metes and marks
contingent; and is accomplished either by Objects remarkable (invisible are
improper, though our Hollanders, will needs bound their Coast-lands upon
Normandy mistaking it for Norman-deepe stumbled upon in some obliterate deeds,
where Germany might better be admitted.) as Mountains, Hills, Towers,
Steeples, or other Edifices, Trees of super-eminence and Marks, and sometimes
ways, balkes, hedges, Rivers, pits and such like, may effect as much being
lined, rainged, rectified, opened, disclosed or cut by extention of common
right-lines from fixed or noted stations.

There is another species of this Remote or Mediate Boundage, where the Plot
extendes not fully to the Meets or Bounds described, but is intercepted by some
small Intermediall; as Balke, Mere, bancke, lane, path, Rill or such like; but
this manner of Bounding, though it be frequent, is improper and defective,
wanting that perspicuity which should give viue Validity to all Records.

Degrees.
Or by Degrees of angular production observed by some Dioptrall instrument,
whether by taking the angle, it makes with some permanent mark, or the
swaruing of the Line or Needle from the Meridian.

For Coastage as East, Southeast, South, etc. Coastage.
it is inseperably incident to all Boundage, as the most Material and
Essential part thereof, and in the recording thereof a vigilant and
circumspect care is required to prevent errors.

And thus much for Boundage.

CHAP. III.
IN Neighbourage it is not impertinent to particularize, how the Plot is
accommodated for Tillage, Meddow, Neighbourage.
Pasture, Wood, water, Fuel, Fish, Foul, Air, etc. as also the Confinage
with Champion, Wood-land, other Lords and Manors, with the Commodities and
conueniences deriuable from the propinquitie and competent distance of Cities,
Towns, Markets, Faires, Ports, Havens, Seas, Forests, Woods, Wastes, Commons,
Meres, Moors Rivers, Quarries, Mines, etc. by opportunity for vent and
intercourse of passage for Commerce, and inter-parlee for Converse, etc. with
the Ways and Venues to the same and their conueniency of Conduct, as by land
over smooth, facill and firm plains, and by water, nauigable Rivers, loughes,
Lakes, etc.

And this may suffize for Situation: It follows to speak of Proportion.

CHAP. IIII.
Proportion.
PRoportion consists in the general Model and partiticular Modulets of the
Plot, and procreats Mensuration and Content.

Mensuration is conversant in extunding the lineall extentions of longitudes,
amplitudes, crassitudes, altitudes, profundities, arches, circumferences, etc.

Lineal Falls.
Lineall dimensions are diuersified according to the custom of the Country, as
Inches, Palms, Spannes, Feet, Cubits, etc. and their composures and
graduations are from Barley Corns; as three Beere-Cornes in length make an
Inch, three Inches a Palm, three Palms a Spanne, one Span and or twelve
Inches make a Foot, one Foot makes a Cubit, two Cubits or three Foot makes a
Yard, five Feet make a Pace Geometrical, sixteen Foot make a Perch, Pole
or Lug, forty Pearches make a furlong, whereof eight make a Mile, and these are
by the Standard measure of England, tho some of them in name be but confirmed
by Custom.

But the Perch in diverse places is of different extent, Perches. diverse.
as eighteen foot in some Countries, in others twenty one, in the Country of
Stafford twenty four, and twenty five in the Forest of Sherewood.

And these dimensions are found or performed either Cominus or Eminus.

The first with Palm, Foot, Pace, Rod, Raipe: but usually the Rule is most in
request for Board, Measures
Stone Timber, etc, and the Chain for land measure.

Decimated
And to accomodate these for exact and expedite operation disme or divide each
foot of the Rule and Perch of the Chain into decimals or Tenths, and each
Tenth or Prime of the Rule into Seconds, but it shall suffice to divide the
Prime of the Chain into two lincks, with three rings between every lincke to
keep it from crossing.

The second is retriued with Plaine-Table, Cominus.
Theodelite, Sector, Circumferentor, Geodeticall-Staffe, etc. Or without
instrument by the same Geometrical grounds.

The first being accomplished by approach or contingence needs no
amplification, but for precise keeping in the Wadd or right line.

The Wadd is delineated either to a mark in sight or out of sight. Wadding.


If the First; let the Chaine-leaders Wadd upon the mark by some intermediall
eminence and at the setting down of every prick, let each man wave his mate
into the right Wadd.

If out of sight and in Champion not much swelling, To a Place not in view.
it is expedient to place two Assistants, the one at the mark, and the other
at the eminentest Medium, and then your self standing at (or directly beyond
or short) the station given, and the first Assistant erecting some visible
object, waft the Wadders into the Wadd. The like by Night with lantern or
Torch-light. Or from some eminent Mount or transcendence (beyond the mark and
in the same extension) surmounting or Surueying the whole tract, pursue the
Wadd.

But if the place cannot be brought within view, instrumentalize the tract at
Randon, the difference of intersection, found by protracting the trauerse or by
angular comparison, shows the point or degree to be pursued.

Now for remote lines the operation is produced by the doctrine of Triangles,
one side and two angles, Eminus.
or one angle and two sides being given; As to instrumentalize a distance,
first point-forth two competent stations, and from the first quantulate the
angle betwixt the mark and second station, and at the second station take the
angle betwixt the first Station and mark: Now the solution may be wrought
either by Calculation or Proiection. Calculation.


The first depends upon the knowledge of Sines and Tangents, and is founded
upon this Theoreme.

In all right-lined Triangles the mutual proportion of one Latus to another,
is such, as the Sines respecting their Angles are proportional.

But for as much as this conclusion is more familiarly found out by
protraction, I will defer, the Proposition until another time.

By Proiection: Protract or project first a line representig the stationall
distance, Proiection.
and from each extreme extend a line including an angle equal to the peculiar
angle found: the intersection of these two lines demonstrates the mark, and
the distances are manifested by the Scale.

The same reason serves for heights and depthes.

And by the continued progress of such operations the Plots and Mapps of
lands, tenements, Cities Towns and Countries are produced, etc.

CHAP. V.
Plotting.
THe Plotting of lands and possessions comprehends their Topographicall and
Mathematical Description, and Consists in Delineation and Tricking.

Delineation is conversant in pourtraying the Types, Surfaces, and Scheames of
the Subject and Adiunct. Delineation


And for exact working of both these, the Plaine-Table is most accomodate: for
the use whereof and of other instrumm^ts there are peculiar Treatises extant,
and therefore I will only touch some few Rules in brief.

Plaine-Table
To Plot with Plaine-Table.

At each alternate angle produce diagonalls for plant-lines to the antegrade
station, and so compass the Plot.

To Plot a field at 2. or more stations.

Extend lines from each station to every mark (chayning the stationall line
only)

To Rectify the Plot: diagone alternate angles. Table: retro grade the Ruler.


To Rectify the stationall line

From some competent plain, instrumentalize the level distance.

To retriue level or horizontall lines and angles in vnleuell and
hypothenusall Plots.

From 2. or more competent stations upon a plain (either natural by position
or rectified from remote) in the Plot or adjacent delineate the whole Plot.
Horizontalls
And by this Plot to give the true content, note each line with the
superficial dimensions found by the Chain.

To Plot irregular Arch-lines.

From the mids of the Chorde-extend a perpendicular to ye Arch, or project a
Triangle by producing 2. Irregulars.
Crures from the Chords extremes: a judicious eye (rectified with these
mensurations may ( ad vnguem) prick down the Delineations.

The best way to expedite the exact Plotting of mixte irregulars, and
consequently of any Field.

Plant not the Table at every Angle, General.
but to prevent pussing and to assure a just closing, extend from some few
Maine Angles (or competent stations in the Plot) Base lines (secants,
contingents, parallels, etc.) for Boundaries or deleble Plant-lines, and from
convenient distances in the same, distantiate every By, dispersed in the Plot,
and so prick forth the Angles, Curues and Deuiations.

For Delineating of Adjuncts, as Edifices and other erections, the Prospectiue
glass is facil and compendious, but for want thereof take this general Rule.

Project all Plumbe-lines in Parallelizme perpendicular to a Parallel or
supposed Common Base of conspicuous eminence. Plotting (...) Archi^^ture


So the Base of the Building proiected in due Site, the modulets right angles
by peculiar erection retain like quality in Plano ex opposito, but ex obliquo
they do alternately appear acute and obtuse. Other Delineations dependant
succeed by consequence, and the eye by serious observation of stationall aspect
may with facility give the Vmbrage: but the Transposition and fore-shortening
of some lines require more particular Rules, which with diverse other matters I
am here constrained to cut off, least this work intended for a Breuiat,
should grow unto too great a Volume.

And therefore for this time this shall suffize for Delineation.

CHAP. V.
Tricking.
THe Tricking of Plots consists in Complements, and Compartiments.

Complements comprehend the Fly or Flies, Scale and Compass, Calendar,
Characters, Colors, etc.

The Fly.
The Fly is a Card divided into eight, sixteen, thirty two equal parts in the
Limb with competent extention to show the Meridian and Coastages of the Plot.

Meridian.
Meridians are diverse ways found-out, but most speedily and exactly by help of
a Dyall, or by striking a line upon your Table, or erecting poles upon your
Plot in a right line, directing to the Cynosure or Polestarre, when it is
perpendicular to Alliot the Thilhorse of Charles-Waine.

Otherwise at the Suns first cutting of the Horizon, strike a line toward
the same upon your Table and erect a mark in the field-line: At the Suns
going down (the same day) plant your Table as before by help of the mark
erected, and strike another line to the Sun from the first point: Now
describe a Circle upon this stationall point to cut the two extended lines at
equal lengthes: The Diameter that mediates the Arch of each Sector is the
Meridian, etc.

The Scale and Compass are no less requisite, Scale.
and may be flourished with Fruitage or Imagery.

The Calendar or Index serves for a Directory to expedite the intimation of
particulars with signance of due Characters. Calendar.


The Colors would be appropriated and suited to the several Modulets of the
Plot to distinguish their Natures, Tenures, Owners, Colors.
or such like: Arable.
-- As

Arable for Corn may be dashed with a pale Strawcolour compounded of Yellow
Oker, and White lead, or of Pincke and Verdigreece.

Meddowes may be washed with a light Green by taking more Verdigreece and
less Pincke. Meddowes.


Pasture would be put into a deeper Green made of the mixture of Azure and
Smalts with Pincke; Pasture.


Heathes and Fennes may be distinguished with deader Green derived from Yellow
and Indico. Heathes.


Trees may have a sadder Green composed of white Lead and Verdigreece. Trees.


Bark, Blocks, Timber, Stone, etc. Bark.
may be fitted with Vmber and White.

Ways and Mud-wals, may have white-leade with rust of Iron, or with Oker and
Brown of Spain. Ways.


Water, Silver, Glass, Crystal, Water.
etc. may be represented with Indico and Azure or black Lead.

Seas may have their greenish Skie-colour expressed with Indico (Smalts or
Azure) White lead and Verdigreece. Sea.


And thus, both these and diverse other colors with their due proportion, may
with small practice be easily produced and multiplied; And it will suffice to
tract the Verges only of Land-Modulets whatsoever you please to signify
thereby.

But howsoever you bestow these Colors of distemper, they must be ground and
bound with Gum-water very thin and bodilesse.

And it shall not be amiss to pounce the ground with a Stainsh Grain of burnt
Allome and a double quantity of pounded Rossin both finely fearced and lightly
pummiced, thereby to preserve the Paper or Parchment from thorowe-piercing with
the Colors.

Compartiments are Blankes or Figures bordered with Anticke Boscage or
Crotesko-woorke, Compartiments.
wherein Evidences or other Memorables may be abreuiated.

And these may be contrived in Parallelograms, Squares, Circles, Oualls,
Lunaries, or other mixed or voluntary proportions compassed and tricked ad
libitu^.

Under this Title may also be rainged the Lordes-Coate with Crest and Mantells.

And these Compartiments with the Scale, Card and Calendar must be bestowed
in couuenient spare and void places.

CHAP. VII.
Content.
HItherto of Mensuration: Content in general is Couchant and Crescent.

The Couchant is either Superficial or Solid.

The first is of Land, Water, Board, Glass and all Surfaces and Figures.

But before we come to entreat of the Areas of Figure, it is not immateriall
to enumerate how this Superficial Content is diversely distinguished for Land;
as into Pearches, Daies-woorkes, Roodes, Acres, Oxegangs, Yard-lands,
Plow-lands, Hydes.

There be also other quantities of Land taking their denominations from our
usual Coin; as Fardingdeales, Obolates, Denariates, Solidates, Librates.

Four square Pearches make a Days work, 10. Daie-workes a Roode or Stong, 4.
Roodes an Acre.

The Fardingdeale or Farundell (Quadrantata terrae) signifies a Roode or of an
Acre, Quadrantata Terrae.
so that if Obolata D^nariata, Solidata, and Librata, do arise in
proportionable graduation from Quadrantata as the moneys do increase in
valuable Estimate, then must the Obalat be Acre, the Denariat an Acre, the
Solidat 12. acres and the Librat 240. vide Crompton lurisd: and Regist:
Origin.1. But we read Viginti libratas terrae vel reditus in Fitzh.87. and
Regist. Orig. 49. and 248. importing (it seems) so much land as yeeldes 20. s.
per annum.

So you shall read further 249. Regist. Centum Solidatas terrarum tenementorum
and redituum.

But for Roodes and Acres, Acrarum diuersitas.
they differ in Content according to the power of the extent or lineall Fall of
the Perch. Potentia rectae est quadratum. Et dupla, ratione quadrupla
proportione.

Yet the Surueyor, whether he be employed in Woodland, or Champion, in the
Forest of Sheere-Wood, where the Acre contains above 2 of Statute Acres, in
Corne-wal where it amounts almost to 140. acres, or elsewhere, howsoever
Customs have accrewed, must make his Computation by the standard:
Notwithstanding that the Lords Demaines (as appears by ancient Surueys) have
been measured by the 20. Mensura Mayor and Minor.
foot Pole called Mayor Mensura, and the Customary lands by a Pole called
Mensura Minor viz. 16. though some claim 18. foote^ So the French Arpent or
Acre containing 100. Arpent.
square Poles is laid-out in th'admeasurement of woods by the 22 foot Pole,
and this is called the Kings Arpent, their other lands are computated by the
Pole of 20. 19 or 18. foot Poles.

The Oxe-gang, Bouata. Terrae.
or Oxengate (according to Skene) called Bouata terrae contains after the
original repute 13. acres but we find it more or less as the custom of the
place inures, and Bouata is properly used of Lands in Gainour viz. usually
plowed.

Librata Terrae. Virgata Terrae.
Four Oxe-gangs of land extend to a Pound-land ( Librata terrae,) of old extent.

The Yard-land (Virgata terrae sieve quatrona terrae) varies from 20, 24, 30
acres. M. Lamberd: and it is not reputed in Demesne, but in Gainor, as are also
fodi^a, minera, mercatus.

Carucata. Terrae.
A Plow-land or Carue of land ( Carucata terrae, that is, quantu^ aratrum arare
potest in nouali tempore:) is said to contain 4 Yard-land at 30 acres to the
Yard-land.

Hida.
A Hide of Land ( Hida or Hilda terrae) is said to be such a portion of land,
as may be tilled with one teame (according to the several tilthes and seasons)
in a year and a day, and so Crompton and the Author of the new Terms affirm
it to be 100 acres by statute, and thereby confound Hida with Carucata, or make
them little different. Others say, that every Hide of land contains 4
Plow-land at 120 acres, and 4 Hides a Knights Fee.

Feudum Militare.
A Knights Fee ( Feudum Militare) is so much Inheritance as is sufficient
yearly for the maintenance of a Knight, and his competent retinewe with
convenient reuenewe, which in the time of H. the 3. was 15 pound; but Sir
Thomas Smith (Repub. Anglorum,) rateth it at 40 pounds per annum. But for the
quantity of land, M. Camden records it to be 680 acres or 800 acres. After
some computations it contains 5 Hydes of land, each Hyde 4 Yard-land at 24
acres.

In the Duchy of Lancaster a Knights Fee contains 4 Hydes of land, each Hyde
4 Plow-land, each Plow-land 4 yard-land at 30 acres amounting to 1920 acres.

Cantred Baronie. Earldom.
Two Knights Fees make a Cantred, 2 Cantreds and make a Barony, one Barony and
makes an Earldom: viz. 38400 acres.

But though these proportions of land do not always hold with their titles of
honor, yet their denominations continue the original institution, and
howsoever they be dismembered quoad quantitatem, Dignities indivisible.
yet the right and dignity is indivisible, insomuch as if a Capital Message
be Caput Comitatus vel Baroniae, it may not be parcelled.

And the Relief depends upon the dignity (rather then the quantity) after the
first allotment, Reliefes of Dignities.
viz. 100 s for a Knights Fee, 100 Marks for a Barony, and an 100 pounds for an
Earldom. Mag. Chart. But to return to the finding out of the Areaes of
Figures.

CAP. VIII.
FIgures with their Calculations for superficial contents may be thus rainged.
Superficial.


To areate Figures.

1. Multiply the perpendicular in the demibase: 1. Triangles.
vel Contra.

2. From the mediatie of the sides united, subduct each side severally;
eradicate the ductat of the said mediatie and remainders. Ramus.

Multiply the length by the breadth. 2. Parallelograms. 3. Squares.
Idem. lib. 11.6.

Square the latus. Idem. l. 12.23.

4. Polygonons. 5. Circles.
Multiply the semiperipherie by the perpendicular, from the Center to the midst
of one side. Idem. 19.1.

1. Multiply the Radius in the semiperipherie. Idem. 19.2.1.

2. Multiply the quadrated Diameter by 11 divide the product by 14 19.22.
Radius by 22 divide the product by 7 19.22. semiperiphery by 7 divide the
product by 22 19.22.


Multiply the Radius in the demi-Arch line. 19.4. Sectors. Sections.


Turn it to a Sector (by proiecting a Radius from each extreme of the Chorde
to the Center) then work vt supra deducting the Triangle. Ibidem.

Add the Base to the other Areaes,

Cones.
Multiply the side in the semiperipherie of the Base. 22.10.

Cylinders.
Multiply the altitude in the periphery of the Base. 21.12. In these 2. add
Basall Areaes.

Multiply the diameter in the Circumference. Or the Plains Area by 4. R. 21.5.
Globes.


1, Multiply the Basall Area by 6. 2. Duplicate the squared diameter of the
containing Sphere. Cubes or Hexaedrons.
3. Triple the square of the diagonall line. 4. Multiply the sides double by the
Triple of the side. So much for Figure or superficial Content.
For Addition, Subtraction, Multiplication, Division, Reduction, Rule of three,
etc. in lines or Figures, I will refer them til the next impression, which I
intend shortly to publish with much enlargement to the more complete investing
of the Art, with due and appropriate Ornaments.

CHAP. IX.
Solid.
THe Content Solid is of Timber, Stone, and other Bodies or Figurates, whereof a
touch in brief.

Pyramides and Cones.
Multiply the perpendicular in of the Basall Area. R. 27.71.

Prismaes Cylinders.
Multiply the perpendicular in the Basall Area. 27.6

1 Cube the crassitude; Or multiply it in the Basal Area. Cubes.
3. Or the Axis in the squared diagonall line, Or the superficies in of the
altitude. 1 Multiply the diameters Cube by 11. divide the product by 21. Ramus.
26.5. Gloabes.
2. Multiply the superficies in of the diameter.
Less then: Subtract the altitude from the semidiameter, multiply the
Remainder by the Area of the circular base, deduct the product from the
semidiameter and conuexe sphericall superficies multiplied together, and divide
the remainder by 3. Globie Sections.


More then; subtract the semidiameter from th'altitude, multiply the remainder
by the Area of the circular base, add the product to the semidiameter and
convexe Sphericall superficies multiplied together, and divide the total by 3.

To retriue the mutual proportion of Cubes or Gloabs

Cube the several Cubes sides (or Gloabes diameters) Multiply the Contents
given by the Cube of the Figurate sought, divide the product by the Cube of the
known Figurate. And so much for Content Couchant.

Of Content Crescent in a word.

CHAP. X.
THe Crescent Content is of Increases renewing at several seasons, Content
Crescent.
and thence the denominations of Aestiuall and Brumall are derived.

The first is of Corn, Hay, Line, Hemp, Rapes, Woade, Fruit, Sommer-Herbage,
etc.

The second is of Mastage, Edge-grouth, Winter-Herbage, etc.

In these Contents and Increases it is remarkable to Record their Productions
both in kind and proportion; as what and how much Grass, Grain and other
Growthes are usually reaped upon an Acre; how many Cattle such a Plot will
Winter and Summer, feed or keep, etc.

And this shall suffice for Proportion.

THE SYNOPSIS OR EPITOME OF SVRVEY METHODIZED.
SECTION.III. Capitulating the Natures and Incidents to Possessions, Tenures,
Lands, Titles, Fees, Discents, Tenants, etc.

CHAP. I.
HItherto of the Essential Parts: Accidental. Parts.
the Accidental Parts incident to Possessions are comprehended under Propriety
and Valuation.

The Propriety of Possessions intimates their particular state and condition,
Propriety.
and may be divided into Vocal and Euidential.

Vocal Propriety denotates the Properties of particulars by due Appellation,
Vocal
which is either Nominate or Cognominate.

The first is derived from the Kind and Species of the Particulars, and that
either General; Nominate.
as Vp-land and Maritime, Woodland and Champion, Molland and Fen-land: Or
Special; as Wealdes, Woulds, Plains, Downs, Vales, Valleys, Mountains,
Fels, Hills, Bogs, Bathes, Spawes, Mosses, Loughs, Moors, Fennes, Woods,
Copses, Heathes, Marshes, Meddowes, Pasture, Arable.

Cognominate.
The Second deduces deriuation from Form, Site, Climate, Object, Season,
Person, Action or other circumstance; as Harpe-Close, Mountacute, Gilden-Vale
Diffrin Cluyd, Salisbury Plain, West-woodes, Vale of Belvoir, Lammas Pasture,
Bel-Acre, Beaumeade, Nightingale Lane, Lough Erno.

So much for the Vocal Propriety of Possessions.

CAHP. II.
Evidentiall. Propriety.
EVidentiall Propriety decyphers the qualities and attributes coincident to the
Possident and Possession: and in the process hereof the Legal part of Survey
is most eminent.

Possident.
In the Possident or Feudatarie his Title and Descent must be intimated.

His Title respects either Dignity of Birth or Calling; Or Right of Possession.

Dignity.
Title of Dignity; as King, Prince, Duke, Archbishop, Bishop, Abbot, Prior,
Marquess, Earl, Vicount, Baron, Knight, Esquire, Gentleman, Yeoman,
Artificer, Labourer.

Right.
Right of Possession may be divided into perpetual and Terminall.

Perpetual is either Allodium or Feudum.

Allodium
Allodium is an entire property and perpetual Right in Possessions without
dependence; and this is proper solely to the King in Right of his Crown.

And all the Crown land within this Realm in the days of the Saxon King
Edward the Confessor are called Ancient Demesne. Kitch. 98. Book Tit. Demesne.

And these Lands in the general Survey called Doomes-day Book (made
according to Geruasius Tilburensis and Ingulfus, in the time of William the
Conqueror) remaining in the Exchequer, Terra Regis
are amongst others) recorded under the Title of Terra Regis.

Fitzh. inferres (13. and 14. Na. Br.) that no lands are to be accounted
Ancient Demaine, Ancient. Demaine.
but such as are held in Socage.

All other Lands within the Realm are called Frank-Fee, Frank. Free.
( Feudum Francum seu liberum) which is defined to be a Tenure in Fee-simple,
of lands pleadable at the Common Law, in opposition to the other, whose
tenants cannot be impleaded out of the L. Court.

Feudum is that which is held of a superior by Service, Rent or both: Feudum.
Or Feudum or Fee is a Right consisting in the person of the true heir, or of
some other that by just Title has purchased or acquired the same: vide Bracton.

And this is always diriued either Immediately or Mediately from the Crown.

The first is where ye Fee resides still in the first Feoffee.

The other is where the Kings Feudataries do again enfeoffee others. Feifz
and Arrierfiefz.
The French term the first of these Feifz and the other Arrierfiefz.

Feudum is either Fee-simple or Fee-taile.

Fee-simple is an absolute seizure to the Feudatarie and his heirs for ever.
Feodum simplex.


And though many Feudists do hold that Feudatarius has not an entire
property in his Fee, I may not conclude upon Iacobutius his insinuated
probabilities, that these Fees (or some of them) were at their first creation
temporary and not perpetual and hereditary.

Tantum aevi longinqua valet solidare vetustas.

Feodum. Taliatum.
Fee-taile or Fee Expectant is a conditional seizure to the Feudatary and his
heirs with limitation, and is either General or Special.

General, is where a man is seized of land to himself and the heirs of his
body for ever.

Special, where the man and his wife are seized of lands to themselves and the
heirs of their two bodies.

The nature of this Fee is employed by the signification of the word Talliatum
which the Normans make Tailler, and in Latin it is as much as Scindere: so
this Feodum or Ius Talliatum does abscinde and cut off the before-General
successions restraining them to the particular Heirs of Families, yet the
local possessions are usual trans-ferred from one family to another, but
Dignities whether Dative or Native are therewith neither conferred nor auferred.

Terminable Right.
Terminall Right is either an Estate for life, as the Dowagers, Grauntees for
life; etc. Or for Years, as by Lease, Mortgage, etc.

Tenant.
And in respect of these and other several Rights, the Tenant is diversely taken
and understood, and implies as well the Feudatary or Owner, as the Farmor or
Termer.

Duty.
Tenant in the first signification sometimes imports duty of Tenurage: as
Tenant by Knight-seruice, Socage, Tenant in Villenage, Burgage, Frank-Fee,
Tenens per Catapultam, tenens Nativus.

Evidence.
Sometimes it intimates his Evidence: as Tenant by Charter, Copy of Court-Roll,
Verge.

Limitation.
Sometimes it implies the extent of his estate of right; as Tenant in Fee-simple,
Fee-taile, at will of the Lord according to the custom of the Manor or by
common Law.

Sometimes it bears relation to the L. of the Fee; as Tenant in chief, very
Tenant, viz. holding immediately of his L. Mesn. Tenant Parauaile, viz. the
lowest Tenants, and most remote from the L. Paramount.

There is also ioint-tenant, sole-tenant, tenant in Common.

Tenant signifying the Termer is diuersified according to the exigence of the
efficient causes of Possessions; Termer.
as Tenant in Dowre, by Courtesy, by Will, Lease, Copy, Extent, Elegit,
Execution, Statute Merchant, or of the Staple, etc. And thus much for the Title.

CHAP. III.
Descent is the deuolution of Possessions derived to the Heir apparent from
his Auncestrie, Descent.
by unavoidable Right and Succession.

And this Descent is either of Blood or of Inheritance.

Descent of Blood is either Lineal or Collateral.

Lyneal Descent is conveyed down in a right line from Grandfather, Father,
Son, Nephew, Lineall.
etc. And here is produced an Heir General.

Collateral Descent springs forth of the side of the whole Blood or Kin; as
Grandfathers brother, Collateral
Fathers brother, etc. And in this case the Heir is said to be Special.

This Descent of Blood is retriued by deriuage of Pedegrees from Auncestrie,
Pedigrees.
by inherent Birthright and lawful succession.

Descent of Inheritance is deduced by deriuing Sequences of Deeds from the
Crown, Sequences
or from him that had Novel Fee. And both these are very requisite to be
intimated for the manifestation of the Validities of Estates, whether the right
dimaine from Heritage or foreign acquisition.

And hitherto of the Possident: It follows to entreat of the Possessions.

CHAP. IIII.
Possession.
IN the Possession the Nature and Tenure require to be iudiciously discussed and
recorded.

Eminence.
For the Nature it is expedient to notify the Eminence thereof, whether Grande,
as Honors, Courts, Castles, Manours, Seignories, Forests, Chases, Parks,
Demesnes: Or Petty, as Graunges, Farms, Tenements, Messuages, Cotages,
Curtilages, Lofts, Crofts, Commons.

Incidents.
In both these kinds diligent and particular inquiry must be had of their
Incidents, by Royalties, Prerogatives, Jurisdictions, Franchises, Privileges,
Liberties, Rights, etc. conferred upon them by Act of Parliament, Statute,
Charter, letters Patents, Graunts, or acquired and confirmed by custom or
prescription.

Lordships.
Hence comes the Lordship Marcher or Royal using iura Regalia. Vide Stowe 176.

Courts.
And Forests have their Courts of Attachment, Swanimote, Air or Justice Seat.
So Markets, Faires, and Court of Pie-Powders for Faires. Court-Leete (Law-day,
or View of Franck Pledge) Court Baron. Also Wrecks, Swannage, Warrenage,
Commonage, Piseage, etc.

Immunities.
Immunities and Exemptions from Theolonie, Pontage, Picage, Murage, Pannage,
Passage, Tranage, Lastage, Chiminage, Stallage, Caiage, etc. of all which
Tenentes Honoris and Dominij de Richemonde per consu etudinem Angliae sunt
quieti per totum Regnum: so other Honors have their Privileges, as Ampthil,
Tickhil, Follingham, etc.

Ancient Demeisme.
The Tenants of Manours holding freely by Charter in ancient Demeisne cannot be
impleaded, nor empanelled upon Enquests out of the same Manor, and they are
Toll-free for all things concerning their sustenance and husbandry, and exempt
from contribution toward the expenses of Knights of the Parliament or Shiere.
Vid. Fitzh. Na. br. 14. and 128.

Infeoffing with Toll, Toll.
implies Freedom from Custom, etc.

With Caruage, from taxation by Carues.

With Bruckboote, from repairing and reedifying of Bridges, with Burghboote,
from the like for Castles.

Foote-geld implies a Privilege to keep Dogs within the Forest not
expeditated or lawed sans control. Foote-geld.


Horne-geld freedom from tax for Horne-beasts there.

Waiues, Weifes, or waiued goods, Waiues.
import all goods and chattels, which being stolen, are left or forsaken by the
thief in his fugacie.

Infangthef enables the L. of the Manor to judge of Felons enhabiting within
the Fee. And Vtfangthef, Infangthef.
to judge, or (at least) to execute judgment of Felons apprehended within the
Fee.

For Accrewments to the L. of the Manor by Felons, Felonies.
not only their goods both Real and Personal are forfaited, but also their
lands not entailed escheat to the Lord ( Post annum diem and vastum) except in
Gloucestershiere where the lands reuert to the right heir after the Kings
year and day. Also in the Tenure of Gauelkinde in Kent, where the father to
the Bough, the son to the Plough.

Baronies infeoffed with Theme alias Them, Theme.
have power to dispose of Villains their Children, goods, and Chattels.

Abishersing, alias Mishersing, Abishersing,
implies both forfaitures and Amerciaments of all transgressions within the
Fee, and also the immunity from like penalties.

Blood-wit.
Blood-wit confers all Amerciaments of Courts for effusion of blood.

Estouers.
Estouers granted out of Woods or Forests, include House-boote, Hay-boote, and
Plow-boote.

CAP. V.
Tenure.
OF the Nature of Possessions I have spoken somewhat: The Tenure of Lands and
Tenements, is the manner whereby they are held of their Lords. Grande Cust.
Cap. 28.

In every Tenure the Confinage and Condition thereof are remarkable.

Confinage.
The Confinage shows to what Lord, Honor, Castle, Manor, etc. the Service
and Suitage (whereunto the Lands and Tenements are liable) is due.

Condition.
The condition intimates the Nature of the service or duty which the Tenant, by
reason of his Fee, owes unto the Lord.

Service.
This Service is by Hotoman defined to be Munus obsequij clientelaris; and this
must be of ancient Commencement and continuance, since it is not now erigible or
to be created (but by the Kings prerogative) as parcel of a Manor, though it
may by contract be established in a kind of Seignorie in Gross.

Manor.
For a Manor is a Seignorie or Dominium consisting of Demesnes and Services of
long continuance; and these may be comprehended under parts Essential and
Accidental.

Court Extinct.
Here note, if the Lord so dismember his Manor, as that he leaves not
Freeholders, or if all the Freeholders save one do escheate, then is he
disabled to keep a Court Baron for want of Suitors.

Non-Parcels united.
Land may hold of a Manor by certain Services which may be Parcel of the
Manor, and the land Non-Parcel; but by Escheat the Service is extinguished, and
the land comes in place and becomes Parcel in due consolidation.

But foreign land cannot be united to a Manor, Manor diuisible.
yet may a Manor be divided into diverse by Partition of Coparceners.

Nor can two distinct Manours by practice be made one in perfect Union, Not
vniable.
howsoever such an innovation continued without contradiction, may in process
of time become to be reputed one in name and use, there being no Record extant
to the contrary: Yet one Manor holding of an other, may by Escheat be annexed
to the same, and so be consolidated and become one in use.

But to return: Demesnes are all such lands, Demesnes.
as have been time out of mind held in occupation and manurance, together
with the Site of the Mansion or Manor House (called in some places Berries,
Halls, Manor places, Courts and Court-houses) for maintenance of the Lords
house.

These Demesnes were called of the Saxons (who had the substance, though not
the name of Manours) Inlandt (and by Bracton ( lib. 4.) Bord-lands) and the
Services Vtlandt in opposition, Out-landt how restraind.
though it may in some sort be restrained to comprehend only Lands, Tenements
and Hereditaments yielding Rents of Assize ( viz. original and set in
certainty) as for Freehold, Copie-hold, Rents of Assize.
or Customarie land; all which are Parcel in Service.

For the Division of Services, Services divided.
they may be all comprehended under Chivalry and Soccage.

Chivalry, or Seruitium Militare, Chiualry.
is a Tenure or Service, obliging the Feudatarie personally to perform unto
his Lord some honorable or Martial office; And this confers to the Lord (the
Heir being in Nonage at the Fathers death) the Real Services of Wardship,
Marriage and Relief, in lieu of the Personal Service, which the Heir in
regard of minority is not able to execute.

Chiualry or Knight-seruice is divided into Regal and Common.

Regal. Chiualry. Capite.
Regal Chivalry is solely confineable to the King, and is properly called
Sergeantie. And this holds either merely and immediately of the King as of
his Crown (which is a Corporation and Seignorie in Gross) and is then further
called Tenure in Capite or Chief: Or mediately of the King by reason of some
Honor, Manor, Castle. Fitzh. Kitch.

Sergeantie.
Sergeantie ( Sergeantia or Seriantia) is either Grande or Petit.

Grande.
Grande Sergeantie is where Lands are held of the King by some noble Service,
performeable by the Tenant personally.

Petit.
Petit Sergeantie is where Lands are held of the King, to yield him annually
some small military furniture toward his wars.

Common Chiualry.
Common Chivalry is that Service which may indifferently be confined to the
Prince, or to a common person; and is called Escuage ( viz. Shield-seruice)
which is either Uncertain or Certain. Escuage.


Uncertain.
Escuage uncertain is of two sorts: First, where the Tennant is Tenure-bound
at his own cost and charges, to follow his Lord in the Kings wars, or to
send a sufficient man in his stead, there to continue according to the
proportion of his Fee: viz. after the rate of 40. days for a Knights Fee.

Castel-ward.
Secondly, where he is bound by himself or his Deputy to defend a Castle, so
often as it shall come to his course or turn, and is called in this case
Castel-warde. Ma. Cha. 20.

Certain.
Escuage Certain is where the Tenant is set at a certain pecuniarie charge (
viz. 20 shillings for a Knights Fee) in lieu of such uncertain Services, as
aforesaid. And this leeseth the nature of Knight-seruice, and is in effect
Socage (though not merely. because it smells not of the Plowe) though it still
retain the name of Escuage. Na. Br. 84. Litl.

CHAP. VI.
SOccage ( Soccagium) is a Tenure of Lands obliging the Feudatary to the
performance of certain inferior and husbandly services unto the Lord of the
Fee, Soccage.
sans Wardship, marriage, Relief.

Soccage is also capable of the distinction of Chief and Common.

Soccage in Chief or Capite, Chief.
is that which holds immediately of the King as of his Crown. Praerog. 41.

Common Soccage is that which holds of the King or some other Capital Lord,
by means of some Manor. Ibidem.

Soccage is either Franck ( liberum) or Base ( Villanum.)

Frank Soccage is where in lieu of service in kind asumme of money is paid to
the Lord. Frank.


Base Soccage is a Servile kind of Tenure, Base.
and is divided into Villanum Soccagium, and Purum Villenagium.

The first is, where a determinat Service is performable by reason of the
Tenement, and not of the person of the Tenant.

The other is where the Feudatarie is liable to uncertain and indeterminat
Service at the absolute and instant will and demand of the Lord. Villenage.
Bracton. and Na. Br. 94.

Yet may a man sans impeach of freedom (in regard of his person) hold in Pure
Villenage; The person, nor the Freehold impeached.
Nor is liberum tenementum impeached to him that holds it in Villano Soccagio,
if it be to him and to his heirs. Bracton.

There be other branches of Soccage, as Burgage; Frank-Almoine.

Copyhold.
And Copyhold (says Kitchen 80) is a base Tenure, and was originally called
Villenage, Fitz. 12.

Mere Copyhold.
But (to retain the modern appellation) some of this is Mere Copyhold, and
escheats forthwith to the Lord by Felony. Kitch. 81.

And some is of more eminence, and held by Verge in ancient Demeisne,
according to the Custom of the Manor, being in effect a kind of Freehold
(though reputed Copy) and yields to the King Annum, diem and Vastum upon Felony.

Some Copy-holds are fineable at the Lords will; and some only are liable to a
certain rate, Fines.
and this is a kind of inheritance called Customary, not simply at the will of
the Lord.

But there is a kind of Customary Land of the Ancient Duchy of Cornwall and
other places, Customary.
where the Tenants have no Transcripts of the entries of their admittances;
Folk-land.
And this was called Folke-land, and the Tenants may be termed Tenants by
Court-Roll, according to the Custom of the Manor.

But where the Tenants are, by reason of the Transcripts of admittances, called
Tenants by Copy of Court-Roll, there the Land is Charter-land or Bockland.
Bock-land.
Kitch. 86.89.

For the Definition of a Copyholder, read West in his Symbol. 1. part. 646.

And for the various Customs of Copyholders in several Manours, it is as
needless as endless to capitulate or enumerate them in this Tractate.

But both mere Copy-holde may be converted into Fee, Conversion of Fees.
and likewise Fees changed from their first institution by feofment; as out of
Chiualry for certain yearly Rent into Fee-Farme, sans further duty than is
specially comprised in the Grant, except Fealty alone, which by probability is
still on foot, because it is inseperably incident to all Tenures. Fealty.
For whosoever is invested in Fee, though in the freest manner, holds perfidem
and fiduciam, that is, by Fealty at least. Smith Rep. Anglorum. 3.

And Dwarenus says, that Fidelitas est substantia Feudi.

Fee-Farme is a Fee, Fee-Farme.
and imports a perpetuity to the Inuestee and his heirs, for an annual Rent
of the third or fourth part of the Value. Fitzh. 210. But if the Rent reserved
be behind and unpaid for the space of two years, then may the Feoffour or
his heirs by Action recover the Lands as their Demesnes. Britton. 66. And land
thus held comes near to the Nature of Ager vectigalis amongst the Ciuillians.

And hitherto of the Propriety of Possessions:
It remains to entreat of their Valuations.
THE SYNOPSIS OR EPITOME OF SVRVEY METHODIZED.
SECTION.IIII.
How Possessions are to be valued by reason of their several issues, Rents,
Perquisites, Privileges and other profits, with particular respect to their
Revenues and Reprises.

CHAP. I.
THE Valuation of Possessions consists in the due Estimate and Prizall of all
Parts and Particulars Essentially and Accidentally thereunto belonging:
Valuation.
And to the exact performance hereof both the Material and Legal Parts are
very requisite.

This Valuation is either Reiterant or Determinant.

Reiterant Valuation depends upon the exact knowledge both of the Revenues and
Reprises.

Revenues.
Under Revenues (or Esplees after Ingham) I comprehend all and singular Rents,
Services, Issues, and profits accrewing and renewing to the Feudist or
Possident by, through or by reason of Fees and Possessions.

And these Revenues may be said to be Conuentuall and Incident.

Conuentuall Revenues comprize al Rents both in Esse and in Posse.

Rents.
Rents in Esse are Receipts certain or couenanted, and payable at days and
terms limited: and they are either Proper or Improper.

Proper.
Rents Proper (whether Rent-seruice, Rentcharge, or Rent-Secke) may be for
Lands, tenements, Pasture, Engines, Mils, Mines, Quarries, Warrens, Fishing,
Fowling, Wood-sayles, Heath, Furse, Turbarie Mastage, (of Beech, Oak, Holme,
etc.) Herbage, Broovage, etc. And Rent-Prouision, as Beifes, Muttons, Venison,
Fish, Foul, Grain and other voluntary reseruations upon graunts or estates
for lives or years.

Improper.
Rents Improper are where, of an uncertain and casual commodity, a certain
Rent or Receipt is by contract created and raised: as for Licenses,
Swan-markes, Profits of Faires, Markets, Courts, Customs, Tollage, Pontage,
Caiage, Cranage, Ferriage, Boonage, etc.

Posse.
Conuentuall Revenues in Posse are all issues and advantages arising of
Possessions not demised (though Rentable) and therefore necessarily valueable
by Estimate: as Demaine-Landes, Timber, Manuells, Wastes, etc.

CHAP. II.
Incident.
INcident Revenues are either profitable as Perquisites, or Parallels to
profits.

Perquisites may be divided into Renouant and Dormant. Perquisites.


Renouant Perquisites are Accrewments acquired by Increase and Casualty.

Increase comprehends all profits derived from the Pregnance and Production of
the Earth. Pregnance.


Of the first sort are Stones, Metalline Oars and Mineralles vt supra.

Of the second sort are Wines, Pirry, Cider, Honey, Production.
Wax, Bombace, Raw-silkes, Hops, Sumach, Pitch, Tar, Campheire, Opponax,
Taccamahacca, Caranna, Masticke, and other Gums: Likewise Drugs, as Mechoacan,
Kermez, Methium, Alkanet, Agaricke, Ambergris, Acacia, Lignum Aloes,
Sassafras, Spikenard, Rubarbe: Also Musk, Ciuet, Ben, Benjamin, Castoreum,
Cantarides, Cocheneil, with other Simples Fruit, Roots. And Furs as Armins,
Sables, Minivers, Lewzernes, Martins, Beauers, etc.

By Casualty are intended all duties and services that be Appurtenant and
Appendant to a Manor, Casualtie.
whether it be Capital or Non-Capitall.

Under Appurtenants, may be rainged all Royalties Prerogatives, Jurisdictions,
Franchises, Privileges, Appurtenants.
Liberties, Services, Customs, etc.

And all emoluments and advantages deriueable from them: Perquisites of Courts;
as Pleas, Fines, Amerceaments, Heriots, (Service, Custom, Covenant) Releifes,
Aids, Farewels, Waiues, Estraies, Deodands, goods of Felons and Fugitives (by
special grant) co^morant in the Manor, Forfeitures, Escheates, Wards (in
Nonage, Idiocy Lunacy) Marriages, Villains, Treasure-Troue: Warrens of Birds,
Conies, Hares, Commons of Pasture, Turbary, Piscarie, etc.

Appendant are Hospitalls, Appendant.
Patronages of Churches and Benefices (Valuable not in contriuing commodities
by Church-Chaffering, but equivalent in validity by reason of the privilege
of electing or presenting a worthy Clarke, (who must be Idoneus) to succeed
and supply the vacancie of the Church) Also Common of Fishing, of Estouers, of
Vicinage.

Dormant.
Dormant Perquisites are such things as are ever pressed and ready at the instant
command and pleasure of the Lord; as Villains and Neifes, which are always
said to be Regardant to a Manor. Regardant.
And to this place may also be indifferently referred Salt Natural, Sand,
Gravel, Marle, Earth and such other things as are always disposeable by the
Possident for deriuing an immediate profit or Reuenewe.

So much for Perquisites: Parallels ensue.

CAP. III.
Parallels.
BY Parallels I intend all pursuites of wild Game, which for moderate exercise
of the body and delight full refection of the mind, are held in private
esteem of Pursuit, or in valueable validity of the Purchase of the Pray,
equivalent to profitable Accrewments. And they are either Generous, as Hunting
and Hawlking: Or Plebeious, as Fishing and Fowling.

It is therefore not impertiment to the purpose to intimate what several Games
are usually found within the Precincts and Privileges of the Plot or Fee, and
how the Country is accommodated for Chase, View, Flight, etc.

Hunting.
For Hunting, Record what Beasts of the Forest there be, and how frequent: as
the Heart, the Hind, the Hare, the Boar, the Woolfe: Of the Chase, Buckes,
Does, Foxes, Martrones, Roes: In like manner what Beauers, Badgers, Otters,
Wilde-Cats.

Hawlking.
First for Hawlking: Fowls of Warren, as Fesant and Partridge: then the Elke,
bustard, Heron, Mallard, Ducke, Teale, Heath-Cocke, Rail, Rock-doue, Pie,
Blackbird, Thrush.

Fishing is either in Fresh-waters; as for Samon, Fishing.
Trout, Carpe, Pike, Manat, Breame, Barbell, Tench, Perch, Cheuin, Dace, Roach,
Ruffin, Eeles, Lampreys Gudgeon, Minnowes, Crea-fish.

Or in Seas and other Salt-waters, for the Sturgion, Turbot, Porpuis, Seal,
Bret, Tunie, Holibut, Mullet, Rochet, Gurnets, Gilt-heade, Base, Dorce,
Macheril, Whiteing, Hering, Haddock, Thornbacke, Codfish, Keeling, Hake,
Dog-fish, Horne-fish, Conger, Lampson, Bowman, Soles, Playce, Buts: the
Lobstar, Crabbe, Pearle-fish, Prawne, Sea and Wood Torteise Oysters, Conchyles,
Winkles, Purples, Cutle, Callough, Cockles, Muskles, Shrimps. Also for the
Sea-Pike, Carpe, Troute, Breame, Tench.

Fowling may be for the Bittour, Curlewe, Mallard, Fowling.
Pyntayl, Stockard, Duck, Teal, Snipe, Shouelar, Stork Cormorant, Gaunt,
Sheldrake, Cob, Olive, Puffin, Pewet, Yarwhelpe, Redshank, Ruff or Reave: the
Godwit, Gnat-snap, Knot: Gray, Green and Bastard Plouer, Quail, Dottrill,
May-Chit, Spawe, Churre, Peeper, Grindle, Skirwingle, Sea and Land Larkes: The
Crane, Storke, Cock of the Wood, Wood-Cocke, Heath-Cocke, Heath-Poote, Grouse,
Turtill; with which the Cuckoo, and Owl, may for their delicatie be rancked:
then the Estridge, Birds of Paradise, Canary Birds, Parrots, etc.

Likewise for Hawlkes: as the Falcon, Ierfalcon, Tercel-gentle, Lanar, Lanaret,
Leto, Ierkin, Saker, Sakret, Marline, Hobby. And short winged Hawlkes: as the
Gosse-Hawlke, and Spare-Hawlke.

And this may suffize for Revenues: It Rests now to entreat of Reprises.

CHAP. IIII.
Reprises.
REprises are impositions and duties whereunto the Plot or Fee is in peculiar
liable; and they are Real and Personal.

Real.
Real Reprises are al Charges and payments imposed, whether by Custom or by
Covenant, for maintenance or repair of Bridges, Sea-banckes, Havens, Sluices,
Ietties, Wharfes, Goats, Causeyes, Ways, etc.

And in this Rank may be Marshalled al Resolutes Dechashes, Decrements.

Personal.
Personal Reprises are Services, Duties, and Payments by Tenure to the Lord or
Lords Mesn or Paramount: as Fealty, Homage, Escuage, etc. Court-suite,
Out-Rents, Boonage, Fines, Heriots, Reliefes, Respight of Homage, etc. Or by
Grant or Deed to Couenantees; as Rentcharge, Extents, Pentions, Portions,
Fees, Corrodies, Salaries, Stipends, Dowres, Annuities, etc. to Divines,
Artists, Linguists, Lawyers, Patentees, Feoffees, Seruitors, Officers, etc.

Valuation Reiterant is thus decyphered:

The Determinant remains.

CHAP. V.
Determinant Valuation.
DEterminant Valuation concludes and determines the Right and Interest of the
Possident by Alienation of the Fee or Possession.

And in this Action, since it is not Reiterable, it is expedient to retriue the
utmost Value and worth; to which purpose that due prizalls may be produced,
estimate all particulars both in Reuenew vt supra: And also Respective; as
Edifices, Heire-Loomes, Engines, Timber, Tinsel, Ward-ships, Aduowsions,
Villains, Commons, Wastes, and other things in Gross, with all Perquisites of
like Nature.

Now by opposing the Estimation of Reprises to the Total Valuation, the
Remanet is rectified, and the true Value retriued.

And thus much for the first part of a Complete Survey.

FINIS.
Brief directions for orderly marshalling of Surueyes, for accommodating of
Field-entries in Rough-Bookes, for Engrossements and their Exemplifications
with framing of Terrars, Rentals, Custom and Court-Rolls, Particulars, etc.
FOr other Instructions and Presidents requisite for methodical operations in
Surueying of Lands and Evidences, with formal Exemplifications incident
thereunto, I must defer them till the impression of the Second part.

In the mean time, not altogether to defraud the expectation of the diligent,
I have intimated these few Inductions ensuing, which though they may seem too
cursorie and incompetent, to give full satis-faction and information for the
due disposures of the copious remarkables, occurrent in a complete Survey, in
fit Symboliographie; yet I doubt not but the ingenious Practizer may pick-forth
more ample Presidents, than may seem (at first view) to be comprizable in the
decurted Passages, as well of the former Tractate, as of this Supplement.

To Survey a Manor: Out of the Series and Protasis formerly dilated, contriue
the Articles (suiting the exigence of the Seignorie) to be given in charge to
the Jury, and that in writing for more substantial and direct proceeding.

The Tenants, both Feudataries and Termors, entered, the Charge ended, and their
Estates summarily recorded, your Assistants ready, and all things prepared,
proceed to the Survey, describing Plots and noting in a Rough-booke (in Folio)
all occurrents as they fall remarkable.

And in this practice you are not co^fined to imitate or insist upon the
precedent Protasis or other President, nor abridged of a voluntary proposition
of any other judicious Method.

The alternate Pages may be delineated into certain general and Collateral
Heads for expedition, as well of the entries instant, as of engrossements to be
selected, noting all Extrauagants orderly in the appropriate parallel of the
opposite Page; so shall you avoid diffused accumulations, which would confound
and puzzle the special Head in marshalling forth particular and due
contriuances.

Nor shall it be impertinent to Kalander or Characterize each Modulet of the
Ploat with the rough Entrance, thereby to facilize and expedite the
ingrossements incident, in contriuing whereof an indigested Chaos of
observations, would much intricate you, in regard the order pursued in
perambulation, must necessarily be inuerted in the Exemplification.

Page. 1.
Tenant and Character. Appellation. Place. Boundage. Mensuration. Content
Improuement. P. a. r. P. l. Hugo Belham E. Hayed. M. Tremaine 24/5. 15.2.20 10.
Elwood. Green. VV Siewing. Th. Dewhurst. 25/5. -- -- -- N. Shawing I.
Franckish. Rent. Estimate. A. East-field. S. Shawing C. Gifford. 100 l. s. d.
l. 7.10.0 150.

Page 2. opposite.
This Pasture is proiected in large Ridges extended and declining South; the
Soil is a sandy Clay of 18 inches Crust close sworded and well repleate with
Trefoiles, Cinquefoile, Ribwort, Morsus, Yarrow, and other grasing Herbs of
good growth, with a Dayrie House in the N. W. corner of two good Bays, and a
fair Pond 7 pole direct East from the House, springing from the West forth of
a male gravel the Base of the Soil: the Hedge-Rowes are well grown and
stored with Peare-trees and Appletrees of good Fruit, etc.

1. In these entries the Tenant is both expressed and assigned his Modulet with
the Character.

2. There are opponed Residence, Species, Habitude, Crassitude, Inuesture,
Ground-Plots, Edifices (Engines) tho last 3 must also be plotted.

Now to Engrosse a complete Survey: Engrossement.
Modulize Alternate Pages, and particulate the Opposite with due observations,
and characterize the Evidences.

To exemplify the Engrossement without delineation of the Models, there is a
method to be pursued in the particular Entries (according to their Eminences
and kinds) of Estates and Evidences.

In Free-holds Record the Possident, Title, Possessions, Freehold.
Tenure, Descent and Reservation.

In Copy-holds; the Possident, Title, Possessions, Copie-hold.
Habendum, Fine, Reservation.

In Leases; Commencement, Parties, Demise, Demise.
Habendum, Reddendo, Covenants.

In spiritual livings; Site, Edifices, Glebe, Decimals, Rectorie. vicarage.
Reprises, Valuation, Estimate, Patronage, Incumbent.

Medowe, Pasture, Arable, require several Contents.

In the Entries of all save the first, the Boundage and Extent of Cartelages
must-be-recorded.

In Edifices and Engines their dimensions, matter, form, and Repair are
remarkable.

Out of the Exemplification of the whole Composition and Body of the Survey,
these subsequents may be selected ( viz. Terrars, Rentals, Customaries,
Suit-Rolls, and Particulars) and thus framed.

Terrars.
Digest in orderly composure, Edifices, Homesteads, Curtelages, lands,
ground-plots, etc. with their qualities, sites, and proportions.

Rentalls.
Compose in computable digestment all the Tenants with their Tenements and Rents
in particular.

Customaries. Suit-Rolls.
Record in fit contriuance all and singular the Customs and Privileges of the
Manor.

Inroll all the Feudataries and Suitors to the Court with their Fees, Tenurage,
Rents, and Services.

Particulars.
Particularize Qualities, Contents, Rents (instant and improueable) Perquisites,
Parallels and other Reuenewables and Respectiues, with vendible and distinct
Estimates; Reduce all Reprises to a due Method and Record the Remanet.

Sequences.
And for retriuing validities of estates, it is not impertinent to derive the
Sequences in Deeds from Auncestrie, and thereby to contriue Offices for the
Tenure. Offices.


Non-parcel.
For other the Lords Possessions comprised in the Survey, and reputed no part or
member of the Manor, they require to be recorded apart in the Infra, under the
Title of Non-Parcels: Vizt, Churches, Chapels, Almes-houses, etc. Also
Patronages, Villains, Commons, Annuities, and other particulars held in
Gross.

Memorandum.
Register all Omissions under the title of Memorandums.

FINIS.
Errata.
FOl. 5. line. 10. read Pederas. f. 12. l 10. r. Male. f. 14-l. 19. r.
Chauning. f. 26. l 3. r. Interea. f. 36. l. 3. r. Holy Wormwood. f. 38. l 23.
r. Wound-wort. f. 38. l. 25. r. Marish. f. 44.16. Cauallirs. f. 61. l. vlt
Piramides and Prismaes wanting in some Copies to be set in the Margent.


