A LINE OF LIFE. Pointing at the Immortality of a Virtuous NAME.

Printed by W. S. for N. Butter, and are to be sold at his shop near Saint
A^stens gate. 1620.

WISE, and therein NOBLE.
AMbition being sooner discovered by acting then plotting, can rarely
personate practice in study, unless the Arts themselves, which in themselves
are liberal, should (...) too curiously censured, too inquisitiuely confined.
It is an easy vanity, in these days of liberty, to be a conceited
Interpreter, but a difficult commendation to be a serious Author: for
whatsoever is at all times honestly intended, oftentimes is too largely
construed. General collections meet (not seldom) with particular
applications, and those so dangerous, that it is more safe more wis^ to
profess a free silence, then a necessary industry. Here in this (scarce an)
handful of discourse, is deciphered, not what any personally is, but what any
personally may be: to the intent, that by the view of others wounds, we might
provide playsters and cures for our own, if occasion impose them. It is true,
that all men are not borne in one, the same, or the like purity of quality or
condition; for in some, Custom is so become another Nature, that Reason, is
not the mistress, but the servant, not the directresse but the foil to their
passions. Folly is a sale-able merchandise, whose factour, youth is not so
allowedly professed in young men, as pleasure in men of any age: yet are the
ruins, the calamities, the woeful experiences of sundry presidents and
samplars of indiscretion and weakness (even in noted, and sometimes in great
ones) so apparent, so daily, that no Antidote against the infection, disease,
leprosy of so increasing an evil can be reputed superfluous. For my part, I
ingeniously acknowledge, that hitherto (how ever the course has proved a bar
to my thrift, yet) I never fawned upon any man's Fortunes, whose person and
merit I preferred not. Neither has any court-ship of applause, set me in a
higher strain, a higher pinnacle of opinion, then seuerest Approbation might
make warrantable. Howbeit even in these few lines that follow, my aim has not
been so grossly leuelled, that I meant to choose every Reader for my Patron:
considering that none can challenge any interest herein from me (unless he
challenge it by way of an usurped impropriation) whom I my self do not out of
some certain knowledge and allowance of Desert, as it were point out and at,
with my finger, and confess that Hic est, it is this one and only. By which
mark, I can deny no man (not guilty to himself of a selfe-unworthinesse) to
call it his own: at least, none of those, who freely return the defects to
their proper owner, and the benefit (if any may be) of this little work to
their own use and themselves. So much it is to be presumed, the very taliarie
Law may require and obtain. In all things, no one thing can more requisitely
be observed to be practiced, then The Golden Mean: The exemplification
whereof, howeuer heretofore attributed, I dare not so poorly undervalue my
self and labors, as not to call mine. But if I should farther exceed, I
might exceed that mean, which I have endeavored to commend. Let him that is
wise, and therein noble, assume properly to himself this interest, that I
cannot distrust the successful acceptance, where the sacrifice is a thriftie
love; the Patron a great man good (for to be truly good is to be great) And the
Presentor, a feodarie to such as are masters not more of their own Fortunes
then their own affections.

Aestatis occasum hau^d aegre tulit vnquam Temperata Hyems. IO. FORD. LINEA
VITAE: A Line of Life.
TO live, and to live well, are distinct in themselves, so peculiarly as is the
ACTOR and the ACTION. All men covet the former, as if it were the total and
sovereign felicity of a humane condition: And some few pursue the latter,
because it gives an eternity to their blessedness. The difference between
those: two is, Life desired for the only benefit of living, fears to dye, for
such men that so live, when they dye, both dye finally and dye all: But a good
Life aims at another mark; for such men as endeavor to live well, live with
an expectation of death, and they when they dye, dye to live, and live for
ever. In this respect has death (being the parting of a precious Ghest from a
ruinous Inn, the soul from the body) been ^y the Ancients, styled a Haven
of safety, a finishing of Pilgrimages, ^ resting from travail, ^ passage to
glory. Eue^ie man that most shuns ^t (and he most shunnes ^t that most fears
it) ^unnes notwithstanding wilfully to meet it, even ^hen posting to it, when
^ee abhorres it: for (the comparison is lively and ^emarkeable) as he who in a
Ship, directs his course to some Port; whether he stand, walk, revel,
sleep, lie down, or any way else dispose himself, is notwithstanding always
driven on to the period of his voyage: So in this Ship of our mortality,
howsoever we limit our courses, or are suited in any fortune of prosperity or
lowness, in this great Sea of the World; yet by the violence and perpetual
motion of time, are we compeld to pace onward to the last and long home of our
graves, and then the victory of Life is concluded in the victory of our ends.

It is granted in Philosophy, Arist. in 1. Ethic. l. Cicer. in off.
that Action is the Crown of Virtue. It cannot in reason (the light of
Philosophy) be denied, that perseverance is the Crown of Action: and then
Divinity the Queen of Nature will confirm, that sufferance is the Crown of
perseverance. For to be virtuous without the testimony of employment, is as a
rich Mineral in the heart of the Earth, vn-vseful because unknown; yet to be
virtuously employed, and not to continue, is like a swift runner for a Prize,
who can with ease gain it from others, but slothfully sits down in the
middle way; but to persevere in well-doing without a sense of a duty, only
with hope of reward, is like an Indian Dromedarie, that gallops to his common
Inn, pricked on-wardes with the desire of Prouender. It is beast-like not to
differ from beasts, as well in the abuse of reason, as it would be in the
defect.

ACTION, PERSEVERANCE IN ACTION, SVFFERANCE IN PERSEVERANCE, are the three
golden linkes that furnish up the richest Chain wherewith a good man can be
adorned; They are a tripartite counterpawne, whereby we hold the possession of
life, whose Charter or Poll Deed (as they term it) are youth till twenty,
manhood till forty, old age till our end. And he who begins not in the
spring of his minority to bud forth fruits of virtuous hopes, or hopeful
deserts, which may ripen in the Summer of confirmed manhood; rarely or never
yields the crop of a plentiful memory in his age, but preuents the winter of
his last hour, in the barren Autumn of his worst hour, by making an even
reckoning with time misspent, dying without any Issue to inherit his
remembrance or comme^dation.

Here is then a preparation made to the groundwork and foundation whereon the
structure and fair building of a mind nobly furnished must stand: which for
the perpetuity and glory of so lasting a monument, cannot altogether unfitly
be applied to a LINE OF LIFE. For whosoever shall level and square his whole
course by this just proportion, shall (as by a ^ine) be led not only to
unwind himself from out the Labyrinth and Maze of this natural and
troublesome Race of frailty, but to fly up in the middle path, the via lactea
of immortality in his name on Earth, to the Throne of life, and perfection in
his whole man, and to an immortality that cannot be changed.

Deceiving and deceivable Palmesters, who will undertake by the view of the
hand, to be as expert in foretelling the course of life to come to others, as
they are ignorant of their own in themselves, have framed and found out three
chief lines in the hand, whereby to divine future events; The line of life, The
middle na^urall line, and the table ^ine. According to the fresh color or
palenes, ^ength or shortness, breadth or narrowness, straitness or
obliquitie, continuance or inter^issio^ of either of these, ^hey presume to
censure ^he manners, the infirmities, the qualities, the very power of Life or
Death of the person. But the line of life is the eminent mark they must be
directed by, to the per^ection of their Masterpiece. All which, are as far from
truth as wonder; only it is true and wonderful, that any ignorance can be so
deluded. Another line of life is the most certain and infallible rule, which
we as we are men, and more then men; Christians, and more then Christians, the
image of our maker; must take our leuel by. Neither is judgment to be given by
the ordinary lineaments of the furniture of Nature, but by the noble indowments
of the mind, whose ornaments or ruins are then most apparently goodly or
miserable, when as the actions we do, are the evidences of a primitive
purity; or a deriuatiue deprauation. Here is a great labor to endure, a great
strength in that labor to conquer, a great Resolution in that strength to
triumph, requisite, before we can climb the almost impregnable and
inaccessible top of glory; which they that have attempted have found, and
they that have found have enjoyed to their own happiness and wonder of imitation.

RESOLVTION is the plotter and the Actor, nay, it is both the plot and the Act
it self that must prompt us how to do, as well as it must point us out what to
do before we can as much as take into the hands of our purposed constancy,
this line which must direct us to life, and make us to live.

Whatsoever therefore in those brief ensuing collections is inserted, to
pattern and personate an excellent man, must be concluded and understood for
methods sake in this one only attribute, RESOLVTION. For by it are exemplified
the perfections of the mind, consisting in the whole furniture of an enriched
soul; and to it are referred the noblest actions, which are the external
arguments and proofs of the treasure within: For as it is a State Maxim in
Policy, that Force abroad in War is of no force, but rather Rashness then
Souldierie, unless there be counsel peaceably at home to direct for
expedition: so are all actions of Resolution in the Oeconomie and household
government of a man's own particular private wealth, but shining follies,
unless there be a consultation first held within him for determining the
commodity, the conueniencie and commendation of such actions, as well in doing,
as when they are done.

Order in every task is for conceit easiest, for demonstration playnest, for
Imitation surest. Let us then take unto our consideration ^his Line of Life,
and trace the way wherein we are to travail, keeping our eye on the Compass
whereby we may run to the Paradise of memorable happiness. And first it is
to be observed, That Resolution has three branches; The one concerns a man's
own particular person for the carriage of himself in his proper duty, and
such an one is known by none other ^ote, then in being A MAN: Another
concerns a man's employment in affairs for his Country, Prince, and
Commonwealth, and such a one as is known by the general name of A PVBLIKE
MAN. The last concerns a man's voluntary traffic in civil causes without
the imposition of authority, only urged on to perform the offices of a
friend, as a private Statist to several ends, all tending to goodness and
virtue; and such a one is ever to be called a GOOD MAN. In every one of those
there is a plentiful employment presenting it self to the liberal choice for
ennobling themselves with public honors, or gayning them the truest honor A
deserved fame, which is one (if worthy) of the best and highest rewards of
virtue.

Superfluous it were and unnecessary, Of the first, a man.
to enter into the contentious lists of divided Philosophers, or unreconciled
Schoolmen, for the absolute and punctual definition of man; Since, it
suffices us to be assured that he is mainely and yet pithily distinguished
from all other created substances in the only possession of a reasonable soul.
This royal prerogative alone points him to be noblest of creatures; and to
speak truth, in an assertion not to be gainsaid, he contains the summary of
all the great world, in the little world of himself. As then the Fabric of
the globe of the earth would of necessity run to the confusion out of which
it was first refined, if there were not a great and watchful providence, to
measure it in the just balance of preserving and sustayning; so consequently,
without question, the frame of our humane composition, must preposterously
sink under its own burden, if wary and prudent direction, as well in
manners as in deeds, restrain it not from the dissolution and wrack, the
procliuitie of corrupted Nature does hourly slide into.

A man's mind is the Cicero Arist.
man himself (said the Roman Orator) and the chiefest of the Grecian
Naturalists, was confident to auerre, that the temperature of the mind
followed the temperature of the body. It were a Lesson worthy to be cond, if
either of those rules may be positiuely received: For out of the first, as any
man feels his inclinations and affections, thereafter let him judge himself
to be such a man. Out of the latter it may be gathered, how easy it were, for
every man to be his own Schoolmaster, in the conformation or reformation of
his life, without other tutour then himself.

Socrates his speech of the use of mirrours or looking glasses, concludes
whatsoever can be ranged in many words of this subject, and is therefore
notoriously useful, and usefully notable; When thou viewest thy self in a
mirror, (said that wise man) surueyest thy complexion, thy proportion, if thy
face be more fair, lovely, and sweeter then others, thy body straighter, thy
lineaments perfecter; consider how much more thou art bound by that, to match
those blessings of Nature, with the accomplishment of more noble qualities,
then others of a courser mould. If on the other side, thou perceive thy face
deformed, thy body crooked, thy outward constitution unsightly or misshapen; by
so much the more have thou reason to live a good life, that thereby concord of
virtuous conditions may supply the defects of Nature, and make thee more
beautiful inwardly to the eye of judgment, then outwardly thou could have
been to the eyes of popular delight.

In short, to be a man, the first branch of resolution is to know, feel, and
moderate affections, which like traitors, and disturbers of peace, rise up to
alter and quite change the Laws of reason, by working in the feeble, and
oftentimes the sounder parts, an innovation of folly. He can seldom be a
flourishing member of a body politic, and so a public deserving man; but
more rarely, scantly ever, a reconciler of divisions, and so a civil good man
for others, that begins not betimes to discharge his own duty to himself.
The old Proverb was, (and it is lamentable, to speak with truth, and say it
is) that A man is a beast to a man; Homo homini lupus.
but it must be of necessity granted, when a man to himself is a Monster, or
more prouerbially, a Devil.

It is said of CAIUS CVRIO, Villeius Pat^r^. lib. 2.
that he was a man most wittily wicked, and most singularly eloquent in
mischief against the Commonwealth. What rarities were here loft? (like a
Diamond set in a rushen ring:) How much better had it been for him, to have had
a duller brain, if better employed, and a slower tongue, if available for the
public good? Every man should in his own person, endeavor and strive to be
like Catoes Orator, a goodman, and expert in pleading, Fabius, orat. lib. 12.
cap. 1.
First good, then expert; For of so much richer price is virtue then Art. Art
without virtue being like the Cantharides, Plin. lib. 11. cap. 35.
whose wings pulled off, they have pretty colors to please the eye, but
poisonous substances to be received into the stomach. How easy it is to guild
a rotten post, to paint a Sepulcher, to varnish an ill meaning, is soon
resolved: Many men can speak well, few men will do well; The reason, for that
we covet to be thought what we are not, and yet continue to be what we are
ashamed to be thought. The excellency of goodness is apparent mainly in this
one point, that even those who least practice it in outward appearance,
cunningly labor to make it the mark whereto all their actions (how foul
soever in the issue) level at. It was truly observed by a grave Author, That
there was never any public mischief attempted in a State by even Atheists,
or very incarnate Devils, but Religion was their color to effect it; at least
a show of some false zeal in as false a worship. For there must be an
intention of virtue in the worst actions, otherwise they could never have
passage by any public approbation; Insomuch, that hypocrisy is reputed the
surest and the safest ground of policy.

By this appears the richness of virtue, that even such as most oppose it,
must and are compelled to acknowledge it for best. In like manner, every man in
his particular to distinguish his actions, is in his knowledge guilty and
conscious of what he does or should do. We were not borne to feed, sleep, and
spinne out our web of life in the delicate softness of vanity, or sloth;
we were not borne to trafique in follies, and to make merchandise of our
sensualities; we were not borne to revel in the apishnesse of ridiculous
expense of time; we were not borne to be Panders to to that great Whore of a
declyning Reason, bewitching pleasure: we were not borne to laugh at our own
security, but to bewail it; we were not borne to live for our selves, but to
our selves; as we were not on the other side borne to dye to our selves, but
for our selves. We must learn to rejoice in true goodness, not vain delights:
For as we cannot judge him to have a light heart always, that sometimes laughes
(for even in laughter there is a sadness,) so we must not imitate by any
outward demeanor, to bewray the minority of our Resolution, except we would be
as childish in understanding as in action.

What infinite inticers has a man as he is a mere man, to withdraw him from
an erected heart? As the temptation of a reputed beauty, the inuitement of a
presented honor, the bewitching of an enforced wealth, the Lethargy and
disease of an infectious Court-grace; yet all and every one of these (with
what other appendances soever belonging unto them) are (if not wisely made use
of) but glorious snares, dangerous baits, golden poisons, dreaming
distructions, snares to intrappe the mightiness of constancy; Baits to
deceive the constancy of manhood, poisons to corrupt the manhood of
Resolution; destruction to quite cast away the Resolution of a just desert.

Now for a man's carriage in his particular duty, what can he determine of,
since he has not more himself, and his own affections to assault and batter
his Resolution in the path of Virtue, then a world of presidents, of partners,
of helpers, to persuade and draw him on to the full measure of an unworthy
life. It is a labor well worthy a Chronicle (and chronicled will be in a
perpetual memory) to withstand the severe assault of Folly, pressing on with
so infinite an Army of followers and admirers as she is accompanied with:
what can one private man do against such a multitude of temptations? Either he
must consent to do as they do; or dissent and hate them: if consent, he is
mischievous with many; if dissent, virtuous by himself; and the last is
without controversy the best. Since never to have seen evil is no praise to
well doing; but where the Actours of Mischief are a Nation, there and amongst
them to live well is a Crown of immortal commendation.

A Golden Axiom there was registered amongst the Ciuilians in the days of
Justinian: That it was not convenient for any man to pry and look after what
was done at Rome, but to examine justly what ought there to be done. Rome was
then the Mart of the World, all sorts of every people came thither, from thence
to receive the Oracles of life (as they might be termed:) yet does it not
follow that any one man with the multitude, should run to Rome, to suck the
infection of dissolute intemperature. Vanity most commonly rides coach't in the
high way, the beaten way, the common way; But Virtue and Moderation walks
alone. It may be said, what profit can redound, what commendation, what reward,
for one man to be singular against many? O the profit is infinite, the
commendation memorable, the reward immortal. It is true the old Greek
Proverb concluded, that one man was no man; yet with their most approved
Authors, by the very word MANY, were the worst sort of people understood, and
by FEW the best. For certainly there is not any allurement could lull men in
the mist of their misdeeds, so much as those two pestilent yoke-fellowes and
twins of confusion, The multitude of offenders, and the liberty of
offending. They are both Examples and Schoolemasters, to teach even the very
ignorant (whose simplicity else might be their excuse) to do what (if others
did not) they might accidentally slide into, but not so eagerly pursue.

To conclude this point, it may somewhat too truly be said, though not by way
of discouragement, yet of caveat, what by the procliuitie and pronenesse of our
frailty is warrantable; Let no man be too confident of his own merit, The
best do err: Let no man rely too much on his own Judgment, the wisest are
deceived: yet let every man so conceive of himself, that he may endeavor to
be such a one, as distrust shall not make him careless, or confidence secure.

It follows that the very consideration of being men, should somewhat rectify
our crooked inclinations, and ennoble our actions to keep us worthy of the
privilege we have above beasts: otherwise only to be a man in substance and
name, is no more glory then to be known and distinguished from a very beast
in nature.

Presidents from Antiquity may plentifully be borrowed, to set before us what
some men have been, not as they were Commanders, or employed for the
Commonwealth; but as they were Commanders of their own infirmities, and
employed for the Commonwealth of their own particular persons. Epaminondas
amongst the Thebanes, is worthy of note and memory even to our Ages, and those
that shall succeed us: Plutarch. in Apotheg.
He (as the Philosopher records) chose rather to be moderate alone, then
mad with the multitude; choosing at all times to consult with himself in
excellent things, not with his Countrymen to give Lust, Dalliance, Effeminate
softnes a Regiment in the Kingdom of his thoughts; no not of his thoughts,
Cicero de leg. lib. 3.
much less of his Actions. Phocion among the Athenians, Iuuenal. Sat. 14.
Brutus among the Romans, are for their particular carriage of themselves as
they were only men, well worthy of all remembrance: And the sententious Seneca
is bold to say, Epist. 98.
that all Ages will ever hatch and bring forth many such as Clodius, (a man
bent to mischief) but rarely any Age another Cato, a man so sincere, so free
from corruption, and so severe a Censurer of himself.

But what need we to search histories of other times, or the deserts of another
Nation, when in our own Land, in our own days, we might easily pattern
what a man should be or not be, by what others have bin? Among many, two of
late times are justly examined; not as they were different in fortune, in
years, in degree, but as they differed in the use of the gifts of their mind.
The first was JOHN, the last and youngest Lord HARRINGTON, whose rare and
admirable course of life (not as he was a Noble man, for then indeed it were
miraculous, but as a man,) deserves all praise and imitation from all. Of whom
it may without flattery (for what benefit can accrue to flatter the dead?) or
affection be said, That He amongst a World of men attained even in his youth,
not only to gravity in his behavior, to wisdom in his understanding, to
ripeness in his carriage, to discretion in his discourse, but to perfection in
his action: A man wel-deseruing even the testimony of a religious learned
Divine.

But for that his own merit is his best commendation, and questionless his
furest reward for moral gifts: let him rest in his peace whilst the next is
to be observed.

SIR WALTIR RAVLEIGH may be a second President, a man known, and wel-deseruing
to be known; A man endued not with common endowments, being stored with the
best of Natures furniture, taught much by much experience, experienced in both
fortunes so feelingly and apparently, that it may truly be controuerted
whether he were more happy or miserable; yet behold in him the strange
Character of a mere man, a man subject to as many changes of resolution, as
resolute to be the instrument of change: Politic, and yet in Policy so
vnsteddie, that his too much apprehension was the foil of his judgment. For
what man soever (...) hend all what the former Discourse has amplified; Sene^
Epist. 128.
Namely that the only felicity of a good life, depends in doing all things
freely, by being content with what we have (for we speak of a moral man.)
This is to remember that we are mortal, that our days pass on, and our life
slides away without recovery.

Great is the task, Of the second branch, A Public man.
the labor painful, the discharge full of danger, and the dangers full of
Envy, that he must of necessity undergo, that like a blaze upon a Mountain,
stands nearest in grace to his Prince: or like a vigilant Sentinel in a
Watchtower, busies and weakens his own natural and vital spirits, to
administer Equality and Justice to all, according to the requisition of his
office.

It is lamentable and much to be pittyed, when places of Authority in a
Commonwealth, are disposed of to some, whose unworthiness or disabilitie
brings a scandal, a scorn, and a reproach to both the place and the Minister.

The best Lawmakers amongst the Ancients, Plato 3.6. and 12. de leg. and 7. de
Repub. Arist. 5. and 6. Po^it. Isocrat. in Pan.
were so curious in their choice of men in Office in the Commonwealth, that
precisely and peremptorily, they repu^ed that STATE plagued, whipped,
tormented, wounded, yea wounded to death, where the subordinate Governors were
not as well unblemished in their lives and actions, as in their names and
reputation.

A PVBLIKE MAN has not more need to be Bonus Ciuis, a good Statist, then
Bonus Vir, good in himself; a very fair and large Line is limmed out to
square by it, a direct path that leads to a virtuous Name, if a man acquit
himself nobly, justly, and wisely, in well steering the Helm of State that he
sits at; otherwise his Honors are a burden, his Height a Curse; his Favors a
Destruction, his Life a Death, and his Death a Misery: A Misery in respect of
his after Defamation, as well as of his after account.

Far from the present purpose it is to diue into the depth of Policy, or to
set down any positive rules, what a right Statesman should be; for that were
with Phormio the Philosopher to read a Lecture of Souldierie to Hannibal the
most cunningest Warrior of his time; and consequently as Phormio was by
Hannibal to be justly laughed at, so as well might Seneca have written to Nero
the Art of Cruelty; or Cicero to his brother Quintus the Commendation of
Anger. The sum of these brief Collections, is intended to recreate the
mind, not to inform Knowledge in practice; but to conform Practice to
Knowledge: Whereto no indeauor can be found more requisite, more available,
then an vndeceiuing lesson of an impartial observation; wherein if our studies
err not with many and those most approved, thus we have observed.

Two sorts of public men.
First, of public men there are two general sorts; The one, such as by the
special favor of their Prince (which savor cannot ordinarily be conferred
without some main and evident note of desert) have been raised, to a
supereminent rank of honor, and so by degrees (as it for the most part
always happens) to special places of weighty employment in the common
wealth. The other sort are such as the Prince according to his judgment, has
out of their own sufficiency, advanced to particular offices, whether for
administration of justice, for execution of Law, for necessity of service, and
the like, being according to their education and study, enabled for the
discharge of those places of authority; and these two are the only chief and
principal members of imploiment, under that head of whose politic body they
are the most useful and stirring members.

Against both those public persons, there are two capital and deadly
opposites (if it were possible) to becharme their resolutions, and blot out
their name from the LINE OF LIFE, by which they should be led to the endless
immortality of an immortality, in an euer-flourishing commendation. The first
are poysoners of virtue, the betrayers of goodness, the bloudsuckers of
innocence: The latter, the close deaths-men of merit, the plotters against
honesty, and the executioners of honors; They are in two words discovered,
Blandientes and Saeuientes, Flatterers, and privy Murderers. It is a
disputable question, and well worthy a canuase and discussion in the schools,
to decide which of the two do the greatest injury to noble personages. How be
it most apparent it is, that envy, the inseparable companion tha^ accompanies
the virtuous, does not work more mischief for the final overthrow of a
noble and deserving man, the^ Flattery does, for driving that noble and
deserving man into the snares of envy. No man can be, or should be reputed a
God; and then how easy it is for any man of the choycest temper, of the
soundest apprehension, of the gracefullest education, of the sincerest
austeritie of life; how easy it is for him to fall into many errors, into
many vnbecomming follies, into many passions, and affections: his only being a
man is both sufficient proof, and yet sufficient excuse. The eloquentest and
grauest Divine of all the Ancients, Augustine.
confessed out of his own experience, Non est mihi vicinior hostis memet ipso:
that he had not a more near enemy to him then himself. For he that has
about him his frailty to corrupt him, a World to besot him, an adversary to
terrify him; and lastly, a death to devour him: how should he but be
inueigled with the inticements of the two first, and so consequently consent to
the unsteadiness of his temptation before he be drawn to a serious
consideration of the danger of the two last? Especially as we are men, being
not only subject to the lapses and vanities of men, but as we are eminent men,
in grace and favor, in prioritie of titles, of place, and of command; having
men to sooth us up in the maintenance and countenancing of those evils, which
else doubtless, could not at one time or other, but appear before us in their
own ugliness and deformity.

A Flatterer is the only pestilent bawd to great men's shames; the nurse to
their wantonness; the fuel to their lusts; and with his poison of artificial
villainy, most times does set an edge unto their riot, which otherwise would be
blunted and rebated in the detestation of their own violent posting to a
violent confusion. Not unwisely did a wise man compare a flattering Language to
a silken halter, Diog. Laert. in vita Diog.
which is soft because silken, but strangling because a halter. The words
wherewith those Panders of Vice do persuade, are not so lovely, as the matters
they dawbe over with their adulations, are abominable. That is a bitter
sweetness which is only delicious to the palate, and to the stomach deadly.
It is reported, Plin. hist. lib. 8. cap. 17.
that all beasts are wonderfully delighted with the sent of the breath of the
Panther, a beast fierce and cruel by nature; but that they are else afrighted
with the sternenesse of his looks: For which cause, the Panther when he hunts
his prey, hiding his grimme visage, with the sweetness of his breath, allures
the other beasts unto him, who being come within his reach, he rends and
cruelly does dilaniate them. Even so, those Patrons and minions of false
pleasures, the Flatterers that they may prey upon the credulity of the abused
GREAT ONES, imitate the Panthers, extenuating, and as much as in them lies,
hiding the grossness, the ugliness, the deformity of those follyes they
persuade unto; and with a false gloss, varnishing and setting out the Paradise
of uncontrolled pleasures, to the ruin often times of the informed, and glory
of their own impiety.

In such a MIGHTY MAN enticed to ouerrule his Reason, nay ouer-beare it, by
giving scope to his licentious eye, first to see, then to delight in, lastly,
to covet a chaste beauty? Alas, how many swarms of dependants, being
creatures to his greatness, will not only tell him, mock him, and harden him
in a ready and pregnant deceit, that love is courtly, and women were in their
creation ordained to be wooed, and to be won; but also what numbers of them,
will thrust themselves into imploiment and servile action, to effect the
lewdness of desire, to corrupt with promises, with gifts, with persuasions,
with threatenings, with entreaties, to force a Rape on Virtue, and adulterate
the chaste bosom of spotless simplicity? A folly is committed, how slight
are they ready to prove it, how sedulous to sleighten, how damnably disposed to
make it nothing? Insomuch as those vipers of humanity, are fitly to be termed,
the man's whore, and the woman's knave. Is such a mighty one affected to such a
suite, as the grant and possession of it will draw a curse upon his head by a
general voice, of a general smart and detriment to the Commonwealth? How
suddenly will those wild beasts, labor to assure him, that the multitudes
love is won by keeping them in awe; not by giving way to their giddiness by
any affability? Will another advance an unworthy Court-Ape, and oppress a
desertfull hope? It were too tedious to recite, what incessant approbations
will be repeated by these Anthropophagi, Those men-eaters, to make a golden
calfe an Idol, and a neglected merit a laughter? That such a kind of
monsters, may appear in their likeness, as monstrous as in effect they are;
It is worthy observation, to see how when any man, who whiles he stood chief
in the Princes favor, they honored as an earthly God, yet being declyned from
his Princes estimation, it is worthy to be noted how speedily, how swiftly,
how maliciously those cankers of a State will not only fall off, will not
only despise, will not only deride, but also oppose themselves against the
party dista^ted.

As many subtle practizers of infamy, have other subordinate ministers of
public office and employment in a Commonwealth, to betray them to their
ruin; yet ever and anon, they like enchanted glasses, set them on fire with
the false light of concealment and extenuation. Let it be spoken with some
authority, borrowed from experience of the elder times, that men in high
places, are like some hopeless mariners, set to sea in a leaking vessel:
there is no safety, no security, no comfort, no content in greatness,
unless it be most constantly armed in the defensive armor of a selfe-worthie
resolution; especially when their places they hold, are hourly subject to
innovation, as their names (if they prevent not their dangers by leaving them,
and their lives at once) are to reproach, and the liberty of malice.

Flattery to either public persons, is not more inductious on the one side,
then envy on the other is vigilant. Great men are by great men (not good men
by good men) narrowly sifted; their lives, their actions, their demeanors
examined; for that their places and honors are hunted after, as the Beazar for
his preservatives; And then the least blemish, the least slide, the least
error, the least offense, is exasperated, made capital; the dangers ensuing
ever prove (like the wound of an enemies sword) mortal, and many times
deadly. Now in this case, when the eye of judgment is awakened, Flattery is
discovered to be but an Inmate to Envy; an Inmate, at least, consulting
together though not dwelling together, the one, being Catarer to the others
bloody banquet; And some wise men have been persuaded, that the pestilence,
the rigor of Law, Famine, Sickness, or War, have not devoured more great ones
then Flattery and Envy.

Much amiss, and from the purpose it cannot be, to give instance in three
public Presidents, of three famous Nations; all chancing within the compass
of twenty years. In England not long ago, a man supereminent in Honors,
desertfull in many Services, indeared to a virtuous and a wise Queen,
ELIZABETH of glorious memory, and eternal happiness: A man too publicly
beloved, and too confident of the love he held, ROBERT EARL OF ESSEX, and
Earl Marshall of the Kingdom; He, even he that was thought too high to fall,
and too fixed to be removed; in a very handful of time, felt the misery of
Greatness, by relying on such as flattered and enuyed his Greatness. His end
was their end, and the execution of Law, is a witness in him to Posterity,
how a public person is not at any time longer happy, then he preserues his
happiness with a Resolution that depends upon the guard of innoce^cie and
goodness.

CHARLES DVKE OF BYRON in France, not long after him, ran the same Fate; A
Prince that was reputed the invincible Fortress to his King and Country:
great in desert, and too great in his Greatness; not managing the fiery
chariot of his guiding the Sun of that Climate with moderation; gave
testimony by an imposed and inexpected end, how a public man in Authority,
sits but in Commission on his own Delinquencie, longer then Resolution in noble
actions leuels at the immortality of A Line of life.

Lastly, SIR JOHN VANOLDEN BARNEVELT in the Netherlands, (whose ashes are
scarce yet cold) is and will be a lively president of the mutabilitie of
Greatness. He was the only one that traffiqued in the Counsels of foreign
Princes, had factors in all Courts, Intelligencers amongst all Christian
nations; stood as the ORACLE of the Provinces, and was even the Moderator of
Policies of all sorts: was reputed to be second to none on Earth for
soundness of Designs; was indeed his Countries both Mynion, Mirror, and
Wonder; yet enforcing his public Authority, too much to be servant to his
private Ambition; he left the Tongue of Justice to proclayme that long life,
and a peaceful death are not granted or held by the Charter of Honors, except
virtuous RESOLVTION renew the Patent, at a daily expense of proficiencie in
goodness.

Others fresh in memory might be inserted, but these are yet bleeding in the
wounds which they have given themselves, and some now living to this day; who
both have had, and do enjoy as great Honors, and are therefore as incident to
as many woeful changes, but that they wisely provide to proppe their greatness
with many greater deserts.

Here is in Text Letters laid before us, the hazard, peril and casualty of A
PVBLIKE MAN: the possibility what Misery, Calamity, Ruin, Greatness and
Popularitie may wind him into. Here is decyphered the unavoidable and
incessant Persecutors of their Honors and Joys: Flattery and Envy two
ancient Courtiers. It comes now to conclusion, that it cannot be denied, but
those public men have (notwithstanding these) chief and immediate means in
their own powers, if they well and nobly order their courses to make their
Country their Debtors, and to enroll their names in the glorious Register of
an euer-memorable Glory: especially if they be not too partially doting on
every commendable Virtue, which in private men is reputed as it is, a Virtue;
but in them a Miracle. Certainly (without disparagement to desert in great men)
there are many particular persons, fit for public employments, whose ableness
and sufficiency, is no way inferior to the praises of the mightiest, but that
they are clouded in their lowness, and obscured in their priuatnesse, but else
would and could give testimony to the World, that all fullness and perfection
is not confined to Eminence and Authority.

A PVBLIKE MAN, therefore, shunning the Adulation of a Parasite (which he may
easily discover, if he wisely examine his merit with their Hyperbolical
insinuations,) then keeping an even course in the process of lawful and just
actions, avoiding the toils, snares and trappes of the envious, cannot choose
in his own lifetime, but build a monument, to which the Triumph and Trophies of
his memory, shall give a longer life then the perpetuity of stone, Marble or
Brass can preserve. Otherwise if they stand not on the guard of their own
Piety and Wisdom, they will upon trifles sometime or other be quarrelled
against and euicted. Neither may they imagine that any one taint (howsoever
they would be contented to wink at it in themselves, supposing it to be (as
perhaps it is) little, and not worthy reprehension) can escape vnespyed. For
the Moral of the Poets Fiction is a goodly Lesson for their instruction. It is
said that Thetis the Mother of Achilles, drencht him being an Infant in the
Stygian Waters, that thereby, his whole body might be made invulnerable: but
see the severity of Fate, for even in that part of the heel that his Mother
held him by, was he shot by the Arrow of Paris, of which wound he dyed. In
like case, may every Statesman be like Achilles in the general body of his
Actions, impassible and secure from any assault of wilful and gross
ennormitie: yet if he give way to but one handful (as it may be termed) of
Folly, not becoming the gravity and greatness of his Calling; he shall soon
meet with some watchful Paris, some industrious Flatterer, or ouer-busie
envious Co^petitour, that will take advantage of his weakness, and wound his
infirmity to the ruin of his Honors, if not to the ieopardy of his life.

The period of all shall be knit up, with the advice of a famous learned and
Philosopher: Sen. Epi. 23
and as he wrote to his familiar friend, let us transcribe to men in
Authority; Let a public man rejoice in the true pleasures of a constant
Resolution, not in the deceiuable pleasures of vanity and fondness. By a good
conscience, honest counsels, and just actions, the true good is acquired.
Other moment any delights only supple the forehead, not unburden and solace
the heart. They are nothing, alas they are nothing, it is the mind must be
well disposed, it is the mind must be confident: it is the mind above all
things must be rectified; and the true comfort is not easily attained, and yet
with more difficulty retained. But he, he who directs all his whole private
life in hononurable proiections, cannot any way miss our LINE OF LIFE, which
points at the immortality of a virtuous name by profitably discharging the
burden of such employments as are usually imposed upon those, whom their
callings have entitled Public men.

Of the 3 branch, A good Man.
A GOOD MAN is the last branch of Resolution, and by him is meant (as is said
before) such a man, as does (beside the care he has of himself in particular)
attend all his drifts and actions, to be a servant for others, for the good of
others, as if it were his own. School-boyes newly trained up in the Principles
of Grammar can resolve what a good man is, or who? Who? Qui consulta patrum,
qui leges iuraque seruat. Such an one, as not indeed singly observes what he
should do, but does even that which he observes he should do. This man not
only lives, but lives well, remembering always the old adage; that God is the
rewarder of Aduerbes not of Nownes. His intents are without the hypocrisy of
applause, his deeds without the mercenary expectation of reward, the issue of
both is, all his works are crowned in themselves, and yet crown not him, for
that he loves Virtue for it self. This man never flatters Folly in
greatness, but rather pitties, and in pity strives to redress the
greatness of Folly. This man never enuies the eminence of Authority, nor
fears the Envious: His reprehensio^s are balms, his Praises Glories, and he is
as thankful to be rebuked, as to be cherished. From such a Man all things
are to be gratfully accepted: His desire to do good to all, has not a like
success to all (notwithstanding in him to will is commendable, and not to be
able to do, pardonable.) For it is not only the property of true Virtue, but
also of true Friendship, as well to admonish, as to be admonished: For amongst
good men those things are ever well taken that are well meant; yet even this
man (that vncompeld, vn-required, not exacted, interposes himself to set at
unity the disorders of others not so inclinable to goodness, is not free from
enmity, with those whom in a general care, he labors to deserve as friends.
The Reason, Flattery procures friends, Truth hatred. How? Truth Hatred? Yes,
for from Truth is Hatred borne, which is the poison of Friendship, as Laelius
well observed: Cic^r^ de Amicit.
But what ensues? He whose ears are so fortified, and barrocaded against the
admitment of Truth, that from his Friend he will not hear the Truth, this man's
safety is desperate: wherefore if any one will only relish words of Down and
Honey, as if we loved to speak nothing but pure Roses (as the Proverb is:)
let such a one learn from the skillful Artists of Nature, Plin. hist. lib. 11.
cap. 6
that the Bees do anoint their Hiues with the juice of the bitterest Weeds,
against the greediness of other Beasts. Let him learn from the skilfullest
Phisicians, that the healthfullest Medicines smart most in the Wound. Let him
learn from the Prince of Philosophy, Arist. Eth. lib. 3.
that Anger was given to men by Nature, (as he writes) as a Whetstone of
Valor; and then he cannot but consider, that any pains which a good Man
undergoes for reconciliation, be they either by way of admonition or
reprehension, tend both to one end, that he may make all like unto himself,
that is, Good Men.

This very word (GOOD) implies a description in it self, more pithy, more
patheticall, then by any familiar exemplification can be made manifest: Such a
man, as makes the general commodity, his particular benefit, may not unfitly
be styled a PRIVATE STATESMAN: His endeavors are public, the use public, the
profit public, the commendation public: But the person private; the
Resolution private, the end private, and the reward peculiar.

It is impossible, that the wretched and auaricious banking up of wealth, can
draw him into a conceit, that he can ever make friends of money after his
death; considering that the World was created for the use of men, and men
created into the World to use it, not to enjoy it. This man's bounty is giving,
not lending; and his giving, is free, not reserved: He cherishes Learning in
the Learned, and incourageth the Learned to the love of Learning by cherishing
them; He heartneth the upright in Justice, and ratifies Justice in the upright;
He helps the distressed with counsel, and approoues the proceedings of wise
Counselors. He is a pattern to all what they should be, as to himself what
he is.

Finally, try all his desires, his actions are the seasoners of his speeches,
as his profession is of his actions. He is a Physician to other men's
affections as to his own, by comprimitting such passions as run into an
insurrection, by strengthening such as decline, by suppling such as are
inflamed, by restrayning such as would run out, by purging such as
ouerabound. His Ambition climbes to none other cure then to heal the wounded,
not to wound the whole; being neither so unwise to do any thing that he ought
not to do, nor so unhappy to do any thing what he does not. His singular
misfortune is, Velleius hist. Romans lib. 2.
that (with Drusus an excellent man) he attempts many times with a more honest
and good mind, then good fortune and success; insomuch, as it often comes to
pass, that other men's mischiefs are preferred before his Virtues: yet still
as he is a good Man, injuries can no more discourage him, then applause can
ouer-weene him.

Even this man has his particular adversaries to threaten him, and (if it
could be possible) to terrify him, and deter him from the soliditie of his
temper: Scandal to defame him, and imposture to traduce him: Flattery and
envy are not a more pestilent brood, set in arms against a public man,
then those two miscreant monsters are against a good man. But is his resolution
any way infracted, for that some refractaries are (like Knights of the post)
hired to witness against him? Doubtless no, but much the rather confirmed to
run by a LINE OF LIFE, to the Goal of Life. His own solace is to him, as an
inexpugnable castle of strength, against all the forcible assaults of devilish
co^plots, built only upon this foundation, that he is conscious to himself of
an unforced sincerity: With the Poet he can resolve: ^orat. lib. 1. Epist. 1.
Hic murus aheneus esto, nil conscire sibi, his integrity to him is a Brazen
wall; And with the Orator, Cicer. quaest. Tusc. lib. 2.
he assures himself, that nullum theatrum virtuti maius conscientia, Virtue
has not a more illustrious and eminent Theater to act on, then her own
conscience. Socrates (a good man, if a mere morrall man may be termed so)
being scurrilously by Aristophanes the Poet, In Comaed. (...)
derided before the people; Plat. apol. Socrat.
and by Anytus and Melytus unjustly accused before the Judges, as a trifler, a
master of follies, a corrupter of youth, a sower of impieties, answered; If
their alleged imputations be true, we will amend them; if false, they pertain
not to us. It was a noble constancy and resolution of a wise man, Diog Laert.
in vita Socrat.
that he (enlightened with the only beams of nature) was so moderate and
discreet. The good man here personated (inspired with a far richer and
diuiner knowledge then humanity) cannot but as much exceed Soerates in those
virtues of resolution, as Socrates did his adversaries in modesty and
moderation.

Kings and mighty Monarchs, as they are first mouers to all subordinate
ministers, of what rank or imploiments soever, within their proper dominions,
are indeed public persons; But as one king traffiques with another, another,
and another, either for repressing of hostility, enlarging a confederacy,
confirming an Amity, settling a peace, supplanting an heresy, and such like,
not immediately concerning his own particular, or his peoples; but for
moderating the differences between other Princes: In this respect even Kings
and private men, and so their actions belong wholly and only to themselves;
printing the royalty of their goodness, in an immortality of a virtuous and
everlasting name, by which they justly lay a claim to the Style of good men:
which attribute does more glorify their desert, then the mightiness of their
thrones can their glories.

In which respect, our SOVEREIGN LORD AND KING that now is, (...). lib. 2.
has worthily chronicled his Grandfathers remembrance, which was (as he best
witnesses) called The poor man's King. A title of so inestimable a wealth,
that the riches of many Kingdoms are of too low and mean a value, to purchase
the dignity and honor of this only Style, The poor man's King.

The famous and most excellent commendation of A GOOD MAN, cannot be more
expressly exemplified in any president or myrrour, by all the instances of
former times, nor shall be ever (far, far be^ seruilitie or insinuation)
ouer-paralleled by any age succeeding, then in the person of JAMES the King of
great Britain presently here reigning over us A good man, so well deserving
(from all grateful memory) service and honor, that not to do him service is
an ingratitude to the greatness of his goodness; and not to do him all
honor, an ingratitude to the goodness of his greatness. A good man, that
even with his entrance to the Crown, did not more bring peace to all Christian
nations, yea almost to all Nations of the Western World, then since the whole
course of his glorious reign, has preserved peace amongst them. A Good man,
who has thus long sought as an equal and upright moderatour to decide,
discuss, conclude, and determine all differences between his neighboring
Princes and fellows in Empire. A good man, of whom it may be verified, that he
is BONORVM MAXIMUS, and MAGNORVM OPTIMVS. A good man, that loves not virtue for
the name of virtue only, but for the substance and realitie. A good man, whom
neither scandal can any way impeach of Injustice, tyranny, ignorance; nor
imposture traduce, to a neglect of merit in the desertfull, to leuitie in
affections, to surqu^drie in passions, to intention of inclyning to folly, or
declyning from real worth; which as an heditarie inheritance, and a fee simple
by nature and education, he retaynes in himself, to the wonder and admiration
of all, that may emulously imitate him, never perfectly equal him.
Questionless, the Chronicles, that shall hereafter report the Annalls of his
life and Actions, shall do infinite injury to the incomparable monuments of
his name, if they Style him, as some would wish, JAMES THE GREAT, or as others
endeavor, JAMES THE PEACEABLE, or as not a few hope, JAMES THE LEARNED. For to
those titles have the Greeks in Alexander, the Romans in Augustus, the Germans
in Charles the Fifth, the French men in Charlemaine, and Henry the Fourth,
Father to their present King, attained: But if he shall be reported in his
Style to be, as in his own worthiness he may justly challenge; he must then
be styled, as by the approbation of all that truly know him, he is known to
be JAMES THE GOOD. Let the sum of this branch of Resolution, which is indeed
Corona operis, the sum of the whole sum, be concluded: That this only
pattern, as he is only inferior on earth to God, who is BONVM SVMMVM, the
chief and sovereign good; so the distinction between his great Master and
him (whose Vicegerent he is) consists in this (with reverence to the divine
Majesty be it spoken) That as God (whom to call good is but an improprietie of
description) is not singly bonus good, but Bonitas goodness, in abstracto, (as
the Schoolmen speak:) So under the great KING OF KINGS, this King of men is
substitute to his King, with this vp-shut; The one is forever the King of
goodness; and our King on earth, not only a good King, but a good man; Such a
good man as does himself run, and teaches by his example, others securely and
readily to run, by his Line of Life, to the immortality of a virtuous name.
A private man, A public man, A good man, have been here particularly
deciphered and discoursed. It comes to conclusion, that he, who desires either
in his own person to be renowned; for the general prosperity of the
Commonwealth, to be eternized; or for the co^munitie of his friends, or any
whom he will make his friends, remembered; in the Diaries of posterity, must
first lay the foundation of a willingness, from thence proceed to a desire,
from thence to a delight, from a delight to practice, from practice to a
constant perseverance in noble actions. And then such a man, howsoever, he
live, shall never miss to end his days, before his honors and the honors of
his name can end, for they shall know no end; and yet even in death, and after
death, ouer-liue all his enemies, in the immortal spring of a most glorious
memory; which is the most precious Crown and reward of A most precious Line
of Life.

The Corollarie.
IN the view of the precedent Argument, somewhat (perhaps) too lamely has the
Progress of a Man's Life (in any Fate) been traced; wherein still the course,
like a Pilot sailing for his safety and welfare, has always had an eye, to
the North-Starre of Virtue: without which, men cannot but suffer shipwreck on
the Land, as well as Mariners on the Sea. Such as have proofs in their own
persons and experiences of both fortunes, have past through their dangers of
their being MEN, as they were first private; before they entered: and from their
entrance waded, into the Labyrinth of Greatness and Employment, from whence
they becam Public me^. Now the^ somewhat boldly (yet the boldness is a
presu^ption of love, not love of presumption) may be intimated; that
howsoever, any great or popular person, (for to such does this application
properly appertain, howbeit free from any particularity except particularly
challenged) in a peculiar examination of himself cannot choose, but find, that
he has encountered many Oppositions of Youth, (even in grave years) and
frailty (in grave actions:) yet having at any time, by any casualtie, a
happiness (danger it self is a happiness if rightly made use of, otherwise a
misery) to account with his expense of time: he cannot upon indifferent and
even reckoning, instead of impayring his Honors but advance them: he cannot,
if he account faithfully, instead of making the World his Confessor, but
confess his own Nobleness; and thereupon He will find, that the toil in
common affairs, is but trash and bondage, compared to the sweet repose of the
mind, and the goodly Contemplation of a man's peace with Himself. All glory
whether it consist of profits or preferments, is WITHOUT, and therefore makes
nothing to the essence of true happiness: But the feeling of a resolved
constancy is WITHIN, and ever keeps a Feast in a man's soundest content. One
pregnant and notable Samplar deserves an eye of Judgment to be fixed on it.
Demosthenes after a long government at his pleasure in the Commonwealth (upon
what consideration, He Himself knew best, and Statesmen may easily guess
at,) is reported to confess to his friends, who came to visit him: That if at
the Beginning, Plutarch. in vit. Demost.
Two Ways had bin proposed before him; the one leading to the Tribunal of
Authority, the other to his Grave; If He could by inspiration, have
fore-knowne the Evils, the Terrors, the Calumnies, the Enuies, the Contentions,
the Dangers, that men in such places, must customarily meet with; that He
would much rather with alacrity, have posted on to his Sepulcher then to his
Greatness. Brutus when He determined his own end, Dion. hist. Romans lib. 47.
cried out with Hercules: O wretched and miserable power of man, thou were
nothing but a name, yet I embraced thee as a glorious work, but thou were a
Bond-slaue to Fortune.

It is superfluous to enlarge (or comment upon) the Sufferings of those famous
Men: Every man's own talent of Wisdom, and share of trial, may with not much
difficulty, conster the sense of their meanings. A good Man is the man, that
even the greatest or lowest should both be, and resolve to be. And this much
may be confidently auerred; That men of eminent commands, are not in general
more feared in the tide of their greatness, then beloved, in the ebb of that
greatness, if they bear it with moderation. Statists honored or favored,
(for favor and honor are for the most part inseparable) have the eyes of the
World upon their carriage, in the carriage either of their glories or
deiections: It is not to be doubted (which is a singular comfort) but any
sequestration from a woonted height, is only but a trial; for being managed
with humbleness and gratitude, it may ennoble the Patients (for their own
particulars) to demean themselves excellently, in the places they had before
(may be) somewhat too neglectfully discharged. Always there is a Rule in
observation, positive and memorable; that an interposition or eclipse of
eminence, must not so make a man undervalue his own Desert, but that a Noble
Resolution, should still uphold its own worth, in deserving well; if we aim
and intend to repute and use Honors, but as isntrumental causes of virtuous
effects in Actions. To all such as so do, (and all should so do that are
worthy to be such,) a service not to be neglected is a proper debt: especially
from inferior Ministers to those, whose Creation, has not more given them the
prerogatives of being men, then the virtuous Resolution, leading them by A LINE
OF LIFE, has adorned them, with the just, known and glorious Titles of being
Good Men.

VADVM non transeat excors.
FINIS.

