THE GENERAL HISTORY OF THE MAGNIFICENT STATE OF VENICE. FROM THE FIRST
FOUNDATION THEREOF UNTIL THIS PRESENT. Collected by Thomas de Fougasses,
Gentleman of Auignon, out of all Authors, both Ancient and Modern, that have
written of that subject. Englished by W. SHVTE. Gent.

VAENETIA


LONDON Printed by G. Eld, and W. Stansby. 1612.

TO THE TRVLY NOBLE, AND WORTHY OF ALL HONORS, WILLIAM, Earl of Pembrooke,
etc. and PHILIP, Earl of Montgomerie. Knights of the Honorable Order of the
GARTER.
MY most honored LORDS;
The desire to know, and to be known, are equally predominant. There is in
both a kind of infiniteness, which Nature comes short off, and can not fill.
Books, including matter supernatural, better satisfy it: They extend Fame as
far as the utmost limit of Time, and Knowledge beyond; being the clearest
Oracles to the living* and faithfullest Heralds to the dead: All other
Inventions are lame. Touching Fame, how barren a shift was he driven to, that
was feign to adopt a Pillar? Tombs die like their Tenants, and are buried in
their dust whom they bury. Those Living Tombs, and Speaking Epitaphs
(Children) are neither built when* nor as we would. Whereas Books (the only
issue, wherein our Wives cannot defraude us) though they be often conceld by
Time, yet in every next impression find a new being, and have an artificial
Immortality of their own, still protecting their Protectors from the murder
of Oblivion.

Hence I have extracted a hope, that your Lordships might be pleased to pardon
my grateful and humble presumption, in consecrating my Labors to your Names.
The great French Henry, and the Illustrious Leonardo Donato now Duke of
Venice, held their greatness no whit lessened by Patronizing the Original,
neither will your Honors be much blotted by the Translation. Your Names shall
shine to Posterity in the same gold, though less curiously stamped. If my
zeal may likewise shine out to you, I aspire to no third happiness. Thus
wishing your Lordships the same fullness and maturitie of Honor that ye have
of Virtue. I remain.

Your Lordships humble devoted. W. SHVTE.

TO THE READER.
ITALY is the Face of Europe; Venice the Ere of Italy. It is not only the
Fairest, but the Strongest, and Actiuest part of that Beautiful and Powerful
Nation. In dismembring of any sensitive Body we may observe some one limb to
out-liue all the rest, as if all had bequeathed their Motion to that one, and
left it sole Executor of Life. It seems in the dissolution of the last
Monarchy, the Genius of it made transmigration to Uenice. In her the
Wisdom, Fortitude, Justice, and Magnanimity of old Rome do yet move and
stir. That which now Vsurps that name is not Rome, but her Carcass, or
rather Sepulcher. All but her Ruins, and the Cause of them, (her Vice) is
removed to Uenice; of whom I may truly affirm their VVarres have engendered
the Peace, and their Peace the plenty of all Christendom. Few States have
performed matter more worthy writing than that; few Historians composed lines
more worthy reading than this: I mean not for curiosity of style, but
integrity. Not that they had not, but that this Subject needed not
Rhethoricall illustration. The nakedness of Truth is her best Ornament, and
Noble actions are eloquent, not only in any Language, but without any, even in
mute Pictures. Touching my Translation, though I have not, as some that write
by Precedent, followed every letter of my Copy, nor Ecchoed my Author in every
word, yet I have not contradicted or denied him in any sense. Touching my
style, I have not made it so high, but that the lowest understanding may get
over, nor affected any thing so much, as not to affect. For my chief ambition
was, that my lines might rather be fit to crown my Readers brain, than hang
in his ear, and make him a Man, than a Parrot. To conclude, those bright and
translucent judgments which shall shine upon my work, will soon dissolve, and
clear any mist of error that shall arise before them, and so warm and
cherish my endeavors, that the second crop may be more worthy tasting. But
those which, like the spies of Ignorance, come only to find fault, if they
lose their labor in me, perhaps may save it in themselves, and exercise that
censorious humor nearer home.

Farewell. W. SHVTE.

THE FIRST BOOK OF THE FIRST DECAD OF THE GENERAL HISTORY OF Venice: From
the foundation of the CITY.
The Contents of the first Book of the first DECAD.
IN this first Book is contained the original of the ancient Venetians, with
the sundry opinions of the Cities foundation* In what place, and by whom it
was first of all built in the Marshes. The terrible fire whereby it was
consumed at her first rising. Her first Officers under the Consularie dignity.
Her ancient reuenew* and new increase thereof. The Tribunes Government who
succeeded the Consuls. From whence the Lombards are issued, with their
progression in Italy. The confines which this Nation had limited to the
Venetians. The Venetians first journey against the Dalmatians. The ancient
opinion concerning their Marriages. The Islanders offer succors to NARSES
against the Goths. The form of the ancient buildings. The Church of Grada
declared Metropolitan. A great inundation over all the Venetian Territory.
The daily increase of the City. Dissension betwixt the Prelates of Grada and
Aquileia. The Creation of the first Duke. The Venetians surprise Rauenna from
the Barbarians. The dangerous War betwixt the Heraclians and the Iesulans.
Prince VRSVS murdered. The Government of the Master or Colonel of the men at
Arms newly erected. And lastly, the retreite of the Heraclians and Iesulans to
Medoac.

FOR as much as no man doubts, but that the first Venetians were the founders
of this City and State, whose History we undertake. I have thought it not
unfit (seeing I perceive the Historians to disagree about their true original)
before we treat of the beginning of the City, briefly to speak somewhat of
Whereof the Authors meaning is to treat.
their Antiquity. Now these first Venetians had not their beginning from
Italy: but were issued, as some think, from the Venetians of Gaul, who dwelt
on the Coasts of the Ocean Sea. And this opinion was not grounded upon the
name only: but because those which possessed the Adriaticke Gulphe, were like
their neighbors very much adicted to Sea business, and they differed from the
Gauls in speech only, (as POLIBIVS says) and not in manners nor apparel.

Others, as Titus LIVIVS, do affirm that they are descended from Paphlagania.
He sets down, how that their Captain PILEMON being dead at Troy, they came
with ANTENOR into Italy. CATO following him, did think that the Venetians
were descended from the Trojan race. Cornelius NEPOS imagines that the
Venetians were so named in Italy of the Henetians, which inhabited the town
of Cromna near to Paphlagonia. There be some that have written, how that this
nation was a neighbor to the Cappadocians, and did make war upon the
Cimmerians, and came afterward into the Adriaticke Sea.

Others think that they possessed a little town near to Amastra, and that they
went over all the Country to meet with the Henetians, as if they had been no
where to be found. But all of them do in a manner affirm, that this nation
of whom we speak, did come from Paphlagonia. The which XENODOTVS did not The
true original of the first Uenetians.
only maintain, but thought that the City of Amisa was the same, which was
afterward called Henisa. Howsoever, those which think so, bring in for their
proofs, the industrious care which both these nations had to breed Horses and
Mules: according to the testimony of HOMER, who says,

And from the Henetians come strong Mules.

And albeit this great Poet spoke then of those of Asia; STRABO a very diligent
obseruer of Antiquity, maintains that even almost in his time the choicest
and best Mares came from the Venetians, inhabiting a parcel of the Adriaticke
Sea, which were highly esteemed for their singular pace and swiftness. These
things indeed, and diverse others do cause me to follow the opinion of those,
which say that the Henetians came into Italy with ANTENOR, and were afterward
by the altering of a letter called Venetians. ANTENORS coming into the
Adriaticke Gulphe is not only proved by the Venetians who were his fellows;
but because the place where they first arrived, was called Troy, which name the
Borough has ever since carried. Euganeans, which inhabited this The
foundation of the City of Padua.
Country, which lies betwixt the Sea and the Alps, did build the City of
Padua. After that, they did in process of time so increase, as they did not
only make themselves masters of that which did belong to the Euganeans (whose
power in times past was so great, as it contained, according to the opinion of
CATO in his book of originals, four and thirty Cities:) but of diverse
places of Bressia and Furli: which they named Venetian. For what places soever
they conquered, were afterward called Venice. Some have confined this Country,
with the Rivers of Po, and Adda; with the lake of La Garda, in old time called
Benac; with the Alps, and the Adriaticke Sea. The extent of the Country of
Venice.
PLINY comprehended on the East side thereof Aquileia, and STRABO on the
contrary

After this sort did the ancient Venetians extend their Dominion in length and
breadth in the pleasantest Country of Italy. But the situation of the
places, rather The trouble which the first Venetians had to keep that which
they had conquered.
then this peoples manner of life, did always procure envy to the ancient
State of the Province. For on the one side the ordinary thefts of the
Liburnians, and the fearful and continual roades of cruel nations on the
other, did hinder them from enjoying any long rest: so as it oftentimes
happened, that by how much their public and private affairs did seem to be
increased by some relaxation from foreign wars, by so much the more were
they miserably overthrown by these sudden storms and alarmes. This nation,
without this, had been most happy, in regard Italy for their dwelling: For
beside, that it is environed on the south side with a most calm circuit of
the Sea, The fruitfulness of the Venetian Country.
which makes it capable to receive all manner of foreign merchandise: it is
moreover watered with most pleasant Rivers, by which, all that comes from the
Sea, is easily transported into the midst of the Province: It aboundes in
Lakes, Pooles and Forests: the territoric being marvelous fertile in Corn,
Wine, Oil, and in all manner of Fruits. It is stored besides, with goodly
Houses in the Country, with Towns, Castles, and Cities very much recommended
for their situation, and circuit of their walls, whereof we will hereafter
make mention in his place.

But let us now return to these new inhabitants, who from the time that their
affairs grew prosperous, were seldom freed from foreign wars. It would be
too long and tedious a labor, orderly to set down in so ancient a matter,
their pains and travail, as also it not being my meaning to insist farther on
the deeds of the first Venetians.

Now after diverse and sundry roads of the Barbarians, and that by continual
wars the one against the other, from their beginning even to the time of
ATTILA, their substance had been continually wasted, and were besides daunted
by the fearful assaults of the Goths: A greater danger than all the rest,
did on a sudden assail them. The Huns, conducted by ATTILA son to Mandluc,
with a horrible spoil did cast The original of the Huns, and their coming
into Italic.
themselves into the Province. This Nation, as says PRISCVS, came from
Scithia, and dwelt near to the Riphean mountains: After a long siege they
took Aquileia, spoiled and wholly burnt it. They destroyed after the same
manner Concorda, Altina, and almost the whole Venetian Territory.

At the fearful report of these wars; the Venetians, and the rest of Italy
were

Certain unknown Historians who have written this History, have in such sort
Diverse opinion of the Historians.
ordered the wars of the Huns, as it seems that Attila did twice enter
Italy, the which none of the most trusty have noted: but all of them say that
neither at the same time, nor yet all together went to dwell in one self same
place. The same authors do affirm that diverse of the choicest men of Padua
began the retreat, and The foundation of the Rialto.
place) the fitst foundations of the City were there laid: And that those of
the Country of Padua who fled, being possessed with the like fear, began to
people Chioggia, Malamoc, and Albiola. They affirm besides, that diverse of
Aquileia withdrew themselves at the same time into the marshes of Grada: But
so soon as Attila was gone, they ran in troops from the fields along the
Sea coasts to the neighbor Islands: That the Aquileians put themselves into
Grada, a place near to the firm land environed with water. The runawayes of
Concorda possessed Caorli, How the Islands were inhabited.
and the Altinoes, six small Islands near together, which they called by the

Diverse do truly affirm, that the year of our Salvation 421, it received
her 421. Macrin Governor of Hungary overcome by the Hunnes.
first foundations, at the same time when as at the report of the Huns
arrival, all Italy began to be afraid: For then, or certainly a little before,
Attila having passed the river of Danubie, overthrew in battle Macrin the
Governor of Hungary and Macedonia; wherewith being puffed up with pride, he
promised to himself the entire conquest of the Western Empire. Others reject
this opinion as erroneous, and dare affirm that this City was first of all
built, about the time that Aquileia, and all the Venetian territory was
destroyed, which happened (as it is very credible) certain years after: But
nothing hinders us from believing, that at the first motions of this war, all
the noblest and richest persons accompanied with troops of household servants
began the flight, that by their means they began to build in those places
first possessed, and that afterward in tract of time, so soon as the enemy
was entered Italy, they ran from all parts in great numbers to those Islands,
The Authors opinion concerning the Cities foundation.
we will willingly follow their opinion, which believe that the City of
Venice was builded before the destruction of Aquileia, the which we will
declare in order how it happened.

The original of the City of Venice, (as we have learned by reading those
authors, How the original of Venice happened.
who have most faithfully written thereof) happened almost in this manner: As the
fear of the Hunnes war had already possessed the people of Italy, and that the
Venetians as the foremost in the danger, were also by means thereof greatly
moved (for all men believed that the Hunnes would come into Italy) their more
Who they were that began to fly.
on the rest: And those who began the flight were honorable persons, full of
piety and Religion. I cannot warrant ought of other places: But it is
certain, that from two most excellent Cities of the Venetians Country,
Padua, and Aquileia, there ran thither from the beginning great multitudes: so
as in this tumult, diverse of Aquileia with their children and richest moueables
retired themselves to Grada: diverse of the chief of Padua did likewise resort
to Rialto.

Those places whereon at this day the City of Venice is seated, were in times
What those places were, whereon Venice is at this day built.
past very strait and narrow Islands, and near to one another, separated by
the pleasant current of rivers, which run turning into the Sea, according to
the change of her ebbing and flowing: There was nothing to be seen in these
strait places, but Seafowle, which came thither from the Sea to seek shelter;
sometime likewise fishermen, (but very seldom) came thither to rest themselves.

Now those of Padua which came to the Rialto (this place is now almost in the
Where the first foundations of the City were laid.
midst of the City) were the first which began to build, and in that place
were the first foundations of the new City laid. How religiously the same was
done, may be coniectured, because by how much any one did affect true
godliness and religion, by so much more for fear of the Hunnes, whom he knew
to hate the Christians, Mark does stand.

All authors do agree together, that the City received her first foundation
on the On what day the City of Venice was builded.
(...) and twentieth of March. If we will curiously observe certain exquisite
works of nature, which are reported to have been done on such a day, it will
not be impertinent of the most sacred Virgin. The greatness of this mystery
is thought to surpass man's understanding, whereby it is hard, not only to
declare it by speech (which can not be done) but to conceive it in mind. But
as we do religiously believe it, we do likewise wisely and constantly
confess the divinity to be joined to the humanity, and the Eternal,
incomprehensible, and holy, to be mingled with the corruptible and measurable.
And we must not marvel wherefore this great God did do it, because it
behooued it so to be, nor if it were possible to be done, in regard it was his
pleasure, for he can do whatsoever pleases him. But it may be, that some will
scoff heereat, as at a vain and ridiculous observation, and will count it
folly to make a differenee of days. Let them think what they please: I think
it avails very much,

Now albeit that for the peopling of this new City, all the most experienced
mariners A very (...) observation.
were called thither from all parts, with promise of great reward, to such as
could build all manner of Ships: it is nevertheless reported, that they never
received any man of servile condition, nor a murderer, or of wicked life:
whereby it appears that those good founders of this City would not have her
birth defiled by the access of such comers. The which some founders of other
very renowned What manner of people were received into this new City.
Cities took no care of, but have freely called the most lewd persons, and
have received them into their City with all freedom and immunity. But those
men

This new City did daily increase both in people and buildings: When as fire,
Four and twenty houses burns at once.
kindled on a sudden in a Carpenters house, did in a moment consume with
continual burning four and twenty houses, and because the matter which
maintained this fire, was without order scattered here and there, and that
there was no likelihood to quench it by humane strength, all the City betook
themselves to prayers; and so soon as they had made a vow to build a Church to
the honor of Saint James, A wonderful miracle smelling somewhat of Popery.
the Town was preserved from that danger. This Church is at this day to be
seen standing in the midst of the Rialto with signs of great antiquity. It
is to be supposed Attila made no have to come for certain years, diverse did
return to their ancient dwellings. For after the first report of this great
war, Subthor brother to Mandluch, who was chief of the enterprise, marched
into Germany: where he afterward dying, Attila, who with Attila defeated near
Toulouse.
his brother did succeed him, after he had a long time run over France,
fought a bloody battle in the plains of Toulouse, with Aetius the Roman, and
Theodoric Italy by force. And in the mean time that journey was not short, nor
without great travail, for in the same he subdued a part of Illiria,
Dalmatia, and Histria, so as it is supposed that four and twenty years were
expired, from the first alarmes of the Hunnes, and their passage over Danubie,
until the total ruin of Aquileia. This new City in the mean time began to
increase near to the Rialto, but not very much; yet nevertheless such as it
then was, it is certain that it was governed by Consuls, as shall be declared
in his place. But so soon as Attila began with his Arms to molest Italy,
then did men of all sorts and conditions, run in heaps seemed in a small
circuit to build sundry Cities, although both in name and effect it was but
one. And this is the most common and frequent opinion of the original of
Venice, approved by diverse modern writers, who affirm this to have been
after the total destruction of Aquileia. But diverse other do think the first
foundation What the true Foundations of Uenice was.
of the Rialto to be the true original and beginning of the City, seeing that
the buildings since then, ought rather to be called encreasements, as made not
only during the troubles with the Hunnes, but by little and little during the
tumults of the Goths and Lombards. And although they came at sundry times into
those Islands, (as has been said:) Yet notwithstanding, because it happened in
the time that the Hunnes were there, that they ran thither in greater number
then before,

But we have sufficiently spoken of the foundation of the City. Let us now
come to discourse to take away all doubts, from whence these new Venetians are
descended. I will briefly show unto whom their true original is to be
referred. I do certainly know, that if the question be demanded, diverse, yea
almost all men will say that they are issued from the Paphlagonian Henetians,
which came with Antenor, by reason of the name: but if we search out the matter
from far, we shall undoubtedly find, that they least of all came from
thence. Antenor was a Trojan, Antenor, and afterward unto his, than the title
only, esteeming much more the thing it self, then the simple shadow of the
name. Those which with Aeneas came into Latium, did the like, who being victors
did easily endure to be called by the names of those whom they had conquered.
Those of Aquileia were afterward a Colonie of the Latins, and Concordia of the
Romans: These being mingled with the ancient Venetians, did possess Grada and
Caorli, at what

This being so, we may much more truly say, that the Venetians are descended
From whence the Uenetians that now are, be descended.
from the Trojans, from the Latins, and from the Romans, rather then from
Paphlagonia, or from the Galls. This is it which we have gathered together the
most succinctly that we could, both of their antiquity, and true extraction. I
will now set down what the state of this new City was in the beginning, what
were her conditions, her frugality and Religion, after that I have called to
remembrance, that there are some Historians, who refer the original of the
City to the year of our Salvation four hundred fifty six, among whom is
Blondus the Historian, who has 456. The sundry opinions of the Historians
concerning the building of the City.
think) was besieged by Attila, and they say that the siege lasted no more
then three years. But grant that it lasted longer, there is no man so ignorant
in humane matters, but may perceive that they began to fly out of Aquileia
upon the report of the Barbarians arrival, and not after that all was lost,
seeing that the same flight would have smally profited them, and would have
been to no purpose at all. It is then most certain that some years before
the loss of Aquilea, they began the second time to build in the Islands. I
will not deny but that the City did receive some The true time when the city
of Uenice was built.
four hundred twenty one.

Now what the ancient State and condition of this City was, may be known by
many evident proofs, but principally by that, that the first founders thereof
were very honest people, noble, and rich. For those ancient Venetians in that
change, after What the Venetians ex (...) was in the beginning.
they had carried away with them their wives and children, and the richest
goods they had, did retire themselves at leisure into the places of most
safety: But being hindered by the incursions of the Hunnes all along the
Seacoasts from tilling the Earth; the poorest amongst them gave themselves to
fishing, and to make salt, or else to transport their neighbors Merchandise,
esteeming that gain more honest than to till other men's ground, some of the
richer fort gave themselves to the ^raffick of foreign Merchandise, others,
keeping their houses applied their wits to beautify

The first and cheifest thing they gave themselves to was the care of Religion,
and by so much the more, as they perceived any great danger toward from the
enemy. The presence of certain Prelates, did augment in them this common
affection to The Venetians zeal to Religion.
godliness, who for fear of the enemy to Christians, had with their
Countriemen retired themselves thither. Their help came in good time, not only
concerning the Ministry of sacred things, but to retain this City as yet
ignorant, in ancient piety and Religion, from being infected with the poison
of the Arrian heresy, seeing The Arrian sect over all Italy.
that contagion did no less overrun the whole Province, than the Arms of
the Hunnes. After that, they did contend and debate among themselves, not on
voluptuous matters, but on piety and continence. Riches and other things
whereof men at this day make so much account, made no distinction amongst the
Citizens for honor, but wisdom only. They did not regard men's sumptuous
clothing, but their goodness, and to such (without seeking for it) did they
freely offer their places of honor. In a word, a man would have imagined that
multitude not to have The Venetians great modesty.
been fugitive Citizens, but Philosophers at their quiet study. And because
we would not have any man think, that we feign this matter to embellish our
Story: any one that has the leisure, may read that which Cassiodorus of
Rauenna Bonitendius has inserted in his Commentaries. Such was the beginning
of the City of Venice, and after such a kind of life, and in such exercises
did she spend her childhood: afterward by her virtue, it grew, and waxed
strong. And because we have (as I think) amply and sufficiently declared what
has been the beginning of this great State, we will speak somewhat of her
first government. For I perceive that those who have written The first
government of Venice under Consults.
dwelt at Rialto. They do more-ouer affirm that Galieno Fontano, Simion
Glauco, and Antonio Caluo (who were then Consuls at Padua at such time as the
first foundations of the City were laid at Rialto) were the first that in
quality of Consuls did govern the City at her birth: Some think that these
men were the Authors of the Paduans flight, and that their first arrival was
in that place, and likewise the first buildings. According to others I find in
these men's stceds, Alberto Phalerio, Thomaso Candiano, and Paulo el Conte. The
third year of the Cities foundation, they created new Consuls for two years,
Marino Linio, Hugo Fusco, and Luciano Graulo. They Attila. Marco Aurelio,
Andrea Clodio, and Albino Moro, were Consuls at the third election for the two
years following. I do not find who succeeded them. But it is credible that
this form of Government lasted till Attilas coming: at which time, all
Islands thereabouts being peopled, in stead of Consuls they created Tribunes.
All of them in a manner say, that the same happened a little after Attilas
coming, and that about the sixty year of the Cities foundation, the
Tribunarie dignity began in the Islands, which were already inhabited.

For the Creation of the Tribunes, the business was first of all debated (as
the The Creation of Tribunes.
manner is) by a few; after that, it was concluded in a general assembly of
the Ilanders, that every Island should have a Tribune, the Magistrate to be
yearly, he should do Justice to his fellow Citizens, and punish offenses
with severity. But that which concerned the general State of the
Commonwealth, was referred to

That which we have hitherunto said, if it be narrowly observed, belongs to the
Cities original. We will hereafter begin to speak of her infancy. For diverse
Historians The parts of man's life compared with Cities
greatly delighted in this kind of writing, (in number of whom is (...)) who
have distinguished the increasing of Cities, according to the several parts of
man's life, Infancy, Childhood, and Youth. Now the Tribunarie Government which
nearly followed the original thereof, shall be rightly termed Infancy. We
will then set down in order what passed within and without the City, during
the same, after that we have acquainted the Reader, how that in the time of the
Lombards (which was during this Infancy) the City received a marvelous
increase. For it The coming of the Lombards into Italy.
Hunnes, did perceive on a sudden, the Lombards (so called by reason of their
long Beards) to be entered into Italy, under Albinus their eleventh King, who at
their arrival, did possess and subdue all that which had been shaken; they
did forthwith sease upon all that which the Venetians held in the firm Land:
not daring to assail them at Sea, because they knew their strength to be
great, or else it may be, they deferred to do it, till a more convenient time.

This Nation (as it is reported) came from Scandinauia, an Island of the Germane
From whence the Lombards are descended.
Sea, who having often a long time before, enterprised on the Province of the
Romans which lies about the River of Danubie, under Geodich their King, he
being Andouinus his successor: then under Albinus, thirty eight years after
their arrival in Hungary, they came furiously into Italy, where their power
did so increase, as they have commanded there more then two hundred years.

At the arrival then of this people, the whole firm Land belonging to the
Venetians lost her liberty, with the name of Venice: and the Venetians State
which was in the Islands, was limited from the Cape of Rising (so named at this
day) even to the The Lombards give limits to the Venetians.
Marshes of Grada, as witnesses Paul Deacon, in his History of the Lombards.
Now seeing we have begun to speak of the deeds and manners of the Venetians,
we will of set purpose omit the residue of this Nations exploites, except so
much as may

I will then declare in order all that which these new Ilanders did in common,
during this Infancy, before the coming of the Lombards. The most ancient is
(as they say) a happy Voyage which they made at Sea, which gave beginning to
their future Marine Dominion. The Histrians and Dalmatians did disquiet the
State of this new City, by incursions and robberies, so as the Ilanders could
keep nothing safe from them. I know not whether hatred moved them thereunto,
envying to see so great a power as that was likely to be in time, to increase
so near them, or else whether it were the ancient disposition of that people,
to rob and spoil at Sea. The Venetians first voyage to Sea.
Some do believe that the same was then done at the entreaty of the
Triestines,

It is reported that at this Battle, certain games were vowed to the honor
of the glorious Virgin Marie; but others set down other occasions of those
games, much differing, and more likely to be true. For they hold that the
Countries custom The ancient custom of marrying their daughters.
was to be troth then daughters in the Church, carrying their dowries thither to
be publicly seen. It happened by chance, that whilst they celebrated such a
ceremony in S. Peter's Church (which stands now in that part of the City
called the Castle) the Triestines who had already professed themselves their
enemies, came in a night from Sea with two Galloyes, and ambush^ themselves in
certain places near unto the City. I^ the morning about such time as they
celebrated the ceremony, they came into the Church, and carried away the Priest
of the place, with a great Pietr^ Candiano who then was Duke, thinking it
needful to use diligence in so desperate a matter, did forthwith man the
Gallyes with numbers of (...) all sorts, and followed the enemies, whom they
o^ The Triestines defeated.
Marshes of ^aorli, as they were parting the spoil. They easily defeated (...)
having reskewed the Prelate, Citizens, and their goods, he entered the second
day of February, two days after his departure, into the City as it were in
triumph. But because the feast of the Purification of the blessed Virgin The
occasion of the games dedicated to the glorious Virgin.
happened upon that day, it is reported that those games were first ordained for
the happy success of that voyage. But being brought in for devotion sake,
they have been since depraved and corrupted by the dissoluteness of those who
succeeded:

Now these Pirates being driven from the Seacoasts next unto the City, and
the Venetian name becoming famous and esteemed of all their neighbors, soon
after, the Eunuch Narses, Lieuetenant to the Emperor Justinian, but a man
valiant and Narses comes into Italy.
careful arrived; who being come into Italy in the time of the Goths, to free
it from their bondage, was with the consent of all men succored by the
Venetians. But we are not certain whether it were with Armor, Victuals, or
Ships, which he greatly needed for the passage of the great Army which he had
brought. For so soon as he had sent twelve thousand Lombards (whom he chiefly
trusted) before Totila, who was by the commandment of the Barbarian, Wherein
the Venetians aided Narses.
camped upon the banks of the River Adice, he resolved to pass along the
coast to Rauenna by the Adriaticke Sea, which he could not do without a great
number of hired Ships, in regard all those places were either filled from the
Marshes which ran into the Sea, or else from the mouths of great Rivers
which held the same course. It is most likely, that this journey which
otherwise would have been most hard and painful for him, was by the
Venetians help made easy; who were men that very well knew the places, and
skilful in Sea-matters. It is to be noted how that Narses, for the great
services which the Venetians did him in that War, did build in that new City
with the spoils of the enemies, two Churches; one to Theodore the Martyr;
(which at this day ioynes to S. Marks Church) and the Churches builded by
Narses.
other to the Saints, Menez and Germinian, which is right over against it in
the Market place.

This is that Narses, who after he had driven the Goths forth of Italy,
valiantly overcome so many barbarous Nations, and settled peace and quietness
in the Province: being justly moved with the Letters of the Empress Sophia
(who at the same time commanded the Eastern Empire, by means of her husbands
baseness) reproaching him with his former condition, and calling him home in
derision, to The Empress Sophia reprocheth Narses.
spinne and weaue like an effeminate Eunuch, did solicit by great promises
Albinus King of the Lombards, to march from Hungary, to trouble the affairs of
Italy. The Narses auswere to the Empress.
thought fit to be sent home as a woman to card and spinne, would shortly
spinne her such a thread, as neither her proud self, nor those who had so
freely slaundered him should be ever able to untwist. And we must not wonder
(as has been already said) that Narses at his coming into Italy, was aided
by the Lombards, who at that time had no power in the Province: for he sent
for that aid (such as it was) forth of Hungary. We have briefly heretofore
declared, from whence this Nation is descended, because our purpose was from
the beginning, not to strai^ far from the affairs of Venice.

Now in the time of the Lombards: Paul, Bishop of Aquileia transported all the
The Church of Grada made Metropolitan by the Pope.
treasure, relics, and service of his Church to Grada, where in times past
the Church of S. Euphemia had been builded. Pope Pelagius at the request of
Helie who succeeded Paul, (or according to Probin following the opinion of
some) did decree,

About the same time did diverse prodigies appear: Armies of fire colored with
blood were seen in the air; The Earth brought forth a marvelous and
incredible abundance of all manner of fruits. There happened besides over all
the Venetian countries, and almost over all Trans-alpine Gaul, so great a
deluge of waters on a sudden, as the River Adice which runs through the
City of Verona, being Strange prodigies.
miraculously swelled, did almost cover the highest top of S. Zenos Church
which A great miracle at Verona.
albeit the windows thereof were open, yet this violent flood did not enter
into the Church, respecting (as it were) that sacred place. Helie caused a
Church to be built in the honor of the glorious Virgin, called at this day,
Barbana.

Then certain years after: Padua being taken and spoiled by the Lombards, the
City, which daily increased, was very much augmented. They gave the fugitives
The Paduan fugitives dwell at Embragola.
that part of the City to dwell in, which is called Embragola, betwixt the
common Ouens and the Arcenall. It is reported that they built two Churches,
which at this day are to be seen at that place; the one near to the other; to
S. John Baptist, the one: and the other to S. Martin. And because the Venetians
should have Fortunatus of Aquileia, strengthened with the Lombards forces, The
Church of Grada robbed.
came and stole away all the treasure and ornaments of the Church of Grada,
which at that time was the Metropolitan: To the which, being by this loss
destitute of a Pastor, Pope Honorius at the request of the Emperor Heraclius
appointed first fruits: and gave it afterward great store of gold and silver,
to buy vessels and ornaments for divine service, with the Shrine of St. Marie
brought from Alexandria. This Pope being told in a dream, that the bodies of
St. Hermagoras and Vision in a dream.
Fortunatus wete buried in a little field belonging to Alexandra of Aquileia a
very devout woman: he transported them to Grada, and did shut them up there
very religiously in a secret place.

Almost the same time, the City of Vderzza was destroyed by Lotharius King
Uderza ruined by the Lombards
of the Lombards. Those who fled from thence, came with their Bishop called
Magnus, a man of an holy life, and rested in the territory of the Iesulans,
where they built a City which they called Heraclea, in honor of Prince
Heraclius; but The foundation of Heracles.
the Moderns have called it Villanoua. It is at this day almost ruined to the
ground. There are to be seen certain signs of a very ancient Church, which
those first founders of Heraclea do say was dedicated to Saint Peter. At the
same time also, Paul Bishop of Altina, fearing the Armies of the Lombards, and
amazed by the spoil of his neighbors, came with his Relics and Jewels,
being accompanied with a great multitude of people, to Tourcelles.

The Episcopal See of Padua likewise, was by the authority of Pope Seuerine
The Episcopal See of Padua, translated to Malamoc.
translated to Malamoc. Diverse Churches were built near to Tourcelles by the
inhabitants thereof, who were very devout people: the which Borough, some
write, was called by the inhabitants Constantiaca, by the name of Constantius,
son to Heraclius; who going to Rome landed there.

But the City of Heraclea in the mean time being greatly increased by the
concourse of so many people, as the place was not sufficient to contain them;
the Shepherds flying from the incursions of the Barbarians, did drive away a
great heard of The foundation of Equiline.
oxen and mares even to those shoares, who not being able to dwell in Heraclea,
they did near thereunto fortify a place for themselves, which they named
Equiline of the thing it self, as Bonitendius says. I know that some think
Equiline to be the same, which is now called Iesulune, but the Authors whom we
follow, make diverse mention of them both, as of two sundry Cities.

This is that we can learn concerning the ancient Venetians their original,
and increase of the City; which we have collected with great labor and
travail. I will

The Tribunes of the Islands abusing their office, had so troubled the State by
civil dissension, as there was some likelihood, that the body of this new
City would be soon dissolved, unless a remedy were applied. Luitprand who
with title Luitprand Duke of Forleini.
of Duke commanded the Province of the Carnons, (called now those of Forli)
perceiving this discord, and supposing (as it came to pass) that this
Venetian State, might through civil division be easily overthrown, (the
increase whereof he thought would be ouer-dangerous for him and his
neighbors) did resolve to What moved the Venetians to change the government.
The general assembly held at Heraclea.
by this enemy, who did daily seek occasion to disquiet the peace of this new
City. All men thus complaining: the general assembly of all the Islands was
published at Heraclea.

Christopher Bishop of Grada held the chief place there, being accompanied
with great numbers of the Clergy: and there after the celebration of divine
service, at That there was no more hope to be had Complaint in the assembly
against the Tribunes.
of the Venetian Commonwealth, nor yet of their liberty, which had been
purchased and maintained by their Ancestors with such generositie, unless the
fury of the Tribunes might have an end. That their selfsame Ancestors had in
times past for the sweetness of liberty, abandoned their most pleasant
Country, their houses, and all other matters, which men commonly hold most
dear, and were come into barraine Islands, where they found nothing that might
inuit them to dwell there. That if they could have dispensed with their
liberty, they might have remained in all safety in the Cities where they were
first borne and brought up, and Whereupon, those which desired the good and
profit of the Commonwealth did resolve suddenly to elect a nevve Duke who
should represent the whole honor and majesty of the State, and have power to
assemble the general Council, at such time as the important affairs of the
Commonwealth should be in question; to choose yearly Tribunes in every
Island, from whence the appeals should come before him: and moreover if any
man had obtained any dignity, Prelatship, or benefice, by the suffrages of the
Clergy, or of the people, he should not enjoy the same without the pleasure
of the Duke.

PAVLVTIO of Heraclea, the first DVKE of VENICE.



THis thus concluded: Paulutio of Heraclea, a man of singular justice, was by
the consent of all men declared Duke; the year (according What form they
obs^ued at the first Dukes election.
see to be at this day observed in the creation of Princes, but they then
proceeded therein more simply. For, ambition being not as yet crept into so
religious a City; no bribing for honors; they had not in those elections
respect to wealth, nobility, and other such like matters, but only to the
virtue of the person: by which means they obtained it, and not by cunning. But
although virtue and wisdom

After he had taken his oath, this new Magistrate was honored with diverse
noble The Duke takes his oath.
ensigns, whereby that sovereign dignity was made more illustrious: and yet
for all that I will not affirm, that all the magnificence which at this day
the Prince enjoys was given him at the same time: for it is certain that
part of them was given him a long time after, and taken from elsewhere.

Now so soon as this new Duke was fully installed, he determined to free the
Commonwealth from this war. And the better to effect it, he entered league A
league made with Luitprand.
with Luitprand. (some say he overcame him in fight) He extended the limits of
Heraclea from the River of Piauo, unto the little stream called Piauicolle. By
his authority rather then by force, he brought the Equilines under his
dominion, (some name the Iesulans for the Equilines, which makes me to believe
their opinion in some sort to be true who think Equiline and Iesulan to be
one selfsame place, though different in name) who at the same time had
forsaken the Venetians. Those of Tourcelles in the mean space builded a
sumptuous Temple to the glorious Virgin, where they placed the body of Saint
Heliodore of Altina with diverse other Relics.

MARCELLO of Heraclea, the second Duke of Uenice.



THese things effected, Paulutio dyed, after he had reigned twenty years and
six months. Marcello of Heraclea was by the common voice chosen in his sted.
We do not find in all the time of his government, which lasted nine years,
any memorable matter to have Horteo Hipates, surnamed Vrsus, next after
Paulutio. Howsoever, they say that he was a virtuous man, wise, and reasonably
well inclined to Arms, though his hap was to dye, after he had gotten more
reputation by peace, than by war.

HORTEO called VRSVS, the third Duke of Uenice.



HOrteo, whom we say was surnamed Vrsus, succeeded Marcello. The Lombards at
the same time took Rauenna a very ancient City. The Exarch who commanded
therein fled for succor to the Venetians. Pope Gregory did likewise by
letters entreat them to aid the Exarch against those insolent Barbarians. The
Venetians, much The taking of Rauenna by the Uenetians. The creation of Exarch.
affecting the Pope, willingly granted thereunto, and coming before Rauenna
with a mighty Army, did forthwith take it, and being taken gave it to the
Exarch. It is reported that the name of this new Magistrate was instituted at
the same time by one named Longinus, whom the Emperor Justinian sent into
Italy in Narses sted, to command with sovereign authority. Prodeus of
Vincenza, a valiant Paulus Diaconus in his History of the Lombards sets down
this exploit, and so does Bonitendius the Secretary, who has inserted in his
Commentaries the Copy of the Popes letters written to the Venetians to the
same purpose.

The Venetians in the mean time were in tumult round about Grada, because
Calixtus Bishop of Aquileia, disdaining (as it is thought) that the new Church
of Grada should preceed his which was very ancient, ouer-ranne the bounds of
Grada. The troubles round about Grada.
But the Pope commanding to desist, the matter was forthwith ended.

There arose after that, great dissension, which in a manner produced a civil
war, greatly disquieting the State near to Heraclea. It is said, that the
Dukes insolency The Duke murdered by his own Citizens.
year of his Magistracy.

The Heracleans being amazed at the news of the Dukes death, removed their
Mauritio and Giouanni his son, Heraclea and Equiline were abandoned,
Difference arising about the creation of a new Duke.


I will now return to that wherein the Authors agree among themselves. For
Vrsus being slain, in regard the Islanders could not agree about the creation
of a new Duke, and that the Electors voices did greatly vary, which was never
seen before then, they concluded to choose no Duke in six yvares following,
but to establish some new Magistrate, that should have the whole power and
authority, whose place should be but for a year. Thus it came to pass that
the fortieth year The master or Colonel of the men at Arms Dominico Leon the
first. Felix cornicula the second. Theodato the third. Iuliano Cepari the
fourth.
or thereabouts, from the creation of the first Duke of the Commonwealth, they
invented a new manner of government.

This new Magistrate set up in the Dukes place, was called the Master or
Colonel Dominico Leon. Foelix Cornicula succeeded him, who (as some say) was
chosen at Malamoc. Next followed Theodato son to Duke Vrsus, lately called
from exile, who by the consent of every one, continued the year following, but
he died before his time was expired to the great grief of all men. Iuliano
Cepari (or according to others) Hippati succeeded him. Some Authors say, that
the Venetians in this man's time took Rauenna from the Barbarians. Fabritio
Ciani, (some set down Giouanni for Ciani) enjoyed the fifth years government,
who before the years end, was deposed from his office, and had his eyes thrust
out by the people. Some have written, that this year the Heraclians and
Iesulans fought one against the other with great fury, and that the place of
battle was for a perpetual memory called Parco de Canale. Both of them at
the last being defeated, the Heracleans, Iesulans, and Equilins sought out new
dwellings.

The end of the first Book of the first Decade.
THE SECOND BOOK OF THE FIRST DECAD. Venice.
The Contents of the second Book of the first Decad.
THe government of Duke restored to the City. Duke THEODATO being blind was
banished. The Principality of Galla his successor had the like end. Duke
MAVRITIO by a new example took GIOVANNI his son for companion, in the
government. From whence the strife proceeded betwixt MAVRITIO and FORTVNATO
Bishop of Grada. Diverse opinions French against the Venetians, under the
conduct of PEPIN. A brief description of the Cities situation. PEPIN takes
all from the Venetians except Rialto. PEPIN, defeated at Sea by the Venetians
betwixt the City and Malamoc. The Romans compared with the Venetians, in both
their exploits against the French: The end of the Venetians war against PEPIN
their full liberty. Heraclea repaired by Duke PARTITIATIO. Description of the
Duks Palace, and of the place where the Senate is assembled. The building of
diverse Churches in the City. For what cause the Plays were ordained, which
are made at Shrouetide in the great Court of the Palace. From whence the
Sarracens are descended. How St. MARKS body, being stolen out of Egypt, was
brought to Venice*

THEODATO, the fourth Duke of Uenice.



THE fifth year of the creation of the Master or Colonel of the men at
Theodato, The government of Duke restored.
son to Vrsus, was on the sudden, by the mutual consent of the assembly
held at Malamoc, declared Duke of the Commonwealth. This man obtained of
Astolpho King of Lombardie, that the bounds of Heraclea should stand for the
Venetians in the same terms as they did of old, even to the River of Piauo.
Besides, there was an Haven distant three miles from Chioggia; near unto the
entry whereof stood a Castle, stronger by art then by nature, which the
inhabitants thereof called Brundulla. Nothing is now to be seen there, but the
ruins of a Tower; all the rest is razed to the ground. Theodato going thither
to fortify it, was surprised by Galla his enemy, the thirteenth year of his
government, A cruel and unworthy act.
and having his eyes put out by his disloyal adversary, was miserably deposed
by him from his dignity; the which he having purchased by so wicked a deed

GALLA, the fifth Duke of Uenice.



Diverse do affirm that Theodato was suspected to have affected tyranny by
the new fortification of this Castle: and that by Gallas means Galla being
very dissolute, possessed with all manner of vices, abusing his ill-gotten
Principality, did justly receive his deserved reward. For after that his eyes
were likewise put out, he was banished almost in the beginning of the second
year of his A punishment of God.
government.



MONEGARIO, the sixth Duke of Uenice.





DOminico Monegario was forthwith appointed in his place* unto whom in regard
of his violent and furious nature, were yearly Tribunes assigned; to assist
him in the government: For they feared that the Commonwealth might receive
some great hurt by his rashenesse, if there were not some in the Council to
counterpoise the violence of his Spirit. But this was to small purpose. For in
steed of a bridle and stay, it proved aspurre to his depraved humor; causing
him to thunder forth all manner of mischiefs. Monegario his miserable end*
The people then being impatient at his new tyranny, after they had deprived
him of his sight, turned him out of all authority, the fifth year after his
Mauritio of Heraclea, a wise man, and of virtuous life, succeeded Monegario.

MAVRITIO of Heraclea, the seventh Duke of Uenice.





THis man having well and happily governed the Commonwealth for ^ certain
time, and thereby purchased the love and good will of the people, did obtain
in another assembly (that which no man ever till The first association into
the Principality.
then had done) liberty to associate his son Giouanni, as Colleague with him
in the Principality. Some affirm that in these men's days those of Heraclea
and Equiline retired themselves to Malamoc: and that the cause* of their
retreit proceeded from the secret hatred of the Dukes against Fortunato Bishop
of Grada, about the government of the Commonwealth. This Fortunato Conspiracy
against the Duke.
had with diverse others conspired against them; but their desseignes being
discovered, he with his accomplices, for fear of being apprehended, fled for
safety to the Emperor Charles: where having accused the Venetians, for that
contrary to the Nicephorus, who commanded the Eastern Empire, despising the
Estate of the Roman Empire, they had showed themselves affectionate to that of
Constantinople: seeing that agreement did expressly import that the Venetians
should be free, acknowledging neither of the Empires; This did in such sort
move Charles, as in the end he did by letters command his son Pepin, who
governed the affairs of Italy, to make furious wars upon the Venetians.
Upon this command Pepin forthwith came and assailed the Venetian coast next to
the firm land, where Heraclea and Equiline stood. The inhabitants of those
places frighted at the first alarm of this war, and distrusting the
sufficiency of their walls, nothing strong either by art or nature, fled
away in great troops

But it seems that the Authors do greatly differ concerning the destruction
of What Bonitendius says concerning the association.
Heraclea, and the troubles of those times. Bonitendius disposes the affairs
of those days in such sort, as he says, that Prince Mauritio (in whose time
Charles King of France had wholly abolished in Italy the power and ancient
Kingdom of the Lombards, enemies to the Pope, by reason whereof he was made
Emperor) the affairs of the Venetians not being very safe, neither at home
nor abroad, amiddest those tumultes of Italy, had drawn in to the government
of the Commonwealth, by having wisely appeased the* quarrels of the Citizens,
and bravely defended their frontiers, (rather by sufferance then approbation of
the people,) Giouanni his son for Colleague in the Principality, which fell
out unhappily; not for himself who was old, and dyed soon after; but for his
son which furuiued him, and his sons son, associated by his father, after
the Grand-sires example.

GIOVANNI, the eighth Duke of Uenice.



BEcause, in the government, Giouanni did not follow his fathers steps: and
that besides his other mischiefs committed in his place, he sent Mauritio his
son with a mighty Sea-armie to assail^ Giouanni Bishop of Grada, a virtuous
man in those days: He, (...) yet the rest, do not set down the occasion of
this war. And it is to be supposed that they did expressly conceal it,
because there was none at all. For it The cruel death of the Bishop of Grada.
comes often to pass, that when a wicked man will hurt any one, he never
regardes the occasion why. This naughty son having obeyed the commaundment
of his bad father, and taken this Bishop, threw him headlong down from an
high Tower.

Fortunato the Triestine, who soon after succeeded him, resolving to revenge
Giouanni, did secretly practice with certain chief men of the City, to
depose young Mauritio, and his father likewise, from the Principality, who
without occasion at all, had committed so cruel a murder. But the enterprise
Conspiracy against the Duke discovered.
being discovered, he with certain of his adherents withdrew himself to
Treuiso, among whom were Demetrio Marmani, Foscaro de Georges, and Obellerio of
Malamoc: who at that time were Tribunes.

Fortunato departed from Treuiso, and went into France to the Emperor Charles:
at whose suite (says Bonitendius) the Emperor commanded his son Pepin,
(who by Pope Adrian was named King of Italy) to make war upon the Venetians:
and that in the mean time, in hatred of the murderer Ma^ritio, and Obellerio
of Malamoc, who (as has been said) did follow the Bishop Fortunato to
Treuiso, being declared Duke, both the father and son, were driven forth of
the City; the one being oppressed with old age, The Duke and his son expeld
the City.
went to Mantua, and the other into France: by means whereof, Heraclea, as the
place of their birth, was wholly with the places adjacent destroyed. Some say
that John was sent by the first Mauritio to assail Grada, to revenge the death
of Bishop Giouanni slain in that place; in which charge not bearing himself
faithfully, It is supposed that Fortunato was displeased with him: Neither is
it certainly known how long these three commanded one after another. Yet
Bonitendius sets it briefly down thus; That the first Mauritio governed three
and twenty years, accounting Mauritio, they were both expulsed the seventh
year of their association. Some hold that in the time of the first Mauritio,
the Church of Oliuolla (called afterward the quarter of the Castle) was by
Pope Adrian erected into an Episcopal See^ the Islands of Rialto, Lupria, and
Dorsse-dura, which were called twins, being under the iuridiction thereof.
Some do besides set down, that at the same time, the Scopares an ancient
Family as then in Venice builded the Church of Saint Moses of an excellent
structure, according to the Cities ability in those days, and enriched it
with goodly presents: And moreover, that Saint Michaels Church, which at this
day has many marks Sergius, who having a long time been sick of an
incurable disease, was in the night time divinely warned in a dream, that if
he did visit a Church which was near to Brundula, he should be healed of his
sickness. And because it came to pass according to the prediction, he did
sumptuously repair the same Church, and bestowed on it many rich presents.



OBELLERIO, the ninth Duke of Uenice.





LEt us return to Obellerio, who in his absence being created Duke (as has
been said) coming to Malamoc, having for a time commanded with the peoples
great good liking, did associate his brother Beato for Colleague. This man went
to Constantinople to the Emperor Nicephorus, where he was nobly entertained,
and honored with certain marks of the Empire. In the mean time, Valentin his
younger brother was by the people given to Obellerio for his Colleague. But we
find the Historians so much to vary concerning the occurrents of these times,
as we can hardly judge which of them best deserves to be followed.

There be others which say, that Obellerio being expulsed by his brother
Beato, Charles, whose daughter he married, promising to the King to betray his
country, and that the French being fed with this hope, did suddenly march
against the Venetians; that having in a moment seized on all the Sea-frontiers
he came to Malamoc, which he found not inhabited, from whence he sought to
pass over to Rialto by boat, whither he had heard the Prince and people were
retired, but being there beaten by a furious tempest he lost the greatest part
of his Army, and was enforced to retire without doing any thing worthy of
note. Touching this and the rest which may easily be refuted, all of them
almost Who led the French Army against the Uenetians.
do affirm that Charles was not the chief leader of this enterprise, but his
son Pepin. And the easier to understand how it happened, we must search the
matter from

The Lombards Kingdom being extinct (as we have said) and the affairs of
Italy settled by Charles, or Pepin his son, who was afterward, installed
King: and the Venetians being in the mean time freed by the agreement betwixt
Charles and Nicephorus; Pepin King of Italy.
there happened strife betwixt the two Empires about Dalmatia. It is reported
that by the same agreement (whereof we now spoke) it was expressly mentioned,
that Dalmatia should be a Province of the Grecian Empire. The Romans not well
digesting that such a maritime Province so near Italy, should be cut off The
cause of the war betwixt the two Empires.
from their Empire, after they had a long time debated thereon, both sides
prepared for war. But soon after, truce being agreed on betwixt Nicetes, who
commanded in that Province for the Greek Emperor; and Pepin: this Governor
returned with his Sea-armieto Costantinople, and coming back in time with the
same Army into Dalmatia refreshing himself in the same Province, he resolved
to assail the towns on the Sea coast (for the truce was already expired)
which did obey Pepin. So soon as Pepin had notice of these preparations, he
assembled all his French and Italian forces and took Comada, rounded on every
side The French tak^ Commada. The Greek defeated before Commada.
with the Sea and Lakes in form of an Island: for this place was very
commodious to bridle the enemies attempts. Nicetes coming thither soon after,
was with great loss of his people bravely repulsed. In this encounter diverse
Venetians were slain and hurt. But it is not known whether this Venetian
succor which accompanied the Grecian, were sent by the general consent, or
whether the Grecian did hire Nicetes being disapointed of his purpose came to
Venice. They say that after his arrival, Obellerio and his brother who then
governed the Commonwealth sought to make an agreement betwixt Pepin and
Nicephorus.

The Venetians power was already so increased, as the two mightiest Empires of
the Earth, did look upon them as on a rock exposed to the sundry billows of
Obellerio practices treason against Pepin.
the Sea. Some in those days did think that Obellerio during the treaty of
peace, did practice some treason against Pepin, (as witnesses Paulus Diaconus
in his History of the Lombards) by means whereof Nicetes and Pepin departed
malecontent from Venice, so as the French soon after assailed the Venetians. Al
those in a manner who have written the Venetian History, do impute the cause
of this war to Obellerio* Charles (as some say) did solicit the Emperor,
or (according to the opinion the crediblest Authors) Pepin, to take away the
liberty of the Venetians. Blondus who has written more of the History then
any of the Modernes, says that he is of opinion according to Godfrey of
Viterbo, that Pepin made war twice upon the Venetians, (the first, when
Heraclea was ruinated, of which The opinion of Blondus concerning the war
French against the Venetians.
exploit we have heretofore spoken) and how that at this first time the
Venetians were overcome, and then restored to liberty, upon condition that
they should never more have intelligence with the Greek Emperor. The which,
they not observing, but underhand practicing the friend-ship of Nicephorus, by
the means of Pepin was advertised hereof, which caused him forthwith to come
and assail them once again with the greatest forces he could gather
together, as shall be hereafter declared, with the issue thereof. But we must
first of all refute Blondus, who seems in some sort to contradict himself
when he says, that they yielded themselves at such time time as Heraclea was
destroyed. If it were so, this had not happened in the time of Obellerio and his
brother, but in that time of Giouanni and Mauritio the younger, seeing that
himself affirms in another place, that Heraclea was razed in their time.

Now because all those which have written the Venetian History do steadfastly
Why the French did assail the Venetians.
to pass, that through the Patriarch Fortunato his report made to Charles,
That the Venetians, contrary to the agreement sworn betwixt him and
Nicephorus, whereby they were declared neuters, should have practiced by their
Agents the friendship of Nicephorus: Pepin was commanded by his father to
assail them with all his forces: and because he had destroyed Heraclea and
Equiline, and thereby greatly The Venetians (...) allwaies kept their ancient
liberty.
weakened their whole power, the common report was that the Venetians with
their Duke were subjected. But it is certain that the Venetians did ever
retain their ancient liberty, and that they were freed from that war, on
condition wholly to forsake the friendship of Nicephorus.

Some strife arising soon after betwixt the two Empires concerning Dalmatia,
Nicephorus part (for it is reported that they succored his Lieutenant Nicetes
by Sea and Land) Pepin being then incensed against the Venetians, came and
assailed them with greater forces than before.

All Authors moreover do agree, that at such time as the French made war
upon them, Obellerio and his brother Beato were by a civil or domesticke
broile driven forth of the City, and had retired themselves to the enemy,
whilst Valentin their younger brother commanded within the town. And the better
to understand the state of this fearful war, we will in breife speak
somewhat of the situation of the City, beside that which has been said in
the precedent book.

The City of Venice is (as has been said elsewhere,) situate upon Islands
very Description of the situation of the City of Venice.
near to one another, which the continual ebbing of the Sea, does sever in a
manner by equal spaces, and yet in such manner, as her shoares on the
South Side betwixt the Sea and the Lakes, are divided by the space of forty
thousand paces into ten Pepin having opposed his Sea-armie against that side to
stop the incursions of the enemy, and thereby to take from him all hope of
having victuals, did with his forces that he had on land, assail the nearest
Islands to the firm land; and having in part driven away, and partly
subjected

This siege having contrary to all men's hopes stayed him there sometime, gave
The retreat of Valentin, and all the Venetians to Rialto.
Duke Valentin and those of Malamoc leisure to retire themselves to Rialto with
their wives and children, and whatsoever such a like fear would suffer them to
carry away: not only transporting their particular wealth, but sovereign
Magistrate, and the whole majesty of their common wealth, where it has ever
since then, made her aboade, with greater felicity and increase of all things.
But this place inuites us to speak somewhat of the antiquity of Malamoc. All
those (in a manner) who have written the Venetian History, do affirm that
this Malamoc which is seen at The ancient Malamoc ruinated.
midst of the Sea. Whereby may be coniectured, how much ground the Sea has
devoured since that time. I dare moreover affirm, that that place was in the
beginning called Medoac, and since by the Modernes named Malamoc, by corruption
of the language like unto diverse others.

The Albiolans amazed at the Dukes flight, and those of Malamoc, fell forthwith
The Albiolans yield.
to composition; the like did those few people which remained in Malamoc. These
For it is not credible (though some say it) that there were none in that place,
which was in time past so populous, but one poor old woman.

There be that have likewise affirmed, that they labored first to overcome
them The Venetians policy.
by famine, but that the besieged having with certain warre-like engines
thrown loaves of bread into the enemies camp, the hautie French impatient of
more delay, did fo^thwith join and make fast together diverse hogsheads or
tuns, head to head, and covering them with boards, made a very long bridge.
Whereupon the Venetians perceiving it did behooue them to fight, for their
liberty, their Churches, and for their own lives, and their childrens, and
for want of so doing to undergo the yoke of the proud enemy, resolved to
fight courageously, intending either to die The Venetians resolution.
fighting, or to preserve their liberty, and to hazard their last fortune by
that manner of fight, wherein they were most exercised. Having then embarked
themselves in small light boats apt for fight and sail, the wind and tide
serving them; after they had tarried for the ebb, they came furiously upon the
enemy, who already approached. There began on a sudden a bloody battle
betwixt them, sustained nevertheless by very different courages: For the
French fought, incited with a desire to spoil* Different intents of the
combatants.
and to maintain their former honor; But the Venetians, for their wives, and
children, for their public and particular wealth, and for their liberty,
which they held deerer then all the rest. And because the bridge was weakly
built, and continually shaken by the waves of the sea, the enemy being
accustomed to firm footing, began The French vanquished by the Uenetians.
of the french: the sword on the one side, and the Sea on the other, presenting
death unto them. The multitude of such as were then slain and drowned, gave
the first ground, why that place, by the which men turn from Malamoc to the
Rialto, was, for that notable victory, called afterward Orphano.

We have heard, how the Venetians fought with good success against Pepin the
son of Charles. We may then, upon a just ground in some things compare the
Venetians The Venetians compared wit^ the Romans.
Commonwealth with that of the Romans, as we will often hereafter do. For
diverse things are to be found, as well in the prosperity as adversity of both
the Commonwealths, much like the one to the other. It is certain that the
prosperous beginnings and increase of both these people, were wholly almost
extinct by the Barbarians: albeit the Venetians Common-welth was in some sort
more new in the time of her first troubles, than was that of the Romans in the
time of the Senonians war. Yet notwithstanding each of them had the French
for their enemies. The Romans were assailed by the Senonians, a Nation
altogether unknown before the taking of the City; These by the Belgians, no
less courageous, but more mighty then the Senonians: because they were,
besides the forces of the Empire, aided Charles and Nicephorus, it had favored
one of the parties. The Senonians were masters of all, saving the Capitol. The
Belgians left the Venetians nothing but Rialto. And both the one and other
deceived the enemy by casting loaves of bread. These men defended the Sea
banks; and the other a little hill. Each of them have valiantly repulsed the
French, puffed up with the pride of his victories and happy success. But the
first did it voluntarily; and this by constraint. But the Roman therein
deserved high glory: in that all her enemies were slain, And the Venetians,
in that they defeated so mighty a king, assisted as well with his own forces,
as with those of his Father in a more eminent and magnificent place, than
either Heraclea or Malamoc.

Thus far extended the Cities infancy. Now follows her youth: during which
the Venetians, after they had confirmed their forces, did mightily enlarge the
limits of their estate.

But we will return to Pepin, who amazed (as they say) at such a loss, did
forthwith Pepin retires to the firm land.
raise the siege. And after the French had spoiled all the places they went
through, he brought back his Army. Some say, that Obellerio, and his brother,
being authors of so many mischiefs, did willingly banish themselves, and
followed the enemy. Others, who make the Emperor Charles the author of this
war, and not Pepin, do affirm, that the French after this loss made peace
with the Venetian, Obellerio into the Country: which the Venetians having
unwillingly granted (as the event witnessed) so soon as Charles was gone,
Obellerio was cut in pieces by the people: and his bowels being rent forth of
his body, were torn in pieces by some of the multitudes teeth; his wife
likewise, who was reported to be of the royal blood of France, was slain
with him. But neither was Charles the leader of this Army, nor did this happen
which they report. And the common consent of the crediblest Historians, makes
me to believe, that it was Pepin which made war on the Venetians. But whether
it were the one or the other, it is certain that the Venetians did wholly
preserve their liberty, and became open

ANGELO PARTITIATIO, the 10. Duke of Venice, and the first at RIALTO.





SOme report, that Obellerio being slain, his brother Beato held the
Principality; and others say, that Obellerio and Beato being expelled,
Valentin their younger brother commanded in the City. But howsoever it was (for
it is hard to judge the right in such diversity of opinions) it is certain
that the Government of these three, lasted not above five years. Angelo
Partitiatio succeeded these three, who was the first that Badoairio, from whom
the Badoairians are descended. The most curious Historians have numbered the
Partitiatij, among the noblest families which came from Heraclea to Rialto. And
that which makes me easily to believe it is; because among the most memorable
matters acted in his Government, Heraclea after it was repaired, (...) (...)
(...).
we find the reparation of Heraclea* which by reason thereof was afterward
called Villa-noua. And because that in the time of the war with the French, a
great number of people ran to Rialto, so as the place was filled with an
incredible multitude of inhabitants; it came to pass, that threescore small
Islands next to them were joined together by Bridges. But all men did think
this place, for the great multitude of people, and for the commodiousnesse
thereof, worthy, that the Sovereign Magistrate, and the whole State of the
Commonwealth should reside there. And with a good and happy presage for the
Duke and the whole Venetian State, it was decreed, That Rialto should ever
after be the Princes seat. According Rialto chosen for the Princes ordinary
residence.
to this conclusion; to the end that the Sovereign Magistrate should not want
a house; the Duke himself did forth with appoint a place, whereon to build the
Dukes Palace, which stands (as we see at this day) near to the goodly Church
of St. Mark. But we may truly say, that it is only the old Palace, which
Partitiatio The Dukes Palace in Rialto.
did edify. For the other neighbour-buildings confronting the Senate House do
represent a newer architecture. For it is nor likely, that in those days they
could tell from whence to have gotten so many costly pillars, and excellent
stones: their means being then very small. But whether it were in
Partitiatios time, or since (as it is most credible by the report almost of all
Annalists) that this work was built: the excellency and greatness thereof
does deserve, that such a thing should not be

This place then, as it is appointed to many and sundry purposes, has
likewise Description of the Dukes Palace.
many and diverse fronts: whereof that which looks upon the West and South, is
vnder-propt by two ranks of columns; and that which supporteth the whole
burden of the work, has pillars of a strange kind of stone, rather big
then long. The Arches are very sumptuous, made of the same matter and
workmanship, embracing under the bending of a costly vault, diverse columns
set very near together. That rank which is above, is made almost of the same
stone and fashion; and because A very excellent Library within the Prelace.
greatest part whereof was given by the last Will and Testament of Cardinal
Bessarion. Wherefore they are called Pirguays.
affairs of the Commonwealth. For the ancient Fathers, the Authors of this
State, have, among other things, borrowed of the Romans, to name those Preguays
which debate in the Senate, because they were entreated to deliver their
opinion, concerning that which was spoken by him that held the chiefest place
in the Senate. But we will speak more amply in an other place. We will now
return to Partitiatio, who having two sons, he sent the one named Iustiniano
Iustiniano the Dukes son sent to Constantinople.
to Leo Emperor of Greece, by whom he was liberally entertained, and greatly
honored and praised; and in the mean time, he took the other, named Giouanni,
for his Colleague, whereat Iustiniano at his return was in such sort moved, as
he obstinately refused to come and see his Father: But the old man being
extremely desirous to see his son, after he had deposed Giouanni, who
refused to obaie his Father Giouanni deposed by the people.
(had not the people constrained him thereunto) did associate Iustiniano, and
his nephew Angelo son to Iustiniano: the people did confine Giouanni that was
deposed, to Constantinople. Some say that he went of his own accord, to
Pergamus to the Emperor Leon, from whence, returning, he did, by his Fathers
commandment, take his wife and children and went to Constantinople. The
Emperor Leo gives many goodly relikes to the Prince.


About the same time, the Emperor Leon gave Partitiatio the body of Saint
Zachary, and part of the garments of our Savior Jesus Christ, and of the
glorious Virgin: Zacharies Church which he had built. He did moreover translate
the Monks of the Covent of Saint Seruulo at the entreatie of the Abbot, into
Saint Hilaries Church, which stood then in the farthest part of the Rialto. And
they which now know those places, do at this day show the ruins thereof in
the firm Land. He built likewise at the same time two Churches in the
Islands, in those days called the Twins, one to Saint Seuerus, and the other
to Saint Laurence. Not long after, his son Vrsus made a Monastery of Nuns
of Saint Laurence his Church. I find in some Authors, that he did likewise
build, to the honor of the Prince of the Apostles, the Church of Oliuollo,
which stands in that part of the town which at this Sergius and Bacchus were
brought thither.

About the same time likewise, diverse of the chiefest of the City conspired
against A conspiracy against the Prince discovered.
these Princes. Giouanni Talonico, and Bono Bragadino chief of the conspiracy
were put death. Monetario, one of the accomplices of this bad design, saved
himself by flight; but all his goods were confiscate. Some Authors do
likewise affirm, that, under this Princes government, Vlric Bishop of
Aquileia, accompained with certain of the chief of Friuli were vanquished by
the Venetians in a fight at Sea. This Vlric was a little before condemned for
an Heretic by Pope Alexander. This man Vlric Bishop of Aquileia vanquished by
the Venetians.
for despite that the Church of Grada was preferred before his of Aquileia,
being Vlric, with diverse other Gentlemen, prisoners. Then the victorious
Venetian pursuing this scattered troop even to the firm Land, did put all the
Seacoast of the Forlani (called at this day the Friuli) to fire and sword, and
destroyed likewise certain towns by their sudden incursions. Diverse that
escaped from the battle, not knowing the ways, after they had strayed a long
time through the marshes of Caorli, fell at last into the hands of the
victors* The Venetians to purchase the name of meek and gentle, did set Vlric
and all the rest of the prisoners at liberty: on condition The public games
at ^tide.
that they should send yearly to Venice, on the same day that the victory was
obtained, twelve wild Boares, (with as many loaves of one size) which, with a
Bull, should be killed before the general assembly: And they should beside,
overthrow with their Pikes Castles of wood. All this is yet at this day
observed with great preparation, as yearly sports, in the market place, on the
sameday as the battle was fought.

This is that which happened as well at home, as abroad, during the government of
Angelo Partitiatio; who after that he had transported the Ducall state to
Rialto, did there begin his government with better augurie, than did in times
past Paulutio at Heraclea, or Theodato since that at Malamoc. For since the
limits of the State

IVSTINIANO, the 11. Duke of Uenice.





IVstiniano after his fathers death governed the Commonwealth alone. Soon
after, he persuaded the State to send to Michael the Eastern Succor sent to
the Greek Emperor against the Sarazens.
Emperor (for the perpetual conservation of their friendship with the Grecian
Empire) certain armed ships to aid him against the Saracens, who at that
time did overrun most of the Islands of Europe, and chiefly Sicilie: but not
meeting the enemy, they soon returned to the City.

And because we have spoken of the Saracens, it shall not be impertinent to
say From whence came the name of Sarazens.
somewhat of the original of the name. For it was then very new; and brought
in according to the opinion of some, in the days of Mahomet: who in his
detestable Sara, Abraham's lawful wife) who had embraced his sect; as if those,
which followed his Doctrine, had been by a Divine oracle the only lawful
successors, and heirs of the Divine promise. I will not likewise deny, but
that this name may be derived from Sarraca, a City in Arabia Foelix: But all
Historians do in a manner hold the first opinion for true. This Nation has
made many and diverse Roades into Affricke and Europe, and many likewise into
Asia, but they have been overthrown and defeated, as well by the French
Armies, as by those of the Venetians. Let us now return to the Venetians
Mark, brought to them from Alexandria after this manner.

The king of that Country caused a magnificent Palace to be built, and for the
erecting thereof, had commanded to take all the fair and rarest stones from
the ancient Churches and other buildings, as well public as private; and S.
Marks Church in Alexandria being built of the same matter, it was thought that
it would not be spared: the which Stauracius the Monk, and Theodore the
Priest, both Grecians, fearing, who did not only celebrate Divine Service there
but as Sextens did heedfully keep that sacred place, were in great care. But
it luckily came to pass that Bono of Malamoc and Rustico of Tourcelles arrived
there, being driven by tempest into that many goodly promises, assuring them
that if they would deliver unto them the body of S. Mark, that both of them
should be greatly honored of the Venetians. At the first they rejected this
demand, as holding it a sacrilegious matter to remove the Why S. Marks body
was brought from Alexandria.
holy body out of his place. But it came to pass by the divine providence,
that whilst they were talking about the matter, some of those who had
commission from the king to seek such stones, came into the Church, and caused
diverse stones which were fit for the building of the new-begun Palace to be
taken thence, greatly thereby disfiguring the Church. These two Sextens being
incensed hereat, and vehemently urged by the Venetians to co^discend to their
request, seeing some likelihood of the Churches ruin, did consent to their
demand. But to the end that the Townsmen (who were Claudina into the sheet, in
stead of that which they had taken away. It is reported that at the same time
there came such a pleasant sweet smell forth of the Church, as every one
ran to taste it. And the matter had easily been discovered, if they had not
perceived the forepart of the cloth and the seals to be whole. And because
they certainly knew that they could not, without great danger, bear the stolen
body to their ships, they bethought themselves of a new subtle invention to
deceive the people: The The Alexandrines insolent to strangers.
painted with admirable art in the sumptuous Church of Saint Mark.

Now to eschew the brauadoes which that Nation did daily use to strangers, to
discover matters, they did put that holy burden into a basket, and covered it
with herbs; then they threw swines flesh upon it, which that Nation according
to their ancient custom did extremely abhor: from whence came this proverb
spoken by Augustus, That he had rather be Herod's swine than his son. Those
Augustus his proverb.
then which were appointed to carry it away, being formerly instructed what
to do, cried aloud when they met any in the streets, Ganzer, which signifies
in the Barbarian Policy of those which carried S. Marks body to the ships.
language, swine, and in this manner they brought it to their ships; and the
Mark appeared to Bono of Mamaluc, and willed him presently to Miraculous
apparition of S. Mark.
strike sail, least the ships, driven by force of the winds upon the rocks
near at hand, should happen to perish: which being suddenly done, they were
by this Divine oracle preserved from danger.

The matter being diuulged at Venice before their arrival, caused a
marvelous Mark in his lifetime The prophecy accomplished
going toward Aquileia, his ship arriving in those Islands, it was revealed
unto him in his sleep, that his bones should one day rest in those places
which he saw so desert and uninhabited. Amiddest this joy there was nothing
heard but songs and daunces, with vows, and prayers, that in all time of need
it would please him to come and visit his Citizens, and to suffer his body to
rest for ever in that place, which the Commonwealth would afterward dedicate
unto him. And in this manner

The end of the second Book of the first Decade.
THE THIRD BOOK Venice.
The Contents of the third Book of the first Decad.
ADeane and Priests were ordained in St. MARKS Church. OBELLERIO taken in the
Isle of Veggio is beheaded. Malamoc being besieged and taken, CARROSIO, goes
into France: Soon after he being restored by the practice of the Chief
Citizens, is finally confined in the Island of Grada and there dies. Saint
PAVLS Church built in the midst of the City. The Venetians unluckily fight
with the Narentines. Those of Verona are succored by the Venetians against the
inhabitants of the Lake of Benac. A mighty Sea-armie against the Sarracen
Moors. What the Moors did in a short space, about Rome and the rest of
Italy. The Venetians and the Greeks defeated by the Moors on the Sea of
Crotona. The bodies of Saint PANCRATIVS, and Saint SABINA, given by the Pope,
were put into Saint ZACHARIES Church. Civil dissension does for a time much
hinder the Commonwealth. TRADONICO is villanously murdered by conspiratours.
When Poueggia began to be inhabited. The Isle of Grada was by the Venetians
coming delivered from the Sarracens siege. Why Dorce-duro was inhabited.
Commachia taken by the Venetians for a revenge. The Duke CANDIANO slain
fighting against the Narentines. The Duke, and Senate, give limits to those of
Chioggia. What the Hunnes did in Hungary The Hunnes defeat BERENGARIVS at his
entry into Italy, and after they had spoiled the Venetian Territory, they
come and besiege the City of Venice. The Venetians overcome the Hunnes at Sea.
The Histrians made tributaries to the Venetians; and they fight with good
success (as some say) at the same time against the Narentines. Duke CANDIANO
was murdered by the people for his overmuch pride, and for being suspected to
have affected Tyranny.

IN this sort did the City daily increase, and it was not only augmented in
strength, but in Religion, and by this happy success did the government of
Iustiniano flourish. But by how much it was happier, by so much shorter was it.
Such is the ordinary custom of humane affairs, as they cannot long continue
in happiness. For soon after that he had laid St. Marks body in the Chapel
of the Castle, and made himselefe Justinians last will and Testament concerning
S. Marks Church
the Host of so great a Sanctity, he dyed. He ordained by his will, that his
heirs should build a greater Church to Saint Mark. He did moreover enrich by
the same will the Churches of S. Zachary and Hilarie with many great revenues.

GIOVANNI PARTITIATIO the twelfth Duke of Uenice.





GIouanni Partitiatio brother to Iustiniano (who being called home from Greece
was made his Colleague) being declared Prince, began his public government by
Divine actions; and appointed for the same purpose the nearest Church to the
Palace: into the which (being dedicated according to the ancient manner) the
body of the holy Evangelist was brought; and from among the Clergy certain
Priests were chosen to celebrate Divine Service there, unto whom was given a
chief Officer, at this day called the Deane. This building was at that time of
a mean stature, nothing like to that riches The Creation of the Deane of S.
Marks Church.
and greatness wherewith it is at this day adorned. But we will speak of the
Obellerio, who, according to the opinion of some Annalists, did (as has been
said in the precedent Book) voluntarily absent and bannish himself, came into
the Isle of Curtia, vulgarly called at this day Veggia, resolving to stir up
new troubles for his reentrie into the government. Partitiatio did forthwith
arm a mighty Fleet, and went to meet him, before he had time to attempt any
thing, and at his first arrival surprised him. In the mean time diverse of
Malamoc, incited by their ancient love toward Obellerio (who Giouanni being
heereat moved did suddenly break up his camp; and being with his army
returned to Venice, came in hatred of those which were fled, took Malamoc, and
Malamoc ruined. The death of Obellerio.
burnt it. Then having taken new forces, he returned with all speed to Veggia*
which being taken, he caused Obellerio his head to be stricken of.

Not long after, diverse of the Nobility conspired against him, by the means
of Carrosio, son to Bonico, and being driven thence by reason of this sudden
conspiracy, he fled into France. Carrosio in the mean time, without the
consent of the people, Duke Giouanni flies.
seized on the Dukes Palace. Against him (thus brought in by himself into the
government) arose a company of the chief Citizens, whose names were, Basilio
Trasimondo, Giouanni Marturio, and Dominico Orcianico. These men were followed
by thirty other gentlemen, who from the beginning did mislike of Duke Giouanni
his The usurper punished Giouanni repealed.
bannishment. They assailed Carrosio, took him, put out his eyes, and
afterward bannished him: They slew moreover Theodato Cy^ri, Marini Patritio,
Dominico Monetario, with diverse others of Carrosio's faction. The government of
the Commonwealth was in the mean time committed to Vrsus Bishop of Oliuollo,
Basilio Trasimondo, and Giouanni* Maturio, until Giouanni were returned out of
France: who being come home, they willingly restored it unto him. This man
having in process of time much to do to appease many secret hatreds against
those of the family of Mastalici, being at that time one of the chiefest of
Venice, was on a day surprised by the contrary faction near to S. Peter's
Church, whither he went to hear Divine Service: and being despoiled of the
ornaments of sovereign dignity, so soon Duke Giouanni deposed from his
charge and becomes a Priest.
as they had cut the hair of his beard and head* they confined him to Grada in
the 8. year of his government; where entering into holy orders, he died soon
after.

PIERO TRADONICO, the 13. Duke of Uenice.





PIero Tradonico was chosen in his place. He was borne at Pola, and being
driven out of Equiline in the time of the French-mens wars, came to Rialto.
Pola is an ancient City in the confines of Italy, and Pola an ancient City.
built (as Callimachus says) in a gulf of the Sea, in form of an Haven, by
the Colchians sent to pursue Medaea. Tradonico took his son Giouanni for
Colleague. He caused a Church to be built in the honor of Saint Paul, the
Apostle of the Gentiles, as costly as the Cities means in those days would
permit, and in that place, where it is at this day to be seen, with signs of
great antiquity. It is said that he made some attempts on their enemies the
Narentines, but

The Ambassadors of those of Verona, came at the same time to Venice, to crave
The (...) request against those of Ben^c.
help against the inhabitants of the Lake of Benac: whom it was to be thought
they could not overcome without foreign aid. Some write that those of the
Lake craved this aid. The most curious Authors nevertheless do affirm, that
it was those of Verona: who having by the advice of the Venetians furnished the
Lake with ships of war, did the more easily overcome their enemies: For
which they did not only thank the Venetians, but sent them rich and costly
presents to Venice. Others say (for there is nothing wherein the Authors do
not almost disagree)

In this state stood the affairs of the Venetians, being more prosperous
within the City, and the places near to the firm Land, than abroad, when
Theodosius The coming of Theodosius to Venice.
of Constantinople, General of the Sea-armie of Michael the Greek Emperor*
against the Moors, arrived at Venice, where he labored with Tradonico, to
have the Venetians to send forth a mighty army against the Barbarians, which
spoiled the coasts of Apulia.

They freely granted his request in honor of the Emperor, and they armed A
Sea-armiegraunted to the Grecian against the Sarracens
threescore Galleys against the Moors* In regard whereof Theodosius entitled
Trad^nico, Protos-pater of the Grecian Empire; which dignity was next to the
Emperors.

Saba the Captain of the Moors, (for it will not be impertinent briefly to
From whence the Sarracen Moors are descended.
speak somewhat of the incursions of this Nation, who are reported to be
descended from Mauritania) at his arrival in Italy took the Seaport in
Tuscanie, now called Ciuita Vecchia, others term it Centochiese by the name of
a Town near thereunto, which the Emperor Adrian did very sumptuously build
(as witnesses Pliny in his Epistles.) I dare affirm these men to be the
ancient Pirgues, the The Pirgueys.
which the name of their City does seem to show which is called Vecchia; and
I would call it the Haven of Pirgues, were it not, that hard by as ye go to
Ostia, there is a place, which the Inhabitants call Pyrgues at this day. Now
Saba having landed his men in that place, and left a sufficient Garrison for
the Guarde of his Guido's Saint Peter's Church at Rome taken by the Moors.
coming, whom Pope Gregory the fourth had called out of France for the Cities
safety, he did on a sudden dislodge thence, and took his journey betwixt Via
Appia, and Via Latina, putting all the Suburbs to fire and sword, not sparing
the noble Church of S. Paul two miles distant from the City. The spoils made
by the Moors.


The Barbarian turned toward Via Latina, and being come to the Forest of
Cassina, he took by force the City which stood therein, spoiling and
ruinating it. The new City which was since then builded there, is at this day
called Saint Germans. The Moors return into Italy.
they left their country and returned into Italy: where they tumultuously

Now seeing it was to be feared; that the Moors would spoil all the Sea
coasts, Theodosius distrusting the forces which he brought from Greece, had
recourse (as has already been said) to the Venetians succors; the which
being easily obtained, he marched against the Barbarians. In the mean time, so
soon as Saba understood Saba the Moore before Tarentum.
the enemies coming he raised his siege from before Tarentum, and suddenly
retired with his army into the streights of the Sea near to Crotona. It is not
known whether he did it for fear, or whether it were most auailable for his
purpose to deceive the enemy under color of flight, to constrain him thereby
to make some The City of Crotona.
rash attempt. Crotona is situated on the Sea of Tarentum, a very ancient
City, Apollos Oracle under Nicellus their Captain; and in times past so
mighty, as the Crotonians had an Army of an hundred and thirty thousand
fighting men, at such time as they were vanquished by the Locrians near to the
River Sagra. They were great warriors, and very expert in a wrestling. But
Pythagoras of Samos, and Milo his disciple, were the chief Pythagoras and Milo
the two ornaments of the Crotonians.
ornaments of that City; the one for being a Citizen of the same, and the best
wrastler of his time; and the other for his skill in Philosophy.

In this place (for the Greek and Venetian Fleet was there arrived) after
certain usual light skirmshes, at last they came to strokes with the whole
forces of The battle of Crotona. The Greeks stir.
either side. The Greeks being broken and defeated, the whole strength of the
Moors lighted on the Venetians: But they being extremely busied in the fight
never perceived the flight of their fellows, until they found themselves
environed on every side by the Barbarians: and by this men's did the Venetian
Galleys sustain the force of the furious enemy. But the great multitude of
the Moors prevailing The Venetian Army defeated before Crotona. The Moors
came into Dalmatia.
they were either sunk or taken. Those Venetians which were left alive, were
taken by the enemy; the rest, were either slain in the fight, or drowned.
Some write that the battle of Crotona was before the Moors besieged Rome,
(among whom is Bonitendius) The Barbarians proud of this success, sailed
into Dalmatia, where they spoiled certain Towns, surprised by their sudden
incursions. They took likewise certain Ships laden with rich merchandise,
returning from Syria, who having from far espied the Moors fleet, had
retired themselves into the Gulf of Trieste: But after they had taken them, in
hatred of the Venetians, they slew all the prisoners.

The report of the loss of the battle at Crotona, brought a marvelous
grief The Narentine^ ro^des even to Caorli.
their sudden and unlooked for coming, they did forthwith put themselves to
Sea. The Narentines joyful for the Venetians loss, came suddenly from
Dalmatia, to steal and spoil, even as far as Caorli. This Town stands at
the mouth of the River Limenes, whither the ancient Venetians, which fled from
Concorda in the troublous time of the Hunnes, had retired themselves. About the
same time Pope Bennet comes to Venic^ The bodies of S. Pancracius, and S.
Sabina brought to Venice.
or soon after (as says Bonitendius) Pope Benedict came to Venice, where at
the Agnes de Morosin Abbess of the place, he promised to send from Rome the
bodies of Saint Pancratius, and Saint Sabina, by the devotion done to which
bodies, the Church might be furthered in the building. They were afterward
sent thither, and placed with great reverence in a little Chapel of the
Church. The Emperor Lotharius confirms the franchizes of Venice


Under this Princes government the Emperor Lotharius (and many Emperors
likewise after him) did confirm by writing all the ancient privileges, and
immunities of the Venetians, to the end they might be inuiolably observed.
Moreover as the Commonwealth was then not very forunate abroad, it was much
less at home: For the civil dissension of six of the noblest families in the
City divided Iustiniani, the Polani Great strife among the Citivens.
and the Bassei; on the other the Barbolani, the Seliani, and the Seuoli, who
being joined together, did by their quarrels, oftentimes present the people
with very fearful and horrible spectacles. And after they had fought in the
midst of the City with different success, even almost to the total ruin
of one another, the Barbolani with all their adherents were driven forth of the
City. But soon after, at the entreatie of the Emperor Ladowicke, to whom
they had retired themselves, the strife between the two factions being
appeased, they were restored to their houses. These things happened during the
government of Piero Tradonico: who after he had governed certain years alone
after his sons death, whom he had associated Duke Tradonico murdered.
service at Saint Zacharies Church, it came to pass as he returned home-ward,
he was on a sudden and unlooked for assailed by certain conspiratours, and
by them murdered, the ninth year of his government. At this so horrible and
fearful a deed, his Ministers and servants, which waited upon him, moved
with a charitable affection toward the old man, endeavored to defend him, and
to repel the wrong, but being driven away by a greater number, and stronger
then themselves, they suddenly with a great noise seized on the Dukes Palace,
where being besieged by the conspiratours, they did thirty days together
sustain their fury. At the last, after they had received assurance of the
people, that the defending of so good a Prince against the treacherous attempts
of wicked conspiratours, should not be imputed unto them for a capital crime;
nor yet the seizing on the public place for their safety, which they had so
courageously defended: they came forth of the Palace; having first of all
capitulated, That the City should not leave such an example The Princes
household-seruants retired into the Palace, do^ Capitulate.
unpunished, to have wickedly and miserably slain so virtuous a Prince,
without desert at all; saying, That it was an heinous matter, to behold
Citizens to walk in a City, where they had committed so execrable a
parricide, and besprinkled the peoples face with the blood of the sovereign
Magistrate.

The people appointed three men to enquire concerning the murder, to punish
Three men appointed by the people to enquire of the Princes murder. The
murderers punished.
the guilty, and to take order for those who had seized on the Dukes Palace.
The three which were deputed, were Piero Bishop of Equiline, Giouanni
Archdeacon of Grada, and Dominico Massoni. These men bannished the guilty for
ever; some into France, and the rest into Greece. Diverse, who as yet were not
condemned, were murdered. Vrso Grugnario one of the conspirators died
miserably, being possessed by Tradonico did not only displease men, but God.
And those who had seized on the Dukes Palace, because it was not done without
great commotion in the City; some of them were bannished out of the limits of
the Venetians, and the most part of the rest were confined into the Isle of
Pouegia. Pouegia newly inhabited.
This place is five mile distant from the City: whither after they had carried
their wives and children, they did in time so increase, as the Town which they
built there was afterward greatly inhabited; but such as it was, the wars of
the Genouezes did wholly ruinate it.



VRSO PARTITIATIO, the 14. Duke of Venice.



THe Commonwealth being quieted by judgment of these three men: Vrso
Partitiatio was declared Duke. Under this man the City was, abroad and at
home, prosperously governed. At the beginning of his government, to the end
that the Venetians might have a firm peace, they were of opinion to send
hostages to the Barbarians. Their Annalls affirm this: but diverse Historians
make no mention of hostages. The Saracens soon after, who came from Alexandria
about eight and twenty years after Saba the Moors coming into Italy, had
possessed the Isle of Candie: and being come on a sudden into Dalmatia, after
they had spoiled the Seacoasts of Histria, The Saracens before Grada.
they came and besieged Grada. Vrso did in such sort terrify them by his
sudden arrival, as with great fear they withdrew their vessels, and in an
instant hoised sail and put to Sea. Some Historians say that Giouanni the
Princes son, a courageous young man, did bear himself very valiantly in
this action. If it be so, it will The S^racens fought with before Grada.
not be amiss to believe, that the Barbarians were so far from flying away
upon report of the coming of the Venetians fleet, as that on the contrary
they were so Bonitendius reports that Vrso did not only fight there fortunately
against the Saracens, but likewise at Tarentum: That he did moreover bravely
assail the Na^entines with 30. ships of war, for that they had, contrary to
the agreement, robbed and spoiled certain towns of Histria. But the
Historians make no mention why he took Arms for the Histrians, seeing they
were not as yet under the Venetians Dominion. It is likely, that after they had
ouerrunne the Histrians, they entered upon the Venetians frontiers. Vrso in the
mean space bare a secret grudge to Pietro Bishop of Grada, till such time as
he had confirmed Dominico Calloprini, who had been elected Bishop of
Tourcelles; the which he refused to do in regard they were enemies. Now the
state of the Commonwealth being peaceably governed abroad, the Duke enacted,
That those who were called the Princes Squiers, should inhabit that part of the
City, which at the beginning Dorsse dura newly inhabited.
was called Dorsse-dura, and should build houses there. And in this sort that
place began to be habitable, which before then was desert for fear of
Sea-incursions. This Princes good fortune was likewise the cause, that the
ancient strife betwixt the Venetians and the Forlani, occasioned by a
particular affection which each of them did bear to the churches of Aquileia
and Grada, was wholly extinct, upon the promise which Vulp^rtio of Aquileia
made, never more to molest the Church of Grada. All Basilius, Vrso declared
Prothospater of the Grecian Empire.
Prothos-pater of the Grecian Empire. But because Basilius should not overcome
him in bounty, he sent twelve great Bells to Constantinople to him for a
present; and the Greeks by this means of the Venetians liberality began at
that time to use Bells.

GIOVANNI PARTITIATIO, the 15. Duke of Uenice.



NOw Vrso, after he had thus obtained whatsoever belonged to the adornment of
man's life, deceased in the seventh year of his government: and by his death
Giouanni his brother began to govern the Commonwealth. He determined to send
his brother Badoario to Pope John: that by his authority Commachia might be
added to their State. This is likely to have been plotted by the Venetians,
because this place stood on the ancient confines of Venice* Marini, Earl of
Commachia, being advertised of their determination, laid wait for the
Venetian on the confines of Rauenna, as he went toward Rome. He hurt and took
him, and after he had The Dukes brother taken by the Count of Commachia.
made him to promise to deal no more in that business, he sent him home. But
Cyprian and Cornelius on the banks of Malamoc, which a while after, in the
days of Prince Vitalis Michaeli, and by his means, was converted into a
Monastery of Nuns. Then falling sick, he left his brother Pietro (by the
peoples command) for his successor but recovering his health contrary to all
men's expectation, he took him for Colleague in the Government; Vrso his other
brother, who was elder then Pietro deceased. Soon after, being troubled with a
dangerous disease, which hindered him from intending the affairs of the
Commonwealth, ( Vrso having in the mean space voluntarily deposed himself)
after he had permitted the people Duke Giouanni does voluntarily depose
himself.
to elect a new Duke, he retired to his own house as a private Citizen; the
sixth year of his Government being not fully expired. Some say, that both the
brethren deposed themselves, because they perceived the people to be
discontented with their Government.



PIETRO CANDIANO, the first, the 16. Duke of Uenice.



GIouanni being deposed, Pietro Candiano succeeded him; unto whom, Giouanni
being called into the Senate, did freely surrender the titles of the Sovereign
Magistrate, and withdrew himself to his own private house. At the same time
certain galleis were sent against the Narentines, ancient enemies to the
Venetians (who robbed all the neighbor Seas) to prevent their incursions; but
they returned without doing any thing, by reason they could no where meet with
the enemy. Not long after, Prince Candiano went against the same enemies, with
twelve Galleis (some say but seven) and met them near to the Promontorie of
Dalmatia, which the inhabitants call Micolal. The (...) animated by their Duke,
did furiously assail them. The Liburnians did bravely rece^ie them. They
fought on both sides with more fury and courage than with forces. The
Venetians at the first had the better, having sunk certain of the enemies
ships: but the great multitude of the Barbarians beginning to pre^aile, and
the Dukes Gallie being boarded, Prince Candiano fighting valliantly The Duke
dies fighting with the Narentin^s.
was slain, after he had commanded the Commonwealth but six months. His

At the first report of this loss, the whole City was in an vproare: which
had Giouanni Parti tiatio takes again the government upon him.
been much greater, if Giouanni Partitiatio, who had renounced the sovereign
dignity, had not suddenly at the peoples entreatie taken upon him again the
government of the Commonwealth, with the Ducall titles. But the tumult being
appeased, the people with a common consent, named Pietro, surnamed Tribuno, for
their Prince.



PIETRO TRIBVNO, the 17. Duke of Uenice.



THis man was likewise made Prothospater by the Grecian Emperor: Tribuno
caused a wall to be made The City (...) fortified.
to defend the City, from the little Canall near to the Castle unto the
Church of Saint Maria Zubanica, with a chain from that wall unto S. Georges
Church, for fear least the enemy should enter the City on a sudden. But at
this day there is no sign of that ancient wall to be seen: He gave bounds to
the Chioggians, from their Haven along the shore, even to the mouth of the
River Acide: which are called Fosson, Besba, and Conchia; and so back again to
the same Haven.

At the same time, the Venetian State, with that of all Italy on the Seacoast
The Huns (...) into Italy the second time.


The Hunnes, who (as we have elsewhere said) were come forth of Scithia,
entered Italy with great fury. A very great multitude of them leaving Scithia
at that time, would stay in no place, til they had first seen how their
friends and kindsfolke in Hungary fared. These men by continual frequentation
with the Italians, being accustomed to the iournies of Italy, had for the most
part changed their natural cruelty and manner of life: by means whereof
waxing m^re civil, they were driven from the places which they had gotten by
right of war, by those that came Civil war betwixt the Huns.
after them. The cruelty of this Nation is reported to be such, as after that
they had been in Hungary, they abstained not from eating humane flesh after
their country manner; who forthwith took upon them the names of those whom
they had driven thence, and were called Hungarians. Those which were expulsed,
were likewise Attila, they were afterward named Bauarians, then Huns; and
certain letters being taken away from both names, it was made but one.

These then after diverse warlike actions done as well in France as Germany,
after they had vanquished Lewis king of Germany, and made him tributarie,
carrying Lewis King of Germany, Tributarie to the Huns.
great store of booty home with them, being proud of so good success,
resolved to make attempts on Italy; having perhaps understood that they were
at strife among themselves. By means whereof coming first into Misia, they
defeated the Princes of the same in a bloody battle, and made them
tributarie. Departing thence* upon report that they determined to invade
Italy: Berengarius, who at the Berengarius Berengarius defeated by the Huns.
being overcome, fled from the battle with the loss of the greatest patt
of his forces.

The Hunnes became more hauty after this victory, and they entered Italy the
nearest way, putting all they met with to fire and sword; and coming to
Treuiso Treuiso taken by the Huns.
they took and spoiled it. From thence determining to go to Milan, the report
of the great wealth of the Venetians which began at the same time to be very
famous over all Italy was the cause, that on a sudden they turned all their
forces upon the Venetians. They speedily made a great number of small light
boats; which The Huns assail the City of Venice.
assail Rialto. The fear, which then fell upon the Venetians, was not like to
that which possessed them in the time of the French-mens wars. For this
terror was much greater then the other. They fought with the French for their
liberty. The great cruelty of the Huns.
contemn godliness but all humanity; for they did not spare the dead
carkases, but like brute beasts they tare them in pieces and devoured them. The
evil disposition of this Nation had at the first report so terrified all
people of each sex and age, as they did not alone bewail the loss of their
liberty; but their lives likewise. But (as it oftentimes happens) this
despair of theirs was converted into fury, and this fury into a desire of
revenge; or if that could not be effected, to die valiantly. This desire gave
them hope to vanquish the Barbarians, if they should attempt to hazard the
fight.

It is to be supposed (for we cannot certainly affirm it) That the Venetians
were Exhortation to the Venetians.
suddenly encouraged by some, by this manner of speech. That it was now time
for them by their actions to show themselves valiant men; That a mighty danger
did not only threaten their Country, but their lives; That they had to do
with a kind of people* who as little used to spare the bodies of the dead, as
their lives in battle. But yet nevertheless they were not made of Iron, but
their bodies might easily be pierced. That they should call to memory how the
ancient Venetians with a few inhabitants of the Latins, made no difficulty in
their Countries behalf to expose their lives before the walls of Aquileia,
against three hundred thousand men; (for Attila had so many in his Army) That
the event of that battle did manifest, how much virtue and courage is better
in war than great multitudes: But it may be that some will term them rash
and inconsiderate for their attempt, in daring to assail the enemy with that
sort of fight, wherein he was most expert: whereas on the contrary, they
should rather have fought with them at Sea, or in the Lakes, known better to
them than to the Barbarians: (then which, he said, nothing could be more
acceptable to the Venetians, who from their youth are accustomed to the Sea)
than in such a place where their valor might be most apparent. Moreover, that
the enemies had neither the skill, nor ships, fit for that purpose. That
their Ancestors had in the same places, where they were now to fight*
vanquished in times past King Pepin, followed with his own forces, and with
those of the Emperor his father: And that they only fought for their
liberty: whereas now* the danger of their lives did constrain them to defend
themselves bravely. Now, in regard that if they were overcome, they were sure
to die, he could not think that there was any Citizen so base or recreant
but would rather choose to dye valliantly with his sword in his hand, then by
yielding, to loose all he had, and to have his throat cut, like a Sheep, by a
barbarous and cruel enemy. He said, That the strength and magnanimity of the
Citizens were such, as they were not only sufficient to rebate the edges of
the Hunnes swords who threatened them; but to free their Country likewise from
so wearisome a siege.

Being animated by these, or such like exhortations, they became courageous.
The Venetians constant resol^tion.
For it were folly to imagine that a multitude of people, being amazed with
the fear of their enemies, could be encouraged without some vehement Oration,
full of perswasiue speeches. All men, after that, ran to arm themselves, not
only to defend their liberty, but likewise, or rather, to preserve the
safety of their lives. The enemies in the mean space hasted toward Rialto.
The Venetians imbarqued in their wel-armed vessels, and fit for the fight, met
with them near to Albiola. The fight at the beginning was very cruel.

The attempts of the Hunnes were diverse; who relying on their great numbers,
Battle betwix^ the Venetians and the Hunnes.
assailed them in sundry places at once. The Venetians every where opposing
themselves against them, did bravely resist their assaults: They fought sundry
days without any likelihood of victory to either side. But at the last, both
parts joining their whole forces, the Barbarians were broken and defeated, and
dispersing their troops, fled far from thence, leaving to the Venetians a
most famous victory. The enemies (as some report) being soon after won by
the rewards of Berengarius, departed out of Italy.

The Venetians grew famous, by gaining this victory near to Albiola. All men
said that the Venetians had abated the fury of the Hunnes; unto whom
Berengarius The Venetians overcome the Hunnes. Great praise given to the Duke.
place. He did likewise greatly praise the absent Duke, by whose means and
under whom all was done. It is to be supposed, that the Duke Tribuno did at
that time fortify the City with a wall and chain; and not for fear of the
Pirates: the which certain Historians do likewise affirm.



VRSO BADOAIRIO, the 18. Duke of Venice.





NOw the Common wealth being thus happily governed at home and abroad, the Duke
Tribuno dyed; the nineteenth year of his government, as some say: and
according to others, the three and twentieth. Vrso Badoiario was chosen in his
stead. This man sent his son Pietr^ to Constantinople to the Greek Emperor,
of whom being made Protospater, he received diverse great and rich presents:
But this young man returning home to Venice, was surprised by a mean Prince of
the Dalmatians called The Dukes son taken at Sea.
Michael, who spoiled him of his treasure, and confined him into Misia; from
whence escaping he returned secretly to Venice. Vrso would have examined the
bounds of the Chioggians; but understanding that Prince Pietro, his
predecessor, had limited* them, he changed his purpose. He is reported to have
bin a very good and The Duke voluntarily deposes himself, and becomes a
Monk.
religious Prince. For the eleventh year of his government, he did willingly
depose himself, and went to the monastery of Saint Felix d'Amiana, where he
spent the remainder of his days in the Monasticke life. The ruins of this
place are to be seen yet at this day, (the Church almost fallen down) as men
go from the City toward the Haven of the Gruarij. This Town belongs to the
Forlani; and may be seen by those which sail on the left hand, near to the
Tower, called La Liamaiore.



PIETRO CANDIANO the 19. Duke of Uenice.





THe government of Pietro Candiano or Sanuto, (for they report this surname to
remain ever after to the family of the Candiani) succeeded this voluntary
dismission. This man was son to the same Pietro who was slain in the
Dalmatian war. He had a son of the same name, who being sent by his father
to Greece, was by the Emperor created Prothospater. Some Authors refer the
rauishment of the Maidens to these times; of whom albeit we have sufficiently
spoken in the first Book, yet because the Historians do likewise vary
herein, it shall not be amiss here to say somewhat of it. The Histrians, who
were at the same time enemies to the Venetians, did on a Peter's Church, which
stands in that part of the City, called the Castle, at such time as they
celebrated their marriage. Whereat the City being in an vp-roare: the Duke,
after he had in have gathered together certain forces, marched suddenly after
them, and ouertaking them in the marshes of Caorli, as they were dividing the
spoil, he did furiously assail them, and (as some say) did easily break
them. Others affirm that they fought furiously on either side, and that the
battle was very bloody; but that at last the enemies were all slain, and
their bodies flung into the Sea. And that in remembrance of this victory, the
yearly Games, called (of the The original of the plays dedicated to them
that are married.
married) were ordained. At a certain day every year they carried twelve
Virgins Pietro Candiano, but under Badoario his government.

I find that about the same time they made war on those of Commachia with
The Commachians vanqu^shed.
prosperous success: who being summoned to restore what they had injuriously
taken

It is reported, that at the same time those of the Cape of Histria did yield
themselves to the Venetians. But it is likely, that they did it more by
constraint, than of free will. For being assailed by the Venetians, for
profaning their ceremonies and rauishing the Virgins, they were constrained to
make satisfaction, and to send yearly to Venice, for a tribute, an hundred
pieces of wine. Pietro Bishop of Oliuollo son to Duke Pietro surnamed
Tribuno, placed the bodies of Saint Saturnine, and Saint Nichodemus, in the
Church of Saint Maria Formosa. And this is all we find to have been done,
during the government of Candiano; who dyed in the second year of his
regiment, or (as some others say) the latter end of the seventh.

PIETRO BODOARIO, the Duke of Venice.



PIetro Bodoario succeeded him (who as has been said) was taken prisoner in
Sclauonia as he returned out of Greece: This man did

PIETRO CANDIANO, the third, the 21. Duke of Venice.



CAndiano son to Pietro succeeded him; who being by his father associated to
the government, was for his great pride banished. But waxing by years more
wise and modest, he was by the common (...) of the people restored to his lost
dignity.

The Narentines in the mean time did by their thefts vex all the Complaints
against the Narentines.
neighbour-Seas, so as the Venetians condition was, in a manner, to be
compared to theirs, who are streighly besieged. The shame and anger stirred up
every one to revenge, saying; It was a dishonor to the Venetians, who had in
times past obtained so many goodly victories on the bosom of the waters,
patiently to endure that a few base thieves who had no hope but in flight,
Being moved with these complaints; they forthwith prepared a new Voyage
against the Narentines. A fleet sent against the Narentines.
And for the same purpose thirty three Sips (called for the manner of their
building Gombaries) were set forth. Vrso Bodoairio, and Pietro Rossolo
commanded the Army. The Narentines being amazed, at the report of this Navy,
had not the spirits to attend them, but by Ambassadors they sued for peace;
which was granted them upon these conditions, That they should pay unto the
Venetians the just value of

The League at the same time was renewed, with the Bishop of Aquileia. Dominico
Bishop of Oliuollo caused certain relickes of Saint John Baptist to be
reverently placed in the Church, builded in times past by his Ancestors, in
that part of the City which is called Embragola. Duke Candiano in the mean
time having three sons, did elect for his Colleague, neither the eldest, nor
the youngest, but the second, The Dukes son which was his Colleague stirs up
sedition in the City.
called Pietro: who soon after became so insolent, as he durst, in contempt
of his fathers wholesome Counsels, stir up certain dissolute persons to
raise a sudden sedition in the City. The whole Senate, in manner, favored
the old father. Candianos authority appeased those tumultuous parties ready
to fight, and on a sudden by the peoples commandment (the greatest number of
whom were actors in this conspiracy) the son was deposed and banished. And
at the same instant the Clergy and the chief of The Dukes son banished the
City. A solemme oath made by the Clergy and chief Citizens. The son wars
on the Venetians.
the City swear jointly, never to suffer neither in the fathers life time, nor
afterward, that seditious person Pietro Candiano to be restored again to his
place, from the which he had justly bin deposed. Some say that he was by the
people committed to prison, and condemned to dye, but at his fathers request
they saved his Guido son to Berengarius, (some say Albert for Guido) and
obtained means at Berengarius pursuit, to make war on the Venetians, whose
enemy he had been proclaimed. Some think that Guido furnished him with six
Galleys to this purpose: For no one particular man had been able to enterprise
so great a matter, in a dejected fortune like his. This rash young man did in
short time take certain Venetian ships, not The Duke dies for grief.
far from Rauenna, wherewith the old Duk^ was so grieved, as within few
days after he departed out of this life, after he had governed seven years
or (as some say) eleauen.



PIETRO CANDIANO, the fourth, the 22. Duke of Uenice.





THe City being busied about the election of a new Duke: (the peoples
affections being ever inconstant) the whole multitude possessed with a
wonderful desire to see this absent young man, did on a sudden by a public
decree repeal Candiano from bannishment; and contrary to the oath, made
as well by the Clergy as the Principal Citizens, installed him in his dead
Fathers place. But soon after, the City, and Pietro himself received the
punishment of their rashness. The one, for contemning her oath, endured

Now in this Princes days, Pietro Marturio Bishop of Oliuollo did with a
sumptuous preparation build the Church of the Augustines. Ambassadors
likewise at The Church of the Augustines builded. The General Council held at
Rome, declares the Church of Grada for Metropolitan. The Duke puts away his
wife.
the same time were sent to Rome to Pope Leo, and to the emperor Otho, to
entreat them, that the Church of Grada might be declared by the general
Council, then held at Rome, Metropolitan of the Venetians dominions, and of
Histria. The which they did not only obtain, but brought home other
privileges granted to

The Duke in the mean time did repudiate Ioane his wife, because (as he said)
she was old. He had a son by her named Vitalis: who taking holy orders upon
him, was by his Father disinherited, under color of entering into Religion: But
it occasioned his future good; for he became afterward Bishop of Grada. Now
his wife being put away, and sent to Saint Zacharies Nunnerie, he married
Vualderta daughter The Duke marries Vualde^ta daughter to Guido.
to Guido, with whom he received for her dowry, great inheritances, many
slaves, and other riches. By means whereof, being puffed up with his great
wealth, and new alliance, he vomited out his bad (...), which till then he had
hidden, and The Dukes tirannie.
gave himself to all manner of vices; beginning openly to practice tirannie in
sted Uderza taken and ruinated by the Duke.
against the inhabitants of Vderza; saying that they did wrongfully hold from
him certain lands belonging to his wife. He did first spoil the Country
round about, then he assailed the City; which, being taken, he burned down
to the ground.

Some Authors affirm, that upon the same occasion he assailed likewise those
of Ferrara: and that he took by force a City of their confines. These warlike
actions made him more insolent. For he placed a company of soldiors in the
Dukes Palace for his guard: and all his speech and actions sauoured of
tirannie. The people calling to mind their ancient liberty, fell on a sudden
upon him, the seventeenth year of his government, as some say, or the
eighteenth, according to others. For the Historians do much disagree
concerning the times of every Princes government. But The people assail the
Duke.
with his Guarde defending himself valiantly from the top of his house, they
set fire on the houses next to the Palace on this side the Canall, on the same
side the wind did blow, which being kindled, the flame did not only burn the
Dukes Palace but Marks Church. Pietro seeing himself environed with so many
miseries, and that he must be constrained either to give place to the peoples
fury, or else to die there, he took his young son which he had by this last
wife in his arms, and went into that part of the Church which the fire had not
yet touched, and coming The Duke seeks to save himself and his young son.
forth by a privy way, he endeavored to save himself and his son by flight,
whom he meant to carry into Exile with him. But when he perceived all the
ways stopped with Armed men, he then fell to entreaties, That they would not
fall upon him The Dukes request to the people.
as on a cruel beast; that they would abstain from hurting him, till he had
excused himself to the people: and then it should be at their choice, either
to put him to a cruel death, if they thought it fit, or else to save his life,
as by their bounty they had All these entreaties were vain; and those who
assailed him cried out a loud, That The death of the Duke and his son ^
it was lawful for them (being an holy and just matter) to take away a
Tirant from the Commonwealth, whose excuses could not be but wicked: And so
rushing upon him, he did in a moment fall down dead to the ground, wounded in
diverse places, with his young son likewise.

Some say, that they did cut the childs throat in the trembling nurses
arms, The bodies thrown upon the common dunghill.
and that the bodies were by the peoples command thrown upon the dunghill, and
there left to be eaten with dogs, but that at the entreaty of Giouanni
Gradonico, that lamentable spectacle was removed from the sight of the
multitude, and the bodies honorably buried in St. Hilaries Church. Some think
that through the counsel Buried afterward very honorably.
of Pietro Vrseolo, who was Duke after him, the people fired the houses next to
the Palace, and that it was done only to hurt the Duke: But it fell out
otherwise. For the force of the wind, and the houses near to the Palace did
in such sort feed this fire, as, besides the Palace, the most magnificent
Cathedral Church of the City, and those of Saint Theodore the Martyr, and
Saint The great harm which the fire did the same day
Marie Iubenica, with three hundred private houses were the same day burnt.

The end of the third Book of the first Decade.
THE FOVRTH BOOK Venice.
The Contents of the fourth Book of the first Decad.
THe Dukes Palace, burnt in the last popular sedition, is repaired at VRSEOLO'S
CANDIANO. He gives a most rich Table to lay upon Saint MARKS Altar. VITALIS
Patriarch of Grada, son to the deceased Duke CANDIANO, flies to the Emperor
OTHO. ADHELETA a most renowned Lady, and her many crosses. The league renewed
with those of the Cape of Histria. VRSEOLO, moved with a Religious desire, does
secretly leave the City. The Commonwealth endangered by civil discord. OTHO
the second makes secretwarre on the Venetians, whom he first seeks to overcome
by famine. Saint GEORGES Church built right opposite to the great
marketplace. The description of the Country of Illiria. All Histria, and
Dalmatia, brought under the subjection of VRSEOLO. OTHO the third comes to
Venice in disguise, and remains secretly for a time with the Duke. The
Phaledrini build Saint BENETS Church. The Venetian ouercomes the Hadrians near
to the mouths of the Rivers Po, and Adice. They fight likewise afterward with
good success in Dalmatia, with Heresimus, King of Croatia. Prince OTHO
banished. DOMINICO VRSEOLO flies to Rauenna the morrow after he had seized on
the Dukes Palace, being driven thence by the people. Those of Zara revolt,
after they had first yielded to the Venetians. PEPIN, Patriarch of Aquileia,
troubles the quiet of the Commonwealth. From whence the Normans are
descended, who have a long time reigned in Italy and Sicilie. GISCARD their
Captain. The Venetians vanquish the Normans at Sea, near to Durazzo.



THE Commonwealth having by the Dukes death preserved her ancient liberty, it
was an hard matter to declare whether of these two were the greatest; either
their joy for being freed from tyranny, or their sorrow to see so many
public and private buildings consumed to ashes by the late fire, which did
maruellously deface the Cities beauty. But fearing least such an astonishment
might breed some greater mischeife in the City (as it is often seen, that one
new sorrow follows another at the heels) they forthwith

PIETRO VRSEOLA, the 23. Duke of Uenice.





THe virtuous wisdom of Pietro Vrseolo, being at the same time known to all
men, was the cause, that at the general assembly held He refuses to take the
charge upon him.
at Saint Peter's Church for the same purpose (which is at this day the
Patriarks seat) he was with a general applause declared Prince: who refusing
this charge, took it upon him at the peoples entreatie, who told him that he
ought not to forsake the Commonwealth in so dangerous a season. Yet it is most
certain that he unwillingly embraced it. For being from his youth brought up
and trained in the love of Justice, he was afraid of popular government, which
seldom or never respects the innocent. But the affection which he did bear
to his Country, for the which we are chiefly borne (as says divine Plato) The
people ^weare to the Prince.
that he would in no sort endure any enterprise to be undertaken against
himself, nor the State, whilst he should manage the sovereign dignity. And
because the Palace had been burnt, he transported the ensigns and Ducall
dignity into his own private house: meaning nevertheless to return to the
Palace so soon as it should be reedified,

His government began by repairing these two places, which he did at his own
The Palace and Saint Marks Church repaired
costs, more magnificently than they were before. Now the Church being thus
beautified, he caused the body of the Evangelist, which few people thought
had escaped the fire, to be brought again into it. He gave besides to the same
Church a table of gold, richly wrought at Constantinople, which he caused to
be dedicated with great solemnity on the high Altar.

About the same time, or a little before, the Sarracens, being entered in two
companies Vrseolo ouercomes the Sarazens before Barri.
into Italy, after they had taken Capua, they beseiged Barri by land and Sea,
a town seated betwixt Brundusium, and the mouth of the River Aufida: the poor
inhabitants where of enduring all miseries through want of food, were succored
with victuals by the Venetians fleet under the conduct of Vrseolo. But because
Vrseolo accompanied with the aid of Greece, came and fought with the enemy on
the Sea, and having defeated the greatest part of them, and put the residue to
flight, he purchased great glory to the Venetians. He had but one son by his
wife Faelicia, and as soon he was borne, they both vowed chastity. He
governed The husband and wife ^ow chastity.
the State in the mean space with such wisdom and integrity, as men did
easily perceive by his carriage, that he had not accepted the charge thereof
for any desire that he had to command, but for the good only of the
Commonwealth; in such sort as a peaceable government had succeeded the tumults
of the deceased Duke, if certain Authors and Ministers of the late Duke
Candianos fury had not resolved to trouble the public peace. The complaint of
Vitalis Bishop of Grada.


At these men's persuasions, Vitalis Bishop of Grada (who was as h^th been
said, rejected by his father under color of entering into religion,) fled into
Lombardie Otho the second; where after he had greatly complained of the
miserable death of his father Pietro, he besought him with great instance to
revenge it, in regard he had been some time his friend and guest. Happily some
would say, that he was justly slain: but they could not say so of the young
infant his brother, whom they had cruelly murdered in his fathers arms. He
did moreover manifest his own banishment (which his very enemies lamented,)
wherein he was likely to wax old and to die far from his native Country, if
he were not by some foreign aid reestablished in the City, from whence he
had been so unjustly driven by his fellow Citizens. The Emperors answer to
Vitalis.


His complaint and tears did greatly move the Emperor Otho, who seemed

Vualderta in the mean season, Vitalis his mother in law, being come along
with him, went to Adheleta, Othos mother, who then lay at Placentia, and by
her means she was soon after, with the consent both of the Prince and people,
admitted into the City. It is not unnecessary (in regard it bolongs to our
History) briefly to rehearse, by what means Adheleta returned to the
Imperial dignity, from whence she fell by the decease of her first husband. A
maruailous example of for tune.


She married first of all the Emperor Lotharius, a great friend to the
Venetians. He being dead, Berengarius his successor confined her for ever into
the Castle of La Garda, (whereof the goodliest Lake of Italy does at this day
bear the name) where she was brought to such poverty, as begging her bread by
letters and messages, she led a miserable life. Whereby we may leame, that
there is no man so great (did not the foolish admiration of wordly riches make
men forget their weakness) but may confess, that there is nothing in this
world so firm and certain, which a man may promise to himself long to enjoy,
Adhele^a escaping secretly from this place, came to Verona, to Alard, who (as I
think) was Bishop of the City: for it is certain that the family of the
Alardi, are at this day of great Accioni his uncle, who was in times past a
good friend to Lotharius, who hid her a long time in a countrie-house, ten
miles distant from the City, until such time, as (known to himself alone)
she married for her second husband Otho the first, who carried her into
Germany; by whom he had a son, which was the Emperor Otho the second, of
whom we even now spoke: Who after he had Berengarius and his some Albert
defeated.
not only defeated Berengaria, and Albert his son, but wholly overthrown
them, and by their ruins confirmed the Empire to himself: he made peace with
the Venetians at the request of his mother Adheleta, against whom he was
incensed for the murder of Prince Candiano.

About the same time there arose a new strife with those of the Cape of
Histria, The Histrions tributarie to the Venetians.
which was soon appeased by the means of a new League; wherein it was expressly
couenanted, That they should pay unto the Venetians every year an hundred
Hogsheades of wine. The Bishops of Grada have for a certain time gathered this
tribute in the peoples name.

Thus stood the State of the Commonwealth, which was suddenly deprived of the
presence of this good Prince, by an unheard of accident.

A certain man, named Guerin, coming from Aquitaine in pilgrimage to Venice,
Guerin comes in pilgrimage to Venice.
to visit Saint Marks body, was brought before the Prince according to his
appointment, which was, that all those who should come to the City for any
devotion should be bountifully entertained in his Palace. This man having a
great while discoursed of religion and of Penance (for this stranger was by
profession The Prince resolves to give over his place.
a Moncke) brought the Prince by little and little to this pass, (who of
himself was sufficiently addicted thereunto,) as he forthwith thought upon
means how he might give over the government. And to put it in practice, he
craved but so Vrseolo How the Prince spent the time, in the mean space, till
he departed.
in the mean time gave himself to all exercises of piety, and taking upon
himself the cause of the poor, he did comfort their poverty with a
marvelous affection. He built, besides, a devout Hospital which is yet to be
seen at this day right over against the great marketplace. He did moreover
take into his own protection, and maintained with an incredible charity, the
Colleges, the Clergy, and all Religious sorts of people. He did patiently
bear whatsoever Vitalis, (who was absent) and his adherents did daily practice
against him, whose wicked deseignes were likewise (as some say) divinely
revealed unto him. At the last, after Guerin failed not to return at the
prefixed time) he left the City in disguised habit, unknown to his wife, his
son, and all his kins-folkes, and went on his journey. When he The Dukes
secret departure.
for sooke his charge and Country, he was followed and accompanied by Giouanni
Gradonico, Giouanni Morosini, Remoaldo, and Marini of Rauenna: they all being
partakers of his enterprise. He led in process of time so holy and religious
a life, as after his death in Aquitaine, where he passed the remainder of his
days, he was (as has been said) honored for many miracles.

VITALIS CANDIANO, the Duke of Uenice.





THe City being deprived of such a Prince was possessed with a marvelous
sorrow, but their desire to have him again was much greater. Yet nevertheless
remembering the Commonwealth, they made have the next day to elect another in
his sted that was so much bewailed. Vitalis Candiano, son to Pietro Candiano
the third, was by the general consent declared Prince. At this man's entreatie,
Vitalis, Patriarch of Grada, who till then for fear of the people had absented
himself; was called home into his Country: And was soon after, by the
Princes means; sent in company of the Ambassadors into Germany unto Otho,
who extremely hated the Venetians Otho the second hates the Venetians.
for the cruel death of Pietro Candiano. This Ambassade was to much purpose,
for Otho; wherein, the presence of Vitalis, son to the murdered Duke, did
greatly avail them, of whom he had a very great care, taking order for his
safety; which he could not have done, if he had dismissed the Ambassadors
unsatisfied.

In the mean space Duke Candiano fell grievously sick, a year and certain
months after his election; and imagining he could not live long, deposing
himself from his charge, and vowing all the remainder of his days to a
mouasticke life, he caused himself to be carried to Saint Hillaries
Monastery, where within few days after he dyed, and lies buried.



TRIBVNO MEMIO, the 25. Duke of Venice.



TRibuno Memio, a great wise man, but of few words, was elected in Morosini and
Caloprini two very noble families, fighting Civil discordes.
one with the other, with greater hatred than force, caused the people many
times to behold very vile and bloody spectacles: of the which I know not
whether I may reckon that for chief and most cruel, which in likelihood,
though not in effect, was done by Stephano Calloprini; who came with his
children, allies, and diverse The cruel intent of the Caloprini.
others of his faction, well armed, to assail the house of Morosini, with an
intent not only to kill all the men, but wholly to extinguish (if it had been
possible) Morosini surprised perhaps, or else fearing their enemies, came not
in sight. I know not whether they defended themselves in their own houses, or
whether dispersed through the City (which some do affirm) they hid
themselves in this tumult among their friends and kinds folks, and did not
show themselves. But the City could not escape that day from being colored
with the blood of her Citizens. For the mischief was, that albeit they fought
not, yet nener the less by chance there was a miserable murder committed.
Dominico Morosino being met near to Dominico Morosino murdered.
the Castle was unluckily slain by the Caloprini: They being afterward
called in question for this murder, (for they were sure that those of the
contrary faction, aided by Tribuno, did Arm themselves to revenge this
injury) fled with their The slight of the Calloprini to the Emperor Otho,
with their promise to him.
Captain Stephano, to Verona, to the Emperor Otho the second; unto whom, for
Morosini, they promised that state of Venice.

Otho did willingly lend an ear to this offer, because he perceived the
practisers to be of the chief of the City: But before he would assail them
by open war, he would try whether he could win them by famine. He forth
with forbad, over The Emperors cruel Edict against the Uenetians.
all Italy, any traffike with the Venetians. He caused to be signified unto
them, that they should not enter into any of the Cities of the Empire, neither
upon traffic, nor any other pretense: If they did any thing rashly, he would
hold them afterward for open enemies. By these menaces they soon knew
whereunto Otho tended. For in shutting all manner of victuals from them, he
meant to bring them to Otho the second his design.
the last and most intolerable point of all misery, which is hunger. But
howsoever the City might be affrighted thereby, yet would not the Venetians
seem to be amazed, nor make show to understand whereunto Otho his desseignes
tended; diss^mbling their grief and fear; resolving rather to endure all
extremes, than to lose The Venetians brave resolution.
their liberty. The want of all necessaries grew already very great in the
City, when those of Capodarger, enjoying the same privileges with them (as
oftentimes one The revolt of Capodarger.
mischief follows an other) revolted against them. The inhabitants obtained
of the Emperor for their revolt, certain inheritances of the Lauretans; to
the end it might serve for a bait for others to do the like.

But these things being done abroad, and the City in the mean time pressed
Caloprini, which were near to Otho, accusing them that by their means and The
peoples revenge on the Caloprini.
pursuit, the enemy laid all these trappes for them. Whereupon by a public
decree the houses of the Calloprini were wholly razed to the ground; their
wives and children committed to safe keeping; and the remainder of their goods
confiscate. Otho in the mean space perseuering in his self-will, not to make
open war upon the Venetians, nor yet to have peace with them, went to Rome;
where being stricken with a sudden disease he within few days died. The
Venetians were by his death The Death of Otho the second.
(as at sundry other times) delivered from a great danger.

Adheleta, after Otho dis decease, not willing to abandon the Caloprini
obtained Stephano, and those who had followed him, should be repealed from
bannishment: which the Prince and people granting at Adheleta's request, and
the Calloprini being returned into their Country: it happened that four of the
Morosini, The Caloprini return to Venice.
remembering fore-passed wrongs, did assail and kill three brethren of the
Caloprini, sons to Stephano, as they returned to the Palace, entering into a
boat to go Three sons of Stephano Caloprini slain.
home to their houses. The Duke was suspected, and the people believed it, that
this murder was committed by his consent; but he cleared himself in open
Assembly.

The same Prince gave to Giouanni Morosino at his return from Aquitain,
whither he had accompanied Vrseolo, Saint Georges Church which stands right
over against the Marketplace, with the Marshes adioining, which were
dependancies of Bennet. He sent his son Mauritio to Basilius Emperor of
Greece; to the end, that being honored by him with certain titles, he might
appear more notable among his fellow-Citizens. All these things thus executed,
he was surprised with a grievous disease: by means whereof he voluntarily
deposed The Duke voluntarily deposes himself.
himself: or (as some say) he was constrained so to do by the people, the
foureteenth year of his government, for that in the civil dissensions he had
carried him self not like a just Prince, but had ever favored one side more
than another. He lived not long after: for so soon as he had made himself a
Monk, he died forthwith.

PIETRO VRSEOLO, the second, the 26. Duke of Uenice.



PIetro Vrseolo was by the people declared his successor. This dignity
Basilius and Alexis (who at the same time did jointly command the Grecian
Empire) that through all their Dominions, the The Venetians free over all the
Grecian Empire.
Venetian Merchants should be free by Sea and land from al customs and
tributes. He did moreover by his Ambassadors, purchase the friendship of the
Kings of Egypt and Siria. Then did he win by bounty, and good offices, the
greatest Lords of Italy. So soon as he perceived a convenient time to
revenge all the wrongs which the Venetians had received of the Narentines; he
for bad to pay them any Prohibitions to pay no more tribute to the Barbarians.
more the accustomed yearly tribute, for the free commerce and Navigations of
the coast of Dalmatia. The Narentines being thereby incensed against the
Venetians, did suddenly rob and spoil: And not satisfied with their thefts at
Sea, they came on shore and spoiled the Country near to Zara: For that City
alone, of all the rest of Dalmatia, was at the same time subject to the
Venetians. But the Venetians were not only molested by these incursions, but
all the neighbour-Nations Likewise: who after they had endured it with much
coffeehouse for a while, perceiving the fury of these robbers, who abused
their patience, daily to increase, and foreseeing The Narentines great
incursions.
that those insolent people, would never give over, unless their attempts were
assisted: Diverse Dalamatians, not finding themselves alone strong enough for
such The Ambassadors of Dalmatia, Liburnia, and Histria come to Venice to
compl^ine of the Narentines.
an enterprise, had recourse to the Venetians. The Ambassadors of Liburnia,
and Histria, came thither likewise, being all of them sent for this purpose, to
treat with the Prince in the name of their Commonwealths; That if he would
send a mighty fleet into Dalmatia against the Narentines, to defend the
Sea-coastes, and the near nieghbours thereof, from the theftes of these
Pirates; that it would come to pass (which they in the name of their
fellow-citizens did promise) that all Dalmatia along the Seacoast, Liburnia,
and Histria, would submit themselves under the Venetians The Ambassadors offers
to the Venetians.
dominion. The offers which the Ambassadors made, did puff up the Princes
mind, and filled the whole City with great hope one day to be Lords of
Dalmatia. Whereupon, fearing to loose such an occasion, they resolved to send
forth a mighty Fleet. But before we speak of the setting out thereof, we
must briefly make mention of the situation of that Province; fetching it from
far.

The Grecians called those Illirians, which inhabited the upper parts of
Macedonia Description of Illiria.
and Thrace, from the Cahonians and Thesprotti, unto the River of Histria,

They (...) besides, that the Province, and the Nation, were so named by
Illirius, son to Poliphemus and Galathea, sometimes Lords of that Country;
that Dardanus, Taulan^s, with others, were his children, from whom the
Dardanians and Taulantians, people of Dalmatia, are descended. This Province,
such as it is, did in times Albania is a part of Illiria.
possessed this Province even to Macedon: and all the Region is by the Moderns
called Albania. In this sort Dalmatia extends it self more from the North to
the South than from the East to the West.

Now the army being in a readiness, and the Soldiers ship't, after that
Vrseolo had received the public ensigns in the Church of Oliuollo from the
hands of The Venetians Army against the Narentines.
the Bishop, he sailed into Dalmatia. It was then the springtime, and sailing
pleasantly, he arrived first at Aquileia, after at Grada. Vitalis Bishop of the
City accompanied with the whole Clergy and the people, went out to meet him,
and after he The Bishop of Grada his present to the Duke.
had welcomed him: Take (says he) Vrseolo this banner of Saint Hermagoras,
which I wish may be fortunate to thy self and to the Commonwealth: cause thy
Soldiers to follow it, among the ensigns of their Country, and let them
fight valiantly under it: I hope that thou will one day confess, that this
banner which we give thee has no less aided thee in the obtaining of the
victory, than the strength and courage of thy people. We are not ignorant how
that by valor all Commonweales are well governed; but they are much better,
when they have God for their Then bidding him farewell, he came with a fair
wind suddenly into Histria.

Histria is at this day the farthest Country of Italy, a neighbor in times
past to The Duke arriueth a^ Parenza
Liburnia, and consists wholly almost of Islands: The Venetians first landing
was at Parenza, but he was scarsely come to the Island next to the City, when
as Andrea Bishop thereof, accompanied with all the inhabitants, came forth to
meet him, and committed his own person his Citizens, and all their means, as
well public as private, into the Venetians hands. The Prince being environed
with troops of Maur^.

The fleet being gone from Parenza, came to the Island near to Pola, which is
a The Duke com^ to Pola.
very ancient City of Histria, builded (as has been said elsewhere) by the
Colehians. At his arrival, the Polani following the example of the Parentines,
came with one accord, with Bercaldo their Bishop, to receive the Venetians.
Sundry other people, who had been a long time desirous to yield unto them,
ran to meet Vrseolo in the same place, where by their Ambassadors they
submitted themselves under their obedience.

Vrseolo, after he had made some stay there, as well to give audience to the
Ambassadors, The occasion of his stay there. The Dukes coming to Zara.
Coricta and Arba rendered to him.
and to receive their oaths and homage, as to levy new soldiers whom he
embarked; he held his course toward Zara. That City was not long before
yielded to the Venetians, in regard whereof all the people went out to meet and
receive them with great joy, calling them their Lords, and deliuerers. The
Bishops Murcemirus, who, after he had banished his elder brother, did possess
Mure emirus king of Croati^ sends Ambassadors to the Duke.
the kingdom of Croatia (namely that Croatia the red, which the Modernes have
termed to be a part of Illiria, which extends it self from the desert plains,
which lie almost in the midst of the Province, even to Durazzo) fearing least
the Venetian, spurred forward by the happy fortune which accompanied him,
would

The Duke in the mean time sent ten Galleys from Zara to spoil the Narentines
Forty Narentine merchants taken.
Country: These Galleys surprised near to the Island next to Belgrade, called
by the inhabitants Chama, forty Narentine merchants, who were returned from
Apulia. Some say that their coming was discovered by spies, and that
therefore the Galleys were sent to meet them. The Duke, after he had refreshed
himself, did forth with follow them; but he found, that, before his arrival,
those whom he had first sent had taken the Island, nee^e to the which we have
said the Narentines were surprised. Whereby it came pass that upon Vrseolo his
arrival, the Ambassadors The yielding up of Belgrade and Trahu.
These men did promise and swear in the name of their Commonwealth, to
remain for ever obedient to the Venetians having of their own accord requested
that it might be so. Trahu is an Island of Dalmatia ioining almost to the firm
Land, with a City of the same name builded by the Issetes. Suringa of Croatia,
brother to Murcemirus, was in this Island, who after the yielding up thereof
gave his son Stephen for hostage to the Duke, whom the Venetian did
afterward marry to his daughter Hicela. The yielding of Spalatra.


The fleet afterward departed to other places of Dalmatia. Spalatra, a very
rich Town in those days, following the example of her neighbors, received
the Venetians The taking of Corcyra the black.
into her walls. After that, he went to Corcira the black, now called Cursula,
the which refusing to obey his commandments was taken by force: That being
done, the Venetian Galleys came near to the Isle of Pharos, (called likewise
by the Modernes Lesnia in sted of Pharos, by corruption of the language) where
they espied a fort builded on great Rocks in the midst of the Sea, which a
far off seemed impregnable to the beholders. The nature of the place had till
then caused the Te situation of Pharos.
Narentines to commit infinite robberies at Sea, who in case of necessity had
that place always for an assured retreit.

There was likewise in the same Island a town, strong both by Art and Nature:
not far from whence the Venetian Merchants were wont to be robbed and taken.
The Venetian Galleys surprise the Haven of Pharos.
The Galleys at their arrival took the Haven of the Island. Then they
summoned the inhabitants to yield, willing them, by the examples of others, not
to try the fury of the Venetian arms: telling them that it was a folly for
them to say, that they had rather endure all shameful extremities with the
hazard of their lives, than to Those of (...) summoned.
preserve their children, and their goods, by receiving the Venetian quietly
into their City. This was sundry times told them, that they should beware,
least by their obstinacy they did incense the Venetians against them: that
after the assault should be What moved those of Pharos to defend themselves.
begun, there would be no hope of composition. There was some likelihood that
they would willingly have received a Garrison, and obeyed forthwith, if they
had been certain to have been received on the same conditions as others
were; but fearing (that which was true) that if the Venetians were masters of
the Town they would raze it down to the ground, the love to their Country,
(which is that we chiefly love) made them resolute to defend themselves and to
beat back the enemy. The Duke on the contrary, so soon as he had
understood the meaning The taking of the castle and town of ^haros called
Lesina.
those within being amazed flung down their weapons, and upon their knees
cried for mercy. At this noise the gentle and merciful Prince commanded to
pardon those that were disarmed; and the Town being razed down to the earth
by his commandment, he departed suddenly from thence, and came to Saint
Maximins. The City of Pharos destroyed.
The Commissioners of Ragusa with their Bishop came and met him, and submitted
themselves to him and to the Venetian people.

The Duke after that, entering their Country in hostile manner, did put all to
The conditions of peace granted to the Narentines.
at Sea. The Narentines, who had made war on the Venetians for the
sovereignty at Sea the space of one hundred three score and ten years, with
different success many times, embracing peace, which was more necessary, than
honorable for them, did willingly accept these conditions. All the prisoners
being set at liberty, the victorious Army was embarked.

The Duke, after he had freed the Sea from Pirates, and brought all the
Seacoasts The Duke returns to Venice
of Dalmatia, Liburnia, and Histria, under the Venetians subjection, he
returned with a prosperous wind to Venice: where he entered, almost in a
manner triumphantly (the true ancient triumphs being no more in use) being
environed by the people, who highly praised him for his great victories unto;
whom after he had related what he had done, and how by the grace of Almighty
God, and his own conduct, he had subjected to the Venetians all the Seacoasts
from Histria, even to the farthest parts of Dalmatia, with all the Islands
near adjacent, he was greatly extolled in an Oration: And it was decred, that
ever after, both he and his successors, should carry the title of the Duke of
Venice, and Dalmatia, beseeching God New ^fficers sent to the Cities newly
conquered
Province. It is thought, that Otho Vrso was sent to Ragusa; his son to
Spalatra; Dominico Polano to Trahu; Giouanni Cornare to Sicore; (called
Sibinica by the Modernes) Vitalis Michaeli to Belgrade; and others to other
towns, whose names the length of time has worn out.

Vrseolo repaired the City of Grada; and with great cost caused diverse Palaces
to be builded. He caused the holy bodies of Fortunatus, and Hermagoras, with
those of Dionise, Largius, and Hermogenes, to be new in-shrined. He caused
likewise a goodly Palace to be built at Heraclea, with a Church, according to
those times; the town being then smally inhabited.

He did in such sort terrify Giouanni Bishop of Belluna, who troubled the
Venetians, by a sudden prohibition to his subjects not to traffic in any
sort with them, as he did forthwith surrender whatsoever had been taken (unto
which Otho could never induce him) withal and humbly The Emperor (...)
sundry privileges to the Venetians.
sued for peace: which because it should last the longer, he would have
confirmed by a new alliance. He sent his young son afterward to Verona to
the Emperor Otho, who had sent for him by letters, whom at the holy Sacrament
of Confirmation he named Otho, who was called before then Peter. He did
moreover obtain of the same Emperor diverse new immunities and privileges of
Faires, and Ports. Concerning likewise the limits of Heraclea, which extended
in time past to the River of Piauo, Giouanni Diacono (whom the Prince had sent
to Verona to acquaint the Emperor with the conquest of Dalmatia) had
commandment to treat with him about it, who easily obtained, that they should
stand at the same stay, as

Otho went to Rome, from whence resolving to return into Lombardie, he
commanded Giouanni (who went along with him) to write to Vrseolo, that he
would be shortly at Rauenna, and from thence would secretly come to Venice, to
perform a vow that he had made, and that therefore he desired to have his
coming kept secret, because his determination was to come thither in disguise
and with a small train. The Duke, marvelous joyful at these news, did with
a wonderful affection attend the coming of such a guest. The Emperor in the
mean space came to Rauenna, and from thence to Pomposia, a place very near
Ghoria at the mouth of the River Po. Then in the night entering into a boat with
five of his household The Emperor Otho comes to Venice in disguise.
servants, and Giouanni Diacono, he came with a fair wind to Venice. He went
rather to the Monastery of Saint Seruula, than to any Inn or Citizens house,
to the end that his coming might be the better concealed. The Prince came to
him by night in the same place, where after a reciprocal gratulation, for the
arrival of the one in health and with a prosperous wind to Venice, and for
the others happy exploits in Dalmatia, they came about midnight into St.
Marks Church, from whence, so soon as Otho had made his prayers and
accomplished his vow, they went to the Palace. And because each of them were
very desirous to have the arrival of this new guest kept secret; so long as
the Emperor stayed in Venice, the Duke every day dined in public, but he
supt in private with him. And to the end The Dukes great wisdom.
by another more strict and holy band, Otho held a daughter of the Dukes, then
newborn, at the Font, the same day she was baptized: He did for ever remit to
the Venetians the Cloak of cloth of gold, which the Commonwealth by accord
solemnly sworn to, were yearly bound to give unto the Emperors. Being
honored likewise by the Duke with diverse great and rich presents he went back
again to Rauenna.

Three days after Otho was departed, the Duke commanded a general assembly,
where he publicly declared how that the Emperor Otho had been in Venice; in
what manner he had been at home with him for certain days; and what The Duke
permitted to associate Giouanni his son into the government.
Vrseolos wisdom for concealing the presence of so great a Prince. And because
he had so well deserved of the Commonwealth, they permitted him soon after by
a decree to associate Giouanni his son into the Principality; whom he sent
thus honored with the sovereign dignity, with his wife, and Otho his
brother, to Constantinople, to the Emperors Constantine and Basilius; from
whence they returned soon after to Venice laden with diverse rich presents.

But because never any humane prosperity was seen to be exempt from one
trouble some accident or other of Fortune; it happened thus, that before this old
Plague and famine in the City.
man, (otherwise most fortunate,) dyed, he saw by two extreme miseries, Plague
and Famine, and by the decease of his son and daughter in law, happened almost
on one day, the course of his happy fortune altered. He was after that
constrained to enter into controversy with those of Cap-darger, and with the
Sacceans, with the one for refusing to pay the tribute called Ripetta, and with
the other about

At the same time the Phaledrini, a noble family, caused the Church and
Monastery The Church and Monastery of Saint Benet builded by the Phaledrini.
of St. Benedict to be builded, which they enriched with diverse great and
goodly inheritances near adjoining. It is reported that the Duke was very
careful to end the reparations of the Palace, and the Church near adjacent.
Then by his last will he divided his wealth into three parts. The first and
greatest, he bequeathed to his children, the second he would have to be
employed for the succouring The Dukes last ^ill.
of poor people and repairing of Churches: and the third to be spent in his
life time in public shows, gifts, and liberality to the people. Those
things Z^charies Church and there honorably buried.

OTHO VRSEOLO, the 27. Duke of Uenice.



OTho, his son, a young man of great hope, and worthy of such a father and
grand-sire, men of great devotion, did with the general consent of all the
Citizens succeed him. He began his government with the same wisdom which
all men expected, at what time Geica King of Hungary being moved by the
report of his great reputation, The Hadrians defeated by the Duke.
gave him his daughter in marriage. He defeated the Hadrians near to
Lauretta, betwixt the mouths of the Rivers Po and Adice: for that they had
spoiled the Venetian frontires; and having vanquished them, he made peace with
them, upon condition they should surrender both to the Lauretans that which
they had lost, and should make no more incursions afterward. But it is reported
that the Hadrians, who before that time had been very mighty, did so
suddenly decaie by the loss of Lauretta, as since then waxing daily worse and
worse, they could never afterward recover themselves.

About the same time Murcimirus (I find in some Authors Heresimus for
Murcimire) Lord of Croatia, did very much molest those of Zara contrary to the
agreement lately made, and did incessantly oner-runne the whole Country. And
the neighbor Cities likewise had already felt the fury of the Croatian
Armies, when Otho resolving to revenge it, marched against the Barbarian; who
daring to tarry for him and to offer battle, was by him very easily broken
and defeated: (...) vanquishet^ the King of (...).
Land. Otho pursuing this happy victory, after he had scoured with his Army
all the Sea, coasts of Dalmatia, Liburnia, and Histria, which his Father had
subdued to the Venetians, he entered under color of taking notice of the State
of the Province into all their Cities, and assemblies; he caused the
inhabitants to make new oaths of fidelity, that they should ever after
continue faithful to the Venetians, in the same manner as they had voluntarily
submitted themselves, and not to permit any Conspiracy against the Duke and
his banishment.
whatsoever to practice ought against their State. At his return from
Dalmatia, he was unfortunately surprised by the conspiracy of Dominico
Flabenico, who after he had shaven his beard, drove him into Greece, the fifth
year after he had taken

PIETRO CENTRANICO, the 28. Duke of Venice.





PIetro Ceutranico or Barbolano (for both these surnames are found in this
family) succeeded Otho thus banished. This man entering into the Government of
his Country, which was full of troubles at home, and abroad, took great care
which business to take in hand first; Yet nevertheless he thought it best to
reduce the City into her former peaceable estate, being yet in an vproare, by
means of this cruel conspiracy, and the banishment of this good Prince. In
the mean time Pepin Patriarch of Aquileia, Pepin Patriarch of Aquileia
disquiets Grada.
presuming on the assurance of these troubles, and on the flight of the Bishop
Vrsus Bishop of that place after his brothers banishment fearing to be
trecherously surprised by those of the contrary faction, fled) seized on Grada,
as though he meant to keep it for Vrsus in his absence. Others affirm^ that it
was taken by force, in the behalf of Vrsus from the Venetian Garrison which
kept it, the which is altogether untrue. For if they had been then friends,
they would not both of them at the same time have pleaded the controversy of
their Churches at the Council held at Rome, not without great suspicion of
envy and hatred; where it is reported that the Pope and the whole assembly
declared the Church of Grada to be the Metropolitan of the whole Venetian
Territory. But it is certain, that the Emperor Conrade was at the same time
in the behalf of Pepin greatly incenfed against the Venetians, declaring
himself in some matters their open enemy.

In this state stood the affairs of the Venetians, when as Centranico after
he had Contranico deposed from (...) dignity (...) by the people shorn and
made a Moncke.
commanded four years, was (as some say) at the pursuit of Vrsus Bishop of
Grada, taken by the people, having his head and beard shaven, and in the habit
of a Monk was banished. He thus exiled, the people commanded Vrsus to take
upon him the public Government, and to command as Duke, till such time as Otho
his brother should be called home from banishment: Those which were sent for
that purpose, brought back word that at their coming into Greece they found
Otho Otho dies in Greece.
dead, a little before their arrival, as though it had so happened by the divine
permission to the end that this ungrateful City might not be so happy as
once again to enjoy such a Noble man, Son to so good a Prince, and himself
so well deserving Vrsus having notice of his brothers death, did voluntarily
depose himself, and went to his own house, after he had commanded one year.

Vrsus hau^ng retired himself, Dominico Vrseolo moved rather by the reputation
of his Ancestors (for he was near kinsman to Otho) than by the favor and
consent of the people, seized indiscreetly on the Dukes Palace. But the people
mindful of Dominico Urseolo, usurps the Dukes Palace.
their liberty, foreseeing how unless they did oppose themselves against the
attempts o^ that insolent Citizen, that on a sudden the evil disposed persons
induced by that p^rnicious example, would without any respect usurp the
Government,

DOMINICO FLABENICO, the 29. Duke of Uenice.





DOminico Flabenico created by the general consent of all men succeeded the
short government of Vrseolo. This man (as has been said) was the Author of
Otho his banishment; and therefore during the government of Vrso Bishop of
Grada, he was banished the City as an enemy, but not long after, he was
repealed at the peoples request. So soon as he had received the government,
he propounded to the people, that he thought it fit and most profitable for
the Commonwealth, to drive the family of the Vrseoli out of the City, as
pernicious enemies to the public quiet. He willed them then to assemble
themselves, and to declare the Vrseoli unworthy ever after to execute the
sovereign dignity, or any other Office whatsoever: Great ingratitude of the
Venetians. The family of the Vrseoli for ever banished from the City. The
custom of taking a Colleague into the Principality abolished.
adiudge them common enemies, and, as such, banish them. The people being ill
advised, having already forgotten the sundry deserts and benefits of this
family, making themselves the ministers of an other man's hatred, did suddenly
consent thereto. After this sort, this family, till then famous, and which had
affoorded so many worthy men to the Commonwealth, was by this ignominy so
dejected, as it could never after rise again. He did likewise abolish the
custom of associating a Colleague in the Principality, the which as most
profitable is carefully observed unto this day. I find no memorable matter done
by him abroad, but being oppressed with years he departed this life.

DOMINICO CONTARENO, the 30. Duke of Uenice.





DOminico Contareno was by the general consent of all men established in his
place. Pepin in the mean time had molested all the places round about Grada,
and for that time there was nothing decreed against him, in regard the City was
then busied in affairs of more importance. Those of Zara had yielded to the
Lord of Croatia, or (as some write) to Solomon King of Hungary. At the report
hereof, (for it was to be supposed, that unless the Venetian Army did
speedily pass into Dalmatia, the other Countries which were now ready to
rebel would soon after revolt from the Venetians) the Duke with a great fleet
suddenly hasted to Dalmatia; Zara taken again which was reuo^ted.
besieged Zara; and took it by force. The report of the reprisall of Zara
auailed much to contain the other Cities in their duty and fidelity.

Pepin in the mean space took Grada the second time by assault, and did more
harm at this entry, than at the former. The Venetians justly moved by this
injury, determined before they would revenge it, to advertise Pope Benedict of
the wrong which Pepin had done them, resolving that if he did not obey the
Pope, who they thought would redress it, to revenge the loss of Grada by
Arms. Pepin suddenly Pepin obeyes the Popes commandment.
obeyed the Popes commandment; but being of an obstinate and turbulent spirit,
he dyed (as some say) soon after miserably.

Some write that Pope Leo came at the same time to Venice. But if they sent to
Pope Benedict concerning the business of Grada (as has been said) following
the opinion of diverse, I cannot imagine how the Popes name should be so
suddenly Benedict for Leo, or on the contrary, Leo for Benedict, or that
(which is most likely) that these things were done at sundry times. They Pope
Leo comes to Venice.
say the occasion of his journey was to visit the body of Saint Mark: and
they affirm that he gave diverse great privileges to his Church, and to
diverse others in the City.

We find also that about the same time, those of Apulia fought diverse times
with Robert surnamed Guiscard, a Norman by Nation, whose power at the same time
was very great in Italy: The which nevertheless I dare not altogether
affirm, because of all those Authors, whom we follow, there is but one which

DOMINICO SILVIO, the 31. Duke of Uenice.





THis is all which happened under the government of Prince Contareno, who the six
and twentieth year of his Principality dyed: he was buried in Saint Nicholas
Church, his funeral being followed by great multitudes of people. Dominico
Siluio was by sudden acclamation of the people; as he followed the body,
saluted Duke. T^o great nic eues of a woman.
He is reported to have married a wife from Constantinople, so full of
arrogancy and greekish pride, who (as says Damian) was so nice and delicate
in which is so much the more dangerous as it is most excessive. This most A
Divine pun^shment.
proud and curious manner of life procured her a very loathsome and stinking
disease, so as she, who by her insolent pride would not use the most necessary
element of water, because it was common to every one, could not be helped or
comforted by the same, nor yet by any other means, to cleanse the filth and
infection of her body.

About the same time Dominico Bishop of Oliuollo deceased. Henry son to the
last Duke succeeded him, who altered the ancient name of Oliuollo, and would be
called Bishop of the Castle, as they are now at this day.

It is reported that under this Princes government the Normans were driven What
the Normans were, and their Original.
out of the confines of Dalmatia. And because the Venetians have had diverse
warlike incounters with this Nation, we must speak something of them. They
were then (as some Authors affirm) near neighbors to the Seacoasts of
Guyenne, who after they had a certain time scoured the Neighbour-Seas, entered
in tract of time under their Captain Raoul by the River of Loire into France.
They ouerranne Lorraine and a part of Germany with fire and sword; afterward
returning Raoul the Normans Captain becomes a Christian.
into France, Raoul made a league with king Charles the third surnamed the
Simple, and being by him persuaded to become a Christian, of an Enemy he
became his Guest; and being named Robert, he married the kings daughter. By
means of which marriage Charles gave unto him that Province lying upon the
River of Seine, which Robert, who came with an Army into Italy, of whom we
must say somewhat, to the end we may the more easily understand, that which
they have done there.

Now at what time this young Robert began to wex great on the confines of
Lucania, By what mean^i the Nor^ans grew great.
and Sicill, the affairs of Italy were then in mean estate, as well by the
new received losses, as by the incursions of the Saracens, who ouer-ranne that
whole Province, and Sicill in like manner. But it is uncertain whether this
man or some other of that Nation, did bring the Normans out of France into
Italy. For it is certain that the same great Robert, who from the shoares of
the Ocean Sea did enter Robert marched first against the Saracens.
Nevertheless howsoever it is, herein all do agree, that at the same time
almost, the Normans did drive the Barbarians out of Italy, and Sicilie, with
many The Normans drive the Sarracens and Greeks forth of Italy.
thowsands of men slain on either side, and the Greeks likewise out of
Calabria and Apulia. But after that the Norman forces, after many and sundry
exploits, became suspicious to the Popes for that they were increased in
Sicilie, and in a great part of Italy; more than was thought needful for the
safety of the Lands of the Church Leo resolved at the same Pope Leo vanqu^shed
by the Normans.
time, if he could not stay them by entreaties, and threats, to use force And
having levied a mighty Army for the same purpose, he fought with them with
bad success near to Beneuentum: where after he had received a notable loss,
he fled forth of the battle into the nearest City. Nevertheless he was
not. discouraged at this loss, but being a man stout and courageous, he found
new means and forces to drive them forth of Italy; but all his attempts
proved vain. He being dead, Pope Pope Nicholas tributarie to the Normans.
Nicholas his successor, not daring to contend with them, thought it much
available for the safety of the Churches Lands; if paying them a yearly
tribute, he might Robert to aid the holy Sea, when need should be; making him
by that means to acknowledge, that he did depend on an other man. This is in a
manner all that which some Authors have set down of the stirs of this Nation.

Others have affirmed, that the same Robert (as we have said) came from
Transalpine Gaul, not making any mention of France; and they say that Tancre^
Lord Sund^ie opinions of the Normans coming into Italy.
of that Province had twelve children, among whom they highly esteem two, that
is to say, William surnamed Ferrabach, and Robert Guiscard. They do moreover
deny that which we have spoken of the Normans, to be done under the conduct
of Robert, but under his brother William. And besides, they do not set down
the matter like those whom we follow, but quite contrary; That Campania and
Lucania were never possessed by them, and that the Saracens were never driven
thence: but how that Willam jointly with the Princes of Campania and Salerne,
marched against the Barbarians, who had already possessed Sicilie, and took
into their fellow-ship Molloc, Governor of Apulia and Calabria for the Greek
Emperor: by whose Molloc after the Island was taken again, did seize on it,
placing strong Garrisons in the Emperors name, unto whom he said the Island
did belong, and not to Molloc Governor for the Greek Emperor deceives his
fellows.
his fellows: whereat the Norman being incensed did suddenly leave the
Island, and came the nearest way into the firm Land, and laid seege to Melphi
in Apulia. For the releeuing whereof, Molloc leaving the Island, the victory
remained to the Norman, and Molloc being defeated with the loss of all his
Army fled into Greece: so that The Normans defeat Molloc.
in the end the Normans being conducted by William made themselves masters of
the greatest part of Apulia. But after they had a long time debated the
possession of this Province, with diverse events, it came to pass that the
Emperor Michael with The Emperor Michael driven from Constantinople.
three of his children were driven from Constantinople by Nicephorus. The
Emperor dealt with Robert Guiscard, who at the same time beseeged Tarentum (for
it is certain that under his conduct the Normans did in those days flourish in
Italy) to come to his aid into Greece, assuring him, that Nicephorus being
vanquished (the which by his means he presumed easily to do) he should
afterward have the command of Greece. Whereunto Robert being likewise persuaded
by Pope Gregory did agree, and raising his seege on a sudden, came to
Ottranto, where assembling and imbarking such forces as he needed, he did put
to Sea, and with a fair wind he landed first at Auellona, and from thence
coming to Durazzo, he beseeged it by Durazz^ beseeged by the Normans.
Sea and Land. Nicephorus sent Alexis with an Army by Land, against Robert and
the Michael, to enforce him to raise the seege of Durazzo. This man obtained of
Prince Siluio in the name of Nicephorus, that the Venetians should send a
mighty Army against the Normans. Some say that Nicephorus obtained it by his
The Venetians Army succoreth Nicephorus.
Ambassadors before Alexis coming, by means whereof the Venetian Prince,
came with a mighty Army against the Normans: and being come before Durazzo in
the view of the enemy, he put his people in battle, and without any long
stay, came furiously against them. The enemies in like manner being puffed up
with their former victories, did courageously and without fear receive the
Venetian Galleys. The Enemies fought with such fury, as they seemed not alone
to fight for the imperial dignity of one of their confederates, but likewise
for their Country. The The Venetians victorious over the Normans.
victory was for a long time doubtful: At the last the Norman Army being
broken, part of their ships taken, or sunck, and the rest fled, the victorious
Venetian opened to those of Durazzo, the passage to Sea, which was before shut
from them.

The end of the fourth Book of the first Decade.
THE FIFTH BOOK Venice.
The Contents of the fifth Book of the first Decad.
THe Venetians are defeated by the Normans under Prince SILVIO in Durazzo. The
Emperor HENRY comes to Venice. The miraculous appearing of Saint MARKS
body, after it had been a long time hid from his Citizens. Upon what occasion
all Christendom took the Cross upon them, and armed themselves against the
Turks and Saracens. Pope URBAN his Oration in the Council of Clermont,
exhorting all Christian Princes to recover the holy Land. The voyage of the
VLTRA-MONTANI into Asia. How unlikely the Christians fought at the beginning in
Bythinia. The Christians beseege Nicea: with their notable victory obtained
against a great number of Turks. The taking of Iconium, Heraclea, with diverse
other Cities, from the Infidels by the Christians. Antioch is taken by them
after a long and painful siege and sundry incounters. Venetians take Smirna.
The dissensions and secret hatred betwixt BEAMOND, and RAYMOND, Earl of Saint
Giles. And whatsoever was done in Phoenicia, is generally comprehended in this
Book.

THe raising of the siege of Durazzo on that side where the battle was
fought, brought no great commodity to the Venetians: For Nicephorus being
wholly undone by the sudden rebellion of his people; the Norman after he had
repaired his fleet returning to besiege Durazzo by Sea and Land, Michael and
Alexis (jointly possessing the Empire by means of Nicephorus overthrow)
determined in the Venetians absence to succor the City, so that it is
reported there was a cruel fight near to the walls, and that the Greeks
being vanquished, and one of The Greeks over thrown by the Normans before
Durazzo.
the companions of the Empire being slain, Alexis saved himself by flight,
by means whereof the Durassians being constrained to yield, became subject to
the enemies power. And not long afterward the Venetians in the behalf of
Alexis came against the Normans, almost in the very same place where the first
battle was fought but the event did much differ from the former. For the
Venetians being The Venetians defeated.
vanquished, received so notable a loss, as of all that great fleet which
Siluio had brought with him a small number was saved: part being drowned, and
the residue taken. This purchased the Prince great hatred and envy: For, at
his return to Venice, the people deposed him in the thirteenth year of his
government. Diverse do confess, that the Venetians and the Greeks were
vanquished before the Port of Durazzo, but that the loss was not so great as
we have said it was; but only that the battle was very bloody on either-^ide
and that so soon as the Norman began to have the better, Alexis fled on the
left hand toward Peloponesus, and Siluio on the right hand toward Venice.
They do besides deny that he was deposed from his government; but that the
two and twentieth, or as others say the three and twentieth year of his
Principality, he fortunately deceased and was honorably buried in Saint
Marks Church.

VITALIS PHALERIO, the Duke of Venice.



SIluio being dead, Vitalis Phalerio was with the general consent chosen
Alexis, to obtain of him, that Dalmatia and Croatia, which they had taken from
the usurpers and purchased by right of war, might for ever remain to the
Venetians. It was likely that the Emperor would easily grant their request, in
regard of the kindness which he had lately received from them. The
Ambassadors were Dominico Dandulo, Andrea Michaeli, and Iacomo Auro. But in
sted of these, I find in some Authors, Ciani Vitalis and Antonio. Alexis did
freely grant their requests, whereby the Venetians have ever since by New
titles given to the Duke of Venice.
just title possessed Dalmatia and Croatia. And Phalerio was the first
(according to some Annalists) who in his titles did bear these Provinces. I
find likewise that about the same time the Greeks and the Venetians fought
under Phalerio before Durazzo with Guiscard, but the issue thereof was as
successelesse as under Siluio.

The Emperor Henry came from Treuiso to Venice to visit Saint Marks Church,
whose miraculous apparition was a little before diuulged every where. It is
The Emperor Henry comes to Uenice.
reported that for a time it was not known in what part of the Church his bones
did rest, so as the common people cried out, that he had retired himself into
some secret place, as though he meant to conceal himself from the peoples
sight: whereupon the whole City being desirous to know his resting place,
prayers and fasts were appointed Saint (...) (...) ap^.
he did miraculously show himself to his Citizens, by putting out of his arms
forth of the earth: and that then to the peoples great contentment, his body
was taken up, and carried to a more honorable place: and it was decreed that
none but the Prince and the Procurators of the Church, should know his resting
place; and it is thought that at the same time they dedicated a new Church unto
him, more rich and sumptuous than the former.

Phalerio did afterward repair the Borough of Lauretta decayed by antiquity:
and reducing it into the form of a little City, he did enrich it with diverse
liberties and privileges, to make it thereby the more to be inhabited. After
he had made this reparation (we find no other matter done by him abroad nor at
home) he departed this life, the twelfth, or (according to some) the
thirteenth year of his

VITALIS MICHAELI, the 33. Duke of Venice.





VItalis Michaeli was chosen in his place. In his time and under his
government, a mighty Army was sent into Siria for to recover the Cities and
places of the Holy land. But because we know that the Venetians have had
share in diverse great exploits executed by the Christians in Asia: I have
thought it not impertinent to touch briefly in order what was done there, to
the end that by that which shall be set down, it may be easily known what the
Venetians did in that journey. Who was the Author of the war against the
Turks.


The Author then of this war (as some write) was a French Hermit, named
Peter, who going on pilgrimage to the Sepulcher of our Lord Jesus Christ, did
understand of Simeon Bishop of Jerusalem, and of other Christians who were
there in small number, in what distres and miserable servitude this holy Land,
where the Savior of the world did redeem us, was held by the cruel
Mahometists: That there was no place in the same, how holy or religious soever
it were, which that abominable Nation had not till then, defiled and
contaminated, by thefts, murders, and adulteries, adding therewithal the
scourges, torments, and wrongs, which those who professed Christianity did
endure, who were of necessity either to go from thence, or resolve to dye
there miserably. To this was joined a great miracle: A wonderful vision happened
to Peter the Hermit.
How that upon Easter even about midnight, it seemed unto Peter in his sleep,
that Jesus Christ did call unto him, inioyning him so soon as he should arrive
in Italy, he should tell the Pope, and afterward, all the other Princes of
France and Germany, that it would be pleasing unto him, and that he did
command them tred Italy with great fury. A very great multitude of them
leaving Scithia at that time, would stay in no place, til they had first seen
how their friends and kindsfolke in Hungary fared. These men by continual
frequentation with the Italians, being accustomed to the iournies of Italy,
had for the most part changed their natural cruelty and manner of life: by
means whereof waxing more civil, they were driven from the places which they
had gotten by right of war, by those that came Civil war betwixt the Huns.
after them. The cruelty of this Nation is reported to be such, as after that
they had been in Hungary, they abstained not from eating humane flesh after
their country manner; who forthwith took upon them the names of those whom
they had driven thence, and were called Hungarians. Those which were expulsed,
were likewise Attila, they were afterward named Bauarians, then Huns; and
certain letters being taken away from both names, it was made but one.

These then after diverse warlike actions done as well in France as Germany,
after they had vanquished Lewis king of Germany, and made him tributarie,
carrying Lewis King of Germany, Tributarie to the Huns.
great store of booty home with them, being proud of so good success,
resolved to make attempts on Italy; having perhaps understood that they were
at strife among themselves. By means whereof coming first into Misia, they
defeated the Princes of the same in a bloody battle, and made them
tributarie. Departing thence, upon report that they determined to invade
Italy: Berengarius, who at the Berengarius Berengarius defeated by the Huns.
being overcome, fled from the battle with the loss of the greatest patt
of his forces.

The Hunnes became more hauty after this victory, and they entered Italy the
nearest way, putting all they met with to fire and sword; and coming to
Treuiso Treuiso taken by the Huns.
they took and spoiled it. From thence determining to go to Milan, the report
of the great wealth of the Venetians which began at the same time to be very
famous over all Italy was the cause, that on a sudden they turned all their
forces upon the Venetians. They speedily made a great number of small light
boats; which The Huns assail the City of Venice.
assail Rialto. The fear, which then fell upon the Venetians, was not like to
that which possessed them in the time of the French-mens wars. For this
terror was much greater then the other. They fought with the French for their
liberty. The great cruelty of the Huns.
like brute beasts they tare them in pieces and devoured them. The evil
disposition of this Nation had at the first report so terrified all people of
each sex and age, as they did not alone bewail the loss of their liberty;
but their lives likewise. But (as it oftentimes happens) this despair of
theirs was converted into fury, and this fury into a desire of revenge; or if
that could not be effected, to die valiantly. This desire gave them hope to
vanquish the Barbarians, if they should attempt to hazard the fight.

It is to be supposed (for we cannot certainly affirm it) That the Venetians
were Exhortation to the Venetians.
suddenly encouraged by some, by this manner of speech. That it was now time
for them by their actions to show themselves valiant men; That a mighty danger
did not only threaten their Country, but their lives; That they had to do
with a kind of people, who as little used to spare the bodies of the dead, as
their lives in battle. But yet nevertheless they were not made of ^ron, but
their bodies might easily be pierced. That they should call to memory how the
ancient Venetians with a few inhabitants of the Latins, made no difficulty in
their Countries behalf to expose their lives before the walls of Aquileia,
against three hundred thousand men; (for Attila had so many in his Army) That
the event of that battailc did manifest, how much virtue and courage is better
in war than great multitudes: But it may be that some will term them rash
and inconsiderate for their attempt, in daring to assail the enemy with that
sort of fight, wherein he was most expert: whereas on the contrary, they
should rather have fought with them at Sea, or in the Lakes, known better to
them than to the Barbarians: (then which, he said, nothing could be more
acceptable to the Venetians, who from their youth are accustomed to the Sea)
than in such a place where their valor might be most apparent. Moreover, that
the enemies had neither the skill, (...) ships, fit for that purpose. That
their Ancestors had in the same places, where they were now to fight,
vanquished in times past King Pepin, followed with his own forces, and with
those of the Emperor his father: And that they only fought for their
liberty: whereas now, the danger of their lives did constrain them to defend
themselves bravely. Now, in regard that if they were overcome, they were sure
to die, he could not think that there was any Citizen so base or recreant
but would rather choose to dye valliantly with his sword in his hand, then by
yielding, to loose all he had, and to have his throat cut, like a Sheep, by a
barbarous and cruel enemy. He said, That the strength and magnanimity of the
Citizens were such, as they were not only sufficient to rebate the edges of
the Hunnes swords who threatened them; but to free their Country likewise from
so wearisome a siege. The (...) constant resolution.


Being animated by these, or such like exhortations, they became courageous.
For it were folly to imagine that a multitude of people, being amazed with the
fear of their enemies, could be encouraged without some vehement Oration, full
of perswasiue speeches. All men, after that, ran to arm themselves, not only
to defend their liberty, but likewise, or rather, to preserve the safety of
their lives. The enemies in the mean space hasted toward Rialto. The
Venetians imbarqued in their wel-armed vessels, and fit for the fight, met with
them near to Albiola. The fight at the beginning was very cruel.

The attempts of the Hunnes were diverse; who relying on their great numbers,
Battle betwix^ the Venetians and the Hunnes.
assailed them in sundry places at once. The Venetians every where opposing
themselves against them, did bravely resist their assaults: They fought sundry
days without any likelihood of victory to either side. But at the last, both
parts joining their whole forces, the Barbarians were broken and defeated, and
dispersing their troops, fled far from thence, leaving to the Venetians a
most famous victory. The enemies (as some report) being soon after won by
the rewards of Berengarius, departed out of Italy.

The Venetians grew famous, by gaining this victory near to Albiola. All men
said that the Venetians had abated the fury of the Hunnes; unto whom
Berengarius The Venetians overcome the Hunnes. Great praise g^uen to the Duke.
place. He did likewise greatly praise the absent Duke, by whose means and
under whom all was done. It is to be supposed, that the Duke Tribuno did at
that time fortify the City with a wall and chain; and not for fear of the
Pirates: the which certain Historians do likewise affirm.

to take by force that Country out of the Infidels hands, wherein for the
Salvation of mankind it was his pleasure to be borne, and to die, where diverse
and great tokens of his humanity were yet to be seen: witness the little
house wherein he was borne; the Temple, where being a child he wept, and
grown bigger had disputed, and at last being become a man had taught; The
mounts of Thabor and Oliuet; this a place of prayer; and that of his
transfiguration; Pilats Pretorium; mount Caluarie, where his cross was set up;
and his Sepulcher not far from thence.

Peter being returned into Italy, had no other thought but to go to Pope
Urban, Peter tells his message to the Pope.
unto whom having delivered his message, he passed the mounts, and went to the
other Christian Princes. In the mean space that he in a manner ran over all
Europe, Urban coming soon after to the Council of Clermontin Auuergne The
Pope comes to the Council of Clermont in Auuergne.
treated of this matter with a very vehement Oration: the substance whereof
was thus.

Pope Urban his Oration.
THat he was not departed from Rome, and come to that holy assembly for the
affairs of the Church of Rome only, albeit it greatly needed to be reformed,
but was stirred up by another occasion, the which, as more holy, was likewise
more notable: That he did not doubt, but that those there assembled had heard
tell of what had be fallen long since in Siria, and chiefly in the confines of
that Region which is commonly called the Holy Land: The unjust usurpation of
the Sepulcher of our Sovereign Lord Jesus Christ (the which he could not utter
without tears) by those cruel barbarous Saracens; that there was no Church,
Altar, or any other sacred place, but was The cruelty of the Mahometans.
either razed down to the groundby those cursed Mahometans, or converted to
their profane uses: that the Religious people dwelling there at such time as
those enemies made themselves masters thereof, were constrained, some for fear
of horrible punishment, to renounce the faith of Jesus Christ, and others that
would persevere therein, were by sword and fire, and other sorts of torments
miserably consumed: That devout Matrons going thither on pilgrimage from all
parts almost of Europe, had not been only forced by them to satiate their
brutishlust, but likewise in contempt and derision of us, tormented by
monstrous embracements: That if that which he had related was not in their
opinions sufficient to cause them to take Arms, and to prosecute revenge, He
besought them at least to consider, and call to remembrance, how thatin a short
time through the negligence of their Ancestors, the forces of Asia were
increased; and besides, how far the Mahometans had in length and breadth
extended their Dominions: How many Countries they possessed, which did in
times past belong to the Roman Empire. But would to God (said he) that the
affairs of Christendom were brought to that pass, that we were but to
complain and bewail other men's miseries. We have (alas) seen in our days
Italy, wholly destroyed by their spoils and incursions; Castles, Cities and
Churches beaten down, and burnt by those Sacrilegious persons. But wherefore
do I relate the murders, imprisonments, rapes, and so many other matters
never almost heard of, which this Land has endured along time: seeing that
Spain likewise, and her neighbor Aquitaine, and all the Occidentall
Provinces, have not only felt the like loss, but having at this day scarce
dried up their tears, do stand in fear of the like. And ye (...) Frenchmen
(said he) albeit that this wound is not yet entered into your bowels; no doubt,
but in regard of your neighborhood, you have heard and seen likewise
somewhat of that, whereof I have now spoken. And the Germans, and other
Western Nations, who have not as yet felt these losses, ought often to
forethinke what dangers menace them from the East, nay rather, how near they
are to them already. I know not (said he) if the Venetians were not, (who with
strong Garrisons defend the Seacoasts, and who have often repulsed this cruel
enemy from Histria and Dalmatia) whether this storm would (ere this) have
been blown even into Hungary and Germany. The power of the Grecian Empire,
which whilst her strength and vigor lasted, was wont to be the Bu^varke of
Europe on the East and West side, is in such sort ruined, as the Emperor
dreams on nothing but on means and forces whereby he may conserve his City
of Constantinople; which place if we had lost (as God forbid) we may easily
conjecture how great such a loss would be, as well to Europe as to him. I
tremble with horror, when I do but think what will happen, if this fire be
not quickly quenched, which (...) does more and more kindle. All the miseries,
which those have felt whom we bewail, hang over our heads. Men and women shall
be reserved to satisfy the luxury of those barbarous people: and ye will
hereafter lament, when it will be too late, that having had means, you have
not opposed your selves against these miseries. It may be you think, that this
cannot come to pass. No more did they who have since felt it. And would to God
we did not so often feed our selves with vain hope. But it were better (o
courageous spirits) whilst we have strength, counsel, aid, power, and money
ready, and generally whatsoeur may give hope of a victory, to divert this
evident peril from us. Nor is our enterprise above humane strength. That
Charles, surnamed the Great, in a manner your Countriman, (o ye Germans) in
regard What Charlemaine did against the Infidels.
of the descent of his Ancestors, and your king (o Frenchmen) and the glory of
your name, did drive the Saracens forth of Spain and Aquitaine: The same
Charles constrained them to leave Italy. The (...) Charles (of whom ye so
much vaunt) did recover Jerusalem which ye term Holy, and drove thence the
enemies: And by how much his glory and reputation is great: by so much the
more ought it to incite you which are descended from him, to attempt some new
exploit which may augment this your ancient renown. If ye do not thus* but
give your selves to rest and idleness, ye shall not only hazard what your
Ancestors have left you, but you shall suffer the native Country of our
sovereign king, to your great shame and contempt, with that of all
Christendom likewise, to be trodden down by these cruel enemies; and his
Sepulcher, Temple, and other holy places to be polluted by murders, rapes,
and sacri^edges. Arm your selves then in time rather, and deface this common
infamy: Purchase to your selves and to all Europe assured safety. I think
you may easily do it. For by how much your forces surpass those of Charles
(If ye all jointly undertake this voyage) by so much more shall the victory be
certain and easy for you. The victors profit shall be great and inestimable,
by the spoils of so opulent a Nation, and such rich kingdoms: But the
Celestial reward shall be much greater, the which in the name of Almighty
God, we promise to as many as shall fight valiantly.

It is reported that when the Pope had ended his speech, the whole assembly
cried The Assemblies answer^ to the Pope.
out, that it was Gods will to have it so: Then the Pope having commanded
silence, replied. Go then (quoth he) ye generous spirits, and let that which
ye have all, with one accord, now spoken, be your watchword in this war,
and let as many as mean to undertake this journey, sew a Cross of red cloth
on the right side of their garments. They report a very admirable matter, the
which I should hardly set down, were it not for the assurance that we have,
that God does An admirable matter.
ever assist holy enterprises; Which is, that the same day that the war was
resolved upon at Clermont, it was known and diuulged to the farthest Regions
of the earth.

But whilst Pope Urban and the rest did labor about the choice of a Captain
in the assembly, the which besides other matters had given great hope to all
men, and that this business had kept them there certain days: it is
reported, that diverse thousands of men affecting this new war came thither:
And that soon after, The number of those who at the same time took the
Croisado.
three hundred thousand armed men were in a readiness to march.

The leaders to these great numbers of Christians, were Godfry of Bouillon,
Eustace, and Baldwin his brethren, Raymond Earl of Saint Giles, and Robert
Earl of Flaunders, The chief commanders.
Hugh, surnamed the great, brother to Phillip the French King, Stephen Earl of
Chartres, the Bishop of Puy, and Peter the Hermit the Author of this enterprise.

This man, because he would be seen to have some chief command in this
Baldwin and his brethren, through Germany, Hungary, and Thrace, to
Constantinople, accompanied with troops of soldiers. The Bishop of Puy,
Raymond, Hugh the great, passed into Italy with greater forces; and came to
Rome to visit the Pope. From whence they departed in three troops. The one
marched directly to Brundusium, the other to Barri, and the third to Ottranto.
But Beamond son to Guiscard a valliant Prince, being incited before by the
report Their sundry p^ssadges.
of this gallant enterprise, did join his forces with those which passed
through Apulia.

Whilst the troops which were in Italy made themselves ready to march, Peter
the Hermit, who was arrived at Constantinople with the three brethren of
Bouillon, so soon as he had crossed the Bosphorus of Thrace, the next and
shortest way, he passed over his troops into Asia; which the Emperor Alexis
(as it is reported) did soon enforce him to do, in regard his soldiers
observed no martial discipline, but gave themselves licentiously to all manner
of evil. The which, Peter the Hermit, ignorant of Martial discipline.
Alexis with others did impute wholly to the Hermit, being altogether ignorant
of martial discipline and unworthy to have any command; by means whereof
diverse did report that the Emperor caused Peter, whether he would or no, to
depart foremost into Asia, where his Army soon after marched toward Nicomedia
and Nicea.

But because it did manifestly appear, that unless some other besides the
Hermit, (who was more religious than martial) did take charge of the Army, it
was likely at the very first encounter to fall into great danger: they chose
Raymond Raymond a German chosen in the Hermits sted
a German by nation, and a very warlike person, for their General. By the
which election we may easily conjecture, that the brethren of Bouillon came not
with Peter Alexis, till the rest of the forces were arrived.

The Sarracens, who had been advertised of the resolution of the Council The
Infidels advertised of the Christians enterprise.
held in France, and of whatsoever the Christian Princes had since then
enterprised in this war; did determine by Ambush to surprise those who should
first come into Asia; to kill them; and then to resist the passage of the rest
over the Bosphorus of Thrace. Raymond having marched on the Territory of
Nicea, without sending forth his discouerers, fell into Ambuscado, and retired
with great loss of his people to the City of Exorga. This place had been of
set purpose abandoned by the enemy: Raymond being wearied with that long
siege, Raymond flies to the enemy.
of a Captain became a fugitive, and with certain others went to the enemies
side. The City after that was valiantly defended for a time, but at the last
the enemy took it; and the most of those who were within it having been
tormented with hunger, thirst, and infinite other miseries, were put to death,
either by the sword, or by some other accident of war; all those which
yielded, were likewise put to the edge of the sword. The Hermit in the mean
time seized on the City of Cynita, which was forsaken by the inhabitants; and
having fortified it with those few forces which he had, he joined himself
with the troops, at such time as his Countrymen arrived.

Whilst these things were done in Bythinia, Hugo the Norman, the Earls of The
French arrive at Constantinople.
Flaunders and of Chartres, departed from Barri, and with a fair wind arrived
at Durazzo. Then at the entreaty of the Governor of Dalmatia in the name of
the Emperor Alexis, they marched in bands, and at sundry times, to
Constantinople, for fear least so great an Army marching all together should
spoil the Country: whither being come, as into a place of safety, it is
reported that Alexis Alexis practices ^reacherie.
did lay snares for them; as one who from the beginning had greatly suspected
their enterprise. But being reconciled to Baldwin, Godfrey and the rest, The
Bishop of P^y and Raymond did arrive, who had conducted their troops through
Dalmatia, Albania,

Beamond, who for his fathers and his own particular enmity with Alexis,
thought not himself safe if he should come into Greece, sailed with a direct
course from Brundusium into Morea; and from thence marching in battle (as if
he had been to fights, through the higher Misia and Thrace, to avoid the
trappes of Alexis, and came into Asia sooner than he was expected; where after
he had taken a City of the Heretics; spoiled and overthrown it; and being
come to the banks of the river Barbara, he caused part of his forces to pass
over at a foord, and kept the residue with himself. But the morrow after by
break of day, Alexis forces Beamond ass^yled by Alexis Subjects.
being come to assail those troops that were gone over the river, they did
greatly amaze them at the first, and had undoubtedly much endangered them, if
Beamond had not speedily come to their reskue with two thousand horse, which he
had ready fot the same purpose; at whose coming, the Greeks retired
themselves. And by this means Beamond perceiving that there was no place free
from the ambushes Alexis, he resolved still to march in order of battle. But
the Emperor, after he had in vain made all these attempts, thought it his
best course to make an Alexis and Beamond reconciled
atonement with him, and to that end sent his Ambassadors to him, laying all
that was past upon the malice of certain people desirous of spoil.

It is reported that Alexis did afterward more esteem of Beamond than of all
the rest of the Princes and Captains of the Army, whereunto the meekness
and courtesy of the Norman did incite him, so as after his coming to
Constantinople, he did so far insinuate himself into the Emperous favor, as
he freely promised him to furnish the Army with new succors, horses,
garments, weapons and all other necessaries. But yet nevertheless, because he
would seem to have A new agreement betwixt Alexis and the Christian Princes.
against himself, his State, and subjects; and that all the Cities which they
should take in Asia (Jerusalem excepted) should be reduced under the
government of the Grecian Empire. This thus conluded: the whole troops were
forthwith transported into Asia; Beamond only with certain others remained
with Alexis, to further the dispatch of victuals and other necessaries. The
Captains in the mean time being come to Nicomedia, so soon as they had
united their forces, resolved first of all to assail Nicea. Wherefore
dislodging thence, they came through forests, and by-ways before the City;
and the siege was planted before Beamonds arrival at the Camp, by reason of
his long stay about the sending away of victuals and other necessaries.

At his arrival, Nicea, the chief City of Bithynia, (called at first
Antigona, by Nicea besieged.
Antigonus her founder, and since then, Nicea by Lysimachus, in favor of his
wife) was assailed in three several places. This City was reasonably strong
by situation, and much more by art, being compassed about with very high and
thick walls, the towers builded foure-square: the fourth part whereof toward
the South is watered with the lake Ascania. They forthwith erected enginnes of
battery, and wooden Castles of the just height of the City walls. Then they
brought thither the ram, and other warlicke engines. They did likewise use
the mine. The strength of Nicea.
steades that had been slain or hurt: So as they were sure that whilst the
passage of the lake should remain open, Nicea could never be taken. Wherefore
it was concluded, for the hindering of the enemies passage, to send to the
Emperor Alexis, and to entreat him, that with a certain number of ships
he would shut up the lake from the enemies. Alexis fulfilled their request,
but not suddenly. Sixty thousand Turks come to succor the Town.
For whilst he made ready his ships, threescore thousand Turks, with
certain troops of Sarracens, came and encamped on the hills next to the
City, whereof they suddenly advertised the besieged by the lake, which was
not yet shut from Bishop of Puy his quarter, who was encamped on the East Side,
where the French did not only with great valor receive the enemies forces,
but running all the rest, they seized on the town of Soccor, by means of
certain Christians that were within it, where they remained till such a time
as the soldiers had made provision of victuals for five days. But being
departed from thence, so soon as they had surprised the City of Sura, and the
Forte of the Imposts, with certain other Sura.
small towns in the Territory of Sura, they labored by a very straight path
The Forte of the Imposts.
to ascend the top of Mount Taurus.

This way, which was but a days journey, was no less dangerous than painful.
A very dangerous way.
It was very narrow by reason of the flint-stones, and sharp rocks which
hemmed it in on the one side, and with a very deep valley on the other, which
was of so fearful a depth, as it did amaze the beholders: the troops were a
whole day passing

Having passed these mountainous streights, they came to the City of Murasis
which forthwith yielded unto them. From thence they discovered such huge and
Murasis.
spacious plains, as their sight was dazeled with beholding them. In the
midst of that plain they espied Antioch, whither all the Captains meant to
march, and to besiege it. Being come down into the valley they descried the
enemies a far off upon a Rivers side, which runs overthwart the plain.
These men were sent by A luckie event for the Christians.
the King of Antioch, to convey the victuals, which was to come to the City
from the mountains. Against these were certain light horse sent, who at the
first charge brake and defeated them, part of whom being slain, the rest fled
to the City. There were taken the same day, a great number of sumpter-horses,
and great quantity of victuals, which as most necessary were brought to the
Army to the great content of the victorious. They came afterward to the river
near to Antioch, What Antioch the Christians did besiege.
to Seleucia; and an other more excellent than that in Phenicia, builded* by
Seleucus Nicanor, son to Antiochus surnamed Ephiphanes, through the which
runs the river Orontes. Toward this then marched Beamond, Hugo, and the rest,
and understood by certain prisoners that Cassianus was King of this City, and
Tributarie to the King of Babylon: who upon this occasion had sent diverse
thousands of men to

The commanders were not amazed at these speeches. Chiefly Beamond who Beamond
gives the first assault to the City of Antioch.
conducted five legions, did the next morrow by break of day march directly
toward the City, where he did fiercely assail the enemies, who were under
the walls in order of battle. But the neerenesse of the walls and their
other munitions, which constrained the assailants to retire, was the cause that
both sides did not fight with all their forces; by reason whereof this fight
was made rather in have, than otherwise. But how light soever it was, it lasted
even till night, at which time Beamond retired to his fellows. After that,
they made a bridge upon the river, which

The City of Antioch is circled with a double wall, The inmost is of brick,
and the other of great square stone, with four hundred and threescore towers,
with a Citadell on the East side thereof so strongly fortified, as it did not
fear the assaults of the enemies. There was besides not far off a lake
abounding in fish, and marvelous fruitful plains, watered with rivers and
fountains, twelve miles distant from the Sea of Cilicia. It is reported that
Saint Peter in the Churchs infancy did Antioch Saint Peter's first Seat
there establish his See, which did afterward greatly illustrate the City.

The Camp at the first wanted no victuals: for ripe grapes hung on the vines:
and the whole Army was a long time fed with great store of corn, found in
wells A boundance of (...) at the beginning of the siege.
where the Countrymen did use to hide their grain, and besides they brought at
times great store of cattle to the Camp, taken straggling in the neighbor
valleys by Heracleus, could never since obtain of the cursed enemy a dwelling
place, until at the last Carpharat the Egyptian, permitted the Bishop and a
few with him to inhabit the fourth part of the City, near to the holy
sepulcher; paying a certain yearly tribute. But being driven forth of
Jerusalem, upon the report of the Christians coming into Asia, they retired
themselves into the mountains near to Antioch.

Now whilst the Frenchmen and Germans performed these warlike exploits in The
Venetians fle^t.
Asia, the Venetians (I know not whether of their own proper motion, or
incited at the entreaty of the Pope and the Emperor Alexis,) sent a greater
Army than ever yet they had done, into Ionia: the which I find to be of two
hundred vessels of all sorts, and under the conduct of Henrico Contareni Bishop
of the Castle, and Michaeli Vitalis the Dukes son.

Some nevertheless do affirm, that the Venetians came not into Asia, till
Jerusalem was taken. But I cannot believe, that a Nation so mighty at Sea as
were the Venetians, would be idle during these great stirs in Asia and
Europe; especially at such a time when as they might perceive all the
Seacoasts from Hellespont even to Pelusium, at the mouth of Nilus, to be
exposed for a prey: the which in The Venetians defeat the Pisans at Rhodes.
and falling from words to blows, they fought on either side like enemies. But
the Venetians getting the upper hand took eighteen Galleys from the Pisans
wherein were four thousand men. It is not known wherefore, nor upon what
occasion the Pisans durst buckle with the Venetians, seeing they were mightier
than they: but having taken them, because they perceived them to wear read
Crosses, they sent them and their vessels away, detaining thirty of the
chiefest Gentlemen among them for hostages. From thence they sailed with a
fair wind into Ionia, The Venetians take Smyrna.
whence it is said, that the body of Saint Nicholas was brought to Venice, and
laid in the Church, dedicated unto him, on the shore.

This is all which some report the Venetians did in their first journey. But
others do set down, after the taking of Smyrna, all that which they did in
Syria, which is not impertinent. For whilst their Fleet was preparing at
Venice, they took in fresh supplies in Dalmatia, and came first to Rhodes;
then to Ionia where they took Smyrna; and afterward they scoured the Seas of
Pamphilia, Cilicia, and Syria. The City of Antioch being taken, the French
Captains did not only besiege Jerusalem, but took it with ease. For it is
certain, that the Venetians, departing

The siege of Antioch in the mean time was no less long than painful,
having The length of the siege of Antioch with the want in the Army.
for the space of nine months greatly weakened all the forces of Europe. For
they were at times tormented with famine even with all extremity; so as
besides the common Soldiers, diverse likewise of the chief, not being able to
endure so great scarcity, sought many times to fly thence, among whom were
Peter the Hermit, William Carpenter issued of Royal blood, and Tancred cousin
to Beamond; who being shamefully reprehended in the midst of their flight for
abandoning the The complaints of the Christians before Antioch.
Army, were constrained to take new oaths. There was likewise great
complaints made against the Captains for bringing out of the west all the flower
of Christendom to die in the East by famine before the walls of Antioch; That
there was no kind of

Beamond his authority (whose virtue and experience in war according to the
How great Beamond his authority was.
saying of as many as have written of him, had purchased to him self above all
the How glad the Army was to fight to free themselves from famine.
to the battle; saying that it were better to dye at once if they could not
win the (...), than hourly to endure those miseries which were far worse
than death.

They were then at the same instant conducted against the enemy, and the fight
being begun in the view of the City, they cruelly fought on either side: the
victory for certain hours space remaining doubtful. But at last the enemies
being The enemies that came to the succor of Antioch are defeated.
broken and put to flight, with the loss of half their forces, they left a
glorious victory to the Christians. And this was not the first time only that
they fought

In the end by the treachery of Pyrrhus, one of the chiefest men of Antioch,
(who Treachery of a Citizen of Antioch.
being drawn by the great fame of Beamond, would be known in favor of him to
have done such a deed) the City was taken by night, the ninth month after it
was besieged: The King, understanding by that nightly tumult that the enemy
was entered, The taking of Antioch.
going forth of the City at a Posterne gate, saved himself in the neighbor
mountains: But being fearful and amazed, not keeping the beaten ways, but
The death of KIng Cassianus.
wandering through woods and groves near to the City, the Armenians, who
inhabited

Not long after the taking of Antioch, there was near unto the City a fiereer
fight than at any time before, fought betwixt the Christians and Corbanes,
Lieuetenant to the King of Persia, and Sensadolus, son to Cassian; where it
is reported that an hundred thousand fighting men of the enemies were slain
upon the place, and that, besides the horse and other beasts of carriage,
fifteen thousand Camels were taken.

The Captain of the Castle of Antioch, who till then had bravely defended the
Why Alexis refused Antioch
place, being moved with this happy victory of ours, yielded it to Beamond.
It is reported that the City being by the general consent offered to Alexis
by Hugo, surnamed the great, sent for the same purpose to Constantinople, was
upon his refusal thereof, by the advice of all men (except of Raymond Earl of
Saint Gylles who alone opposed himself against it) given to Beamond. They say
likewise, that (...), the day before he committed the treason, had agreed with
the Captains Alexis knowing in his own conscience, that he had dealt
perfidiously with the French and Germans, refused to accept their bounty,
fearing some deceit to be couched in their offer: perceiving very well, that
they did justly suspect him for not observing the agreement made betwixt them.
For he had never succored them with victuals or ought else, notwithstanding
that they had oftentimes sent unto him in their greatest miseries. Antioch
being adjudged to the Norman, the Army dislodged the fourth month Rugia.
Albaria.
after the yielding thereof, and march ed first to Rugia, and from thence to
Albaria. This place did somewhat hold back the happy success of their
affairs by reason of a long siege. At the last, the Walls being beaten down
with the Ram, Beamond saved. A great quarrel betwixt Beamond and the Earl of
Saint Gyles.


There grew in the same place a quarrel betwixt the Earl of Saint Gylles and
the Norman, who returned with all his troops to Antioch: The other Captains
wintered; some at Albaria, and some at Rugia. Beamond being requested to come
where they wintered, means was made to reconcile him to the Earl of S.
Gylles; but the one would in no sort leave his stubburnnesse, nor the other
diminish his authority: and each of them having used words, sauouring not
only of emulation, but of hatred and wrath, they were ready to have come to
strokes, had not Beamond, fearing that by his means the (...), (...) (...)
(...) and by the Earl of Flanders.

The Winter was spent in certain light ^ttempts, (...) (...), and his Tripoli
besicged by the Christians.
followers: But at the beginning of the Spring ((...) (...) place toward the
East are exceeding hot) the Army began to march. (They (...) (...) and in the
valley near to the C^tie of Camella, in regard it was (...) day; resolving at
their departure thence to make War on the King of (...) in) (...) behalf of
Raymond. Tortosa.
For he determined to have that Kingdom either by (...) policy: Therefore
they laid siege to Tripoly; but striving in valne by (...) of the strength
thereof, Raymond ma^ched with the other to Tortosa. Beamond likewise, Godfrey
and the Earl of Flaunders departed at the same time from Antioch. But
understanding that Raymond was become more au^acious, by reason of his exploits
done in winter: and foreseeing the (...) (...) which Christendom would receive
if they should fight one with another* Beamond with his troops returned to
Antioch. Godfrey in the mean time and the Earl of Flaunders came and besieged
Gibella.
Gibella a most rich City, and soon after took it. From thence they marched
to Tortosa, understanding that their fellows were in great danger by reason of
their small number. The Earl of Chartres being sent for likewise by Raymond,
Agreement made with the King of Tripoly.
at all, leaving the enterprise unfinished, they dislodged, and making peace
with the King of Tripoli upon more easy conditions than the former which they
propounded to him, being furnished by him with weapons, clothes, money and
victuals, and they marched directy toward Jerusalem.

The first day that the Army dislodged, it came to Bethlem; from thence to
Zabarim, Bethlehem. Zabarim. The river Braim Berithon.
where they were in some want of water; the third day they camped on the River
of Braim; departing thence they came divided in five troops over steepie
mountains, and rocks, not without fear of ambushes, to Berithon a Sea-town;
and from thence to Sagitta: At the last they came on the tenth day to Cesarea:
Cesarea. Ramolles.
where after they had rested two days, they marched in battle to Ramolles,
which the enemies had forsaken for fear. The 3. day after, about sunrising;
those which Jerusalem.
were in the Vantgard, descried not far from thence the Walls of Jerusalem:
At Christ our sovereign king with great reverence; others upon their knees
weeping for joy, did salute the holy City and the holy Sepulcher. But
because this place requires that we should say somewhat of the antiquity and
magnificence thereof: to the end that this book grow not too big, we will
begin the sixth, which follows by the description of the City.

The end of the fifth Book of the first Decade.
THE SIXTH BOOK OF THE FIRST DECAD Venice.
The Contents of the sixth Book of the first Decad.
THe sixth Book contains the description of the City of Jerusalem with the
taking thereof. GODFREY of BOVILLON made King of Jerusalem. The Christians most
happy victory against the Turks. The taking of Ascalon Syria. The Venetian
Fleet returns into Italy. The privileges granted to the Venetians in the
City of Ferrara. The Venetian Sea-armie called back into Syria. The taking of
the Cities of Ptolomais and Sydon, with the privileges which the Venetians for
their part obtained therein. The lucky issue of the war against the Paduans,
and their confederats. Two strange and wonderful accidents happened by fire in
the City of Venice one after another. Those of Zara, and other people of
Dalmatia, do rebel. Prince ORDELAPHO his success at the reprisall of the
Cities in Dalmatia; with his death, fighting against the Barbarians. The
Venetian Army at the pursuit of Pope CALIXTVS returns into Syria. The City
of Tire besieged by Sea and Land. The Tyrians yield. The Venetian Army
returns from Syria into Itali^.

THe City of Jerusalem which we may properly term The description of
Jerusalem.
holy, is (as we have learned,) seated on a high place environed almost on
every side with very high mountains, having neither fountains nor Rivers
near to it, but only Siloe, which Josephus calls a fountain, and others a
river. This which we cannot call a river for the small quantity of water which
is in it, running from mount Sion, passes through the Iosaphat. The Territory
near to the City is very dry and barren, and is full of Cisternes to receive
rain water. The Solymi which were sometime called Lycians according to
Herodotus, were the founders of this City, as the very name it self does
witness; and Cornelius Tacitus does affirm it, in that place where he speaks
of the antiquity of the Jews. Homer nevertheless singing the praises of the
Lycians, does seem to make a difference betwixt them and the Solymi. His verse
is thus; This man again warred on the Solymi, Meaning Bellerophon, who was
descended from Lycia. Concerning the Religion, Strabo a man very much addicted
to Paganism has written thereof. For there is no man almost, but has either
read or heard what the Authors of the holy Scripture have set down
concerning the antiquity of this place. It is good then, and (I say) lawful,
to know how near some, who were stuffed with Paganish superstitions, have
approached to the knowledge of the truth.

The common report (says he) of matters believed concerning the temple of the
Ierosolimitans does affirm, That those, who are now called Jews, are
descended Strabo his opinion concerning Moses.
from the Egyptians: For Moses, a Priest of Egypt, being possessed with a
certain Idea of Religion, detesting the vain institutions of his own
Country, came from thence into Palestine, followed by great numbers of people
highly devoted to Divine matters. He taught them how greatly the Egyptians did
err, to attribute the name of God to brute beasts; and the Grecians likewise,
to represent their Gods Strabo did not know all. But it is altogether
necessary to understand, how an Ethnic, brought up in superstition, does
approve that which is directly contrary to his law. For he does sufficiently
approve that which he does not reprove, and chiefly that, which he knows to
be openly repugnant to the dreams of his Religion. But Moses, after he had
thus persuaded a great multitude of people, brought them in to the same place
where the City of Jerusalem now stands, the which he possessed, with so much
the more ease, as for the barrenness thereof it was desired of none; being no
such place as was worth the contending for by Arms. For the place, whereon the
City is seated, is very stony, and ill-prouided of water. Strabo would
hereby infer, that Moses, and those which followed him out of Egypt, were
the founders of this City, and not the Solymi. He sets down besides, That
there Josephus in his History of the Jews.

But so soon as straying forth of the right way, they gave themselves over;
first to tyranny; then to covetousness; and unto all other vices: it came to
pass, that Sin the cause of the d^struction of Jerusalem.
by a just judgment of God, the City has not been only once, but many and
sundry times, and in diverse manner, taken and afflicted. For omitting that
which went before the time of Alexander the great, it is written, That the
first Ptolomie, king The first taking of Jerusalem by Ptolomie. The second by
Titus.
of Egypt, did wholly destroy it: Then in succession of time, under the happy
government of Titus son to Vespasian, it received so much the greater loss,
by how much before then it had offended: Soon after that, in the days of the
Emperor Adrian, and then after him, these losses following one an other, it
had no leisure The third by Adrian.
almost to breath in the midst of so many miseries, which have continued
even to the time of this journey. In this manner the Holy Land, otherwise
happy, has been a long time tormented under the cursed Empire of Mahomet, who
cruelly possessed it, at such time as the Christian troops did arrive.

Now after the Princes had viewed the situation of the City, they resolved to
assail The Christians besiege Jerusalem.
it in three several places. The Earls of Flanders and Chartres encamped on
Stephens gate; (for near thereunto is a Chapel of his name, because it is
thought, that he being thrown out of the City, was stoned in the same place)
Godfrey and Tancred on the West Side; and Raymond near to mount Sion, toward
the South. So soon as the camp arrived, certain skirmishes were made on both
sides, as occasion served. And the Army in the mean time wanted no victuals,
as it did before Antioch, by reason of the Sea which was not far of; as also
for that they possessed diverse strong towns in Palestine. They attempted at
times, during the seege, to take the City by Scalado, but it was in vain. At
the last, bringing wooden Castles, and other warlike engines, before the walls,
the battery was somewhat more furious than before; and a breach being made
they marched to the assault, which lasted from the day-breake till noone, with
a great slaughter of our men, the which did howerly increase, without any
likelihood of waxing better, had not Baldwin, followed by a troop of Soldiers,
mounted the wall on boards, which the enemies had there placed to catch our
engines, which were brought before The Christians take Jerusalem.
Citie-gate in the mean time being broken open, and the wall near thereunto
beaten down by the Ram, the victors entering on every side, the enemy
retired, where at their first entrance they made in all places a marvelous
slaughter, without exception of sex or age. David's tower, fortified in manner
of a Cittadell, was forthwith yielded up. All the fury of the fight was near
to the Temple, whither great multitudes of people were retired. They fought
there with great loss on either side. Despair encouraged the one, and shame
the other; because the City being taken, the Temple was possessed, and kept
from them by a few. Yet nevertheless they entered it by force, and ran so
courageously upon the enemy, as being thrust Great effusion of blood in the
Temple.
the fight was very bloody, not only at the entry of the Temple, but in the
midst thereof. And so great was the slaughter as well of the victors, as the
vanquished, as the blood, which was spilt on the pauement of the Temple, was a
foot deep. In the end, the uppermost part of the Temple being not yet taken,
the retreat was sounded a little before night. The next morrow, after
commandment was given

In this manner was the City of Jerusalem taken in the year of our Salvation
1099. and four hundred fourscore and ten years after it was taken by the
Infidels, 1099.
and the thirty ninth day after the Christians had besieged it. Godfrey of
Bouillon Godfrey of Bouillon king of Jerusalem.
was by the consent of all men saluted king: who after he had received all the
Royal ornaments, (except the Crown) would by no means be crowned; saying,
That it did not become a Christian to wear a Crown of gold in the same place,
where Christ, the sovereign king, had worn a Crown of thorns.

Whilst these things were done in Jerusalem, fearful news was brought, that
Godfrey, after he had left a good Garrison in the City, marched almost as
far as Asdona. There they fought a bloody battle, which for diverse hours
space inclined to neither part. In the end the enemies were broken, and put to
flight, with great loss. Some say that The defeat of the enemy, with the
number of the dead.
there died the same day an hundred thousand men. The prisoners that were
taken did report, That the number of their Army was five hundred thousand
fighting men.

During this happy success in Syria; the Venetians, departing from Smyrna,
after they had coasted the Seas of Lycia, Pamphilia, and Cilicia, they arrived
in Syria, and kept the Haven of Ioppa, taken before by the Christians. But I
dare not affirm, The Venetians coming into Syria.
before Jerusalem, were releiued with victuals coming from the Sea. The which
I can not see how it should be done by any other, but by them, at that time;
seeing that all the coast of Syria was as yet in the enemies power. After the
Venetians had left a sufficient garrison for the defense of their vessels,
they departed from Ioppa, and marched in order of battle toward Jerusalem:
from whence returning they took by force the City of Ascalon upon the Sea,
which the French had The Venetians take Ascalon.
a little before attempted in vain; and leaving Frenchmen there in garrison,
they laid siege to Caypha, which is likewise called Porphiria, near to
Ptolomais: the which siege lasted longer than it was suspected. From whence,
because they would not live idely, they went to besiege Tiberias: the which
being yielded by the inhabitants, those of Caypha did soon after the like.

Some Authors attribute these exploits to Godfrey, and not to the Venetians.
Godfrey, with his Army by Land, after the taking of Jerusalem; and by the
Venetians, by Sea, keeping way with him still all-along the coast. And from
thence it comes that the Venetian Chroniclers attribute the whole to the
Venetians; and the French The Frenchmen and Venetians joined together. The
death of Godfrey.
to Godfrey. It is certain, that so soon as the Venetians arrived in Syria,
they joined with the French, and that the affairs of the Christians were, for
the space of a whole year, governed in the Province under the happy fortune
of either of them. These things being done, the Venetian Army returned to
Venice. And Godfrey of Bouillon soon after died*

It is reported, that, about the same time, the bodies of Saint Nicholas and
Saint The bodies of Saint Theodore and Saint Nicholas brought to Venice.
Theodore, were brought to Venice; the one being laid in Saint Saviors Church,
and the other in that which of a long time had been dedicated unto him on the
banks of the Sea. The Normans under the conduct of Roger, brother to Beamond,
made incursions on Grecia and Dalmatia. The Venetians, after they had made a
league with Caloman, son to Geica King of Hungary, marched against the
Normans. The Venetians agreement with Caloman King of Hungary.
But I know not upon what ground the Normans at the same time made war on the
Venetians, and Alexis. The Venetian fleet being strengthened by the succors of
the Barbarian passed into Apulia. For Caloman had not only made a league with
the Venetians, but joined his forces to theirs. I know not upon what occasion
this was done, unless it were that the Hungarians did at the same time

Now the Venetians having, in a manner, at their first arrival taken
Brundusium, The Venetians take Brundusium
left a garrison there, and scattering their forces on every side over the
firm land, filled all the Seacoasts with spoil and terror. And afterward
the fleet being stuffed with booties returned to Venice. It is said, that it was
expressly mentioned in The Hungariaus give over their pretended right to
Dalmatia.
the treaty of peace with Caloman, that neither he, nor any of his successors
should pretend any right to Dalmatia.

About the same time Matilda, a noble Lady of the illustrious family of the
Sigefretti, Vitalis about the end of the fourth year of his government died.



ORDELAPHO PHALERIO, the 34. Duke of Uenice.





ORdelapho Phalerio was chosen in his place. In the first, or certainly in the
second year of his government, a very great fleet was sent A new fleet of
Venetians in Syria.
again into Syria. The Venetian Chronicles say, That they were one hundred
Galleys; Blondus mentions but fourscore. The Genoueses likewise about the
same time, a little before the Venetians, had sent their fleet thither.
Baldwin, called King of Jerusalem after his brothers death, Baldwin King of
Jerusalem.
was at the same time encamped before Ptolomais a Sea-towne. This man being
discouraged with the loss of a great battle in Syria, soon after the death
of Beamond is set at liberty and returns to Antioch.
Godfrey, durst never after attempt any thing, until that he understood that
Beamond Tancred, his brothers son, who to free him, paid a great weight of
gold for his ransom: For being then confirmed by the presence of so notable a
man, he came (as has been said) and besieged Ptolomais, called Acon by the
modernes, and at last Acre by corrupted speech.

Baldwin, being encamped in this place, received two mighty fleetes called out
of The taking of Acon by Baldwin.
Europe upon fair promises, and being strengthened by these succors he shut in
the City more strictly by Sea and Land, by means whereof it was taken the
twentieth day after. Blondus says that after Ptolomais was taken, there was no
warlike exploite done until that Beamond (who was then gone into Italy) was
returned Baldwin made more account of Beamond What account Baldwin made of
Beamond.
alone, than of all the other Christian Captains in the Army. But that which
Blondus writes of Beamonds coming into Italy, seems to be very true:
Because diverse Annalls make mention, That whilst Beamond tarried in Italy,
the Venetians, in favor of Alexis, armed themselves against the Normans, who
were encamped before Durazzo: and that, remembering perhaps the loss which they
had in times past received, they durst not assail the enemy who was in the
Haven, but held their course toward Apulia, where after they had greatly
molested and endangered the enemy, they returned to Venice, leaving their
enterprise imperfect. If it be so, we must think that the Venetian fleet,
after the taking of Ptolomais, returned into Italy, as well because it was
Ordelapho (as they affirm) which marched

It is reported, that the occasion which moved Beamond to make war on Alexis,
The occasion of the War betwixt Alexis and Beamond.
was because that after Tancred had seized on Laodicia, the Greeks invaded and
molested the Sea-townes of the Principality of Antioch. Others say, that
Beamond was so terrified at the only sight of the Armies of Alexis and the
Venetians, as he suddenly fell to composition, and that by that means the
siege of Durazzo was raised.

The Venetian Annalls affirm, that after the taking of Ptolomais, their fleet
sailed to Sydon, whither Baldwins forces marched by Land, which in few days
they took. Sydon stood in times past between Berithon and Tire, the three The
taking of Sydon.
most famous Cities of Phaenicia, the most renowned for antiquity and riches.
Ordelapho. Some Authors say, that the Venetians, after the taking The
Venetians take Faronia by assault.
of Sydon, took Faronia by assault, which is a Sea-towne near to the mouth of
Nilus, and how likewise in that journey they sunk diverse ships of the enemies,
which did use to scour the Seas. In recompense whereof Baldwin gave the
Venetians Baldwin being puffed up with the happy success of his affairs
desired farther to extend the bounds of his The Castle of Soball builded by
Baldwin.
Kingdom; and to the same purpose he caused to be built on the other side of
the River Jordan (famous for the baptism of Christ our Lord) the Castle of
Soball in a very high place: but that, soon after the Venetians were returned
into Italy, having lost certain battles against the enemy, and fortified
some places near to Ptolomais, plotting higher matters in his mind, he died,
even as these warlike preparations Baldwin surnamed Burgensis, who was his
near kinsman, Baldwin surnamed Burgensis King of Jerusalem.
was declared King of Jerusalem in his stead; and for the stronger assurance
thereof he was confirmed by Pope Gelasius. Others write, that upon the return
of the Venetian Army from Syria, Ordelapho soon after led it against the
Norman; but they set not down upon what occasion, nor to what place. And I
think they did understand it to be the journey against Beamond (already
mentioned) notwithstanding that they affirm, how the same enterprise was not
against Beamond, but against Liemond his son.

The Venetians at the same time did obtain sundry great privileges of the
Emperor Great privileges granted to the Venetians by the Emperor Henry the
fourth
Henry the fourth; and they say, that for the same purpose Vitalis Phalerio,
Stephano Morosini, and Vrso Iustiniano were sent to Rome, who in acknowledgment
of that grant, promised him in the name of the people, a yearly cloak of
cloth of gold, and a pension of money, which was not very great. Some say
they obtained these privileges at Verona, and that the Emperor willed them to
send commissioners to him to treat of the controversy betwixt them and the
Paduans. For it fell out at the same time, that the Paduans, joined with those
of the Marches of Treuiso, and of Rauenna, were in Arms against the Venetians.
And, notwithstanding that the occasion of this war is unknown, yet may we
perceive by the Emperor Henry's declaration, which followed soon after, that
these two people then, as at other times, were at variance concerning their
bounds. The Venetians The War against the Paduans: with their (...).
and afterward fought with their whole forces, where the Paduans being
overcome, six hundred of their people were taken prisoners. The Paduans being
terrified with this loss, had recourse to the Emperor Henry, demanding aid
of him against the Venetians. Henry, for that he would not seem to contemn
their request, concluded with the Ambassadors sent for that end (as has been
said) to Verona, That, all strife and contention laid a side, The Venetians and
the The Emperors mediation between the Venetians and the Paduans.
Paduans should lovingly treat together concerning their greefes, Declaring to
the Venetians, that they ought to remember how they were sprung from the
Paduans; That they should greatly err unless they did honor the City from
whence they were descended; and respect the inhabitants thereof in the same
manner, as well-bred children do their ancient parents: That the Paduans on
the other side, in sted of envying the Venetians glory, ought rather to
rejoice to see The Venetians and Paduans reconciled.
Venetians at the same time obtained of the Emperor Henry that which has
been already mentioned. Other Historians have thought, that those privileges
were granted to the Venetians at his first arrival, not making mention of the
golden

At the same time a great part of the City was consumed by fire; which
beginning in the house of Henrico Zeno, took hold on Saint Peter's Church; and
in an instant, after it had consumed a whole street by reason of the wind and
of the matter apt to burn, it flew on the farther side of the canall, where in
a moment it consumed the Isle of Cassian to ashes; and so scattering it self
here and there, burnt our Ladies Church, and the streets of Saint Agatha, Saint
Austen, and Saint Stephen all on a rue. Two months after or there about: (for
Authors do not set Two great accidents of fire happened in the City.
down the certain time) the City being yet terrified with the first fire,
was presently frighted with another more terrible than the former, which
beginning at Malamoc burnt and drowned.
the houses of the Zancares flew into Saint Laurence his Island, and being
suddenly scattered abroad did in a moment burn sixteen Islands of the City,
and that part of the Dukes Palace, which looks upon Saint Bassus Church. Some
say likewise that Malamoc was at the same time, in a manner, wholly burnt, and
not long after drowned. Whereupon by the advice of Ordelapho, those of Chioggia
were suffered to take stones, columns, and what other things they would carry
with them to Chioggia, to build Churches, and other public buildings, with
Chioggia builded with the ruins of Malamoc. S. Ciprians Monastery builded.
the ruins of Malamoc. And by that mean this city, which till then was but
of a mean structure, was in an instant greatly bewtified with costly
buildings. The religious brethren of Saint Hilaries order of Malamoc removed
themselves to the Seruulo. The Gradonici likewise builded at Muriana a goodly
Church to Saint Ciprian, for the religious sisters of the order of St. Ciprian
of Malamoc. The Badoarij moved with that selfsame zeal to Religion, did, at
their own costs, build the Church of Holy Cross, with the Monastery
thereunto adjoining.

The Commonwealth had scarce time to breath after those two terrible accidents
of fire, when as on a sudden news was brought, that those of Zara, having
driven away their Governor, were revolted from the Venetians, and had yielded
themselves to Caloman King of Hungary. For the Barbarian, after the war with
the Normans wherein he was accompanied by the Venetians, being pufte up with
The (...) of Zara.
pride for his good success, (in contempt of the alliance which the Venetians
till then had strictly observed) seized upon Dalmatia, and took Zara first of
all, and the residew of the Province in a manner by a voluntary submission.
And wholly to alienate that Nation from the Venetians obedience, he proclaimed
forthwith, That he came to set the Dalmatians at liberty. And after he had
given great gifts to the Churches of the Cities, he went back into Hungary,
where he dyed suddenly. Caloman King of Hungary dyed suddenly.
It was thought that it fell justly upon him for breaking the league which he
so religiously had sworn unto.

Ordelapho, taking occasion by the death of Caloman to recover that Province,
did in the thirteenth year of his government pass over into Dalmatia. He
besieged Zara and in short time took it. The Barbarians in the mean time who
were left in garrison in the city, or (as I think rather) were sent out of
Hungary to raise the siege, coming to fight with the Venetians, were by them
broken and put to rout, and by that means did wholly abandon Dalmatia; Thus by
the happy success Zara recovered ^e ^hy Venetians
of this victory, Zara was recovered. Then the troops marched to Sicqua,
which was likewise revolted, constraining the inhabitants to yield. The town
was soon after dismantelled. Other places consequently submitted themselves to
the Venetians obedience, who not satisfied with this victory, traversing the
mountains Croatia brought under the Uenetians obedience.
of Croatia, subdued in a short space whatsoever lay in the midst of the
country. By means whereof some say, that the Venetians began then to use
the title of Croatia.

Now ofter Ordelapho had quieted the Province, and enlarged the bounds of the
State, he returned to Venice, whither he brought diverse great Lords of Illiria,
with other men of note, prisoners; the which made his return home more A new
Army of Hungarians in Dalmatia.
at Venice did greatly busy them, by plotting means how they might keep that
Province under their obedience. For there was likelihood, that unless the
Sea-townes were strongly kept with good Garrisons, the Dalmatians (being
naturally inclined to change and nouelty) would deliver their country to the
enemy. Ordelapho, knowing that in such dangerous businesses speed was to be
used, Ordelapho comes again into Dalmatia.
passed into Dalmatia with a greater Army than before, and ouertaking the
enemy Ordelapho dies and the Venetians are defeated
Ordelapho, encouraging his Soldiers, and thrusting himself into the foremost
ranks, fighting hand to hand with the enemy, was stricken with a dart, of
which wound he suddenly dyed.

The Venetians being amazed at their Princes death did for a time sustain the
enemies forces; but being disordered, they fell to flight; diverse were slain
in the fight, and many taken prisoners. The report of this loss brought great
heaviness to the City. The common people thought, that their Prince being
dead, and their Army defeated, there was no more hope for them to be able to
keep the Province. Vitalis Phaledrio, Vrso Iustiniano, and Marini Morosino the
Secretary, were sent thither, who obtained Truce with the King of Hungary for
five years.
truce of the king for five years. Ordelapho's body, being brought to
Venice, was honorably buried in Saint Marks Church, who fighting valiantly for
his Country was slain in the nineteenth year of his Principality. Dominico
Michaeli was chosen in his sted.



DOMINICO MICHAELI, the 35. Duke of Venice.





BAldwin, the second of that name, sent to this Prince for aid. For the
affairs of the Christians in Syria, were brought to such a pass, that they
spoke no more of making themselves greater, but only how to keep that which
they had gotten. For albeit in the two first years of his reign he had
obtained certain victories of the enemy, yet there was some likelihood, that
they daily waxing stronger (as indeed they did) they should hardly be able to
keep those places which they held in Syria, without fresh supplies. He
requested the Venetians by his Ambassadors, to pass with a mighty fleet
into Asia; and the more easily to obtain it, his Ambassadors in his Baldwin,
expecting supplies from Italy, Baldwin taken prisoner by Dalochus king of the
Parthians.
being taken prisoner by Dalochus king of the Parthians, with whom he had
fought, was carried away captive to Cayro. Then those that remained in
Jerusalem, did speedily certify Pope Calixus of the state of the affairs of
Syria, assuring him, that if they were not forth with succored with supplies
from Italy, and Europe, that their dominion in Asia would not only be soon
brought to nothing, but the name of Christians would be extinct, and all
reduced under the power of the Turks.

The Pope being moved by this great danger, began forthwith to examine which
were the chiefest forces of Italy, and found that there were none but the
Venetians, Dominico speedily The Popes resolution for the succor of the holy
Land.
to pass into Asia with a mighty fleet, to aid the Christians. The people
then being called before the Assembly, after due Prayers made unto God, the
Patriarch of the City by the Princes commandment spoke to them after this
manner.

The Oration of the Patriarch of Grada to the people of Venice.
I Think (o people of Venice) that you are not ignorant, what our own forces
in part, and partly those of the rest of Europe have done these precedent
years, for the recovery of Palestine, which ye call the holy Land. For this
is the six and twentieth year (if I mistake not) since that great voyage, which
so many Christian Princes, taking the badge of the cross upon them,
undertook for the same purpose into Asia, where by the Divine bounty and
their valor, all that which stretches from Bythinia even to Syria, was in a
short space taken by force out of the hands of the cruel enemy. And our
people likewise after they had taken Smyrna in Ionia, and executed many
martial exploits all along the Seacoasts of Syria, did not only purchase
great commendation, but had their share in the Cities that were taken. The
which if we well observe, ye shall find, that they laid a sure foundation at
that instant whereon to enlarge in time to come your Dominion in Syria. But it
has happened in a short time, that by the decease of Godfrey, Baldwin, and
Beamond, with other excellent Captains, who died according to the necessity
of nature, our affairs in Syria have been so altered, as in sted of their
woonted prosperous success, they are on a sudden fallen to the ground, and
do daily wex weak, so as being more and more exposed to the violent assaults
of the enemies, we have left us small hope of ability to defend that
Province. The which Baldwin, the second, fearing, did not long since send his
Ambassadors unto us, to entreat us, with great promises, to prepare forthwith
a mighty Army, and therewith to pass speedily into Asia. The entreaties of
so great a person did move us. But being at the point to open the matter unto
you, and devising means how to provide such an Army, we have with great
terror received news, how Baldwin is taken by Dalochus king of the Parthians,
and carried prisoner to Cayro. Whereupon Varimond Bishop of Jerusalem (o ye
Christian people) being amazed, with all those which lie in garrison in the
City, have speedily sent for aid and succor to Pope Calixtus, saying, that
unless they be speedily releiued, themselves, with whatsoever they possess in
that Province, are in danger to be lost. The Pope being troubled with these
news, has thought the Venetians alone to be worthy of such an enterprise. He
has written to your Prince, and to you, (ye people of Venice) whom he
entreats, exhorts and adiureth, not to abandon Christian Religion in so
great a danger. Wherewith your Princes pleasure is you should be acquainted,
to the end ye might will and command a great Army to be provided for that
purpose: whereunto, pity alone, and the affection which we bear to the
Apostolic Se^, and to all Christians in general, should not only provoke us,
(which having received from our Ancestors as here ditarie, we ought to preserve
and increase with all our power) but likewise the desire which we have to
enlarge the bounds of our Dominions. Who is it but sees that it will cheefely
be an holy and just war, the which we ought principally to consider in all
things; and secondarily, highly worthy of the charity and Religion for which
ye are are euerywhere famous, to defend by Arms, and to preserve from the
enemies wrong, this land where Christ, our king, was borne, did hide himself,
wept, was betrayed, taken and crucified, and his most holy body laid in the
grave, and who (according as holy Writ does witness to us) shall come the
sovereign Judge, one day, to enquire of the deeds of all mankind. What
Churches? what monasteries? what Altars do ye think can be so agreeable unto
him, as this holy voyage? Whereby ye shall free from base and cruel
servitude, the place of his birth, his Sepulcher, and generally all the signs
and tokens of his humanity. But because humane affairs are of such nature, as
there is almost no public charity exempted from ambition: And your selves
likewise, perhaps since I began to speak of this subject, have closely
demanded of your selves, what honor, what glory, what recompense may be
expected thereby? Certainly it is, and ever shall be well be seeming, and
greatly profitable for our reputation, that the Venetians only, of all Europe,
have been thought fit at this time to oppose themselves with all boldness
against all Asia in a manner. The farthest parts of the East shall feel the
worth of the Venetians power. Afric shall talk of it; but Europe shall
greatly admire it: All men shall speak of you: The whole honor of the war
shall be attributed to you. That which we have done heretofore in Asia,
seems to be effected rather by strangers than by us. But that which we shall
henceforth do there, shall be ascribed to us alone. The glory of strangers
has greatly hurt us, who by their luster have (in a manner) darkened all our
great actions: the which in time to come they shall not do. Their travail and
danger in breaking the enemies forces shall be our praise and glory, to have
thus bravely broken and beaten them back. Moreover I doubt not, but that all of
ye are willing and desirous to enlarge your estate as far as may be. But how?
by what means will you effect it? In living idely? or rowing up and down
these Lakes in your little boats? He that thinks so, does greatly deceive
himself. The ancient Romans of whom ye vaunt ye are descended, and whom ye
desire to imitate, did not purchase the Empire of the World by living idely,
and at their ease, but by making one war to grow from off an other: By war
they did subdue all Nations: And finally, by war their power and greatness
did increase beyond all thought. Heereunto we may yet add that which is most
to be desired, That we are to take Arms against enemies, whom to kill it is
not only lawful, but likewise just and holy. Besides, those whom we
relieve, have already, and will still give us a share in those Towns and
Cities conquered from the enemy: But happily, some will think this a small
matter, and wholly unworthy (for the recompense) of so great an enterpri^e. I
confess that it is small in show. But whosoever will think upon the time to
come, will find it to be an assured foundation whereon to build and increase
our Dominion in the Leuant. For great and admirable matters are oftentimes
seen to spring from mean beginnings. But if neither the honor, recompense,
nor the mutual love we all bear to the Christians name can not move you:
This, undoubtedly, ought to provoke you thereunto, That by freeing this holy
Land from the bondage of the enemies, appearing one day before the Throne of
this incomprehensible Judge we shall stand upright, acknowledged by this great
King and by all the rest, for Soldiers of his guard, receiving an holy guer
don, for so holy a war. Depart then in Gods name, and prepare a mighty Army,
which may be for the profit and honor of the Commonwealth. It behooves you to
use speed, least (as it often times happens) some unlooked for accident do
foreslow so great an enterprise:

This speech being ended, a sudden noise was heard over all the Church,
entermingled The Venetians resolve to succor the holy land.
with sighs and tears, all the people craving that the Army might quickly be
in readiness; saying, That there was no man in the whole city, but had rather
enroll his name for so holy a war, than to live idly at home. Hereupon they
armed forty Galleys; (as they say which speak sparingly of the matter) but
(according to their opinions who speak more indifferently thereof one hundred;
also (according The number of the Fleet.
to others who amplify the matter) two hundred: which opinion nevertheless I
hold to be the truest. For if it were so as they say, I know (...) upon what
occasion Prince Michaeli (as shall be heere-after mentioned) should dare (...)
(...) the enemies Fleet before Ioppa, which consisted of seven hundred
Ships of war. But some say that the enemy, insted of seven hundred, had
but three score and ten. Michaeli; and chiefly Blondus, who has more
curiously, than any other, set down that which was done at the same time in
Syria. Besides, Giacomo of Genoa, who came to Jerusalem by and by after the
battle, does write that the Venetians had two hundred vessels, whereof
three score and ten were Ships of burden.

The Prince, being come to Dalmatia, took in fresh supplies. Then he sailed
with a fair wind to Ciprus, where having certain notice of the great
multitude of enemies encamped before Ioppa, he marched furiously against them.
The Barbarians Ioppa besieged by the Barbarians.
at the same time held those of Ioppa, which were become Christians, straightly
Michaeli, who (as has been said) was come somewhat near to the enemy, did
on a (...) assail him, not giving The Barbarians defeated by the venetians
before Ioppa.
him time to order his Ships in battle; vanquished him, and enforced him to
discampe, after he had slain some, and taken the rest. Some Authors affirm,
That they fought in the maine Sea, and that the enemies Fleet was but an
hundred vessels, Ships of burden, laden with rich Merchandise: so as there was
neither Captain, Mariner, nor Soldier, but were a long time after the
better for that rich booty.

Some Authors do affirm, That Prince Mihaeli, after this victory came to
Jerusalem, The Duke of Venice comes to Jerusalem.
where being kindly welcomed by Bishop Varimond and the rest, he was by them
gratified, for his opportune arrival, and for his happy defeating of the
enemy. It was debated there among the Captains, after what manner they should
prosecute the Wars. Wherein having spent certain days, without any
resolution what City they should first attempt: It is reported, that by the
advice of Prince Michaeli they fell to cast lots, and that the same falling on
the City of Tire, it was The lot fell upon Tire.
the first that was besieged. The manner of casting these Lots was thus. The
names of all the Cities, which they would besiege, were written in little
scrowles of Paper; and being laid together confusedly on a heap upon the next
Altar, they were mingled by a young boy: then after the celebration of Diuince
Service, the same boy drew forth all those scrowles one after an other, in the
presence of the Princes; and in this sort they concluded to begin the war by
the siege of Tire.

This City was in time past an Island in the maine Sea, seven hundred paces
distant Description of the City of Tire.
from the firm land. Alexander, son to Philip, being encamped before it,
caused that space or distance from the Sea to be filled up to join it to the
land. It is very famous in respect of such excellent Cities as have descended
from thence; Alexander besieged it, it was taken by warlike engines the seventh
Month of the siege. The excellency and riches thereof consists in Purples
and Scarlets; in regard whereof, foreign Kings, and the Romans likewise, have
ever enfranchized the Inhabitants of that place. The City it self is in
circuit two and twenty Stadij. It is thought, that Agenor, son to that
ancient Belus, was the founder thereof, and that it was in times past called
Sarra. From whence it came (as I think) that we find in the Venetian Annals,
Surra for Tire. The Phoenicians (among whom, next to the City of Sydon, Tire
has ever held the chief The Phoenicians, the inuentors of Arithmeticke, the
Alphabet, and Astronomy.
place, as well for greatness as antiquity) have been highly praised and
esteemed by all ancient Authors, for inuenting Arithmeticke and the Letters of
the Alphabet, and for being the first that gazed upon the Stars in the night.

It was then concluded to besiege this City by Sea and Land; where at the
beginning of the siege it was agreed upon betwixt Varimond and the Venetians,
That whatsoever Baldwin the first had in the last wars given to the Venetians
in Syria, should remain firm to them. Blondus says, that he had seen the
Coppie of the Privilege, which did expressly contain, That the Venetians
should in all places of the Kingdom of Jerusalem, and Principality of
Antioch, have a particular place and street apart, and a place for them to
plead in before their Magistrate. They Varimond, The conditions granted by
Varimond to the Venetians.
and those who did then manage the affairs of Syria, did grant to the
Venetians, and much more than this, which Baldwin at his return from prison
did willingly ratify.

In this treaty with Varimond, it was expressly said, That if the Cities of
Tire Tire besieged.
and Ascalon were taken, the Venetians should partake the thirdes thereof. This
City had in times past been besieged by Baldwin by the space of four
months, who could not take it, by reason it was so environed with the Sea.
This new siege likewise was much longer than was suspected: But whilst it was
besieged by Land and Sea, those of the Land-Campe began to murmur against the
Venetians; saying, That they alone were out of danger in their ships, and that
if the enemy (whom they continnually expected) should arrive, who would
assail them by Land, the Venetians in the mean time would put forth to Sea,
and get to some place of safety, and therefore they would either discampe, or
share equally The distrust conc^ed against the Venetians.
the labor and danger betwixt them. This slander being reported to Michaeli,
he was greatly troubled therewith: and after he had continued a certaiue time
pensive, ruminating to himself by what means he might root out this
suspicion which his fellows had unjustly conceived: he commanded on a
soddaine to pluck up all the A courageous act of Prince Michaeli.
bords from the bottom of the vessels, or (as others say) all the nails and
oars, Varimond and the rest of the Captains, he used this speech unto them.

The Princes Oration to Varimond and the rest.
I understand, (quoth he) companions in Arms, that ye do in some sort doubt
of the faith and loyalty of the Venetians, and that instead of holding us for
faithful companions, Ye repute us cowards and traitors. But our fidelity is
not of so small continuance, that we will suffer ye long to suspect it, for
which we are resolved to hazard all dangers. Take (says he) this certain
pledge of our fidelity. (and in so saying, he caused all the furniture of his
vessels to be thrown down before them) Then he added, Ye have now (as I take
it) O Varimond, and the rest, matter enough to repose trust in us, albeit that
it is a common saying, that, before all things, we should consider the nature
and inclinations of people. But to the end to take away from every one
occasion of evil speaking, it has pleased us to do thus; to let ye
understand, that the Venetians have the same ^age like you. It remains now,
that with a like affection we go forward with the Cities siege; which being
taken, I hope that in short time, we shall become masters of all Syria.

The fidelity of the Prince and the Venetians, was highly esteemed; all men
with Proof of the Venetians loyalty.
a loud voice, did greatly praise them, and accounted them for faithful
companions and good Soldiers. Thus being confirmed, and continuing the siege
with greater care than before, they report an accident newly happened in the
Camp, which the ignorant multitude may hold for a miracle. Those which kept
the guard (experienced belike in such matters) reported that they had descried
a Dove, executing the office of a Post, coming from the Camp of Dachines King
of Damascus, A strange case of a Pigeon.
who made great preparations to relieve the Tryians; and at such time, as it
should fly over the Camp, they took special care at the very instant to
make a great noise, so as the Dove loosing her strength, fell down all amazed.
Being taken up, Dachines did entreat the Tyrians to be of good cheer; That
within few days he would be near them with great forces, and by the death of
their enemies free them from the siege. The Princes were greatly moved at these
news: For there was some likelihood that the Tyrians upon this hope would have
more obstinately held out the siege, and that which was most dangerous, they
feared to come to strokes with so mighty an euemie. Whereupon they bethought
themselves of a subtle stratagem; to tie The Christians. stratagem before Tire.
counterfeit letters to the Doves fee^e, instead of those which Dachines had
sent to the Tyrians: which imported, Not to expect any succor from the King,
And therefore they should do wisely, seeing their affairs stood so as they
must needs yield, to give place to the time, which they were chiefly to think
on, and by a

These Letters being publicly read, (for the Pigeon being let loose flew
directly The yielding up of Tire.
into the City) the Tyrians being wholly discouraged did yield themselves the
fifth month of the siege. I know of a certain, that many will hold this,
which we have reported of the Pigeon, for a fable, thinking it to be against
nature, and so consequently unworthy of belief, that a bird transported into
a far Region, should at a flight return to her former nest. But it is
undoubtedly true that it was so: The which has been of ten times known by
experience. For diverse do witness, that the ancient Romans made use sometimes
of birds for the same purpose. Pliny makes mention of a Pigeon, which brought
letters to the Camp before Modena. I find that Fabius the Roman Historian,
and Cecynna Volateran, have The like done by a Pigeon before Modena.
sometimes used swallows in such like business. But let it be granted that it
may be so; it is no less strange, that these birds, flying in the air, should
fall to the ground Titus Flaminius, all Grecia did recover her ancient
liberty. Plutarch, a man of singular learning, has taught the same to come to
pass by the clearing of the air, because that by a sudden cry ascending
upwards, the air is forcibly cleft, leaving no support for the birds; for
waxing more soft and slipperie, the birds fall, as though they were come into
an empty place, without any stay at all, whereby they fall down, being
stricken with the noise, as if it were with an arrow; It may be likewise
according to the same Author, that this noise engenders in the air a violent
by-turning like to the tempest of the Sea, wherewith birds, being touched,

Now the Tyrians having yielded; there were set up on the Towers and highest
The third part of the City given to the Venetians
places of the City, the ensigns of Varimond, and of the Venetians, unto whom
were given the third part of the City, according to the agreement, the
prowess and valor of whom (according to the saying of Chronicles) was greatly
admired in that siege: The like was given to them in the City of Ascalon.
Baldwin, Baldwin ratifies it.
returning from his imprisonment at the same time, did not only approve all
these things, but did likewise at the ratifying thereof highly honor the
Venetian Prince.

It is to be seen in some Authors, that he used this preface. Dominico
Michaeli,

During the Venetians prosperous success in Syria, Caloianes son to Alexis
(some set down Emanuel for Caloianes) envying that the Christians had obtained
so notable a victory; and chiefly the Venetians, unto whom was ascribed all
the glory of whatsoever had been then done in Syria; resolved to make open
war New war against the Greeks
against them. In regard whereof, there was some likelihood, that the
Venetians, if they respected their own private affairs, would wholly leave
Syria, as indeed it happened. For the Prince being speedily called home, upon
the first commotion of the Greeks, did depart out of the Province: who being
come to Rhodes; and the Townsmen refusing to furnish him with victuals: he
took and spoiled the Caloianes, who had already declared himself their open
enemy; (which some Authors affirm) or else certainly, because the Venetians
had in times past received some notable injury of the podians, they would then
at the instant call it in question, having so fit an occasion

Prince Michaeli, from thence comm^g to the Isle of Chyos, wasted it likewise,
and carried from thence the body of ^int Isidore to Venice, which was laid in
Saint Marks Church, in the Chapel, ^ich we have elsewhere said was builded by
Narses with the spoils of the enem^s. The fleet made some stay there, in
regard of the great sharpness of the wi^er. From whence (finding that place
fit for All the Islands of the Grec^an Empire taken.
the affairs of war) they would no^slodge, until they had taken all the
neighbour-Islands from the Greeks. W^eupon departing thence on a sudden, they
first took Samos, then Lesbos, A^dros, and all the other Islands of the Greek
Zara and all the other Cities of Dalmatia recovered.
left a garrison there. Then comm^g into Dalmatia, he recovered Zara (as some
write) which had, before, driven t^nce the Venetian Magistrate; and being thus
recovered (to the end that her dest^ction might serve for example to the
neighbor Cities how in time to come to f^ifie their faith so religiously
sworn unto) they did for the most part ruin it. Ten they recovered Spalatra
and Trahu by force.

But other Authors have p^sed over in silence that which we have now mentioned
to have been done by h^ in Dalmatia. All these great atchieuements luckily
finished, after that he had ^amed one part by Arms, and protected the other
The Prince returns to Venice.
Army entire to Venice, w^ere he was received with general joy. And so soon
as he had related what he h^d done in that voyage, the whole City did highly
praise him. The affairs of the Christians in Syria still declining by little
and little, did every In whose time the Turks recovered the Holy Land.
day wax worse, vn^ill the time of Baldwin the fifth. From whom Saladine, King
of Egypt, reco^ered Jerusalem, the fourscore and eighth year after the
Christians had taken ^t. There were diverse and sundry warlike preparations
made as well in Italy as i^ other parts of Europe, for the conservation of
Syria. But all those attempts p^oued vain and fruitless; of which we
determine briefly to speak as occasion shall serve, not interrupting the
course of our History.

During the aboade of Prince Michaeli in Asia, or soon after his return, the
The building of the Hospital of the public charity.
Hospital of the public charity was builded, with all that which stands
near to it. The body of Saint Donato, brought from Pera to Venice, was laid
in a Church newly built, by the diligence and cost (as some Authors say) of
one called Marco Iuliano* Michaeli, after he had governed the Commonwealth
eleven years, did fortunately decease. His funerals were followed by great
multitudes of people. His tomb is to be seen at this day in the porch of
Saint Georges Church, right over against the Comcell-Hall on the left hand as
ye enter into the Church.

The end of the sixth Book of the first De^ad.
THE SEVENTH BOOK Venice.
The Contents of the seventh Book of the first Decad.
THe voluntary submission of the Faneses. The institution of a new Religious
Order in the Church of Saint SALVATORI. The erecting of the CLEMENT. The
Paduans are defeated on the turning of the River Burnt. The Venetians war
against the Normans, in favor of the Emperor EMANVEL. The building of the
great Tower before the Marketplace. Diverse people of Histria made Tributaries.
The building of the Church of the Crossed Friars. How greatly the conspiracies
of the Neighbor-people did trouble the Venetians. The original of the plays
made at Shrouetide. What the Emperor EMANVEL did to the Venetian Merchants
over all his Empire in one day. The Venetians mighty Sea-armie against
EMANVEL. The family of the IVSTINIANI are almost extinct through the malice of
their enemies. The miserable death of Prince VITALIS, slain by his own people
at his return from Greece. Two huge Pillars of a wonderful workmanship,
erected in Lombardie. An Ambassador of Venice is abused by the Emperor
EMANVEL. The cause why the Emperor EMANVEL hated the Venetians. At what time
they began to shut up in the public Treasury the money of particular
persons under color of loan. Pope ALEXANDER flies to Venice in disguise. The
Venetians make war against the Emperor FREDERICK BARBAROSSA, in favor of
the Pope. The Emperors Son defeated at Sea by the Venetians; with his
imprisonment; and the Emperor FREDERICK his coming to Venice. The Honors and
Titles given by Pope ALEXANDER to the Dukes of Venice. The agreement betwixt
FREDERICK, the Pope, and the Venetians, made at Venice. The Venetian Prince
having accompanied the Pope to Rome, returns to Venice, honored with rich
presents. And lastly the description St. MARK.

PIETRO POLLANI, the 36. Duke of Venice.





PIetro Pollani succeeded his deceased Father-in-law Michaeli. At his entrance
into the government, the Faneses submitted themselves to the Venetians
authority, promising to aid them when need should be; to give yearlie the
quantity of a thousand pound The Fanese^ made Tributarie to the Venetia^s.
weight of oil, for the use of S. Marks Church, and to pay them, besides, a
yearly pension of money, in manner of Tribute. It seems unto me that this
tribute proceeded from some aid which they had Bonfi^io Michaeli,
Administrator at that time of the Church of S. Saluatori, and all those which
accompanied him, took a Religious habit A new Religious order.
upon them, instituting a new order, which was afterward authorized by Pope
Innocent; and after him, Pope Alexander the fourth consecrated their Church.
Pietro Gathilaso caused the Church of S. Clement to be builded on the Canal
Orphano. It is reported besides, that at the same time a great strife arose
betwixt the Venetians and the Pisans, occasioned by a brauado, rashly made upon
them in the Haven of Rhodes by Michaeli Vitalis, the Princes son, General of
the Venetian Army: Agreement with the Pisans.
receive a great disgrace: which afterward caused diverse and sundry murders
on either side. And these two States would have been more sharply bent one
against the other, had not the Pope by his wise mediation, suddenly pacified
their strife.

Diverse cities of Dalmatia, insinuating themselves into the Venetians favor,
promised each of them in her own name to wait on the Prince with one armed
Gallie, as often as he should put to Sea with fifteen Galleys. The Polani
likewise, a people of Histria, offered them all aid, with all necessaries for
the furniture of the Galleys, at any time when the Prince, marching against the
enemies, should arrive in their Country.

I find about the same time the Venetians fought a cruel fight with the
Paduans The Paduans defeated.
who would have cut off the River Burnt near to Saint Hilaries Church. Guido
Monticulano, General of the Venetians Army by Land in that war, having
incountered them near to Tumba, the bickering was very bloody on either
side; but the enemies being overcome and put to flight, three hundred and
fifty of them were brought prisoners to Venice: who nevertheless at the
entreatie of the chief of their City, laying all the blame on some audacious
persons among the Common people, and not on the Nobility, were all freely sent
home again. Vrso Badoario left to Giouanni Throno of Mayorba diverse goodly
Lands seated near to Muriana and Maiorba, to build an Hospital in the name of
Saint James; which being since much augmented and enriched, was given to the
Religious sisters of the order of the Cistercians. But whilst the City was
thus at quiet: the Venetians, because they would not live idely did set set
forth an Army, at the request of the Emperor Emanuel against Rogero, son to
Guiscard King of Sicilie. This Prince, departing Rogero son to Guiscard King
of Sicilie.
Georges Arm, who with great boldness used such speed, as being arrived on
the sudden before Constantinople, he set fire on diverse houses near to the
City with fiery arrows, which he shot from his Galleys.

The affairs of the Empire being thus troubled; Ema^uel by his Ambassadors
Emanuell his request against the Normans.
had recourse unto the Venetians, of whom, in respect of their ancient
friendship, he freely craved help in his great need: or if he asked it too
late, that they would yet revenge the wrongs done unto him. Therefore they
prepared a mighty Fleet, A new Army against the Normans.
Baldwin: as some Authors do affirm. The Fleet being departed from the City,
sailing on the maine, and grievously tossed with a mighty tempest, did put it
self into the Haven of Caorli, a territory of the Forlani; where the Prince
falling sick, and perceiving his disease growing worse and worse and that
there was no hope of his sudden recovery, after he had committed the charge
Giouanni his brother, and Reyniero his son, he returned to Venice. Emanuel
likewise had armed a great number of vessels, which he committed to the
charge of one of his Lieutenants, with all authority at Sea. He came by Land
with his forces into Albania where he besieged the City of Butritot.

But during these atchieuements: the Venetians after they had slain diverse of
Corfu taken by the Venetians.
the enemies, and taken many prisoners, took the Isle of Corfu by force. Some
nevertheless affirm, That the Island was rather recovered; that they did not
fight on the maine Sea; and That the Kings Fleet being dispersed and defeated,
the Venetians took fourteen of his Galleys: who after they had left strong
Garrison for the guard of this Island, sailed forthwith into Sicilia: where so
soon as they The Venetians Army in Sicilie
the Province to fire and sword; burnt diverse Cities; cut down the Trees;
plucked up plants by the roots; and carried great numbers of prisoners with
them to Venice. By means whereof the Empire was not only protected (as at
other times) by the Venetians forces, but restored to her ancient splendour and
majesty, which would hardly have been done without their aid. The Princes
death, which happened before the Armies return, hindered the public joy for
such a victory* who deceased the nineteenth year of his government. Dominico
Morosini was by a general consent chosen in his place.

DOMINICO MOROSINI, the Duke of Uenice.



ABout the same time (as some write) Rogero King of Sicilie deceased, The death
of Rogero king of Sicily.
who was an enemy to the Venetians. This Prince, after diverse great
atchieuements, having subjected under his power the City of Thunis

Appulus, and Calaber, Siculus mihi seruit and Apher.

Which may be thus englished,

The proud Calabrian bears my yoke
Black Africa I tamed,
Sicilia's Island felt my stroke
with'Pulia, (Naples named.)
Six galleies were sent the same year to defend the Seacoasts, on which the
Pirates made ordinary incursions, who sailing on the maine, took five Galleies
of Ancona, which Guiscard, one of the Pirates of his time, did command; who
being taken was presently hanged. About the same time likewise, diverse
buildings as well A sudden fire:
public as private, were consumed with fire in our Ladies Island, no man
knowing from whence it came. Besides, at the same time the foundations of the
great Tower was laid, which is right over against the marketplace, and is a
very admirable piece of work. For it is reported, that the foundations of the
same great Mass are laid so deep underground, as there was more time spent
therein, than on the whole work besides. The top thereof, glistering with
gold, is of such height, as

The Polani, with diverse other of Histria, did by their thefts trouble the
Gulf. The Dukes Son with Marino Gradonico were sent against them with fifty
Armed Galleys. Pola being besieged by them, the inhabitants at their first
arrival sued for peace, which was granted them on condition, That they should
no more rob at Sea; and pay yearlie two thousand weight of oil for S. Marks
Church. The Parenzans likewise, being moved with the like fear, promised to
give them aid, as oftentimes as the Duke should go to the wars. The Emonians
promised as much, with a yearly tribute of oil. Some did, besides,
acknowledge them for their Sovereign Lords, promising to free all the Venetian
Merchants from subsidies and impositions: Those of A^cona likewise at the same
time made a league with the A league with Willam King of Sicil.
William King of Sicilie who succeeded Rogero; in regard whereof he granted
diverse privileges, and immunities, to the Venetian Merchants which frequented
the Faires of Sicilie.

Pope Anastasius, at the Venetians entreatie, erected the Church of Zara into
an Archbishops See, whereunto he subjected all the Cities of the
neighbour-Islands. Zara made an Archbishopricke
Yet I am not of opinion, that the same was done so much in favor of those of
Zara, who were not at the same time greatly affectionate to the Venetians, as
in hatred to the other Cities of Dalmatia; which, for the most part being
revolted from the Venetians, did at the same time obaie the King of Hungary.
If this be so (as diverse likewise affirm it) we must think, That Dominico
Michaeli, at his return Vitalis Michaeli the second, in whose time, we find,
Trahu, Spalatra, Ragusa, and diverse other Cities of Dalmatia, to be possessed
by the Emperor Emanuel.

The Church of the Virgin, which the crossed Friars possess, was built at the
charges of the Gussoni, an honorable family, as that likewise of St. Matthew:
toward the which Bernardo Cornari did freely give the ground. This is all which
is observed to have happened at home, or abroad, under this Princes government;
who died the eighth year of his Principality, and was buried in the Church of
HolieCrosse.

VITALIS MICHAELI, the second the 38. Duke of Venice.





VItalis Michaeli, the second, succeeded him: who after he had wholly rooted
out all ancient emulation betwixt the Venetians and the Pisans, made a league
with them.

The Venetians under this Princes government took part with Pope Alexander the
third, vpheld by the kings of France and England, against Octauian the
Antipope, who was alone favored by the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa; who,
for this cause, commanded the subjects of the Empire which were near
neighbors to the Venetians, to overrun them. At the Emperors commandment,
The Venetians neighbors take arms against them.
those of Verona, Padua, and Ferrara, so soon as they had joined their forces
together, did assail and take by force the Cape of la Mothe. But understanding
Vlrich, Bishop of Aquileia, presuming on these troubles (for he likewise Ulrich
Bishop o^ Aquileia brought to Venice as a prisoner.
favored Octauian) came with a great troop of Forlani and took the City of
Grada, not so much in hope to keep the place (for he had none at all) as to
take thence the rarest and richest things, and to carry them to Aquileia. But
being taken with the manner by the Prince his unlooked for coming, himself,
with twelve of his Channons, and many others of note, were brought prisoners
to Venice. From The original of the Games at shrouetide.
a fat Bull with twelve wild Boares, which should be slain in the
Marketplace, in the presence of all the people, for a perpetual testimony to
posterity of their victory. But some Authors refer this to the government
of Angelo Partitiatio, which we have heretofore mentioned. But I think the
error proceeded hence-from, that they deliver the same to have happened in the
time of Pope Alexander; not making mention of which Alexander.

Whilst these things were done near the circuites of the City, the Emperor
A secret league betwixt the Greek Emperor and the king of Sicilie.
Emanuel attempted by new sleights to gripe from the Venetians. Who having made
a new League with William king of Sicilie, had given his daughter secretly to
The Emperor Emanuels Ambassadors at Venice.
this King from the Venetians, whose faithful friend he knew him to be, and
who (as then) were ignorant of what had passed, he requested them by his
Ambassadors to aid him against him. Some write that after the agreement was
sworn to, there arose some dissension betwixt the Emperor and the King. If it
were so, the matter is answered, for otherwise it would be a hard matter to
believe, that such affinity The answer made to the Greek Ambassadors.
Nations, nor by their ancient custom, take Arms without a cause against him
who was their good friend and confederate: But that the Emperor Emanuel might
wholly make use of their means, as of a Nation which did greatly affect him,
so far forth as their honor and conscience would give them leave: though
they could not at that time send him aid, without great breach to their
reputation and public loialtie. The Ambassadors were with this answer
dismissed, who were no sooner departed from Venice (because there was some
likelihood of discontent

The Emperor, who before then bare them no great good will, thinking by this
refusal to have a just occasion to make war upon them, seized on the Cities
Emanuel seizes on the Cities of Dalmatia.
of Spalatra, Trahu, and Ragusa, but it is not known whether it were by force
or by a voluntary yielding of the inhabitants. Then adding treachery to
treachery, he did feign that he seized on them, only to constrain the
Venetians to renew the league with him, and with no intent to detain them.
Therefore he entreated them by his Ambassadors to suffer their merchants to
use their traffic in the accustomed faires of Greece, and that he would
shortly let them understand, how much he did love them, and was mindful of
the benefits which he had received from them, as from his good friends, and
companions in Arms. The promise of so great a Prince did indeed move the whole
City, but much more the remembrance Sebastiano Treachery of Emanuel.
Cyani, and Auria Maripietro; who were scarce come to Constantinople, when
Emanuel, at a day appointed for the same purpose, caused over all his Empire
all the Venetians to be taken, with their ships and merchandise, commanding
them to be straightly kept till his farther pleasure were known, and their
money and goods to be shut up in the public warehouses.

The Ambassadors amazed at the newness of this deed (for they durst not by
the law of Nations hurt them) leaving Constantinople returned into Italy.
Some, who in this rumult and fear had put to Sea, arrived sooner at Venice
than the Ambassadors, and did report, that by the treachery and disloyalty
of Emanuel, all their Countrymen (a few excepted) were imprisoned, and their
ships and goods seized on in the havens and faires of Greece.

The unworthiness of the matter did greatly trouble the whole City. But
calling to mind that there is nothing sooner punished among men than
treachery, being resolved to revenge this wrong, they suddenly prepared a
mighty Army. A A great Fleet against the Greek Emperor.
hundred galleys were (as they say) in as many days, with a marvelous
cou^age, Michaeli. He first took Trahu by force, and wholly ruined it: whereby
we may perceive that they had voluntarily yielded to the Greeks. Ragusa
likewise being recovered, the walls next to the Seaside, with a tower, were
beaten down to the ground, whereon the Emperors Arms were engraven. This
being done in Dalmatia, they came with a fair wind into the Isle of
Nigrepont, where Prince Michaeli preparing to besiege the Cities
notwithstanding that they were furnished with good garrisons, was dissuaded
from it by the A new deceit of the Greeks.
not ignorant of his masters meaning, to abuse so mighty an enemy by some
delay counseled Vitalis to send his Ambassadors to Constantinople, assuring
him that he knew of a certain, that Emanuel would rathet choose a shameful
and discommodious peace, than war.

The Bishop of Equiline, who spoke good Greek, and Manasses Badoario, were
sent thither. Vitalis in the mean time went to the Isle of Chios, where he
soon reduced the City with the whole Island under his obedience. And because
the cold grew already very sharp, he resolved to spend the winter there,
and to expect the return of his Ambassadors. And for that after the taking of
Chyos, Emanuel in the mean time being cunning and polliticke, so soon as the
Ambassadors arrived made show in public to desire peace, sometimes craving
such things, then refusing others, now approving the Ambassadors demands, and
on a sudden saying that he would communicate them to his Council, and so of
set purpose by these delays, he mocked the Venetians. At the last, the Bishop
of Equiline and Manasses returned to Vitalis, having effected nothing at all,
accompanied with the Ambassadors of Emanuel, who arriving at Chios, and
alleging now one matter, and then another, caused a marvelous delaie.

Whilst these things were doing, the contagious sickness, seizing on the
Venetian The contagious sickness in the Venetian Army
Army, did in a short space carry great numbers of them into another world.
The rumor was that the wells and fountains, from whence the Venetians drew
their water, were poisoned by the Emperors commandment, and that the
contagion Emanuel came with a great Army to the rescue of the Islands; but not
daring to assault the enemy, he returned, after he had caused all the waters
to be poisoned. It is reported that the whole family of the Iustiniani, was
wholly extinct by this sickness. The family of the Justinians, wo^ne out by
the sickness.
For all the males of this family, that were able to bear Arms, did follow
the Prince to these wars. The City did meruailously bewail the loss of
this family. But calling to mind that there was one of the same house yet
living called Nicholas, who having taken holy orders on him, did serve in Saint
Georges Church, right over against the marketplace, or (as others say) in
Saint Nicholas Church on the shore; messengers were by the Commonwealth sent
to the Pope, The family of the Justinians restored.
that he might have children. Which being granted, the race of the Iustiniani,
which has produced since then so many learned men and great orators, was
preserved in the City.

Although Vitalis was greatly vexed with this loss, and perceived the matter
to be delaied by the malice of Emanuel, yet would not he seem to keep his
Soldiers idle. Therefore, at the beginning of the spring he departed from
Chios, and came to Lesbos, and from thence to Lemnos, then to Scyros. But
because the sickness which was begun in the winter time, did still increase,
and that the Soldiers and Mariners did suddenly fall down dead in the
streets; being frighted with the

Some Authors write, that Trahu, Spalatra, and Ragusa, did revolt and yield to
the Greek Emperor, (which nevertheless diverse do deny) whilst the
Venetian Army was on the Coasts of the Islands Ciclades; and that Michaeli at
his return recovered them.

The Army being returned to the City, the sickness followed soon after;
which The Plague very great in Venice.
waxing more contagious at home than abroad, diverse thousands of persons died
in few days. Whereupon the people being called into the assembly, all men
laid the blame of that loss on Michaeli, calling him traitor to the
Commonwealth Emanuel enemy to the Venetian people, had suffered the
opportunity of so godly a victory to be snatched forth of his hands, having
abandoned his Army to the treacheries and deceits of the Greeks: whereunto as
he was ready to answer, and to allege his excuses, there arose a sudden
noise among the people which was intermingled with reproaches. He perceiuiug
it dangerous to make any stay there, stepped aside out of the thronge, having no
man in his company, and went along the shore the nearest way to Saint
Zacharies Church. Thus escaping he met with a certain man who fell upon him
and gave him many dangerous wounds, whereof he shortly died, having been
devoutly confessed; the seuententh year of his gouernmeut. Others Prince
Vituli^ murdered.
the beginning greatly beloved of every one for his wisdom. His funerals did
manifest the good will and affection which the people bare unto him, who in
great multitudes were present at the same.

So soon as he was buried, the whole company came into the Cathedral Church,
where, to cut off those troubles and seditions which seemed to threaten the
City, being yet in an vproare for the Princes murder, they chose ten from
among them, The creation of the ten.
who did swear at that instant to elect no Prince, but such an one as should
be for the profit of the commonwealth. Diverse are of opinion that these ten
were not appointed to elect a Duke, but only for to punish the murder, and not
then only, but likewise ever after, when any one should offer outrage to the
sovereign Magistrate, Auria Maripietro, a man of singular An example of great
affection to a man's Country.
wisdom and ripeness of counsel, and who at that time was one of the ten:
But he bearing an incredible affection toward his Country, persuaded them at
the same time to make choice of some other, who would be more for the profit of
the commonwealth than himself; and in so saying, he named Sebastiano Cyani,
a man of threescore and ten years old, and exceeding rich; protesting, that he
was fitter for the commonwealth, being one who was not able alone to help it
in those dangerous Cyani for their Prince, who was forthwith received by the
people with great applause. And because diverse matters worthy of memory, as
well abroad, as at home, have been done under this Princes government, we
will begin with those done in the City.

SEBASTIANO CYANI, the Duke of Uenice.



NOt long after he was created Duke, there were brought out of Emanuel lived)
in ships of burden commonly called Carraques, three Columns, or Pillars, of a
wonderful Three great Pillars brought to Venice.
greatness* these ships being come into the haven, as they began to vnship one
of these pillars with cables and other engines, the huge weight thereof,
surmounting the industry of the laborers, brake all the ropes, so as it ^ell
into the bottom of the Sea, where it yet remains: the other two were landed
with more care. The which, after they had laien for a certain time on the
shore* no man durst undertake for any hire whatsoever to set them up. The
desire which all men had to see them erected, was the cause, that by a public
decree it was every where published, That whosoever would by his industry
undertake to bring the same to effect, it should be lawful for him to crave
of the Prince and People whatsoever he would, promising on the public faith,
that it should be given him: Provided, that it were a matter which might
honestly be demanded. At the report hereof, diverse How the Columns were
erected and by whom
wetting with water the great cables which supported the whole weight, being by
that means brought into the Market place, did set them up in the same place
where they now stand, leaving a certain space betwixt each of them. And on the
top of the one was set a gilded Lion with open wings, which is the badge of S.
Mark, and on the other the figure of S. Theodore the Martyr, holding his lance
and shield, with the Dragon under his feet.

It is reported, that he demanded for his recompense, That it might be lawful
The recompense which the Ing^ner demanded.


But whilst these things were done in the City, Emanuel being desirous to
make his profit of the Venetians misfortune, (for he had heard how greatly the
City Cruelty against the law of Nations.
outrage to their Ambassadors that were with him; contrary to the law of
Nations. Prince Vitalis, at his departure from Greece, had sent them to
Constantinople, upon likelihood that the enemy would hearken to a peace: He
called then Henrico Dandulo, one of the Ambassadors, into his cabinet, as if
he had meant to have imparted some secret matter to him, where he made him
blind by holding red hot copper before his eyes. This monstrous treachery,
which notes such a Prince to be of a base and abject mind, makes me to
believe, that which diverse Venetian Historians have reported of him: That being
descended of base Parentage, after he had

This widow (as I think) had been wife to Alexis; for Emanuel succeeded him,
her husband being dead. After his death there being some likelihood that such
an Empire could not be well governed by a Woman's authority, the Princes and
other great Lords of the Empire, did solicit her to marry again, and to take
for husband whomsoever she should like among the Nobility. She being
enamoured on one of her household servants of mean condition, named Gryphon
(who Cruel determination of a Woman.
after he had usurped the Empire took the name of Emanuel) called him secretly
into her cabinet, and bewraied to him her wicked intent. I have determined
(said sundry ways, and at sundry times: These thus Armed, thou must, when
need shall be, bring into some place in this Palace, making them ready to
strike, when thou shall command. Then, all the chief of the Empire being
called together, I will ask them if their meaning be to have me marry with
such an one as I love, and whether they will acknowledge him for Emperor of
Greece? If they say (as I doubt not but they will) that they are so content; I
will then name the for my husband and Emperor, and enforce them at the instant
to swear fealty and allegiance unto thee; But if they shall refuse so to
do, I will deliver them all into thy hands, and into the power of thy friends,
to do with them what shall seem good unto thee. This young man, being valiant
and amorous, did greatly praise the invention All the Princes of the Greek
Empire murdered.
base and unequal nuptials, they were altogether at an instant murdered: and
by that means, in one day, ended the race of Constantine in Grecia.

Emanuel having in this sort usurped the Empire; It is reported, that he found
a Book of Prophecies, wherein reading by chance he was greatly frighted at
one of the verses, which said, that those of Adria should one day command in
Constantinople. I omit the rest, which he, being not able to understand, did
impart to soothsaiers and Astrologians; who were of opinion, that it was to be
meant of the Venetians, The cause why Emanuell hated the Uenetians.
who inhabited the Adriatic Sea: which he himself likewise imagining,

The Cities treasure being wholly exhausted by means of the great affairs
which When the loan began at Venice
had happened, it was decreed, That the moneys of particular men laid in
Deposito, should be brought to the treasury of Saint Mark, to be employed and
kept in the name of the Commonwealth as need should be, until such time as
the City had recovered her former wealth. The which at this day is commonly
called a Loan, which was (as some say) devised by Prince Michaeli. From whence
(as is supposed) grew the chief reason of the peoples hatred against him, and
the principal occasion of his death. Diverse Ambassadors were sent likewise
about the same time from sundry places to treat af an agreement with the
Emperor-

Thus stood the affairs of the Venetians, when as (to the end that the City
might The True cause of Vitalis his death.
be always busied about weighty matters) The Cause of Alexander the third
gave them the subject of a goodly victory. Some modern Historians do in no
sort approve this matter. But all the Venetian Annalists, and some strangers
likewise, do make particular mention of it; and say, That after diverse secret
enmities betwixt Alexander and the Emperor Frederick, occasioned, because
(...) the new Schism Wherefore the Emperor Frederick hated Pope Alexander the
third.
betwixt Alexander and Octauian the Antipope, the matte^ ^eeing referred to
the decision of Frederick, Alexander would not stand to his judgment: Fredrick
being moved heerewith, called Octauian before him, and declared himself openly
against Alexander. In hatred of whom, he published a General Council at Dijon
a City A general council published to be holden at Dijon.
in France; the which being dissolved by reason there was nothing done,
because Pope Alexander refused to come thither, Frederick in rage resolved to
return into Italy. Whereupon having sent his Antipope before him, he marched
soon after with great forces beyond the Mounts; but before his arrival
Octauian died. In whose sted Guido of Cremona being elected, Frederick promised
to assist him with all his power against Alexander. And after diverse exploits
executed in the Province, coming near to Ancona, he turned toward Rome,
whither he suddenly marched with an intent wholly to overthrow Alexander. Who
being frighted with his coming, making use of two Galleys belonging to William
King of Sicilie, he came first to Cayetta, and from thence to Beneuentum.
Frederick, after he had installed Guido in the holy Chair, returned into
Lombardie. But Guido likewise died soon after.

Now Alexander, committing the temporal government to the Romans, craved The
flight of^ Pope Alexander.
no more but to intend Divine matters; Provided, that they of the contrary
faction The Emperor Fredericks rigorous (...) against the Pope.
temporal jurisdiction in their own power) or whither it were rather the
unjust command of the Emperor whereby he was bannished forth of all Italy,
and those attainted of capital Treason which should give him meat or drink,
or receive him into their houses; threatening to ruin those Cities which should
give him entertainment, and to make war on those Lords and Potentates, which
should William King of Sicilie, he came through Apulia to mount Gargari; and
from thence taking ship (as Obba of Rauenna says) in a vessel of Liburnia, he
came to Zara; And afterward passing through Dalmatia, he came in disguise to
Venice, as to the only refuge of all liberty. Yet there scarce thinking
himself in safety (as being unacquainted with the Venetians love and
affection toward Pope Alexander comes to Venice in disguise.
him) concealing his estate, which he thought best so to do, he remained so
long in the Hospital of the Charity in poor raiment, called by the name of
Commodo, as at last he was known by a natural mark upon his body. Some
write, that the better to live there in secret, he served for Scullion of the
kitchen. But it is more

Foreign Historians do affirm, That he came to Venice with thirteen Galleys
belonging to King William, and not like a fugitive, to recover the Emperors
favor in a free City, the place having been appointed for the meeting. But
if it were so as they say; What needed so many Galleys? which were sufficient,
not only to have transported the Popes small household, which is likely, at that
time, to be but mean, but all Rome likewise: which in those days was smally
inhabited. Besides, what needed he to have made so long and dangerous a
journey? As though he had rather to have trauersed the Seacoasts with danger,
than to pass in safety through the

Therefore, in disguised habit, or in these Galleys (for some of our Historians
covertly seem to consent thereunto) he must of necessity come to Venice. But
how soever he arrived there, all those, whom we follow, do agree, That being
at the pursuit of Frederick driven from the Pontificiall dignity, he had
recourse to the How the Venetians entertained the Pope when they knew him.
Venetians; and that, being known, he was honorably entertained by Prince
Cyani, and lodged in the Castle of Oliuollo: with promise, either to reconcile
him to the

First of all, they concluded to send Ambassadors to Frederick, to entreat
him, A resolved Ambassade to Frederick in the Popes behalf.
in the name of the commonwealth, to be reconciled with Pope Alexander, and
that in so doing he should not only perform a matter most profitable for all
Christendom, but most acceptable to the Venetians, who wholly sought the
profit and advancement of Alexander. It is reported that the Pope being present
when the letters At what time the Venetian Prince began to seal with lead.
were writing to Frederick, and perceiving that they sealed them with wax, he
commanded, in favor of Ciani and his successors, That ever after the Duks
letters should be sealed with lead: the which is observed even to this day.
Obba of Rauenna who lived in those times, as well in regard of the antiquity
of his book, from whence we have taken this, as also because he has curiously
set down al which passed in this war says, That the Venetian Princes had
till then used two sorts of seals; namely lead in all their public acts of
perpetual remembrance; and wax in all their missiues, and other private
writings. And how at that time by Pope Alexanders

The Ambassadors being come into the presence of Frederick, were at the first
Frederick his answer to the Uenetian Ambassadors.
courteously entertained. But so soon as they made mention of peace with
Alexander he fell into a rage, and said: Get ye hence, and tell your Prince
and people, That Frederick, the Roman Emperor, demands his enemy which is
come to them for succor; whom if they send not presently unto him bound hand
and foot, with a sure guard, he will proclaim them enemies to him and the
whole Empire: And Frederickes menaces.
that there is neither alliance, nor law of Nations, which shall be able to
free them from his revenge for such an injury, To prosecute which he is
resolved to ouerturne all divine and humane laws: That he will sodainey bring
his forces by Sea Mark.

The Ambassadors, being sent sent back in this manner, did report at Venice
Preparations for war against Frederick.
the fierce menaces which the Emperor had uttered: wherewith the City was in
some sort troubled; For there was likelihood of more sharp wars, than ever
in any time before. They decreed forthwith to arm a great number of Ships,
and to make themselves ever masters of the Sea. For, that being well defended,
they did not greatly fear the enemies forces.

Whilst the Fleet was preparing, and the whole City in expectation of this
war, speedy news was brought, that Otho son to Frederick, did approach
Ciani determining to meet him, caused the Fleet then presently made ready, to
set sail. Before they went aboard the Pope celebrated divine service, with
prayers to God, That it might please him The Prince im^ himself in the Popes
presence.
to grant the victory to the Prince and his followers. Afterward turning
toward Ciani, he honored him with the golden sword, and with other signs of
Knighthood; who sailing from the Port with thirty Galleys, made way with speed
toward the enemies. It is reported that they met on the frontiers of Histria,
near to Frederick his Fleet put to flight, and his son brought prisoner to
Venice.
the Promontori^ of Salberico, in the Country of the Piranni. And that they
fought there a long time; where at last, the enemy being broken and put to
rout, eight and forty of his Galleys were taken; and among others, the Royal
Gallie, and two Otho prisoner to Venice.

At the report of this victory, the whole City was filled with marvelous
joy and amazement: They did hardly believe that the battle was so luckily
obtained, and At what time the Venetian Prince did begin to m^rrie the Sea.
that so small a number had fought so valiantly. But understanding that the
Fleet was at hand, and that Otho, son to Frederick, with diverse other great
personages were brought prisoners, a great multitude of people ran to see
them. The taking of so great a Prince made Ciani his return the more
triumphant. Unto whom, being come on shore, the Pope, after he had
congratulated his victory, presented a ring of gold. Take (quoth he) Ciani
this ring, and by my advice, give it to the Sea,

The Venetians suffered Otho upon his word, to go unto his father Frederick.
promising to return if he could not mediate a peace for Alexander and for
them. Departing upon these promises, and being come into his fathers presence,
he was entertained with so much the more joy, as the fear and doubt of his
being alive had been great: where after many reciprocal embracements
entermingled with Otho ^is discourse to his father Frederick.
reares he did briefly discourse of the battle, and refer it to have been
done by the divine providence, saying he had omitted nothing in that fight
which did belong to a good Captain, and that there wanted nothing for the
obtaining of victory, but a just quarrel. It behooued him then to believe,
that God was powerful therein, and not men, seeing so mighty an Army as
theirs was, not being slow Alezander for his place, whose quarrel he might
perceive, by the success to be maintained not only by men, but by God
himself: further alleging. That he had already dis^uieted him with the
forces of the Empire, and sought to put him from his seat, yet all in vain:
That therefore he should do a deed pleasing to all men, and worthy of a
Christian, if (all hatred being forgotten) it would please him to change his
mind, and after assurance taken from the Venetians for his safe coming, he
would be pleased to visit the Pope, and openly to give

The discourse of Otho did mightily prevail with his father; who on a sudden
How far Otho his entreatie prevailed with his Father.
being changed from war to peace, began to incline toward a reconcilement
with Alexander and the Venetians. Whereupon so soon as he had received
safe conduct from the Venetians, he came to Venice. Pietro Cyani, the Princes
son, was sent with six Galleys to Rauenna to meet him. Diverse small boats
went as far as Chioggia to do the like. But being arrived at Venice, without
staying in any place, he went to see the Pope, who tarried for him at the gate
of Saint Marks The Emperor ariues at Venice
Church, reuested in his Pontificalibus, sitting in a chair richly decked:
near unto whom when he approached, he threw off his purple roabe, and crept on
his knees even to his Holiness feet, the which he humbly kissed. The Pope
raised him up, and embraced him. Then both of them entering into the Church
went unto the The Emperors obedience to the Pope.
high Altar, whereon that most excellent table of gold (whereof we have
heretofore spoken) enriched with most precious gems was laid, and the which is
at this day to be seen in the treasury of Saint Mark. The same was then
seen and gazed upon by the people, who received a wonderful contentment to
see the two greatest Potentates of Christendom talking there lovingly together.

Some say that the Pope (for satisfaction of his wrongs sustained) whilst the
Diverse opinions of the Historians concerning this reconciliation.
Emperor kneeled on the ground did set his foot upon his neck, speaking this
verse of David, super aspidem and Basiliscum ambulabis; and that the Emperor
with a great and invincible courage made answer at the same time, Non tibi sed
Petro. Unto whom he replied in choler treading more hard upon him, Et mihi
and Petro. This was done upon Ascension day. Others say that it was upon the
day that the battle was won, and that in memory thereof, the Pope granted
great pardons to all, who repenting, and being confessed, should visit every
year on the same day Saint Marks Church. Not long after, the Emperor and the
Pope departed from Venice. But the Venetian Historians say that both of them
tarried there certain months.

Obba of Rauenna reports that Frederick came by Land to Ancona, and Pope
Alexander with Prince Cyani arrived there at the same time: the whole City
running How long the Venetian Princes have used the Canopie.
out to meet them: And to give them honorable entertainment, the City sent out
two Canopies; the one for Alexander, and the other for Frederick; and that then
the Pope commanded a third to be brought for the Venetian Prince, and
permitted him in the presence of all the people, that he and his successors
should for ever use one, as they at this day do, when they walk abroad in
solemnity, with the other Ducall Ensigns.

When they arrived at Rome, the Pope was received with all gladness: who
observing amongst these triumphs silver trumpets which made a very excellent
sound caused eight of them to be given to the Venetian Prince, in memory of
his victory: which the sovereign Magistrate of Venice should ever afterward
use. All the Venetian Chroniclers do affirm this to be true.

Cyant taking leave of the Pope; returned with his holy blessing to Venice. The
Alexander being at Venice) the Canopie, the silver trumpets, and the banner,
(being the ensigns Why they use silver Trumpets.
which he and his successors had received, on condition to have them carried
before them ever after) he entered the City with great joy. This is it which
we find The ornaments and ensigns of the Venetian Princes.
as well in the Venetian Historians as in strangers, touching this so famous
victory, obtained by the Venetians against Otho, son to the Emperor
Frederick: All which the Venetians, who lived long time after, would have to be
publicly represented.

Cyani being oppressed with old age, and ill disposed of his person, after that
he The death of Prince Cyani and his last Will.
had prosperously governed the Commonwealth for the space of eight years,
caused himself to be carried into Saint Georges Monastery, where in short
space he died. He gave to the Commonwealth by his testament diverse lands,
near to Saint Marks Chuch; and some others in the Mercers street, near to
Saint Iulians, to the Pristes of the Church where he should be buried.

It is reported, That it was he which did enrich Saint Marks Church with that
sumptuousness and magnificent cost, whereof we will make so much the shorter

Now this Church is not, as diverse other, so much recommended for the
greatness and unmeasurable extent, as it is for the richness thereof. It is
builded in The description of Saint Marks Church.
form like a Cross, whose corners are highly vaulted, and covered with lead,
as all the rest is, which is discerned of Seamen higher than all the buildings
of the City above six-score stadij from thence. The whole mass is besides
supported by most curious Arches, joined together by a marvelous skill: The
inner part, from the middle even to the highest part thereof, glistereth with
gold; and the concauitie of the vaults is enriched with diverse goodly and
ancient pictures, made after the Greek manner, which, with the labor to
behold them in respect of their height, excellent piece of work, but not of
our time. All this bears up the highest top of the Church, divided into six
steeples: every of which, built like a Piramides, has on the sharpest point
thereof standing a white marble statue of a naked man. Diverse other
representations delightful to behold, and wrought with exceeding skill, do
greatly beautify the spaces betwixt these steeples. The whole work as well on
the right hand, as on the left, is of the same substance and workmanship, and
all that which is vaulted underneath, is covered with gold. In a word there is
no place in the whole Church, either within or without, but is either trimmed
with gold, or marble, or with some other rich stone; so that two Columns of
Alablaster, which stand near to the high Altar, and the Calcidonie-stones,
which are to be seen in Marks Church, the adorning whereof (as I have said)
is for the most part attributed to Prince Cyani. And because it wholly (in a
manner) glistereth with gold, I will not stick (as I have already done) to
call it the golden Church, as often as I shall have cause to speak thereof.



The end of the seventh Book of the first Decad.
THE EIGHTH BOOK Venice.
The Contents of the eighth Book of the first Decad.
THe institution of the public Alms, by whom, and at what time. The fourth
rebellion of those of Zara. A new journey of the Christians against the Turks,
with the defeat of SALADINE, and the recovery of the City of Acre by the
Christians. The coining of the money (called Aurelia) in the City. Pola
surprised by the Pisans. The recovery of the same by the Venetians, and the
defeat of the Pisans near to Modona. ISAAC is imprisoned by his brother
ALEXIS, after he had deprived him of the Empire. The Christian Princes that
march against the Turks arrive at Venice. The Venetians agreement with these
Princes. The recovery of Zara. The resolution of the Venetians, and the
stranger-Princes to go into Greece, at the entreatie of young ALEXIS.
Constantinople is taken by the Christian ALEXIS, after the deceasse of his
Father ISAAC, through the treachery of his people. The recovery of
Constantinople by the Christian Princes, and by the Venetians joined together.
BALDWIN, Earl of Flanders, made Emperor of Greece. The Isle of Candie, with
all the Islands (in a (...)) of the Aegean Sea, allotted to the Venetians for
their claim which they (...) (...) to Constantinople. The beginning of the
war against the Genoueses, for the Isle of Candie. The victory also against
the Paduans, for a wrong offered to the Venetians at a public show at Treuiso.
The Venetians send a Colonie to Corfu. The Emperor HENRY, who succeeds
BALDWIN, is treacherously taken by THEODORE the Albanois. The taking of Damiet
in Egypt by the Christians, where they became rich with the spoil: and

THe common opinion is, That by a Testamentarie legacy Who was the Author of
the public Alms.
of Prince Cyani, this holy distribution of money was likewise ordained,
whereby the Procurators of S. Mark do at this day relieve with the public
money, the necessity of Orphans, and other poor distressed People. But the
ancient manner of distributing it The ancient manner of distributing Alms.
was altogether different from that at this day; the which being more seemly,
was also more to be praised. would in the evening go to the poor men's houses,
and give them the Alms in very great secrecy. A man should not have seen in
those days (because there was no such need) so many poor people at their
Gates as now there are. The recommendation of friends and kinsfolks did then
smally prevail; those only which were known to be poor were alone relieved.
The ancient manner is now wholly changed: and this change proceeds from the
great multitude of businesses. For they which at this day have those offices,
are almost of the chief of the Senate, for Council, Age, and Authority,
whereby they have not only the managing of this business of the Commonwealth,
but diverse others likewise, and of greater importance: So, as being employed in
diverse businesses, they themselves

AVRIA MARIPIETRO, the 40. Duke of Uenice.



IN the place of deceased Cyani, the people did subrogate Auria Maripietro,
(called by some, Andrea) having for the same purpose appointed four men
amongst them, who should ever after have authority to choose forty. Being by
these men chosen Prince, he had no sooner A new manner of electing the Prince.
received the ensigns of Sovereign dignity, but forthwith he disioyned the
Pisans from those of Ancona: who being backed by the Pisans, and by conueniencie
of the places, had for a time by their ordinary incursions greatly molested
the Venetians at Sea. But at the last, after a reciprocal restitution of
whatsoever had been taken, truce was granted for ten years.

At the same time those of Zara revolted from the Venetians the fourth time,
The fourth rebellion of those of Zara.
and soon after this revolt, Bella King of Hungary, filled their City with
Garrisons. It is said that they did thus upon coffeehouse, that their Church
should be subject to that of Grada; if it were upon any other occasion, yet
this at the least was all their pretext. It is certain that this City, which
in respect of her often rebellions that they might serve for an example to
others. But men's hope to see this Army in readiness, in regard of the
poverty of the common Treasury, was small; whereupon diverse of the wealthiest
Citizens bearing a singular affection to the commonwealth, Example of great
love toward a ^ans Country.
loving their Countries profit more than their own, did give great sums of
money. There were likewise diverse impositions exacted at Rialto toward this
war. By means whereof the Army being ready, sailed into Dalmatia. At the
Venetians arrival Zara was besieged, and all the Islands near to the City
were in a short space recovered. The City it self, in regard of the Kings
Garrison within it, could not be taken.

But whilst the Venetians were busied in the Dalmatian wars, the Christian A
New Army of Christians for the recovery of the bolly Land.
Princes took arms for the recovery of Jerusalem, from whence the Sarracens
under the conduct of Saladine had expulsed the French, the foure-score and
eighth year after it was taken by Godfrey. Wherefore the Venetians taking
truce for two years with King Bella, at Pope Clement his entreatie, who did
earnestly solicit them to undertake this voyage, they soon resolved to levy a
mighty army. Diverse great Princes likewise did for the same purpose arm
themselves (as we have said) Who were the chief of this enterprise against
the Turks.
at the Popes request. Among whom were the Emperor Frederick, the Kings of
France, and England, and Otho Duke of Burgundy, accompanied by diverse great
Prelates: The Pisans likewise ioining themselves with the Venetians on the
Adriatike Sea, passed into Syria with diverse vessels. But both their fleetes
arrived there, Frederick and the other kings. For the City of Acre, (which the
Christians had likewise lost) was besieged, before Frederick had crossed Saint
Georges Arm to come into Asia, or before that Philip (departing from Messina,
whither he was come with Richard, after they had crossed the River of Genowaie
and the Tuscan Sea) did arrive in the Province. Richard being tossed with a
furious tempest cast Anchor in Cyprus, which he wholly spoiled, because the
inhabitants at his arrival had refused to receive him into their Haven. From
whence soon after he passed into Syria.

Frederick, after he had taken certain Towns in Asia, entered Armenia the
less, The Emperor Frederick dies in Armenia.
where unadvisedly going into a deep River, to wash and refresh himself,
being Saladine. And besides that, want of all necessaries Great famine in the
Camp before P^olomais.
was so great in the Christians camp, as the Soldiers did not refuse to eat
whatsoever they found, how unwholesome or bad so ever it were, and being almost
starued, did expose themselves out of their Trenches to be slain by the
enemies shot. In the end, at the arrival of these two Kings, the two Armies
being joined together, the French became so strong, as they no more feared to
be enforced by the enemy to discampe from that side. Saladine resolved by
force to open a way for his Soldiers, and using fraud with force, he caused
a ship full of Snakes and Serpents, to Saladines Army defeated.
sunk. Whereupon, the Townes-men and those of the Garrison having lost all
hope of being relieved, did yield, after they had maintained the siege a whole
year. Ptolomais yields.
They were cruelly dealt with, by reason that in their capitulation they
promised to give the Christians a part of the holy Cross, the which could no
where be found.

Acre being taken, the Venetians possessed the selfsame right, which they
had in times past purchased by Arms in the same City. This is all which
happened abroad during the Principallitie of Auria. But within the City they
stamped a

HENRICO DANDVLO, the 41. Duke of Uenice.





HEnrico Dandulo, being declared Prince by the forty according to the manner
above mentioned, succeeded him.

The Commonwealth under this man did not only purchase fame and renown, but
did mightily enlarge the bounds of her Dominions. He first of all forbad those
of Verona from trafficking with the Venetians, because they had wronged
certain Venetian Merchants on the River Adice. This prohibition caused them to
restore that which they had taken from the Venetians in their Privileges and
immunities, and never more to molest them sailing on those streams.

The Army returned from Syria, for the great want it had of fresh supplies,
having been abroad three years: The Pisans likewise left the Province: But
they, continually during the three years they were abroad, did so envy and
hate the Venetians, that the same (as it often happens) did beget open
dissension, which turned at last to the Pisans overthrow. For they, sailing on
the Adriatic Sea, surprised The Pisans take Pola.
the City of Pola tributarie to the Venetians, with intent to winter there, if
it were possible. But the Venetians, not being able to suffer such indignity,
did Arm ten Galleys, and six ships of burden: and adding certain fresh
supplies of Soldiers, they came speedily to Pola, the which being as speedily
recovered, they burnt all the Tuscan ships which they found in the Haven. The
greatest part of their Fleet was The Pisans defeated by the Venetians.
making toward them, they fought almost in the view of the City, where the
Tuscan conuoie being broken and put to flight, two of the Marchant-ships were
taken. Soon after, they made peace with the Pisans.

Some Venetian Historians, not mentioning this peace, do affirm, How the same
Giouanni B^silio and Thomaso Phaledrio being sent against them with great
forces, did in such sort terrify them, as they enforced them speedily to
forsake the Seas: and going afterward against the Brundusians who had assisted
them with men and victuailes, they did constrain them to sue for peace, the
which was granted by the Venetians. Peace granted to the Brundusians.


Pellegrino Bishop of Aquileia did at the same time make a new league with the
Venetians, thereby the better to enable himself against Treuiso, whose open
enemy he was And by that means being made a Citizen of Venice, he did
purchase diverse lands in the City, and did by this agreement promise the
Commonwealth all aid and assistance when need should be. For his sake the
Treuisans were forbidden an^e more traffic with the City.

About the same time the Venetians had a new occasion presented them to
enlardge their dominions. Isaac at the same time commanded the Grecian Empire,
Alexis, whom he had ever so dearly loved, as (the name of Emperor excepted,
which he reserved to himself) he lived in equal command with him. Isaac had
moreover not long before paid to the barbarous enemy (who had by his own
rashness taken him prisoner) a great weight of gold for his ransom. But this
most unthankful brother, forgetting Great ingratitude and cruelty of a
brother.
all these benefits, took his brother Isaac by treason, plucked forth his eyes,
and Boniface The Christian Princes arrived at Venice.
of Montferrat, Baldwin Earl of Flanders, and Henry Earl of S. Paul, were
arrived at Venice, and with them the Duke of Sauoy, intending to march against
the Turks and Sarracens. Some Authors say that they sent their Ambassadors.
But the most part affirm, that the Princes came themselves in person and
compounded with the Venetians for the passage of eight thousand foot, and four
thousand Georges arm, by which way all the Christian Princes had still passed
over their forces; because there was no likelihood of any other safer way into
Asia, as also, for that Germany and Hungary were not quiet, and likewise in
regard of these news stirs at Constantinople, the which daily increased, by
reason of that which had happened.

The Venetian Chronicles make mention of nine and twenty thousand foot, of The
number of the Christian Armi^
whom nine thousand were Targuetiers, the which is more credible. For it is not
probable, that four so great Princes, undertaking so long and dangerous a
voyage, would levy but twelve thousand five hundred men, seeing that any one
of them could easily have furnished as many. It is reported that they promised
a very great

Now the Ships of war being ready, because the Soldiers arrived later
than it was expected, the journey was put off till Harvest. By means whereof
the Princes and Captains having spent all they had brought with them for that
voyage were constrained to borrow of the Venetians. It is reported that the
Venetians The Venetians bo^ntie to the christian Princes.
in sted of lending did freely give them the money which they demanded, to the
end to tie them unto them, having determined to make use of them, promising to
use greater liberality toward them, if they would lend them their forces till
such time as they had reduced the Province of Histria under their obedience,
and recovered the City of Zara which had so often rebelled, the which for a
few years had bin Agreement betwixt the Venetians and foreign Princes.
possessed by the King of Hungary. This being freely granted, they made an
accord (Dalmatia and the adjacent Islands excepted, which they acknowledge to be
a part of the Venetians Dominion.) Duke Henrico, albeit he were evil disposed
of his person, and his sight much impaired by the malice of the Emperor
Emanuell, would nevertheless for the love he did bear his Country, make one
in the number. Therefore he departed from Venice before any of the rest, the
15. day of October. The morrow The number of the Ships for the Voyage.
after, they all followed him. The Navy consisted of two hundred and forty
Ships of war. For, besides the threescore Galleys promised first to the
French; they made ready threescore and ten Ships of burden, to embarke the
foreign Soldiers, and sixescore other Vessels, vulgarly called Vrserions, for
the carriage of the victuals, horse and furniture of the Army.

The Triestines, and other the Inhabitants of Histria, accustomed to rob at
Sea, amazed to see so mighty a Fleet, did speedily send to the Prince for
peace, which was granted them on these conditions; That those of Humaga, and
the Triestines, Histria reduced to the Venetians obedience.
should pay to the Venetian Prince a yearly tribute for each of them, of
fifty hogsheads of Wine. And to this purpose they sent Commissioners to
Venice, to swear to this conuention before the Senate, and to remain ever
after loyal to the Venetians, as their Ancestors had done. From Histria the
Army came to the siege of Zara. This siege, (by reason that the City was well
victualled and furnished with Soldiers) lasted longer than was expected. The
City being often assaulted, The recovery of Zara.
with great effusion of blood on either side, was in the end after sundry

The Winter in the mean time was very much spent, by reason whereof and Young
Alexis comes to the Army.
through the sharpness of the weather, they were constrained to tarry there.
At what time, young Alexis, who had escaped from the bloody hands of his Uncle,
arrived at the Camp, and came into the presence of Duke Dandulo, and the
French The complaint and request of young Alexis.
Princes, that Wintered there. This young boy, after he had with tears greatly
complained on his Uncles cruelty, of his Fathers blindness, dark
Imprisonment, bonds, and ill usage, and of his own banishment, able to draw
pity from his enemies, After all which he promised to give them a great
weight of Gold, with Young Alexis (...) promise^.
other great rewards so soon as by their means he should recover the Empire.

The tears of this young child did greatly move all the assistants; his age
likewise, and his cause, were found to be just and reasonable, the which all
men did willingly favor. Then the great promises which he made in this great
danger, did show that he had been taught what to say, by those who attended
him in his flight. For hardly could a man of riper years (much less one like
himself, who was not yet out of childhood) have of himself invented those
things which he promised them. It is reported that he promised, so soon as he
should be alone, or with his Father, restored to the Empire, he would make the
Church of Constantinople subject to that of Rome, and give the Venetians and
Frenchmen, a certain weight of gold in recompense of the losses which they
had sustained in times past, and at sundry times by the Emperor Emanuel: And
moreover, to give unto the Venetians a great to sail with a direct course to
Constantinople, if a contrary wind did not hinder The Venetians and the
Princes resolve to go to Constantinople.
them. The Bandetti of Zara in the mean time, so soon as they had notice of
the Venetians departure, made rodes and incursions all along the Seacoasts of
Histria and Dalmatia; against whom a new Army was intended. Rayniero Dandulo,
Son to Duke Henrico, a brave and courageous young man, did command in the
City Incursions of the Bandetti of Zara
as Lieutenant to his Father: He, having armed certain ships of war, passed
over into Dalmatia against those banished Zaratins. He caused a Fort to be
built in the nearest Island to Zara, which was called Evil Council, to resist
the incursions and desseignes of the enemies: The Bandetti being backed by the
aid of the King of Hungary, came on a sudden and surprised the Garrison
within it, and razed the Agreement with the Bandetti of Zara.
sued for peace and obtained it on these conditions; That (the chief of them
having given their children in hostage to the Venetians) all the Bandetti
should return home into their Country; and should obey the Venetian
Magistrate, and the Church, (that of Grada) and should besides send every year
to the Duke of Venice a thousand Connie-skins.

Whilst these things were done in Dalmatia, the Venetians and Frenchmen after
they had first crossed the Ionian Seas, and afterward the Aegean and the
Hellespont, arrived at the Bosphorus of Thrace, called St. Georges arm. But
we must

Bizantium (named, as all men know, Constantinople by Constantine, who much
Description of the City of Constantinople.
augmented it, and did there establish his Empire) yea builded (as says
Trogus) by Pausanias King of Sparta, is seated in so pleasant and commodious a
place, as the Megarians, who along time before were the founders of Calcydonia,
which is right over against it, were esteemed by Apollo's Oracle of small
judgment; because they refused so goodly and fertile a Country, as is that
where Bizantium was afterward builded, and chose a barren and desert soil.

The straight of the Sea is five hundred paces in breadth, and waxes still
more S. Georges arm. This City on the North side has the Sea of fifty
stadij in length, and the maine drawing toward the West. At the mouth of this
straight in a small distance stands Constantinople on one side, and Pera on the
other, so called in Greek (as I think) for the small space that is betwixt
them, being opposite one to another. Alexis had shut up this space with a great
iron chain, and placed a strong Garrison at either end thereof, to hinder the
enemies entrance.

Now whilst this great fleet stayed there; the Ambassadors of the Isle of
Candie came with two Galleys in the name of the whole Island, to acknowledge
him for Young Alexis giue^h the Isle of Candie to Boniface of Montferrat.
Island to Boniface of Montferrat, a valiant man, and his near Kinsman. The
chain in the mean time could not be broken, until that a very great ship,
called the Eagle, furnished with great iron tongs, and driven forward by a
North-winde, struck upon it, and brake it in pieces. Presently hereupon the
Venetians entered the straight Constantinople besieged by Sea and Land.
and landed all the foreign troops, which done, the City in an instant was
besieged both by Sea and Land. But so soon as the Camp arrived, Theodore
Lascaris, son in law to the Emperor, made a sudden sallie with his forces
on the Pilgrims, (for Theodore Lascaris sallies forth on the Christian
Pilgrims.
the Frenchmen and they on this-side the mountains departing to the wars of
Asia, would at the first be so called) to trouble their incamping. The fight at
the first was very bloody, and doubtful, but at the last, the Greekish fury
being abated, Theodore with his forces was constrained with great loss to
retire into the city. The Venetian fleet on the other side attempted to win
the Haven, but they spent two whole days in breaking the chain which locked
it. And this fight was so much the more difficult to the Venetians, by how much
the Garrison of the Haven was stronger than that of the straight, whereof we
have spoken. Twenty Galleys on a front being tied together by great iron
chains, lay at the entry thereof, to keep out the enemies* and it was
dangerous to come near them, in regard of the great number of arrows which
flew from them against those which came foremost. Yet nevertheless A great ^ght
a^ the Haven.
the Venetians valor ouer-came this: For after they had likewise broken it,
and furiously assailed the enemy, the haven was won in an instant. The
Galleys being forsaken at the very first brunt by Alexis Soldiers, fell into
the possession of the Venetians.

After this victory, they resolved to assault the City with engines on all
sides, and Constantinople straightly besieged. An assault given to the City.
after they had divided the portions betwixt them, the Venetians did forthwith
erect diverse warlike engines against the City on the Havens side. Then they
took two great masts of ships, and tying them together they made a bridge upon
them, from whence they shot into the City at their pleasures, by reason the
bridge was much higher than the walls. They did moreover cast fiery lances
upon the nearest houses, which lighting upon dry matter kindled such a flame,
as those who defended the wall being therewith terrified, in great confusion
forsook their places; which the Venetians mounting on ladders, did forthwith
possess. Alexis at this sudden rumor came running thither with three
thousand Soldiers which were of his guard, and made show at the first, as if
he would have assailed the Venetians, using Lascaris had been beaten into the
City with great loss, Alexis made a stay, as though he would have deferred
the fight till the morrow. But the Venetians pursuing the victory, did
already in a manner fight in the very City. Whereupon Alexis at the entry of
The flight of Alexis.
the night holding all for lost, left his wife and children, and committing
great treasures which he had drawn forth of the ground to the keeping of his
Daughter Irene* who was a Nun, about midnight he left the City and fled.

His flight being openly known, Isaac was forthwith taken out of prison, and
Isaac delivered out of prison.
the Citie-gates being set open, the young Alexis was with great joy received by
all The mutual comfort of the father and the Son.
by his virtue recovered. The child on the other side was no less joyful, to
see his Father freed from the prison of his wicked brother; and that so
perfidious a person, hated of God and Men, being driven justly both from Empire
and Country, was compelled to undergo so ignominious a banishment: saying,
that his own happiness did not so much content him, as to see his Father
revenged on his enemy; That he did not doubt, but that this wretched Alexis
was greatly troubled in his mind, Isaac did in open Isaac ratifies what his
Son had promised.
assembly confirm and ratify all that which his son had granted to the
Venetians and Frenchmen, the Protectors of his state. And all the good old
man's thoughts were, how, and by what means he might pay the Venetians, and
French, that which had bee^e promised them: when falling suddenly sick,
having (as it was Isaac dies suddenly.
thought) taken the air too soon, he died in few days after. The Son, no
less mindful than the Father, to acknowledge the benefits which he had
received, did mean, not only to effect what he promised, but to relieve those
that passed into Asia, with victuals, men, and all other necessaries. But this
ungrateful City, accustomed Sedition against the young Emperor.
being raised in the City the people with great noise ran to the Palace,
where after diverse reproachful speeches used to the young Alexis, they told him
that he was a foolish boy, smally experienced in affairs of consequence, who
desirous to pay a great sum of money foolishly promised to aeouetous Nation,
enemy to the Greeks, made no matter of ruining and despoiling his City of
her wealth. But the young man A discreet answer of the young Emperor.
fearing in that tumult to be slain, and being more discreet than one of such
years, he told them aloud, that he would therein be ruled by his subjects. By
this popular answer he appeased the tumult for that night. The next day, so
soon as he had debated the matter with diverse of his friends, by their advise
he sent to his Cosen Boniface, entreating him to come to his aid about the
third watch of the night following, with all the forces he could bring,
acquainting him in what danger he was among his own subjects; the Empire not
being alone in hazard, but his own life likewise. Therefore he did earnestly
entreat him, not to forsake him in those

Among those who knew this secret, was one called Alexis, surnamed Myrtillus,
Myrtillus issued from mean Parents.
or (as other say*) Murciphon, whom the Emperor Isaac had preferred from a
mean estate to diverse places of honor. This man being ambitious, and sudden
in his attempts, discovered the whole matter to certain of the contrary
faction, whom he The treachery of Myrtillus.
knew to be of great authority in the City, and procured them to raise a new
stir at the hour appointed of the night following. This was accordingly
effected. Now therefore in the midst of the vproare, he counseled the young
Alexis, trembling Myrtillus speech to the people.
in declaring unto them in what terms the affairs of the Empire stood, and
the imminent danger which threatened them from those couerous Nations, (for so
he termed them) and enemies to the Greeks, and therefore he said it was most
necessary to have a man of judgment, valor, and discretion; and not a child,
if they desired to redress these mischiefs. He obtained at that time what he
so much desired. For Alexis throat. Then after he had appeased Young Alexis
murthere^.
the tumult, and raised great forces, his first resolution was to drive the
French and Venetians forth of the Empire; and afterward for his better
safety, to put all Alexis Friends and Allies to death.

In this resolution he forthwith marched out of the City, and embattailed his
Army, whom he conducted against the enemy, after this manner. In the Front he
A new Greekish invention to deceive the Ch^istians.
placed Priests bearing Images in their hands, who at the beginning of the
fight should sing certain spiritual Hymns. I know not whether he did this
to draw his enemies to some devotion, or whether he thought by beginning with
divine Action, the sooner to obtain the victory. The first charge lighted by
chance on the Earl of Flanders quarter, who like a valiant and careful
Captain, did with a few sustain the furious assaults of the Greeks, until
that an armed Legion came to his rescue, and soon after all the rest.
Whereupon, the fight in an instant being equal, The Greeks put to fl^ght
near the City.
and his enemies very much shaken, Myrtillus altogether dismayed fled a pace
toward the City, and was so narrowly pursued by our men, as himself and his
troops had like to have been taken under the Walls. The Italians and French
Marie from the Greeks: imagining that it did foretell their victory, in
regard such a divine power had forsaken the Greeks and was come unto them.
They did afterward consult whether it were best to besiege Myrtillus in the
City. All men were of opinion that it was lawful and just to kill a wicked
man, who had not only defiled himself by an execrable murder, but had
likewise seized on the Empire which was engaged to them by covenant for great
sums of money. A new agreement betwixt the Venetians and the Princes.


The Venetians and French contracted new alliance, wherein it was expressly
mentioned, That the half part of the City, Towns, and other matters which
should be taken perforce from the Grecian Empire, should belong to the French,
and the other half to the Venetians. Some Authors make mention of another
kind of division, wherein the Venetians had but the third part only of
whatsoever was taken. But the most part are of the former opinion: Hereupon,
all of them prepared for the besieging of the City, and they proceeded therein
both by sea and land with Constantinople besieged the second time.
French men, and the Venetians. Nevertheless the victory was not very easy.
For the siege, through the wilful obstinacy of the Greeks, lasted threescore
and eight days. The Venetians valor did greatly appear in this siege; who,
having assaulted the City after the same manner as they had done at the first,
after they had driven the enemy from the walls, entered the town somewhat
before those, who Myrtillus flight.
in great numbers fought on the land-side. Myrtillus in the darkness of the
night departing with his wife and concubines, carrying with him a great weight
of gold, avoided his deserved punishment. The Citizens being reduced into
evident danger, (for the victors who possessed the walls, amazed them on the
one side, and Myrtillus flight dismayed them on the other) did (necessity
enforcing them thereunto) sue for pardon; and to this purpose, they caused the
Clergy to go foremost Constantinople yields.
with their relics and Images* and themselves after being unarmed, who coming
in view of the Venetians, which possessed the walls, began to cry for mercy:
the which was easily granted them upon the opening of their gates. The
Venetians entering first, the French followed with all their troops which had
fought by land. Now Fifteen men appointed to elect a new Emperor.
the City being taken, the chief of the Army consulted together to name
fifteen men which should have authority to elect a new Emperor. And it was
expressly mentioned, That if the Emperor whom they chose were not a Venetian, it
should be lawful for the Venetians to appoint one of their own nation, whom
they pleased to Baldwin of Flan ders chosen Emperor of the East. Thomaso
Morosino Patriarch of Constantinople.
be Patriarch of the City. This thus concluded, the Venetians deputed five
Electors, the Earls of Flaunders and Saint Paul as many, and the Dukes of
Sauoy and Montserrat made up the number. By these men's voices Baldwin Earl of
Flaunders was declared Emperor; and Thomaso Morosino Patriarch of
Constantinople by the Venetians: who soon after went to Rome, and was
confirmed in his dignity by Pope Innocent.

The Princes in the mean time desirous to prosecute their voyage to the holy
Land, using great liberality to the new Emperor, gave him the moitie of the
City, Provinces, The Princes liberality to the new Emperor:
Tributes, and other matters, (fallen to them by agreement) of the Greek
Empire. And not satisfied with this good office, they added to this great
liberality,

All things at last being quieted in the City, the Army speedily departed.
Boniface Thrace reduced to the Emperors obedience.
of Montferrat, and Henry the Emperors brother dislodged first of all, who
with great good success possessed Thrace which lies on either side betwixt
Constantinople, and Adrianople, three days journey in length. And all that
conquest, such as it was, they reduced under the Emperor Baldwins obedience,
according to Henrico remaining at Constantinople, dealt with the Emperor to
bound that part of the Empire which was fallen to the Venetians, because it
wholly almost consisted of Islands seated in the Aegean and Ionian Seas. And
because the Isle of Candie belonged to Boniface by the gift of young Alexis:
Baldwin to take away all cause of strife, and that their fellows should truly
receive The Isle of Candy given to the Venetians.
whatsoever had been promised them, he made Boniface King of Thessalie, and
gave the Isle of Candie, which he took from him, to the Venetians: And the
better to confirm the matter, the Venetian Prince sent M. Sanuto, and Rabani
Carcerio his Ambassadors to Boniface, who was encamped before Adrianople; and
till they returned he sent an Army to receive all the rest. The Ambassadors
sent to Boniface, arriving at Adrianople, showed him the Emperors decree; and
offering him besides a good sum of money, he easily condiscended to their
request, and made over to the Venetians all the right which he pretended to the
Isle of Candie by virtue of Alexis gift.

In this mean time Thomaso, Patriarch of Constantinople, at his return from
Thomas^ confirmed Patriarch by the Pope.
Rome, where he had obtained whatsoever he demanded, came to Venice, and after
he had stayed a while there, being ready to return into Greece; he took
with him four galleys which were sent for supply to the Prince at
Constantinople, with which he recovered Ragusa which was revolted from the
Venetians; and having repaired Durazzo, which the Greek Emperors had
abandoned, he left a good Garrison in it. Thence he came directly to
Constantinople, where he was received of all men with great joy: But nothing
did so much hasten his return, as the commandment which the Pope had given
him to crown Baldwin Emperor of The coronation of the Emperor Baldwin.
Greece. And that Coronation-day was beautified with a great assembly as well
of

Scarce was the year expired wherein Constantinople was taken, but that all
the Cities and strong Towns of the Greek Empire, as well on the Seacoasts as
on the firm Land, were reduced under the Emperors obedience: Adrianopolis
excepted. But this fortunate fuccesse was interrupted by his too sudden death.
Some affirm that he died at Constantinople. And others say, that being
inc^mped before Adrianopolis, he fell into an Ambush, and being taken by the
enemies he died The death of the Emperor Baldwin.
in Prison; and that, by his death, there was no Emperor in Greece for seven
years after. This is that which the Annalists maintain. Those which allege
the contrary, say, That Henry, his brother, was at the same instant saluted
Emperor in Henry brother to (...), Emperor of the East.
his stead, who, being discamped from before Adrianopolis, which his brother
had besieged, to effect his more speedy Coronation at Constantinople, received
news on the way of the death of Henrico the Venetian Prince; so as there was a
small time betwixt the death of the Emperor Baldwin, and that of Henrico, who
deceased Prince Dandul^ dec^aseth.
the thirtenth year of his Principality, and was honorably buried in Saint
Sophias Church.

It shall not be amiss to set down in this place certain propheticke
verses, which I find in some Historians to be attributed to S^bylla, the which
are reported to have been common almost in every man's mouth, long time before
the Frenchmen and Venetians took Constantinople: if it be so, I do assuredly
believe, that Emanuel The (...) why the Emperor Emanuel hat^d the Venetians.
bare to the Venetians. And forasmuch as all that in a manner which happened at
Constantinople, since the time of the Emperor Constantine until Henrico the
Venetian Prince, is comprised in these verses: I have thought it fit to set
them down word for word, to the end that by them it may be known how well
this woman possessed with a divine fury, did prophecy of things to come; and
that which Plutarch speaks of the Egyptians is not altogether absurd, who
thought that the spirit of divination was easily communicated to women, They
begin thus.

A Prophecy found in Constantinople.
AENeadum gloria Bizantium deducetur, Eruntque Danai in robore delicato vsque
ad Leonem sexaginta pedum. Donec catulos eius Vrsus deuoret. Hunc Aquila
dispecta Vrsum dissipet, Aquilam Hircus obumbret, Pullum voret Aquilae, Fietque
Potentum in Hadriaticis aquis congregatio. Caeco Duce Her cum abigent,
Bizantium prophanabunt, Hircus non balabit amplius, Nec Gallus cantabit, vsque
dum sexaginta tres

Which may be thus Englished.

Bizance shall rise, the Romans glory hight,
Graecia shall flow with fullness of delight,
Until the sixtie-footed Lion come;
Whose princely whelps with death the Bear shall dome.
The Bear shall by the royal Eagle fall;
The Goat orethrowes the Eagle, Chick and all.
And in the midst of the Adriatic strond
Shall meet great States combined by mutual bond
Against the Goat. They, led by Chieftaine blind,
Shall quell his pride and tame his Tiger mind,
And Bizance self they likewise shall subdue.
So droops the Goat; And the shrill Cock that crew
So loud of late, hence forth shall chant no more,
Till of a greater number kept in store
Sixty three feet, with thumbs thrice 3. times told,
By fading hence this mystery unfold.
The Roman Empire (says she) shall be translated to Constantinople: which
The meaning of the prophecy.
came to pass in the time of the Emperor Constantine; and Grecia shall live
peaceably Emanuel his time who lived three score years; Andronicus, whom
Sybilla calls a Bear, after he has slain his children, shall usurp the
Empire; Isack son to Emanuel, of whom none account was made shall put
Andronicus to death; Alexis shall take his brother Isack by treason; who wore a
long beard after the Greekish manner: and having put out both his eyes, shall
thrust him into a dark Prison, into which likewise, some say that young Alexis
son to Isack was put, from whence escaping afterward, he came for succor
to the Venetians. That the Venetians at that time joined with the French shall
pass into Greece under the conduct of Prince Dandulo, who by the envy of
Emanuel had almost lost his sight, as has been said; and that Constantinople
being taken by Sybilla (if this Oracle be hers) calls the one a Cock, and
the other a Goat. This is that which she has said.

PIETRO CYANI, the 42. Duke of Venice.





PIetro Cyani, son to Duke Sebastiano, succeeded Dandulo; and was Earl of
Arba when he was created. The Venetians in the mean time, who were at
Constantinople, because they would not be without a Magistrate, did create a
Praetor to govern them; which creation nevertheless was not to be in force
till it were confirmed and allowed by the Prince and Senate at Venice. The
first who executed this new Magistracy in Constantinople was (as it is
reported) Marini Zeno. Ambassadors were sent to Constantinople to the Emperor
Henry to renew the league. Boniface of Montferrat on Boniface King of Thessaly.
the other side, having conquered Thessalie was called King thereof, according
to Baldwin his decree.

But whilst these things were done in Greece, the Venetians after the creation
of Cyani, to the end they might with more ease join all the places of the
Greek Empire to their State, which were fallen unto them by the agreement made
with the A Deeree of the Venetians about the possession of the Islands.
French and the other confederates, they published an Edict; That all the
Citizens of Venice, or their allies, who could at their own charges seize on
the Islandes of the Aegean and Ionian Seas, and of other places near
thereunto, depending in time past on the Greek Empire, (reserving certain
Islandes mentioned in the decree, which they were expressly forbidden to
attempt) should claim them for their own, as lawfully purchased by right of
Arms. Although at the first this may seem not The cause of this decree.
was necessary to be so, as well for that the City was at the same time
busied about the affairs of Greece, as in respect of the great numbers of
Pirates; who were so increased, whilst the Venetians were employed in the
Thracian wars, as there needed a mighty fleet to repress their incursions:
And therefore there was no possibility with any safety to sever the forces of
the Commonwealth in so many places at once. It was then thought most
convenient, that the wealthiest of them should set forth one or more Galleys a
piece, or other ships of war for the same purpose: The which they presumed
diverse would do for the hope of the proposed gain; and that thereby it might
come to pass, that the Commonwealth having afterward

Besides, every one was bound to keep at his own Costs, the places which
should be possessed (which the Commonwealth could not do without great
expense) and to carry thither their wives and children, with all their wealth:
And The Venetians flecte against the Pirates.
by this means, as by Colonies sent from the City, the whole should be
subject to the Venetians obedience. But howsoever they had respect either to
the one or other of the fore-nam'd occasions, it is certain that diverse
particular persons did take Arms for this purpose. And to the same purpose
before any of the rest, the public fleet of one and thirty Galleys sailed
into the maine, conducted (as some say) by Rayniero Dandulo, and Rugiero
Permarin: and others changing both the names make mention of none but Raynier^
Permarin. All Annalists almost, and other authors likewise do set down the
atchieuements of particular persons before those of the publik State: as though
it were likely that private persons durst have attempted

And because the continual course of this business does so require it, we
will first of all set down that which was performed by the general Army.
They were scarce out of the Gulf, when they met with Leo Vetrano the Genouese,
one of the most famous Pirates of those days, with nine Galleys; who being
assailed by the Venetians, was easily broken, taken, and brought to Corfu,
whither the fleet sailed, where he was hanged. After the recovery of which
Island, the Venetians sailed toward Mod^na end Corona recep^acles of theeue^
and Pira^s, ^ned.
Modona first, and then to Corona, the two receptacles of thieves and Pirates,
which Mega, who the same time possessed those places. I think that these
places were held by him, and by others, at such time as the Venetians were
busied in the wars of Constantinople* At which time all the Islands and
Sea-townes of the Aegean and Ionian Seas were exposed for a prey to as many as
could win them: the Empire being then very much declined. Albeit I will not
deny but that he might be before then

The passage of the Sea being in this sort opened, all men hasted to these
Islands The names of the Islands passesse^ by particular persons.
as to an assured booty. Marco Dandulo and Giacomo Viadre being joined
together seized on Callipolis. Marco Sanuto, accompanied with diverse Citizens
who were at the Islands Cyclades, made himself master of Naxos, Paros, Molos,
Herma and Andros. Raban Carcerio with his nephews took Euboea, called at this
day Nigrepont, and Euripa near adioining. Andrea and Henrico de Glass^s,
seized on Tenos, Micon (which the Modernes have called Micolla) S^hyros,
Philocolion, (called in times past Philocandea) with Staliminium which is named
Lemnos.

In this mean time Henry, surnamed the Fisher, Earleof that part of Morea
Henry the Fisher makes a^tempts on (...) Isle of Candie.
which is called Mailla, aided by certain Galleys of Genoa, attempted to take
the Isle of Candie from the Venetians. But Rayniero, General of the Army,
arriving there unlooked for, did not only prese^ue the Island, but sanke four
Genoa-Gallies that were found near the shore, in which some will needs
affirm, that Vetrano The Venetian^ send a Colonie to Candace.
was taken, and forthwith put to death. The Venetians soon after, to curb the
practices of the Greeks, sent to Candace* called Candida by the vulgar, the
head City of the Island, a Colonie, namely horsemen of the order of Senators,
and footmen of the common sort of people.

The Genoueses in like manner did rob and scour the Seas, against whom
Gi^nan Treuisano was sent with nine Galleys well provided; He, having met with
the The Gen^ueses defeated by the Uenetians.
enemies vessels: By which loss the Genoueses being daunted sued for peace.
Some Authors affirm, that, the Genoueses having taken a ship from the
Venetians, Treuisano was commanded to pursue them with two Galleys and two
ships of burden; who, having over taken them in the Libian Sea, near to the
ruins of old Carthage fought with them, and took from them four ships, and
soon after, twenty eight more on the Sicilian Sea.

About the same time there arose great dissension between the Venetians and the
Paduans about a small matter. The Treuisans were at the same time by reason of
a long peace, full of riches and delicacies, so as giving themselves over to
all sportes and pastimes (as men commonly do in a prosperous estate) they
invented pleasant Pleasant games invented at Treuiso.
recreations. They erected in the Marketplace of their City a Castle, made of
very costly silk, compassed about with scarlet in sted of Walls, within the
which were placed the noblest maidens of the City, wearing Coronets on their
heads in The Paduans and the Venetians. quarrel at the games of Treui^.
not far off from thence did assail the Damsells, fearing that the Venetians
would carry away the glory of the fight, laid hands on the ensign wherein
was painted the picture of Saint Mark, and having plucked it down, did
shamefully tear it in pieces: By reason of this brave there arose on a sudden
a great quariell; and they had fought in the very place with great slaughter,
If the Marshalls of the field had not instantly broke up the games. But the
Paduans, not acknowledging their faults (for there was some likelihood that the
Venetians would revenge this injury) after The Paduans make roads on the
Venetians.
they had made a league with the Treuisans, making show as if they had received
the wrong (being usual with those that will cover their fault) began first;
and without any warlike summons, entering into the Venetians Territory, carried
thence Cyani had fortified with a strong Garrison, under the command of Marco
Concano a valiant person.

The Venetians being moved as well at this second as first affront, went to
arms, and coming suddenly to the Tower, they assailed, brake, and defeated
them, and The Paduans defeated.
took more than four hundred prisoners, with four ensigns, which did highly
content the displeased City of Venice. The Treuisans, who were coming to aid
their fellows and allies, understanding that they were defeated, returned back
all amazed. The yearly tribute which those of Chioggia were wont to pay, was
forgiven

Soon after this battle of Bebia, by the mediation of the Patriarch of
Aquileia, Peace be^xt the Paduans and the Venetians. A great cu^tesie.
a peace followed, on condition nevertheless, That the Paduans should send to
the Prince at Venice, five and twenty of those which began the ^tir at the
games of Treuiso; who being delivered, the Venetian sent them home again
without any A new strife betw^xt the Uenetians and Paduans.
harm at all. This peace lasted not long, for both sides fell on a sudden to
Arms. The occasion of this new war grew about the confederates of both these
people.

The Forlani were at strife with the Treuisans about their bounds, who
presuming Bertoldo, their Bishop by whose authority the whole matter was
managed, went for succor to the Paduans. But others say that it was to the
Venetians, who made him a Citizen of Venice, And that which makes me most to
believe it, is the ancient alliance betwixt the Paduans and those of Treuiso.
But they affirm that at the first beginning of the war, Bertoldo and the
Count Gorician came to Venice, where after they had agreed upon truce for five
years, the war was finished.

About the same time the Episcopal See of Malamoc, (as some say) was
translated The Bishops See at Malamoc, translated to Chiogg^a.
to Chioggia. After that a great Earthquake did wonder-fully shake the City,
whereby a part of Saint Georges Church fell down to the ground, and diverse
other private buildings. This happened in the places near to the ^irme Land. But
the Venetians power did daly increase in the Islands. Raban^ Carc^io, who had
seized on the Isle of Nigrepont, fearing that he should not be able at his own
charges to keep such an Island, did freely with his Nephews put himself under
the Venetians obedience, Pietro Michaeli, Stephano A Colonie sent to Corfu.
Foscar^, Sigiberto Quirino, and Giacomo Seiano. Guifred, Prince of Achaia, who
did succeed his Father Mega, with Gallus the wrongful possessor of
Cephalenia, came, and shrouded themselves under the Venetians protection.

Whilst these things were done in the Islands, and on the Seacoasts of Ionia,
the Emperor Henry made a league with the Valachians; and after he had
married the King of Valachias daughter, he did in short space by means of that
new affinity, recover all the Towns of Greece, which by Baldwins death were
revolted; And all matters being peaceable abroad, he attempted a very holy
and pious matter A ^dition of the ^stantinopolitans, affirming their Church not
to be subject to that of Rome.
in the City, by favoring the Popes Nuntio sent expressly to Constantinople,
to the end he might draw the Greeks to the obedience of the Sea of Rome. It
was likely to have raised a great tumult in the City, all the Citizens crying
out against Henry that it was the part of a good Emperor to meddle with
temporal, and not with divine matters* that they had been too much obedient
to him, to have endured that their Church should be termed subject to that of
Rome. Therefore Henry, after he had left the Greeks to their wilfulness,
returned to the government of the Empire and declared the son of Boniface to
be King of Thessalie, and gave every day hope of greater matters. But he was
on a sudden prevented by death.

Whilst these things were done in Greece, Prince Cyani sent Ambassadors to
the The Emperor Otho confi^mes the Uenetians privileges.
Emperor Otho, to congratulate his victory obtained against his enemy P^ilip
Duke of Sueuia, and his corriuall in the Empire, who freely granted them the
confirmation of all their privileges and immunities. Angelo Ph^ledrio
Procurator of Saint Mark, did greatly enrich with diverse sorts of precious
stones, the golden Table which (as we have said) lies upon the great Altar in
the sumptuous Church of St. Mark. Prince Cyani (his first wife being dead)
married Constantia Daughter to Tancred King of Sicilie. It is reported
likewise, that he builded the Church of Saint Marie of Jerusalem; which is at
this day an house of Nuns.

Peter, Earl of Auxerre, after the death of Henry, whose sister he had
married, Peter Count of Auxerre chosen Emperor of the East.
was, by a general consent, chosen Emperor of the East, who with his wife
coming to Rome, was crowned by Pope Honorius in S. Lawrence his Church without
the City. Afterward he departed from Rome with John Cardinal Colonna, (sent
by the Pope for Legate into Hungary, to levy forces against the Turk) and
being come to Brundusium, he there shipped his wife and children. But himself
entering into the Venetians Galleys, sailed directly toward Dalmatia,
determining to go from thence by land to Constantinople.

It is reported, that in the Venetians behalf he would needs assail Durazzo.
Theodore Duke of Albania, commanded there, who took it from the Venetians,
after they had rampierd it with strong walls, where he placed a strong garrison
of Albanians; so as the Emperors assaults were in vain. This Theodore called
himself Emanuel, who had been Emperor, in the list of his Ancesters. But
feigning afterward to be reconciled with Peter, he invited him The Emperor
Peter murt^ered.
to a dinner in the City, where in the midst of the banquet he was
murdered. Others say, that this perfidious wretch slew his guest near to the
groves of Thessalie called Tempe. Giacomo Tepulo was at the same time the
Venetians Magistrate in Constantinople; who perceiving the French forces half
wasted and consumed in Greece, made a league with Theodore the Albanois for
five year, and with the King of Turks for two year.

In the mean time Robert, son to Peter, came through Hungary, and Misia, to
Robert (...) to Peter Emperor of the East.
Constantinople, where he was suddenly saluted Emperor. The Prince at the
beginning did communicate diverse great affairs of the Empire to Marino
Michaeli the Venetians Magistrate in Constantinople. In which faithful league
of friendship Great friendship betwixt the Emperor and the Venetian Magistrate.
and confederacy, he perpetually continued, so as in all the titles of his
letters of

This Robert married the daughter of a rich Matrone, though of mean birth,
formerly The Emperor Robert his vnforunate marriage. A cruel revenge of a
subject on his Emperor.
betrothed to a Senator: whose great heart not brooking so apparent injury,
resolved presently how to revenge it. Whereupon, accompanied with diverse of his
faction, who were mighty, in a great rage they came to the Emperors Palace:
which breaking open, and finding the Maiden, they cut off her nose with great
cruelty: Robert here-with vexed w^nt presently to Rome, where after he had
complained to the Pope of the wrong done to his wife, returning toward
Constantinople he died ^n Achaia. Baldwin, his son, being left very young,
married the Daughter of John King of Jerusalem, who by a general consent was
entreated to take upon him the government of his sonne-in-lawes Empire, who
was yet in his Nonage. The Cardinal in the mean time who was sent by the
Pope into Syria with great forces, arrived at Ptolomais. The chief in this
enterprise was Andrew Andrew King of Hungary chief of the voyage in^o Syria.
King of Hungary, who (as it is reported) was aided by the Venetians in the
transportation of his troops and carriage, the which was easily granted him,
by D^miet Damiet in Egypt taken.
in Egypt, near to the River Nilus, was taken in this journey, and that they
brought away thirty thousand prisoners. We find no other memorable matter to
have been done in this action.

The end of the eighth Book of the first Decad.
THE NINTH BOOK Venice.
The Contents of the ninth Book of the first Decad.
THe ninth Book contains the full description of the Isle of Candie; The
revolt thereof from the Venetians; and the recovery of it by them after they
had chaced away Count Mailloc. The Nobility of the Island go from thence
rather than they will obey the Venetians. The rebellion of the City of
Candace. How after diverse warlike exploits, all the Candiots almost were
reduced under the Venetians obedience. New stirs of the Islanders; appeased
by force. The preparation of VATTASVS to seize on the Island, the Inhabitants
having offered it unto him. The punishment of the rebels after the enemies
were driven out. The Venetians victory against the King of the Exagoni before
Constantinople. VATTASVS defeated in Genoueses for nine years. The war of
the Venetians by Sea and Land against the Emperor FREDERICK and ECCELIN. The
Genoueses victory against FREDERICK, and the Pisans, near to the Isle of
Cirna. The fifth rebellion of Zara, and the speedy recovery thereof. The
declaration of the Assemblies which are made for the Creation of a Duke. The
Paduans are set at liberty by the Venetians, by the help of Pope ALEXANDER,
so soon as ECCELIN was driven forth of the City. Twelve thousand Paduans
murdered at Verona by the command of ECCELIN.

THe continual reuolts in the Isle of Candie, happening Description of the
Isle of Candie.
almost one after another, which for a time greatly troubled the Venetians
affairs, do enforce us a little to digress from Italy: whereunto the
subject alone does not inuit us being filled with va^ious matter, but the fame
of this Island so much renowned for the greatness and antiquity thereof. That
therefore such as are ignorant of antiquity may not err in the knowledge of
her name, it is the same Creta, which the vulgar at this day call Candie, by
the name of a City (as I think) which is of late so called therein. Dosiades
Hesperides: And Anaximander says, by King Curetus: Philistides and Crates say,
that it was first called Acria, and after Cureta; from whence we may easily
gather that her name was in the future derived.

Eudoxus (to speak somewhat of her situation) thought it to be s^ated in the
Aegean Sea. But the most curious Authors say, that it is environed with
diverse; namely the Aegean, Cretan, Libian, Egyptian, and Carpathian Seas.
Apollodorus says that it is in length, two thousand, and three hundred stadij.
Artemi^orus sets down four thousand and one hundred, extending from the
East to the West, where her outstretched proportion is longest. Some account
but two thousand, and her breadh to be much less. Pliny thinckes that no part
thereof does exceed fifty thousand paces in breadth, two hundred threescore
and ten thousand in length, and five hundred fourscore and ten thousand in
compass. Her territory, besides, is very closely compacted, full of
mountains, and very fertile valleys. Mount Ida.


Ephorus writes That the most ancient inhabitants of the Island were first
instructed by Radamanthus to build Cities, and to lead a more civil life; and
afterward Radamanth and Minos Lords of Candie.
by Minos his successor, strictly to observe Justice: having established laws
and ordinances for the same purpose. The same Author, and Plato likewise, did
think, That this people, and the best-mannerd of Greece, especially the
Lacedaemonians, have been followers and obseruers of these laws. But (as
Strabo says) all things being altered from bad to worse, this holy kind of
life vanished, and men's manners Constantine had translated the Imperial seat
to Constantinople; and afterward upon the division of that one entire Empire
into twain, having two Emperors; one for the affairs of Greece, and the
other of Italy; this Island was ever reputed as a part of the Greek Empire.

In this passage of time it was not only molested by the Barbarians, but at
sundry times greatly afflicted; And notwithstanding all oppositions, after the
Empire of Myrtillus, which lasted not long, it was taken from the Greeks, and
joined to

Envy which ever waits on prosperity, so soon as the Venetians possessed
Candie, What moved the Genoue^es* to attempt on Candie.
did incite the Genoueses repining at their greatness, to imploie all their
forces (which at that time were great and mighty) and by some means or other
to snatch it from them. For the Island was as yet scarcely fortified with
Garrisons, when they attempted by some of their Nation, with armed Galleys for
the purpose, to conquer it: but afterward with greater force, when they
understood Vetrano their countrie-man, whom the Venetians had put to a
shameful death: wherewith being througly vexed, this aemulation was converted
into open hatred, and they assayed by all means to win the Candiots to
rebellion. Which they being ready to put in practice: Count Mailloc took
arms to trouble the affairs of the Island. This man being courageous and
sudden in his attempts, Co^nt Maillo^ his enterprise upon Candie.
presuming on his assurance of the Genoueses forces, did in a short space
reduce the whole Island in a manner under his obedience.

The Venetians, who from the beginning were resolved to keep that Island by
all means whatsoever, did set forth a great Fleet. And in the mean time
diverse were of opinion, after it should be recovered, to dismantle all the
Cities, Castles, Rayniero Dandulo who was a man sudden and very rich, did
presently offer to keep whatsoever should be recovered, at his own costs. At
which offer of his all the assistants blushed, so as no man afterward durst
speak of razing of Cities, fearing thereby they should seem unable to keep
the Island under their subjection. The Army being ready, departed under the
command of the same Rainiero, according to some Annalists, who had more
mercenarie Soldiers out of Lombardie, than of their own allies and
confederates. The Venetians Army ^n Candie.
At his arrival in the Island, the Metropolitan City of Candace which at
this day is the best (for Merchants traficke) of the whole Island; was forth
with recovered, and after all the other towns and Castles. Count Mailloc being
brought to very mean terms in a Fort, and being enforced to yield upon
composition, departed out of the Island.

The Candiots were already brought to a reasonable good pass when as certain
Rayniero Da^dulo his death.
seditious Greeks did by their commotions interrupt the peace of the Island.
Rayniero speedily opposing himself against these combustions was slain with
an arrow, shot through his body, who being carried to Candace, was buried in
Saint Georges Church. His death being reported at Venice, Giacomo Longo and
Leonardo Tepulo Gouerno^r of Cand^.
Nauigaioso were sent with speed to guard the Island; and with them Giacomo
Tepulo for the Islands Governor. And in another place, Raphaeli Zeno sailed
toward Morea to the relief of Coron and Modon. Giacomo Longo meeting by the
way not far from Candie, three Ships of Genoa, suncke them and gave chase
to diverse others. Moreover seeing in regard of the leuitie and inconstancy of
the Greeks, there was no likelihood of ability to quiet the state of the
Island, without a great A Colonie sent to Candie.
the order of Senators, and footmen of the common sort of people. Unto whom,
being scattered here and there in Candace and other places of the Island, were
great inheritances given; to some for term of life, and to others in
perpetuity. Howbeit some Authors affirm That the Colonie was sent thither
presently upon the Islands recovery as has been already spoken in the
precedent book. Sedition in Candie.


Soon after the arrival of the Colonie, the Hagiostephani (who for Nobility
and riches were the chief of the Island) being desirous of novelty, did
revolt from the Venetians, and seized on Mirabeau and Sethia. Giouanni Tep^lo
to appease these Sa^to comes to ^ide the Venetians in Candie.
stirs called Marco Sanuto to his aid from the neighbour-Islands; promising
well to reward those whom he should bring to his succor* For I know no better
means that he had to deal with a Venetian than upon reward. The Historians
make no other mention wherefore this reward was promised him at his arrival.
The Authors of the rebellion were in an instant chaced thence and the towns
recovered: But in the mean space, there arose some strife betwixt the
commanders which gave fit occasion to a mischievous fellow called Seuastus who
was desirous of innovation, and watched for nothing more than how he might
disturb the peace of the Province; the which revolted on a sudden.

It is reported, that because sufficient order was not taken for the provision
of victuailes A new commotion in Candace.
in the City, there was no bread to be sold on a market day (as was wont
Seuastus, who with others desired to disturb the State, would not let slip
such an occasion. But having drawn together a great multitude of people, they
all ran first to Sanutos lodging, as to him who dealt not with the Cities
business (but diverse think that Sanuto had concluded with them so to do, who
because he would not seem to partake in so wicked an enterprise, nor to take
arms to trouble the State, but upon necessity, was contented (as has been
said) that they should first come to him) and then afterward they came with
great rumor to the Palace, and the City was suddenly taken by a few
Soldiers fore-appointed for the same purpose.

Tepulo perceiving all this to tend to a rebellion, retired himself in
disguise to The Gouerno^ of Candie flies, being (...) like a woman.
the house of Marco Tonisco his friend; and imagining that, the Town being
taken, it might endanger his life if he should be found there, he was secretly
in the night let down by a cord from the City walls in woman's attire. This
sudden flight caused him to take his journey toward Themenum, a very strong
City; where thinking himself in safety, he resolved to remain, after he
had a little fortified the place a new, because he would not seem by too much
despair to abandon the Province. Some say, Tepulo being driven forth of the
City, Sanuto became Captain Sanuto chiese of the rebels.
of the Rebels, who forgetting his Country and the benefits that he had
received of the same, did in have with those of his faction run up and down
the Island, causing it to revolt from the Venetians: And that after he had left
Stephano Sanuto his kinsman to guard it, and joined all the Greek and Italian
troops together, he did in short space reduce all the Cities and strong places
(in a manner) of the Island under his command. Some likewise say That he came
and besieged Temenum whither Tepulo had retired himself, who with those that
were come to his

Thus stood the affairs of Candie, when as Dominico Quirino, and Sebastiano
Bethanio Venetian supplies in Candie.
being sent as Prouidatori, with great forces of horse and foot arrived in the
Island. The Governor who till then durst not rashly attempt ought against the
enemy, who was much stronger than himself, after he understood of the
Prouidatoris arrival, (who, besides the forces they had brought into the
Island, were well furnished with weapons, money, and victuals) being thrust
forward with hope to Sanuto being aduertized of Tepulos departure, Sanuto
narrowly follows his enemy.
and of the place where he was encamped, did with his Army forthwith march
thither. The Governor being somewhat daunted at the sudden coming of his
enemy, had certain notice by his spies what forces he had in his camp. And
being strengthened with new supplies, which (as I think) were mingled among
the Islanders, he was not slack to embattaile his troops ready for the
fight, if the enemy Sanuto his dessigne.
were so pleased. Sanuto on the contrary, imagining that which was true, That
by temporizing he was able to overcome him, made none account hereof. For
besides, Tepulans, he saw new forces daily to arrive at his own camp from the
City of Candace, and from all other parts almost of the Island; and on the
contrary, that time would bring so many discommodities to the enemy, as he
would be at last enforced to die by famine, or by some other violent death, or
else wholly to forsake the Island.

Tepulo soon discovered the purpose of his enemy; and not being able to draw
him to battle, he left a strong garrison in the fort newly builded, raised
^is camp, and returned to Themenum: From whence soon after departing in great
silence, Candace taken by Tepulo.
he came to Candace, and about midnight setting up ladders against the City
walls, Stephano Sanuto who commanded there, with diverse others were taken
prisoners. The enemy being troubled with these news, resolved to give ear to
a peace, the which he obtained of Tepulo on these conditions, That after he had
retired all his Garrisons which he held in the Island (for all the country in
a manner from Milopotamus unto the Promontorie of Spatha, was possessed by his
soldiers) he should leave Candie, and get him home into his Islands with one
Galley, Accord betwixt Tepulo and Sanuto.
and a little ship for the passage of his troops, or with more if need were,
not of his own, but of ^ired ones for that purpose. This agreement being made
with the Governor, and assurance given on either side, Sanuto embarked his
troops, and

This is in a manner all which some Authors set down of the second rebellion
of Great reasons in San^to his behalf^.
the Island, which may yet rather be termed a civil war. For it is not
credible that Marco Sanuto did ever bear Arms with an intent to take the
Island from the Venetians; but only to drive thence the governor, who was his
mort^llenemie. For upon what ground or what assurance should he bear Arms
against his countrymen and country? And what should move him to rise against a
people, till then invincible? seeing he knew for a certain, that if the
Venetians were once his professed enemies, they would not only have taken
Candie from him, but all the other Islands which he had forme^ly won by right
of war.

Besides, what simplicity had it been in him to intend the ruin of those,
with Great reasons in Sanuto ^halfe.
whom he resolved afterward to join himself. For he would never have gone
about to have drawn Count Mailloc forth of the Island, if he had in any sort
desired to have taken it from the Venetians. But it is far more p^obable,
that it was Tepulo. Some Historians refer to the same time that notable
victory ob tained by Giouami Treuisano over the Genoueses, whereof we have made
mention in A n^w commotion in Candie.
the precedent book. Candie remained not long quiet* For a new commotio^, much
more terrible than that whereof we now spoke, did trouble the whole Island, the
which growing from a small cause, kindled such a flame, as the whole Province
felt it. The common report is, that by the counsel of one named Pietro
Philameno Governor Paulo Quirino, who at that time was Governor of the
Island, he commanded restitution to the Islanders of that which had been
taken from them. Now because it was not done with that speed as they would have
it, the Greeks who were set on by others, took occasion to ouerrunne, under
the conduct of Petro Scordillo, (who did owe the stolen horses) all the
country of Reparitana, from whence they carried away great spoils. The
Candiots upon this stir being desirous of nouelty, complotted forthwith a
revolt, whereupon in short space all that lies from Milopotamus unto the
farthest part of the Island toward the West, rebelled against the Venetians.

The Governor, to stay these new insurrections of the Greeks, speedily sent
Pietro The Venetians defeated in Candie.
Thonisto, and Giouanni Gritti, with great forces beyond the streights of
Milopo^amus: who passing through the forest of Psieuronessus, not sending out
their discouerers, were assailed and defeated by Constantine Seuasti, and
Theodore Milesin, who lay in ambush for them, being accompanied with great
multitudes of Greeks. Many Venetians were there slain by them, who knowing
the ways of the forest did meet them scattered here and therein amaz^d
troops. Giouanni Gritti one of the Captains, died there, who was an
industrious and courageous person, with Nicola^ Balastro, Marco Bono, Andrea
Thealdo, and Vendramino of Aquileia, with a great numbe^ of soldiers. A few
of those which escaped the slaughter, Agreement betwixt the Venetians and the
Greeks.
having thrown away their Arms, came by very strait and narrow ways to
Domin^co Delfino, under whom peace ensued betwixt the Venetians and the
Greeks. To some of whom, to win them by bounty, (as to Seuasto, and his
companions Authors of the revolt) were given in perpetuity certain Lands on
the hither side the River Musella, toward the West.

There be likewise in the Island certain Lands possessed in old time by the
ancient men at arms called by the common people Knight-ships. Some of these
were given at the same time to the chiefest of the Greeks, as some other of
them likewise to Theodore and Michaeli Melissini, so soon as they were
received into favor. This is all which we find to have happened as well abroad
as at home during the government of Prince Ciani^ who after he had commanded
two and twenty years, (...) willingly ^posed himself
being become unprofitable to the Commonwealth by reason of his old age, did
willingly depose himself, and dyed fortunately soon after in Saint Georges
Monastery,

GIACOMO TEPVLO, the 43. Duke of Uenice.



GIacomo Tepulo was by the forty elected in his place. Candie in this Princes
time was not very quiet; whereof I will briefly mention some passages, before
I touch any other matters, which happened as well abroad as elsewhere during
this Principality. The Venetians too much lenity toward the Candiots, was
the cause that the Greeks (who are by nature lightheaded and inconstant)
insted of yielding love Sedition in Candie by ^uer much liber^ie.
For a base mind does rather abuse another man's pati^nce than make any good
use of it; and is sooner brought to his duty by severity and exemplarie
punishment, than by meekness and favor.

Thus the Scordilli and the Melissini through too much licentiousness having
given themselves over to all manner of vices, and laying aside all shame,
began first to disturb the common quiet by secret thefts, and afterward by
open robberies to make havoc in all places. The Governor being moved with
these unseemly actions, did forthwith leauie Soldiers, and sent to entreat
Marco Sanuto, with the greatest forces he could raise to come speedily into
Candie, for the more

Sanuto esteeming de^ay in such a case dangerous to the Commonwealth, with all
speed possible assemb^ed his forces and then wafted over into the Isle of
Candie. Sanuto comes to the aids of Candie.
Where to bridle the Rebels, ^ee caused a Castle to be built in a very
comodious place. At the sight whereof the enemies being daunted, though not
giving over their wilful headiness, sent to John Vattasus (who held Lesbos an
Island of the Aegean Sea, and who possessed at that time diverse places of the
Greek Empire, entitling himself Emperor of Greece) promising him by their
menssengers the entire dominion of the Island, after the Venetians should be
driven thence, so as he would in time send them sufficient aid to expel the
enemy.

The forces of Vattasus were at that time very great. For he was in league
with Robert, son to the Emperor Peter, had by the advice of his counsel
preferred the alliance of the King of Jerusalem (who had but the title of that
Kingdom) before his. Vattasus, being drawn on by these promises, sent thirty
Galleys to aid the Candiots. At their arrival Marco Sa^to being won by
Vattasus (as it is reported) departed out of the Island with all his forces.
Whereupon the General of Vattasus his Army resolved to besiege the Cities;
and entering Rethimna, he constrained Marco Quirino to yield himself: The like
did Ma^gareto Foscari at Milopotamus, Uatt^sus ^is ^mie succoret^ the Rebels in
Candie.
and Conrad Millenius at Castel-nouo. Yet all these places did not yield at the
first summons, but after they had fought and valliantly defended themselves for
a time. Cat^ldo Auenali, who had seized on the Fort of Boniface with a good
troop of Soldiers, did valliantly defend that place till the coming of the
Governor, who was with an Army secretly departed from Candace to relieve his
own Soldiers and to raise the siege; whereby the enemy being constrained
hastily to dislodge left behind him diverse engines of war: And because the
victory seemed not so easy as the Candiots had persuaded him it would be,
perceiving withal that the war was more troublesome to him than the
Venetians, he determined to return to Lesbos. Wherefore after he had shipped
all his forces, he left Candie to Vattasus Armi^ leaves Candie. And suffers
ship^acke.
the Venetians* and sailed thence. His fleet soon after, being very great,
was in such sort tossed and beaten by a tempest near to the Island of Cithera,
as they were all castaway, three small vessels excepted. Nicolao M^tatio and
Marin surnamed Marini, being sent Ambassadors into Greece about a peace,
suffered shipwreck in that tempest. The Governor Nicolao Tonisto, who
succeeded Giouanni Storlato, and Bartholomeo Gradonico his successor, did
recover certain towns.

Nicholas Seuastus and Michael Molesini, Authors of the rebellion and so many
An agreement with the chie^e Rebels of the ^sland.
mischiefs, being dealt with by Gradonico, returned to the Venetians obedience;
and he gave them all the territory which lies from Petraea to the mount Athis;
on condition, That they should send every year five hundred pound weight of
Wax for Marks Church; and likewise pray unto God for the Venetian Prince, and
perpetually bear Arms against the Rebels, till they were all reduced under
the Venetians subjection. There remained no more Rebels at that time but
those that inhabited along the River Petraea even to the mount Summonium.
Gradonico Gradonico dies.
dyed in the mean time, and by his death the Prouidatori took the government
into their own hands. For to every Governor two Prouidato^i were given.
Gio^anni Ardizino and Marco Molino, had this place in the Island when the
Governor Two Prouidatorij given to ^rie Governor.
dyed. Molino being at the siege of Sithie, a Sea-towne, perceived on a sudden
twelve Galleys, who with full sails came from the maine toward the Island:
Vattasus sends new aid to Candie.
Which Vattasus sent for supplies to the be^ieged. Whereupon, fearing if this
Fleet from whence he sent Ardizino with those ships of war which he had
ready in the Haven for the same purpose to hinder the enemies landing, if he
found it to be necessary for the Commonwealth. Vattasus forces in the mean
time were entered into the Haven of Suda, where the Venetian Galleys, arriving
as soon as they, did with great cries assail the enemy, who already
possessed the Port. The Greeks forthwith prepared for the fight, which they
could not fitly do by reason of the straightness of the place, so as they
attempted to repulse the enemies fleet by their warlike engines and shot. The
inhabitants bordering that place, who at the first The Venetians fight with the
enemies.
noise came running to the aid of their Countrymen, did greatly help the
Greeks. For all the shore was filled with townes-men and peasants, who
without intermission Ardizino the Prouidator being sore wounded commanded to
sound the retreat: The Venetians determined the next day to renew the fight;
which the Greeks fearing, about midnight they left the Haven, and sailed
thence into the maine.

Whilst the Prouidatori executed these warlike exploits, Angelo Gradonico
arrived Angelo Gradonico G^uernour of Candie.
in the Island as Governor. By his wisdom the Subriti were reduced to the
Venetians obedience, nevertheless upon condition, to deliver alive into their
hands Emanuel Dracontopulus and Constantine his brother; or if that could not
be done, to kill them, as the chief authors of all the Rebellions, Because so
long as they should live, there was no likelihood that the Island would ever be
at quiet: Agreement with the Candiots.
Besides, that the Caleothetes, and the Anatoliks (who boasted to be issued
from the Emperors of Greece) should be bannished; and that thirty of the
Noblest families of the Subriti, should come and dwell in the Town of
Boniface. The Candiots and their affairs being thus pacified* they which held
the City of Nicella, (for there were diverse of Vattasus garrisons still in the
Island) did forthwith yield.

But it is now time to leave the Candiots, and to return to other matters
happened at the same time in Greece, as well in the firm Land, as in the Islands
near adioining, which being of greater importance, have more troubled and
molested the Venetians. For so soon as the new agreement or new affinity (as
it was said) betwixt Vattasus and the King of the Hexagoni was known abroad,
and that the rumor John King of Jerusalem, Governor of Constantinople, being
troubled with Request made to the Venetians for the preservation of the Greek
Empire.
these news, began to consider by what cunning means he might preserve and
defend the Empire committed to his charge; in which business the Venetians were
they alone from whom he expected aid: The which having imparted to Theophilo
Zeno the Venetian Magistrate at the same time in Constantinople, they both sent
to Prince Tepulo, to acquaint him with the League and affinity of these two
mighty Princes, who by the report of all men were in Arms for the invasion of
the Greek Empire, and that therefore they had need of aid with all
expedition, which is a chief point in Martial business, saying, That they
knew of a certain, that both

The City gave a willing ear to this advertisement, and being moved by the
imminent danger, they commanded forthwith to levy a great Army. Whereupon 25.
The Venetian fleet comes to the aid of Constantinople.
the command of Leonardo Quirini, and Marco Gussoni, sailed directly toward
Constantinople, when news was brought them that the City was besieged and
environed with a mighty Army. The Generals of the Army, being troubled at
this report, made all the have they could, for fear least some mishap might in
the mean time befall the City.

Leo Gaualla, a man well experienced in marine matters, did command the enemies
Navy, who having notice of the Venetians approach, shifted his place, and
brought his Galleys nearer to the shore, where the land-armic was encamped (for
the City The Army of the Greeks before Con^tinople. The Greeks ^feated.
was already besieged by land.) But this deseigne of the enemy could not make
the Venetians change their first resolutions, who at their first arrival did
so furiously assail the Gre^kish Navy, as in a moment they suncke four and
twenty of their Galleys, and put the rest to flight, in the view of the amazed
enemies. The victorious Venetians entering the city, which they freed from the
siege, were ioifully enterteined

The victorious fleet returned to the City sooner than was expected, to the
exceeding The Uenetians joy at the return of their Navy.
pleasure and contentment of the people. They took great delight to hear,
that their Countrymen were delivered from so great danger; and their joy was
not small for that so proud an enemy had been so suddenly defeated, who was
as soon overcome as looked upon.

But the vanquished could not long remain quiet. For Vattasus who on the other
Constantinople besieged again^ by Vattasus.
side had armed five and twenty Galleys (because the former fleet as some say
was sent from the frontiers of the Ponticke Sea by the King of the Hexagoni)
came again and besieged Constantinople, with greater numbers of small vessels.
But how great soever the Army was, it could not discourage Giouanni Michaeli
Magistrate at that time for the Venetians in Constantinople, who with sixteen
armed Galleys in the Haven for guard of the City, gave a furious assault to
the enemies Camp. Vattasus Army did not long endure the fury of the fight.
For the affrighted Vattasus Naui^ put to fl^ght.
enemies did forthwith invent means how to escape: and fortune soon after
being adverse to their party, they openly began to fly. Ten of the enemies
Galleys being taken, and the residue put to flight, gave the Venetians a goodly
victory, Vattasus fell sick, and soon after died in the City of Nymphea. He
left behind him Vattasus dies*
a son named Theodore, begotten on a daughter of Theodore Lascaris, whom he
married when they were both very young. Other Authors affirm that beside one
and twenty Galleys taken from the enemies before Constantinople, diverse others
were taken from them at the streights of the Rhodian Sea, among which were
diverse of Syria.

About the same time, at the entreaty of Pope Gregory, truce was concluded
for nine years with the Genoueses. His Holiness knowing the little love which
the Emperor Frederick did bear toward him, thought it much available
Stephano Iustiniano, and Marino Morosini, were sent thither; and others set
down Giouan Cornari, and Paulo Molino. Diverse Authors affirm, That the
matter was debated at the Council held at Lions; and others say, That the
truce was concluded at Rome. The Articles of the truce betwixt the Ven^tians
and the Genoueses.
Among sundry Articles set*downe for the assurance of both parties, it was
specially mentioned, That it should not be lawful for either of them, to
purchase new enemies, nor yet new alliance, nor to denounce war against any,
nor to aid any one,

Blondus says, That this treaty was ended before the Venetians succored
Constantinople; and by that means they were thought to have infringed it,
whereof afterward grew such grievous wars twixt these two people: But neither
he nor those which believed this, did consider, that the Venetians did as they
ought in bearing Arms against the King of Hexagons and John Vattasus, who
invaded that which belonged unto them: For the Venetians had purchased right
and title in part of The reason why the venetians succored Constantinople.
Constantinople, whither in the name of the Commonwealth they had been sent
from the beginning, unto whom to deny aid and help in so great a danger,
they humbly craving the same, had been as ill done, as for them to infringe an
agreement, how holy soever: The Venetians raised the enemies Camp before
Constantinople, 'Because it was just and reasonable so to do; seeing it is It
is lawful for all men to defend their own.
his own. For it is as cruel and inhumane a matter to hinder any one from
repelling an injury done to him, as to wrong an other man. And the Genoueses
themselves, if any man should have invaded ought that had belonged unto them,
would they have forborne to take arms, till they had received advise and
consent from the Venetians? Besides, it is to be thought that the Genoueses by
means of this treaty, did deal but craftily with the Venetians. For,
imagining The craft and sub^iltie of the Genoueses.
that it would come to pass by means of this agreement, whereby they held the
Venetians bound as with a chain, that they would delay the aid, either by
determining, or making show to prepare forces, until the enemy (whom perhaps
they Gregory (who was the means for the truce) from the least thought that
the Venetians had in any thing at that time broken their faith, as on the
contrary he ever remained firm and constant in their friendship and alliance.
Nay, moreover, I find, that about the same time, or soon after, the selfsame
Genoueses did demand aid of the Venetians, as of their faithful friends and
companions, against the Emperor Frederick, and the Pisans, which was freely
granted them: But of this we will speak elsewhere.

It is reported that Pope Gregory, at the beginning of the truce, did request
the Venetians The Popes intretie to Arm against the Turks.
and Genoueses, with all the other Potentates of Italy, to take Arms for the
recovery of the holy Land; and that the same had been done (because they had
all freely promised so to do) had not the Popes sudden death broke off that
notable enterprise. The Venetians at the same time had friendly composed
certain differences betwixt themselves and the Genoueses: diverse Commissioners
for the same purpose being sent from either side. But a cruel tyranny, which
had then crept into the City, did in a manner interrupt the whole treaty
already concluded, which would not have proved very necessary, in regard of
that which afterward happened.

Eccelin, a man basely descended, and whose grandfather of the same name,
coming What Eccelin was with his co^mi^g into Italy.
like a poor Soldier out of Germany, had followed the Emperor Otho the
third into Italy, being made rich and raised to honor by the Emperor
Frederick the second, (whom he very much resembled) did by little and little
commit great tyranny in Italy, whilst Frederick being armed against the
Pope, ouer-ranne the greatest part of Italy, and chiefly Lombardie; where
diverse famous Cities were greatly vexed, under a color only (as I find) for
that at the beginning of the controversy between Pope Gregory and Frederick,
they had remained Neuters, not taking parts as others did. Eccelin by goodly
promises solicited the Paduans, and in Eccelin in Padu^
hope to preserve their liberties, constrained them to follow the Emperors
part. Wonderful cruelty of a Tyran^
whence being brought forth, they were either condemned to death, or perpetual
banishment; their goods spoiled, Noble Maids, and Matrones ravished and
defloured: In a word, all detestable actions which a proud conqueror is
accustomed to use toward poor captives, was executed by this new Prince on
the wretched Paduans: Diverse fled away for fear; Diverse likewise being
destitute of all means, and banished the City, with their wives and children,
came to Venice, as to the only Sanctuary of freedom.

All Lombardie on the other side did tremble at the Armies of Frederick. It is
reported Pietro Tepulo defea^ed and taken prisoner.
that Pietro Tepulo, son to the Venetian Prince commanding certain troops of
Milan against Frederick, was vanquished near to the new Court, and taken
prisoner with great loss, together with sundry men of note. Frederick, in
hatred to the Giouanni Tepulo, brother to Pietro. For the Venetians in the
Popes behalf had sent five and twenty Galleys into Apulia, under the command
of this G^ouanni Tepulo, to invade the Cities of that Province, which took
part with Frederick. This Tepulo having at his arrival chaced away the
Garrison of the Province, seized on Thermida, then on Campo Marino, and soon
after on Bestica. But whilst he was busied in razing and ruining the taken
Town, word was The Venetians take Fredericks great ship, called the Bar^e or
Cethea.
the Seas, carrying a thousand Soldiers, and which had fought at Sea for
Fredericks party) was entered into the Haven of Siponto, called at this day
Manfredonia; whereupon he sailed thither with his Galleys, where for his own
advantage finding the ship in the Haven, he assailed it, took it with great
ease, brake it in pieces, and burnt it in the enemies sight. For this cause it
is likely that Frederick sent Pietro Tepulo to be executed in Apulia. Whilst
these things were done abroad, or at least soon after, diverse good decrees
were enacted in the City. They established first the The Court of Requests
establ^shed
Court of Requests, with three Judges, to decide every man's controversies. And
next the ancient Laws and Statutes of the City were examined, and being
again Giouanni Michaeli, where he defeated with a few Galleys, the great Army
of Vattasus. Frederick after he had obtained this victory at the new Court,
in the state of Milan (as we have said) where Tepulo was taken prisoner, came
to Padua, already subject to the cruel tyranny of Eccelin, where keeping the
Feast of Easter, news was brought him, how the Pope had a while before
excommunicated him, and all those which followed The Pope excommunicateth the
Emperor Frederick.
him, or in any sort did give him assistance: wherewith being incensed, like a
man beside himself, he forthwith fell on the Venetians Territories, and being
come as far as S. Hilaries Church (where a little before Eccelin had builded a
Fort in the view Frederic against the venetians*
thereunto, by reason of the water which enuironeth it, did bravely sustain
the enemies assault, until that a great number of light vessels being come to
the rel^efe thereof, enforced him to dislodge.

It is certain that sundry occasions moved Frederick to war on the
Venetians: For first, he would revenge the injury that he had received, by
the burning of his Barze, and because the Venetians had made a league with the
Pope. But that where with he was most moved, was, because he saw great numbers
of Paduans were retired to Venice for refuge, thereby fearing, if they dwelt so
near, the City of Padua

The Genoueses about the same time sent to the Venetians according to their
agreement, entreating them speedily to aid them with a nauall Army, saying;
That they understood how the Pisans, assisted by Frederick, had armed more than
one hundred Galleys against them, and that their affairs could endure no
delay, being well assured that the enemy would soon be with them, with whom
they were not resolved to fight, without the aid of their Confederates.
Hereupon the Venetians speedily set forth threescore Galleys; which being given
in charge to Andrea Andrea Tepulo sent to aid the Genoueses.
Tepulo (who was the Dukes son likewise) he was commanded to make have to the
succor of their friends. This man sailing directly to Pola, condemned the
Polans in a pecuniarie fine, for not furnishing a Galley which they were bound
to do, and Frederick, and the Pisans, was defeated by the Genoueses, near to
the Isle of Cyrna. At these news Andrea The City of Pola taken and ^uined.
returned to Pola. For he had notice that the Polans soon after his departure
were revolted from the Venetians; whereupon, at his arrival he recovered it,
spoiled, and razed it.

Zara likewise remained not long in quiet; for soon after that the Army was
returned The fifth rebellion of Zara.
to Venice, it revolted the fifth time, and chaced away Giouanni Michaeli their
Governor: For the recovery whereof a mighty Army was appointed, and five
and forty Vessels were armed, whereof five and twenty were Galleys, and the
Rayniero Zeno was made General of the Army, who arriving with his forces in
Dalmatia, came and besieged this so often-rebellious City: where after he had
stayed two whole Months, and executed sundry exploits, the stubbornness of
the Inhabitants being qualified, at last they yielded.

The City being recovered, they concluded to send Ambassadors to the King
Zara recovered.
of Hungary. Whereupon soon after Stephano Iustiniano, and Pietro Dandulo,
were sent thither. These men dealt in such sort with King Bella, as he
renounced and The agreement with the King of Hungary for Zara.
made over to the Venetians all the right which himself or any other Kings of
Hungary might pretend to that City; and because this deed of his might be
more firm and authentical, they would have it to be set down in writing.

At this stay stood the affairs of the Venetians, when Prince Tepulo deceased,
in the twentieth year of his government. He was honorably buried in the
Church of S. John and S. Paul the Twins.

MARINO MOROSINI, the 44. Duke of Uenice.



MAr^no Moros^ni succeeded him, by a new manner of election, according to some
Authors. We have set down the form of the Princes The form of electing the
Venetian Princes.
election used till those days; which was indeed without deceit, and such, as
if they, who lived in those times, had been ambitious, it would have easily
ministered occasion to them to have done much evil. But that which has
followed since, is much more certain than that ancient manner, and much more
different. For first of all, when question is of electing a Prince: before the
Electors come to any casting of lots, five men, appointed for this purpose, do
in the name of the Commonwealth acquaint the future Prince with that which he
is to observe, as well concerning his own dignity, as for the honor

Sabellicus says, That he learned this manner of election (for there is no
mention hereof left in writing by any Authors) of Benedicto Treuisano, whom he
accompanied Benedicto Treuisano.
from Venice, at such time as he was sent to be the Magistrate at Verona. He
learned then of him, that these one and forty Authors of the Princes election,
do shut themselves up in that part of the Palace, where the Senate does
commonly meet every day: and then at their entering in, they choose three
among them, exceeding the rest in age and authority, as Princes of the whole
assembly, whom they name Priors, unto whom after they have given the chiefest
place, the rest of the company divide themselves into four parts, from whence
they are called one

Now those that be called from any one of the four parts (for that it is not
material) come before these three, every one carrying in his hand a little
folded scrole, wherein is written the name of him whom they choose for Duke.
They lay them all down in a certain place, and returning to their seats, two
Secretaries who stand before these Priors, do in their presence read, how many
voices every of them has. The names of them that are appointed for voices are
put into a cap, and being well mingled together, they are drawn forth one by
one at all adventures, and according as they are drawn, they are likewise in
the same order with their suffrages afterward committed to lots. But this lot
is not so much for the creation of the to depart*, and to withdraw himself
into a place not far from thence. But before they come to cast lots, those
that be there present are demanded, whether any of them can allege any
matter against him for whom they are ready to cast lots, and it is lawful for
every man freely to speak his mind. If there be then any one who will tax
him with some crime, he rises up, and declares all that he knows against
him, which may make him unworthy of such a dignity: This man as faulty is
called forth of that secret place before the Lords, who command him to purge
himself if he can of that which is objected against him, which having done, he
is sent back again to that private place. Then they ask again if any man
will impugn that which he has spoken, and in the same manner as often as he
is taxed with

Thus after he has made his last excuse, they begin again to cast lots for
him, and they cast into vessels, one for the consent, and the other for the
refusal, their small bals marked with a certain caracter to avoid deceit. Then
they heedfully reckon the balls of the consent, which if they amount to the
number of five and twenty, Since when the form of electing the Prince has
been in use.
he for whom they drew is declared Prince, if they are less, they fall to cast
lots for him, who was drawn for the second place. Against him likewise, and so
the rest, it is lawful for every man to speak what he thinks good, and the
like for him to to refute their accusations: and this man shall be Prince, if
the number appointed Scratino, as they call it. And therefore if by chance there
prove no creation at the first time, the first voices are crossed out and after
proceed to new casting of lots for those which are shut up in the same manner
as we have said. And the same is reiterated until such time as they have a new
Duke.

This is that which Sabellicus has set down, under the authority of so
notable a man, concerning the Princes election, which I have of purpose
mentioned, to the The Popes Legate comme^h to Venice against Ec^elin.
end that all men may know what was the ancient manner, and what the new form
now is of electing the Venetian Princes, whereof we have hitherto spoken, and
shall Morosini was the first that was created in this sort. But howsoever this
manner of election were then or since invse, it is certain that the Venetians
have of a long time observed it in the creation of their sovereign Magistrate.

Now to return to Morosini his government: In his time Philippo Fontano Bishop
of Rauenna, came (as some Authors say) to Venice, as Legate from Pope Gregory
or (according to others) from Pope Alexander, who using spiritual Armor
propounded everlasting life as recompense for all those who should take Arms
with him against the tirant Eccelin, who was proclaimed enemy to the Church of
Rome. Eccelin at the same time laid straight siege to Mantua: Philippo to
break his forces, An Army at Venice against Eccelin.
furnished Philippo, they relieved him with Armor, ships, and victuals, and
they generally caused all necessaries to be carried speedily to the camp, which
they thought to be expedient for the wars and besieging of towns.

The Army departed from Be^ia, (which was the Rendez-vous for all the troops)
to march against the enemy, and came on a sudden to Corregiola. Ansedin
nephew to Eccelin, and governor of Padua, was already come thither with
certain The riuer^ Brent and Bacchillion turned backwards.
course of the rivers Burnt and Bacchillion, to be turned back, so as he did
in a manner draw dry all the lakes which were near thereabouts being wont to
be filled by the flowing of those rivers, to the end the Venetian ships might
not come near the firm Land to Land the Army. This did in some sort make the
Navigations more difficult. For when they came to the mouth of Corregiola
finding the ancient channel almost without water, and so shallow as it could
not bear any great vessels, they were constrained to use small boats and
barks. In them they passed over first the Archers to beat back the enemies
which stood upon the bancks opposite against them; and afterward they landed
the residue of the Army, which marched directly to the city of Sacco, which
being strengthened by Ansedin with a strong Garrison was valiantly defended.

The Bishop of Rauenna did on a sudden raise his Camp, and seized on some
S^cco taken by the Legate and the venetians. An Assault given to Pad^a.
small towns not far from thence, Ansedin beng advertised thereof, after he
had Philippo and the Venetians having received the Sacceans upon their
faithful promise, pursued the enemy. Padua at their arrival was so suddenly
assailed, as they had (in a manner) taken all the suburbs of the crooked
bridge, ere they in the City heard the assault. Philippo and the Venetians,
waxing more hardy by this fortunate success, did more furiously assail the
enemy at the Port Altina. The Paduans blushing to see so excellent a city, so
fully furnished with men and all necessaries, to be lost by their fault,
began courageously to resist the enemy. The fight was eager on both sides:
these men fought for their country, the other for renown: the love to their
country did animate the one, and the hope of victory the others. At Ansedin
thinking all lost, fled with certain of his The flight of Ansedin. Padua taken.
friends on the other side of the city. His flight being known, the town was
forthwith yielded. The castle which at this day is to be seen in one part of
the city, within four days after did the like.

Eccelin all this while being ignorant of what was done at Padua, and seeing
that Eccelin before Mantua.
he lost his time before Mantua, resolved to bring back his troops to Verona.
He forthwith therefore raised his siege, and camped on the River Myncia, where
he had determined to tarry three days. But he was constrained to alter his
purpose Eccelin his cruelti^ against the Paduans.
For by sundry exquisite torments he put tweluethousand Paduans to death which
were in his Army, who were not mercenarie men, or of the common sort, but all
Gentlemen, and some of them of great account. We find not that ever any man did
the like, (except Cornelius Scilla) in slaughtering at one time so many men
subjected under his obedience. Of whom it is reported, That at one time and
Twelve thousand Puenestines slain by Sylla in cold blood.
place he put twelve thousand Prenestines to death, because they had favored
Marisu party, not pardoning any one of so great a number, but only one that
had A Noble courage of a Prenistine.
to be extinct, did boldly refuse his mercy; and in saying that he would not
thank him for that courtesy, he cast himself into the throng of those who
were put to execution.

It is not to be thought strange, or untrue which we have delivered touching so
many thousands of men at one time sent forth of Padua to the wars: For it is
certain by the testimony of a very credible Author, That there has been
reckoned at times in Padua four hundred families, all Gentlemen; and that
which is more, sixscore thousand men sent thereout to the wars at one time.

Eccelin, after the massacre of the Paduans, having shut up with great Rampires
a the City as it needed no more to fear the attempts of Eccelin. Then he
marched suddenly being well accompanied, to that place where the River
Bacchilion was shut up: The Governor of Vincenza, equal to the Bishop both in
strength and courage, sallied with the troops which Eccelin had left there in
Garrison. The fight began speedily and held out long time without certain
knowledge which side had the better. But word being brought in the heat of the
skirmishe, that the Ra^piers of the flood were broken down, and that the River
with great force was returned into the ancient channel, the Bishop suddenly
sounded the retraite. Diverse warlike attemps were afterward performed on
either side, but they are not fitting to be here set down.

Some Authors affirm that the Pope, in acknowledgement of the aid and succor
which the Venetians sent him in his action, granted them that the Deane of
Saint Marks golden Church should in high solemnities, use a Mitre and
pastoral staff, which none of their predecessors could ever till then
obtain. The Prince being oppressed with age, after he had fortunately
governed the Commonwealth, deceased the fourth year of his government. His
body was buried at the entry into the golden Church. Raini^ro Zeni was named
Prince in his sted.

The end of the ninth Book of the first Decad.
THE TENTH BOOK Venice.
The contents of the tenth Book of the first Decad.
THe occasion of the first war against the Genoueses is handled in this tenth
Book. Why the Venetians did seize on the City of Acre. The Venetians victory
against the Genoueses between Acre and Tire. Aid sent by the Venetians to
BALDVVIN Emperor of Constantinople. PALEOLOGVS seizes on the Greek Empire,
and expells BALDVVIN. The Genoueses take three Venetian shipp^ at the Bosphorus
of Thrace. The Venetians defeat the Genoueses, and take four ships from
them near to the Haven, called the seven Swine. The Venetians besiege Tire in
vain. MICHAEL DORIA takes certain Venetian ships at the going out of the
Adriaticke Sea. The notable victory of the Venetians over the Genoueses in the
view of the Sicilians near to Trapani. PALEOLOGVS in league with the
Venetians. Genoueses take Sydonia in the Isle of Candie. Apopular tumult in the
City, wherein the Prince is wronged. Eight Galleys of Genoa taken near to
Cyprus, which are brought to Venice The Venetians victory against the
Genoueses in Syria at the same place almost where they wanne the first
victory. The Venetians are denied victuailes by their neighbors. Truce with
the Genoueses: war with those of Bologna almost for three years space at the
mouth of the River Po* War likewise against Ancona for the impostes at Sea.
The Commonwealth has a new war by reason of the troubles in Candie. The
rebellion of those of Cape Histria. The Acoonitans, after the Venetians had
driven them from Sea, have recourse to the Pope. A great Earthquake in the
City: diverse incounters in Histria for a while against the Patriarche of
Aquileia, and the Prince of Goritia. The City of Acre is ruinated and over
thrown by the King of Babylon.



RAINIERI ZENO, the 45. 'Duke of Uenice.





THERE was in Phaenicia (one of the Provinces of the Kingdom of Siria)
between mount Carmell and Sydon, a City in times past very famous, called
The City of Ptol^mais called Acre.
at first Ptolomais, afterward Acon, by a more usual name. Some Venetian
Historians have set down Acre for Acon, following therein the vulgar, who so
call it. The Venetians, at such time as the Christians took Jerusalem, with a
part of Syria, had by an agreement

The Venetians alleged, That by covenant made with Baldwin not only a The
origina^ of the war^e betwixt the Venetians and Geno^eses*
street, but the third part of the City belonged to them, and so consequently
that Church was theirs which was dedicated to Saint Saba. The Genoueses
insisted on Alexander the fourth, who loving equity Their d^fference referred
to the Pope. The Popes sentence.
as well as peace, did forth with conclude, That seeing the ^iuine service was
common to them both, the Church likewise ought to be so. The Genoueses having
notice of the Popes sentence sooner than the Venetians, presuming on the good
will which Philip of Montfort a Frenchman by Nation, did bear unto them, who
was Governor of the City, they came not staying for the Popes answer, and
seized on the place, and speedily fortified it in manner of a Castle. Philip
also The Venetians commanded to lea^e Acre.
same, as on the contrary, upon their speech, That the thlrd part of the City
belonged unto them, he commanded them (to give the people contentment) to
depart thence.

The Venetians, disdaining to digest such an injury, made a speedy league
with M^nfred, King of Sicill, against the Genoueses; But whilst they were
busied in preparing their Army, the Prince of Antioch, and the Patriarch of
Jerusalem, did sharply by their letters rebuke Philip, counsailing him to
govern himself more discreetly; and assured him, that if the Venetians were
not reconciled to the Genoueses, from whom they were severed by his pride and
their own, the affairs of Christendom were like to receive a great affront
in Syria, by reason of that quarrel. The Venetians understanding the small
account that Philip made of those aduertisements, and that it was certain,
that he would not change his determination, either for admonitions or threats,
but that he would continue will full in the hatred Lorenzo Tepulo; Acr^ taken
by the Venetians.
and that coming to the Haven of Ptolomais, after they had broken the chain
which shut it in, they furiously charged three and twenty Genoueses ships of
burden, and two Galleys, being there by chance in the harbor, which were as
easily taken as unawares assailed; and that afterward having despoiled them of
all their tackling, they burnt them all in a moment. With the same violence
likewise they came to S. Saba's Church, which the Genoueses had fortified, the
which being likewise

Whereupon the Genoueses, rather incensed than daunted with this loss, having
armed two and thirty Galleys at Tire, came to meet with the Venetian Navy;
but it was in vain. For the Venetians leaving the Syrian wars, for the care
which they had of the affairs of Greece, sailed into the Pontick Sea, to the
aid of their Countrie-men, which dwelt in Constantinople, whom the wars of
V^ttasus had entangled. In the mean time the news of that which had been
done in Ptolomais, being come into Italy, did in such sort stir up the
Genoueses, who already The Genoueses resolution.
did not greatly affect the Venetians, as they resolved to levy a mighty
Army, to revenge this wrong: Therefore, after they had armed forty Galleys,
and ten Argozies,

The Venetians likewise in Italy foreseeing the dangerous war, which they
were to make with the Genoueses, did with a marvelous speed arm fifteen
Galleys, and ten ships of burden, of which Andrea Zeno was made General; And
with like celeritie, those Venetians which were in Ptolomais made ready about
forty lesser ships, commonly called Vaccetes, and ten Argozies.

At this stay stood the affairs of the Venetians and Genoueses in Syria, when
in The Popes disigence to make peace betwixt the Venetians and the Genoueses.
Italy Pope Alexander, upon tidings what had passed at Ptolomais, and
considering how great either of their forces were, and that by their mortal
hatred, some horrible mischief was threatened those Christians which at that
time were in Syria, had an The treaty of peace broken.
Popes mediation peace would soon have ensued, if they had not in the mean
time fought together in Syria. The news of this encounter did greatly trouble
the deseignes of the Pope. For so soon as both the Armies arrived in Syria,
the Venetians albeit they kept a strong Garrison in Acre, had not forsaken
Tire, where the Genoueses and Philip Montfort remained, who undoubtedly would
have offered violence to the Venetians which held a part thereof, had not the
Governor of the Wisdom of the Governor.
City expressly forbidden any attempt whatsoever, within the circuit of the
City, or

The Genoueses hereat being more incensed, came on a sudden forth of the
haven, and sailed directly toward Ptolomais. Andrea Zeno and Lorenzo Tepulo,
Generals of the Venetian Army, being aduertized of the enemies proceeding (for
diverse Venetians were in Tire, as has been said, mingled among the enemies)
imagined the truth, to wit, That the Genoueses meaning was to come thither,
thinking in the same manner to surprise them, as their own men had been of
late surprised by the Venetians. For which cause on a sudden they drew all
their vessels forth of the haven, so as these two mighty fleets met one with
another. Upon the first kenning of each other, they quickly put themselves in
order of battle, and then ran furiously one upon another, being armed
indeed more with hatred than with force; The Genoueses defeated by the
Venetians.
fight had the most advantage, as being the stronger, and greatly fortified by
the aid of the Pisans, with whom they were then in league; In the end the
enemies being broken and defeated, and diverse of their Galleys sunk and taken,
to the number of five and twenty: the rest trembling with fear escaped to
Tire. The Venetian brought back his victorious Army to Ptolomais, dragging
after him the taken Galleys, and some thousands of Genoueses.

This notable loss of the enemies did not yet appease the Venetians fury, but
on the contrary did the more inflame it: For that soon after this victory
they ouer-threw all the buildings, as well public as private, which the
Genoueses possessed

Moreover, two thousand six hundred Genoueses who were taken in the fight, and
brought thither (as has been said) were by them made Galley-slaues. It is
reported that the Pope was greatly troubled with these news; and that he would
not dismiss the Ambassadors of Genoa, who were called home after the loss of
the battle, till the Venetians had granted, that all the Genoueses Soldiers
which were taken prisoners, should be set at liberty.

Thus were the Venetians affairs entangled in Syria, whilst in Greece they
were Vattasus, and another while The power of the French ^uch decayed in Greece.
by Theodore his son. For the power of Baldwin was so decayed, as if the
Venetians had not at times come into the Pontick Sea to bring him aid, the
Greek Empire would not so long have remained in the hands of the Frenchmen:
which they having often done at other times, did not cease to continue, so
soon as they were become Masters of Ptolomais, notwithstanding their cruel
war with the Genoueses. For they sailed into Greece, as forgetting their
affairs in Syria, to give Baldwin timely The death of Theadore son to
Vattasus.
succors. But upon news of the death of Theodore, which was thought to have
happened opportunely for the quiet of Greece, the Venetians returned into
Syria, whither they were called by sundry messengers.

In the mean time, Michael surnamed Paleologus, who was left Protector of
Michael Paleologus.
Theodore his children, with the absolute government of the Empire, had at the
beginning given hope to all men of a happy peace: For he made show to be
contented, and highly to respect the children, and to preserve and defend that
which Theodore had left them. But soon after, he did not only defeat Baldwins
forces, but wholly chased them thence: whereunto, how, and by what means he
attained, I will briefly set down. Yet I will make mention by the way of that
which some Authors do report, to wit, That Theodore did not leave Paleologus
as Protector to Great treachery of a Greek.
his children, but one named Gregory Imisole, whom Paleologus caused to be
slain, as he was hearing divine service, and that having by his death taken
upon him the Theodore) so soon as he had assured his own estate, he caused
them miserably to be put to death. William Prince of (...).


This man being installed Protector, began the war against William, King of
Achaia; a Frenchman by nation; and he ceased not to pursue him till he had
constrained him to fight, wherein being overcome, and taken, he confined him to
prison. Being proud of this victory, he came and assailed Baldwin. The
Emperor being advertised that his enemy approached with his forces, resolved
to guard the streights of the Ponticke sea, and to dri^e him if it were
possible, far from the haven. So soon therefore as he had prepared a nauall
Army, with the greatest forces that he could levy, he gave the command thereof
to Marco Gradonico the Venetian, who was then Magistrate in Constantinople,
determining either to hazard all or else to divert that haughty enemy from
his purpose. For being desperate of all aid, he knew not by what invention
else he could be able to keep Constantinople, John Vattasus, and after by
Theodore his successor, as he was enforced to Pawn Philip his son (who had
To what extremity Baldwin was brought.
afterward committed to ward in Venice) to the Merchants of Bruges, who was
lent him a great sum of money, and to sell the gutters and couerings of lead
of the public buildings and the precious relics of Saints: so great was his
want of money.

Thus being compassed with miseries, and almost distracted, he sent all his
forces, to the guard of the strait and passages of the Sea, not leaving any
garrison in the City. But whilst he sought means to keep out a foreign
enemy, he was overthrown by domesticke treachery. For certain Greeks (who
by nature were lightheaded and inconstant) being wearied with so many miseries,
(or rather as I think Palcologus, and to will him to come at a certain hour
of Treachery of the Greeks against the French.
the night, with what forces he best pleased, promising that without doubt they
would bring him in, and make him master of the City without the loss of any
one man. Paleologus would not slip such an occasion, but came about midnight,
with great troops of soldiers through by-waies for fear of descrying. He
was no ^ooner come to the walls, but the traitors received him into the City,
without the Paleologus takes Constantinople.
slaughter of any one except of those which had the guard of the gate. Baldwin,
and Pantaleon Justinian the Patriarch, being awaked at the first noise of the
surprise, in

Some Authors say, that Baldwin and his troops were absent when Paleologus
took the City. But whether he were there or no, it is certain that the City
of Constantinople was lost in this manner the eight and fifty year, (or as
others say) the threescore and third year after it was taken by the Venetians
and Frenchmen. The Venetians dispatched messengers with speed to the Pope; and
Baldwin sent to Lewis the French King: but no aid was either given or denied
by any of them both. Yet Paleologus would not stand still in so fair and even
a way, they concluded to send Marco Michaeli with eighteen galleys The
venetians send a fleet to guard the Ista^d^
to guard the Islands, and all the Seacoasts, with express charge not to let
slip fit occasion to disturb Paleologus. The which was so valia^tly executed,
and with such dexterity, as all men did assuredly believe, that Paleologus was
at the point to leave Constantinople Paleologus ready to leave Constantinople.
The Genoueses leagu^ with Paleologus. William Prince of Achaia, set at
liberty. The Citi^ of (...) called at this day (...)*
in despair, had not the Genoueses in hatred to the Venetians readily offered
him their aid. For having made a league together they sent their whole army
out of Syria into Greece, which of a certain was much more strong and mighty
than that wherewith they fought betwixt Tire and Acre.

Paleologus trusting to his own forces, attempted to enlarge the bounds of his
William at liberty, (who as we have said was by him imprisoned after his
defeat) on condition to deliver the City of Epidauro in Morea into his hands
(so was this City called in old time which stands almost in the midst of
Greece, called at this day, by corruption of the language Maluasia) being
assured, that with this City he would greatly molest the Venetians by sea and
land. But the Venetians having notice thereof, with little difficulty drew
William to their party, and swear perpetual friendship with him, who ser^ed
them afterward very faithfully in this war. They sent moreover eight and
thirty Galleys with supplies, to their Army which was already in Grecia.

But whilst this mighty Army was preparing against Paleologus, diverse ships
of The league of Achaia with the venetians.
war at sundry times departed from Venice; as ships of burden fit for the
fight, and Galleys well appointed, not so much for the guard of their own
frontiers, as to spoil whatsoever they could find belonging to the enemy, and
to frustrate his atempts. The venetians in the ^sle of Negrepont.
most part was possessed by* the Venetians, after they had driven thence
Anfosius, Frederick the third, King of Sicily, who having a part thereof by
contract of marriage with Marulla, daughter to Boniface of Verona, held the
party of Paleologus.

The enemies fieete sailing forth of the Sea of Thessalonica met with three
Venetian ships of war near to the Bosphorus of Thrace, returning from
scouring the Seas, almost as far as Constantinople. These ships being taken,
all the prisoners which fell to the Genoueses were forthwith murdered, and
they which happened on Paleologus, had their eyes plucked out. The Venetian
navy feeling winter draw on, and the enemy not stir, returned to Venice.
About the beginning Cruelty of the Greeks and Genoueses.
of the next Spring, Gilberto Dandulo departed from Venice with two and thirty

Now albeit the maine war was near to the Islands of the Aegean Sea, and
along the coast which runs from Morea to the strait of Gallipolis, ^et the
affairs of The Genoueses put ^o flight.
Syria were not altogether quiet. For all the Italians (in a manner) that were
in Iernsalem did so much favor the Venetians in Acre, as it was plainly seen,
that they did more affect them than they did the Genoueses: whereas on the
contrary, those of Tire held altogether for the Genoueses. By this means all
the Christians which were then in Syria, were divided in factions one against
another for the party of The Christians in Sy^ia divided into factions in
regard of the venetians and Genoueses.
these two mighty people: and those Cities which in times past had been with
so much labor and blood freed from the cruel Empire of Mahomet, were in an
instant Genoueses, who being come into the maine directed their course to
Sicily where the Genoan fleet was reported to ride. And not finding the enemy
there, they sailed into Syria, where near to Tire they took an Argozie of the
enemies. After A new venetian fle^e in Syria.
this they entered the haven* determining to force the City: But Andrea
Barofio, a discreet and valiant Captain was governor of the town, who
although the Venetians had sent to Ptolomais for supplies to girt the City
with a streighte siege, Tire besieged by the venetians.
both by sea and land, did nevertheless with the garrison thereof very
bravely defend it.

The Genoueses in the mean time were not idle: For understanding by their
spies, that a great ship called the Strong Castle, with ten other ships of
burden laden The Genoueses ambush discovered.
affirm that Michael Doria commanded that Genoan fleet, and how they fought
at Sea, as also that the Venetians trusting to the strength and greatness of an
Argozey returned to Venice, after they had lost the other ships laden with

The Venetians in sted of being discouraged at this loss, were the more
animated to revenge; so as not long after they sent Giacomo Dandulo into
Dalmatia with seven Galleys, with full power (If it should be expedient for the
Commonwealth) to join with those whom he should find there for the guard of
the Islands. Whereupon after he had taken three from Zara, he sailed into the
Sea of Sicilie, where receiving three other Galleys of Candie, and not long
after four from Nigrepont, strengthened with these supplies he sailed to
Ragusa, where he met Marco Gradonico with ten Galleys; These two fleetes
being joined together, sailed into Sicilie; where after they had coasted all
that part of the Island, which looks Lanfranc of Bourbon. This loss being
reported at Genoa, eight and twenty Galleys were suddenly set forth, to
revenge this injury; who sailing into Sicilie with a direct course to meet
the enemy, found the Venetians at Ankor in the Haven of Three Genou^ses
galleys taken by the venetians
Trapani. Some write, that the two fleetes met by chance before Trapani: But
whether it were so or no, it is certain that the Galleys on either side sailed
in order of battle ready for fight.

It is reported that the Genoueses came too eagerly to charge, and so by
consequence too unadvisedly. For after their coming from Genoa they feared
nothing The Goneueses deseated by the venet^ns before Trapani.
wilfulness was such, as rather than to escape with dishonor they chose there
to die fighting. In this fight were taken four and twenty of their Galleys:
and the residue burnt or sunk. Above two thousand five hundred were taken
prisoner^, and more than twelve hundred slain: the rest were drowned.

The victory was not unbloody to the Venetians; but their joy to have so
bravely vanquished the enemy, would not suffer them to think on their great
loss. And The inconstan^ and lightness of the Greeks.
because that by this overthrow the Genoueses power was thought to be wholly
abated, Paleologus, who till then had taken their party, made truce with the
Venetians for five years. The Senate after the battle of Trapani, sent one
and twenty A new Venetian Army sent to Mod^n.
Galleys to Modona for the guard of the Seacoast, because (as I think) they
were advertised that the Galleys of Genoa made incursions on those places.

It happened by chance that certain of the enemies ships being come at the
same time as far as Modon to rob and spoil, so soon as they understood of
the Arrival of the Venetian Army, presuming on their swiftness on a sudden
like run-awaies they turned their backs. The Venetians holding themselves not
deceived in their enemies flight, forthwith followed them: But the Genoueses
being still daunted with their former loss received in Sicilie, and
determining from the beginning not to sight, did escape by strength of their
oars into the Haven of Rhodes: from The Genoueses come into Candie.
where after they had coasted the greatest part of the Island, they took Cydon
a sea town (called at this day Canea by corruption of speech) which for the
most Can^a in Candie ruined by the Genoueses. A popular commotion in Venice.
part they spoiled and ruined.

During these exploits in Greece, there arose a great commotion in Venice which
did threaten the Commonwealth with evident danger. The expenses of this long
war had till then so exhausted the public treasure* as the Senate was
constrained to invent new subsidies for the entertainment of the Army:
Whereupon they laid Rayniero came forth, to the end by his sovereign
authority, either to dant the popular fury, or else to pacify their
tumultuous spirits by some gentle admonition: But this The people bear small
respect to their Prince.
manie-headed beast, without any respect at all to the ducall dignity, did
forthwith cast stones at the Prince: who being affrighted gave place to their
fury. No sooner was the Duke retired, but the Authors of the sedition having
found a fit occasion for their theeuish intents, did by force enter into diverse
gentlemen's houses which they ransackt, and spoiled. At the last the tumult
being appeased, sharp informa^ion was The seditio^s pu^ished.
were severely punished.

It is reported that about the same time all the streets and places of the
City were paued with brick, and that the bridge of Rialto was with great cost
new builded, with more cunning workmanship than before. All this
notwithstanding the ruining of Cydon, and the taking of the ship so richly
laden, did greatly discontent the Venetians; Therefore, three and twenty
well-furnished Galleys were given to A new Venetian Army against the Genoueses.
Marco Gradonico, to sail to Acre, with express commandment to epsy a fit
time when with most advantage he might fight, and when it should be offered,
to employ Certain Genoa ships taken.
which they took and sent home to Venice; of which success the people were
very joyful. I greatly wonder at that which some do write, touching five
ships of Pisa, that were brought to Venice with those of Genoa, seeing that
some few years before the Venetians, consorted with the Pisans, fought with
the Genoueses in Syria, and that soon after they were comprehended, as friends
and allies to the Philip: Others The Venetians victory against the Genoueses.
which make mention how the galleys were sent to revenge the ruin of Cydon and
the taking of the rich marchant-ship, affirm that they did not fight near
unto Rhodes with the Genoueses fleet of eight and twenty galleys, but betwixt
Tire and Acre, and that they went more courageously to the charge, in regard of
the places of retreat which either of them had, though nevertheless at the
last the Venetians there likewise got the upper hand* having taken five of the
enemies Galleys.

Whilst these exploits were done at Sea, Prince Zeno died in the seventeenth
year of his government.

LORENZO TEPVLO, the 46. Duke of Venice.



LOrenzo Tepulo son to Prince Giacomo, succeeded him. At this Princes entry
Pope Clement the fourth after he had discreetly considered how great miseries
the Frenchmen, with others who till then were in Syria had endured, and were
likely still to endure by means of the wars The Pope endeuoreth to accord the
Venetians and the Genoueses.
the Venetians and the Genoueses, to listen to a suspension of Arms, if they
could not on a sudden conclude a peace. And the more easily to effect it, he
entreated either of them to send their Commissioners to him to Viterbo. The
Kings of France and Sicilie, did request the like, offering freely to employ
themselves to mediate a firm peace betwixt them Commissioners were sent to the
Pope, but certain months Great scarciti^ of victuals in Venice.
after, they returned to Venice without conclvding any thing. About the same
time there happened great scarcity of victuals in the City, by reason that the
passages into Sicilie and Apulia for corn were shut up from the Venetian
Merchants: For the Genoueses scouring all the Seas, there was no man that would
undertake to relieve Iagratitupe of the neighbors.
or readier than those of the Venetians for the overthrowing of Eccelins
tyranny: They would in so great necessity relieve that City which had so
well deserved of

The Venetians disdaining to be thus unworthily dealt with, to the end that all
men might know, (and chiefly they who had so wilfully refused them) how gently
they had dealt with them in time past, they made a decree which continues till
this day, That all merchandise passing between the Gulphe of Fana, and the
mouth of the River Po, should pay a certain tribute to the Commonwealth; And
to this purpose should come to Venice where their merchandise should be rated,
if it so pleased the Officers thereunto appointed. And to prevent all deceit
herein, they created a new Magistrate, who had certain ships of war
appointed him, carefully to look to the Seacoasts: This caused (for it was
likely that the Neighbors at the first report of this new Edict would oppose
themselves against it) the league to

About the same time the Genoueses and the Venetians, as well in their own
Truce granted betwixt the Venetians and the Genoueses.
name as the Pisans their associates, made a truce by means of Philip the
French King, who succeeded Lewis, being then greatly desirous to relieve the
distressed Frenchmen in Syria. Wherewith (as it is reported) he was so greatly
affected, as he kept with him at Cremona the Ambassadors of either of these
people so long, sometimes entreating the one, and anon exhorting the other,
appeasing and promising so much, as at last all sorted to his own desire: And
this was the eleventh year (according to some Authors) since the beginning of
the war against the Genoueses. Now there are some other Venetian Historians,
who seem to augment this number, Rayniero Zeno ruled seuenteen years. Others
set down only sixteen, and affirm, That the war began at Ptolomais in
the beginning of his Principality, which was the year of our salvation 1260.
and continued till the 1260.
time of Lorenzo Tepulo. But in my opinion this incertaintie of times has
chiefly happened through the negligence of Writers, who for want of due
observation have (perhaps) attributed longer time to Zeno than he reigned. Or
else it may be that the war was not commenced in the beginning of his
Principality. For their confusion herein is so great, as a man can hardly
discern the truth of the matter: wherefore, following the opinion of Blondus,
a most exact obseruer of times, I think that this first Genoan war endured
but eleven years.

Now truce being concluded with the Genoueses, the Venetians had new war New
war against the Bolognians.
in Lombardie. Those of Bolognia, who at that time possessed the greatest part
of the Country of Flaminia, being grieved that by the new decree of Impost
lately, as aforesaid, made by the Venetians, their Merchants were excluded from
their traffic, prepared with all secrecy a new war, to open them a passage
for their navigations. Being therefore ready to set forward, they sent their
Ambassadors before to Venice, who, concealing their warlike preparations,
should treat with the Venetians about the abolishing of that Decree, and
dismissing of their Garrisons on every side, to the end that their Merchants
might have free passage. Whereunto if the Venetians should refuse to consent
(as it was likely they would) they were Tepulo soon discovered the fraud of
the The Bolognians intent discovered.
Bolognians: Whereupon he fell to his subtilties, which were no less pollitick
than theirs, and speedily sent out nine Galleys to prevent the enemy. It was
most certain that he who could soonest discover the others policy, and first
seize upon the place, would make all things after very difficult for his
enemy. Wherefore the Venetians came with speed to the mouth of the Po, which
is called Primario, near to Rauenna: where at their arrival perceiving the
Bolognians to build a Fort on the other shore, they likewise with speed seized
on S. Alberts, which they instantly fortified by help of the Soldiers.

Within few days after, Prince Tepulo came thither with Sea-forces, the better
to What was the number of the Bolognians Army.
regard of their great numbers. For their Army was reported to be forty
thousand fighting men, and all of the same Province: which the Celtique Gauls
had in part possessed, (a most warlike race and almost not to be conquered) and
in part the Senonians, (who for certain Months held the City of Rome) which
was afterward called Flaminia, and at last Romagniola. Whereby may be
coniectured that the same Province does not at these days bring forth men
wholly different from those whom it nourished in former times, but very
courageous, and of great spirits, and such (in a word) as it was not said
without cause, That a red Italian, a black German, Avsuall preuer^
and one of Romagniola with his hair of two colors, are commonly froward
fellows.

Now, this dangerous war was drawn out at length, till the third year
after, when at last they fought with all their forces, under the conduct of
Marco Gradonico, The Bolognians deseated.
where the victorious Venetian brake and defeated the enemy with great loss.
The Bolognians hereupon being discouraged, sued for peace, which they obtained
on these conditions, That having overthrown their Fort at Primario, being
permitted Peace granted to the Bolognians.
to carry thence certain things with them, they should leave the entrance of
the Po, free to the Venetians.

The Anconitans, by the example of those of Bolognia, durst attempt to take
Those of Ancona complained to the Pope of the Venetians.
arms: and sent to Pope Gregory the tenth to complain on the Venetians. The
Pope entreated the Venetians not to stop their navigations: This entr^atie they
did neither obey nor resist, But because they would not seem (against their
custom) to contemn the Popes commandment, they sent Ambassadors to him, who
alleging The Anconitans complaints ended.
well, by false reports to traduce the Venetians before the Pope, and that
their accusations were untrue; These and such like allegations of the
Venetians, by little and little ended the matter. And the Pope herein was so
far off from conceiving any displeasure against them, as he^ rather procured
the truce before then concluded at Cremona between them and the Genoueses, to
be renewed for two years more. The truce between the Venetians and Geno^eses
prolonged.
These things thus succeeding in Italy, certain Lords of Nigrepont, who as
yet Andrea Dandulo, Governor of the Island, with sixteen Galleys invaded that
part of Asia the less, which then was under obedience of Paleologus: from
whence having carried away great booty, they provoked this Prince to war
upon them. So soon therefore, as his Army was ready he came to Nigrepont and
besieged Orea. The Lords of the Island, to free their people from the siege,
came with twenty Galleys to draw the enemy to fight: wherein being broken and
put to flight, Paleologus, in a manner, bereft (...) defeateth them of
Nigropont. The league renewed betwixt* Palcologus and the Venetians.
them of all their fleet, and brought away diverse of the chief as prisoners.
But five hundred Venetians, found in the fleet of those Lords, he committed
to his Lieutenants, to be sent home to Venice, with commandment to renew the
league for five years following.

I cannot but exceedingly marvel, in that it is said, that those Lords of
Nigr^pont made war on Paleologus, against the will of Dandulo. Those of the
Island

On these terms stood the affairs of Venice at such time as Tepulo dec^ased,
the sixth year of his government: who was buried in the Church of the Twins,
in the monument of his Ancestors. Giacomo Contareni was chosen in his place.



GIACOMO CONTARENI, the 47. Duke of Uenice.





AT the beginning of his government it was likely that the war The war
like to have been renewed with the Genoueses.
would have been renewed with the Genoueses, because an Argozie of Venice
laden with merchandise, was taken by two of Genoa. It was snpposed to have
been done by the public command, and therefore they began to prepare a new
Army: yet nevertheless they determined (following the custom of their
Ancestors) to demand first of the Genoueses, in the name of the Commonwealth,
that which had been taken from them, which if they refused to do, it was not
questionable, but that the Venetians would use all manner of hostility. The
Ambassadors, who for this purpose were

The popular sedition which happened in the City in the time of Tepulo, by
reason of the Impost on the Mills, was wholly extinct under this Princes
government. But things being thus pacified at home, a new war sprung up
abroad. The inhabitants of the Cape of Histria, of whose affection toward
them the Venetians New (...) with those of Cap^d' His^ria.
^d better conceived than of all the rest in that Province, were suddenly
revolted. (...) (...) was sent thither with great troops to reduce them to
their obedience. The Patriarch of Aquileia succoureth the rebels.
Venetians Arms, they sent to Fo^li, to entreat the Patriarch of Aquileia, in
regard of (...) mutual amity, to come to the succor of a Neighbour-Citie,
and to take Arms to repel the Venetian who highly menaced them. He being
moved with their entrea^ies, in have levied forces and sent them to their aid.
The Histrians relying on these succors* attempted by diverse means to divert
the Venetian from the siege. But neither those, nor yet their own forces, did
greatly avail them; for The rebels subi^cted.
being vanquished, they were constrained to return to the Venetians obedience;
Rayniero M^rosini was sent Governor into the Province to contain them in
their Rayniero Morosin^.
duty.

The Venetians being freed from the war of Histria, were suddenly troubled
with that of* Ancona; and yet I know not whether this began before the other
was ended. For the Annalists handle this matter so confusedly, as we can
hardly New war with (...) Anconitans.
tell what to believe of it. Besides, very few Historians make mention of this
war of Ancona: And they which do mention it, say, that the Venetians
besieged Ancona in the time of Pope John the one and twentieth, whose Papacy
lasted no longer than the first year of Prince Contareni his government. They
affirm moreo^er, that the war began upon occasion of the decree for the
new impost, made certain years before, which to abolish they had made means
to Pope Gregory The Anconitans se^ke to defrand the Venetians of their Impo^s.
but without effect. The better therefore to annihilate this decree, they
caused certain merchandise to be secretly transported into the Sea of Histria,
and to other places near to the entrance of the River Po. The Venetians being
therewith incensed, (for the Anconitans abusing their lenity and patience,
became daily more insolent) forthwith armed six and twenty Galleys, to the
which they added certain The Venetian fleet before ^cona.
from whence being beaten back, and the fleet having no place of safety to
ride in before the City, nor being yet come to an Ankor; there arose a
terrible tempest, which did cast and beat part of their vessels in pieces upon
the Neighbour-shore. The Venetian fleet scattered by tempest.
Six Galleys striking upon the Rocks of Senegaillo, were wholly lost, and the
residue of the fleet being driven forward by violence of the tempest ran up
into the maine. Afterward new forces, with supplies of ships and Galleys, were
sent from The A^conitans policy to surprise the Venetians.
up the Venetian ensigns on his Galleys, which he had taken from them at the
assault of the Haven, framing in the best manner he could, the rest of the
tackling after the Venetian fashion. Then from as far as he might discern
them, he began with great joy and clamor to hail them as their friends and
companions. By this policy on a sudden they grapled with two of the foremost
which they took, and dragged to the City, to the great contentment of the
Inhabitants: But we do not find who commanded the Army at the same time.
Howbeit, it is certain that by his The G^nerall of the Venetian Army punished.
negligence and want of experience in martial matters, the Venetians received
two great overthrows in short time, and that for his labor, he was called
home from

They did better afterward than at the first. For they resolved to tame the
stubbornness of the enemy by a siege: whereupon within a few days after,
Ancona was again besieged. At which time the inhabitants foreseeing what
might happen, and that by the perseverance of their enemies they might fall
into some manifest danger, they sent to Pope Nicholas the third, newly elected,
to animate him against The (...) s^nd to ^ope Nicholas the third.
the Venetians, and to acquaint him chiefly with that which their enemies had
till then done to them, and did daily more and more; and besides, to declare
unto him, that they had already by the Venetians means endured all the
miseries, which those who were a long time straightly besieged, were wont to
sustain, and they

The Venetian Ambassadors were come at the same time to Rome, to congratulate
The Venetian Ambassadors at Rome.
his assumption to the Papal dignity: who, after they had a long time
attended there, and not being called, as were others, to the public
congratulation, they doubting the matter, that the Pope by reason of those of
the marches was offended The Venetians discontentea with the Pope.
with them, sent word thereof to Venice. The Duke and Senate taking it in bad
part, did by their letters call home their Ambassadors, who being on their way
The Venetian Ambassadors brought back^ (...) Rome.
sharply rebuked the Venetians for so straightly besieging the Anconitans,
being feodaries of the Church of Rome, forbad the Ambassadors (who would have
defended the cause) to speak. It is reported, that the same day they returned
to Venice, eight Galleys with supplies were sent to the Camp before Ancona: I
know not The venetians send ^w supplies before Ancona.
whether it was done upon necessity, or else in hatred to the Pope, for using
their Ambassadors with so small respect. The enemy thereby perceiving, that
in sted of raising the siege, the Venetian did more sharply oppress them,
abating their courage, they became suitors for peace. The matter being debated
without any resolution, the Commissioners returned home without any peace: So
soon as they were gone, they resolved to strengthen the Army with fourteen
Galleys; two of which straggling by the way were by the enemy surprised, who
lay in wait to catch what he could: Nevertheless, he bought his peace at no
mean rate.

The Duke being already old and decayed, not able for his age to attend the
public The Duke willingly deposes himself.
affairs, by consent of all men deposed himself, and soon after died: His
funerals were great, and were followed by multitudes of people, to the Church
of the Friars Minors, where he was buried. Giouanni Dandulo, then absent, was
chosen in his place.

GIOVANNI DANDVLO, the 48. Duke of Uenice.



SOme Authors affirm that under this Prince the peace was concluded with those
of the Marches, because (perhaps) this war ended at the beginning of his
government. They say besides, that it was expressly mentioned in the Treaty,
that the decree of the impost should

About the same time the Sea did in such sort ouerflow the City as it was in a
Great ouerflowing of the Sea, with an earthquake. A new war with the
Patriarch of Aquileia.
manner held for a prodigy: Whereupon, soon after ensued a great earthquake.
They began likewise at the same time to stamp diverse sorts of golden coin in
the City. A new war was kindled against the Patriarch of Aquileia in regard
of the Histrians, whom he especially maintained against the Venetians. Certain
people of that Province were revolted, whom the Venetian would reduce under his
subjection, and to that purpose had sent an Army into the Province. The
Patriarch speedily came to their aid: but considering with himself that his
forces were not sufficient to hinder the Venetian, he yielded without any
further trouble, making The Patriarch allieth himself with Count Gorician.
But this Patriarch so soon as he had joined his forces with those of Count
Gorician, being strengthened with the new alliance of this Prince, he returned
again to disquiet Histria. These new commotions were followed with rebellions
of diverse Cities. The Venetians having notice hereof were constrained suddenly
to arm themselves and to reinforce their Army. It was commonly reported that
the enemies Army consisted of six and thirty thousand men, among whom were
great troops of horse. The rumor of so great numbers caused the whole City
The Venetians preparations for H^stria.
to be very careful for the preparation of this new war. They provided
therefore a great number of ships of special choice which were manned with the
third part of all such as were able to bear Arms. Thriests besieged by the
(...).


The Army being gone from Venice, and arrived in Histria, did suddenly
encampe before Thrieste. For among others in this insurrection this City
likewise

Not many days after, the enemy came thither, and at his arrival assailed
the The Patriarcks Army comes to Thrieste.
Fortes; which were not only well kept and defended, but those likewise which
were within them having made a sallie upon the enemy, skirmished fiercely
near to the Rampire where diverse on both sides were slain, and among others,
the Nephew of Count Gorician, a valliant and brave young man. The retreit being
sounded, truce was taken for a day. In the mean time Gordiano, a man of
authority, and who till then had held an honorable place in the Venetian
Army was suspected of treason. The speech was that he had secretly practiced
with the enemy to yield the Forte up into their hands. Being apprehended and
put to the torture he confessed his wicked intent; whereupon the next morning
by break of day, he was A Traitor punished.
enemies Camp; who now perceiving that he could neither prevail by force nor
cunning, being out of all hope to surprise the Fort, he returned without
effecting any thing.

The enemy being gone, the Venetian troops returned soon after. Now whether
they had retired themselves of set purpose because they would not fight with
the enemy, whom they knew to be much stronger than themselves, and that in the
mean time the fleetrode at anchor in the maine, or else in some haven hard by,
until they had news of the enemies retreat; or rather whether after they had
left strong Garrisons in the fortes to maintain the siege, the rest of the
Army not The Venetians Army comes again before Th^este.
to assail the City, was beaten from the walls with great loss. The Army
afterward departing thence, the siege was continued by those who lay in the
fortes until such time as they understood of the enemies return. Upon the
first tidings whereof they abandoned the same (whether through fear, or
weariness to tarry Those within the fortes retire to their sh^ppes
so long in a place I know not) and retired themselves to their galleys. This
is all (in a manner) that was done for two years space in Histria.

But in Syria the Venetians which were in Acre* made^ruce with the King of
Babylon The Venetians take truoe with the King of Babylon.
for two years, who had at the same time ruined Tripolie, a very famous City,
and had caused Tire, Sydon, and Berithon to undergo the same fortune. It is
reported that he made truce with the Venetians and the other Christians which
were in Acre, to the end that his overmuch prosperity might not stir up al
Europe to take Arms against him. Howbeit the same did not keep them back:
The Pope exhorts the Christian Princes to ^ndertake the ^oiage into Syria,
with his offer.
For Pope Nicholas by Letters and Ambassadors excited all the most famous
Princes of Europe, to succor the afflicted Christians in Syria. And for his
own part he made offer of fifteen hundred armed Horse: And for their passage
into Asia, the Venetians offered him twenty Galleys, together with victuals
for the Mariners, who were to be paid by his Holiness: for the expedition of
which business, the Bishop of Tripoli came to Venice.

The Venetians being moved at the Popes instant pursuit, added to these twenty
The Venetians offer, for this ^otage.
Galleys, which were promised, five more, armed at their own cost, because
they would not seem careless of the affairs of Christendom; of the which
fleet Giacomo Tepulo was declared General, with the Popes Legate. But the
other Princes of Christendom not appearing, all this great preparation of
Galleys and Arms, was to no purpose. For the time of the truce being expired,
the King of Babylon ^uing notice of what was done in Europe, sent his son
with a great Army to besiege Acre taken by the Infidels.
Acre, who suddenly enguirt it on every side with furious assaults: The
Venetians with the Popes Soldiers, for a time did bravely defend it. But no
supplies coming out of Europe, those which could escape by Sea slipping away
one by At what time the Christians were driueu out of Syria, 1290.
one; the City was at the last taken by a few, spoiled, and razed down to the
foundation. In this manner was the Christian name wholly extinct in Syria, the
year of our salvation 1290. and after that great and notable voyage
undertaken by the Urban the second, at that time when Jerusalem with a part of
Syria was taken, one hundred ninety six years.

Prince Dandulo, after all these miseries happened in his time, deceased (the
tenth year of his Government being scarce expired) and was honorably buried
in the Church of the Twins. It is reported that his funerals being ended,
there arose A popular tumult about the creation of the Duke.
on a sudden a great tumult, and how the people flocking on every side, used
many threatenings and reproachful terms to the Senators, and by name demanded
Giacomo Tepulo for their Duke. This man being virtuous, and a lover of the
public peace, after he had sharply reprehended the peoples rashness, secretly
departed the City* and came to Marroco; where he remained unknown, Pietro
Gradonico was by consent of the Senate declared Prince of the Commonwealth.

The end of the tenth Book of the first Decad.
THE FIRST BOOK Venice.
The Contents of the first Book of the second DECAD.
THe wars of the Venetians and Genoueses compared with those of the Romans
and Carthaginians. The second war with the Genoueses, after the truce
expired. The Venetians burn Pera. GIOVANNI SOVRANZA loses diverse
Sea-companies through extremity of cold, after his atchieuements on the
Pontick Sea. The Venetians are defeated at Corfu, where they loose a great
Army. They receive the like loss soon after, at the straight of Gallipolis.
A new peace betwixt the Venetians and Genoueses. The Commonwealth greatly
endangered by the conspiracy of BVCONIO. The Venetian fleet brings a great
booty out of Greece. Traffic every where prohibited to the Venetians,
because they had taken Ferrara. The public liberty in danger to be lost by
means of a cruel conspiracy of her Citizens. War for a time in Dalmatia
about the Zara. The Church and Covent of S. DOMINICK builded in the City. The
City freed from the Popes interdiction by the means of FRANCISCO DANDVLO. The
ancient Port beautified and enlarged. A new rebellion of the Candiots quickly
appeased. The Venetians free the Paduans again from the yoke of bondage. The
war begun again in Histria, causes the Venetians to take Arms. The
voyage against the Turk ^oncluded, and soon broken through the default of the
French. The Venetians and Florentines make a league against those of Escalla.



PIETRO GRADONICO, the 49. Duke of Venice.

IN writing the Venetian History, diverse matters offer The Venetia^s and
Genoueles compared to the Romans and Carthagenians.
themselves unto us, so conformable to those of the Romans, as it is not
possible to see any thing more like, as well in counsel, travail, accidents
of fortune, as other sundry events. But among all, which (as I have said) are
very many, the Venetians war with the Genoueses, seems in my judgment to
have great resemblance with those which the Romans had Strabo says) is a
promontorie stretching from the Alps, whose height on the North side extending
toward the South, serves The situation of Italy.
for a Rampire. It is besides watered toward the West with the Ligusticke and
Tirrhene Seas, and on the East with the Adriaticke and Ionian Seas. And from
thence the waves begin to mingle themselves together; and to make it more
strong, they would feign shut up the Alps more closely, but it cannot be. In
this deep Gulf stands the famous City of Venice* On the other side, the
Ligusticke Sea labors to hold fast the feet of the Appenine hills which it
almost does, and within this turning likewise lies the City of Genoa, envious
of the Venetian greatness* in such sort as they are almost one opposite to the
other. Prudent nature did se^ betwixt the two former a great vastness of Sea,
which might serve for a bar, if they should at The distance betwixt the
Venetians and Genoueses.
any time happen to invade one another, thereby to quench their mortal hatred,
and cool their boiling fury: But to these she has not alone opposed the
breadth often shunned. But neither the distance of Sea could restrain the wrath
of the former, nor the difficult access of the Appenin hills that of these
people. From whence the Venetians are descended and from whence the Genoueses.


The Romans held themselves descended from the Trojans. The Venetians boast of
the same original. The Libians mingled themselves with the Phoenicians; and
the Genoueses were likewise mingled with them. Emulation of great a^chieuements
did first stir up those men, and afterward the desire of rule: And on these
two points only has the war grown betwixt these people: Those for Sicilie,
and these (as has been said) for the City of Acre. The Romans who were
victors* were often times in greater danger than the Carthaginians whom they
vanquished. The Venetians have run the selfsame fortune, notwithstanding
The Ligustick and Lybick wars had almost one self same end.
like, yet nevertheless has it not heene wholly different. That great
Carthage was razed down to the ground, and this proud Genoa, wanting further
ability, has at length given place to the victorious Venetian.

But tbe better to continue the discourse of these wars, which the Venetians
had afterward with these proud people, we must first of all set down certain
matters

Gradonico at the same time commanded Histria, when he was chosen Prince of
the Commonwealth. Being called home to Venice he took possession of his
charge, which he began with divine matters, commanding the day and feast of
Saint Katerine to be yearly solemnized, unto whom when he was but a private
person he was much devoted. I believe that the Senate in favor of the Duke did
make a decree for this purpose; by means whereof this holy Virgin

It is reported that about the same time, Andrew King of Hungary son to a
Venetian Andrew King of Hungary comes to Venice.
woman of the family of Morosini, and to Stephen the Kings son, came to
Venice, where he was so far off from contemning his mothers house, because it
was a private family in a free City, as he would needs appropriate to
himself the ancient Arms of the family, by adding thereunto only a white
Cross with a circle; to the end that by that difference, those of the same
family might be known from the other Morosini. Stephen his father was borne
in Ferrara, whither Thomasina Morosini, by whom he had this Andrew, who in time
got title of Governor of the Kingdom; and afterward that of King. Some
Authors refer the ruin of Ptolomais to these times; but the greatest part
of them affirm that which we have reported thereof in the precedent book.

The truce being expired, the war against the Genoueses was more fiercely A
new war with the Genoueses.
than ever renewed. But the Venetians good fortune was not so apparent in the
next Ptolomais, nor for a street or Church only, but to acquire the absolute
command or dominion at Sea. In this quarrel the Venetians were the first in
field. But I think it was not in respect of the Genoueses assailing the Pisans
at that time, who after they had taken the haven of Legorne from them, and
burnt it, suncke diverse ships of burden full of flint stones and gravel in
the haven thereby to take the use of the Sea from them: For the Pisans forces
had been already before that time greatly weakened, chiefly by that notable
loss which they sustained in the The Pisans vanquished by the Genoueses.
Isle of Lamel, where twelve thousand of their people were slain or taken by
the Genoueses, with the loss of five and twenty Galleys. Now the Venetians,
to draw the Pisans forth of this danger, who had in times past so faithfully
relieved them Rogero Morosini, to Rogero Morosino General of the Venetians A^*
mie.
spoil and destroy whatsoever belonged to the Genoueses. Others make mention
of forty six only: and others affirm that there were no Galleys in this
Fleet, but diverse ships of all sorts. Their first charge was against those of
Pera. This place near to Constantinople, which I think was at the same time
but a village, had been fortified by the Genoueses, and was much frequented by
Genoa Merchants trafficking the Ponticke Seas, who for the near neighborhood
thereof to Constantinople and for transportation of their merchandise to and
fro had the commodiousnesse Pera taken and burned by the Venetians.
therefore being not yet fortified, was soon taken by the Venetian and
consumed to ashes. From thence the Army sailed to the old Forts which the
Genoueses held, which being taken were for the most part burned. The Genoueses
in the mean time lay quiet without action. Giouanni Souranza the next year
following was commanded to hold the same course with five and twenty Galleys.
At his arrival he took the City of Capha by assault in Chersonessus of
Tauris: where being overtaken A wonderful mat^er in the fennes Meotides.
Army likewise was greatly afflicted. The fennes Meotides which are not far
thence, together with the Cymerian Bosphorus, are so congealed with extreme
cold, as it is most certain that in those places where in Summer men fight
with Galleys, in Winter they combat on horseback on the Ice.

The Genoueses likewise thinking it time to be stirring, sailed into the maine
with The fleet of the Genoueses in the Adriaticke Sea.
threescore and six Galleys, or threescore and ten (according to some Authors)
under the conduct of Lampadio Doria: who desirous to revenge the losses
received on desirous of fight, for any assurance they had of their own forces,
or for that they were ignorant of the Venetians valor, but only through their
own natural obstinacy, the which at last, by right or wrong, would overthrow
them.

The Genoueses on the other side hardly digested, that in the former wars
they The Venetians and Genoueses resolution.
had seemed at times to strike sail, and to yield to the Venetians, Besides, a
fresh grief at wrongs received on the Pontick Sea, for the space of two
years, did greatly move them; but nothing did so much animate and encourage
them, as for that about the same time they had so abated the power and forces
of the Pisans, as they (who not long since had been very mighty) had nothing
left them besides the bare shadow of their ancient name. With these hopes and
encouragements, both parties Carolo and Andrea Dandulo geoeralls of the
Venetians ^mie.
came bravely to the fight. Carolo and Andrea Dandulo (as discreet as valiant)
commanded the Venetian Army; who having omitted nothing which might help to
the obtaining of the Victory, did boldly and valiantly receive the enemy
coming toward them. In the beginning the fight was doubtful, and the
slaughter very cruel, such indeed as could not but happen at the encounter of
two so mighty armies: There was nothing heard but the frightfull clamours of
mariners, and soldiers, encouraging one another: All the Sea rang with the
noise of broken vessels clashing The Venetians defeated at Corfu.
together. Thus the battle lasted a certain space with great slaughter: but
at last the Venetians were defeated. And the victorious Genoueses holding them
straightly to it, filled every place with blood and ruin. All the Venetian
Historians (one Sunarie opinions touching the battle at Corfu.
fore-excepted Author sets down the matter somewhat more at large. For he
(quite contrary to the rest) says, That the Genoueses, being besieged by the
Venetians in Corfu, would have delivered all their ships of w^rre to the
Dandulo's so they might have been suffered to depart thence with lives and
baggage; And that upon denial, their fear turning to despair, they joined
battle. At which time the Genoueses ioining policy with force, laid
fifteen Galleys A strange death of one of the generals of the Venetian Army
Venetians were taken with Andrea Dandulo one of the Generals of the Army, who
with sorrow and shame* during the time that they carried him prisoner toward
Ricoaldo of Ferrara writes, That the Genoueses fought there with fourscore and
eight Galleys, and that thirty Venetian Galleys escaped from the battle,
having kept aloof from the beginning of the fight: likewise that five thousand
prisoners were brought to Genoa: where by reason of the great flaughter of
their own people, they showed small joy for the victory, so as it was
reported every where, that the Genoueses had lost more at Corfu than the
Venetians.

This was the success of the battle in Dalmatia. The report of this loss
brought great fear and sorrow to the City. But the fear of imminent danger
caused, That (all grief being laid apart) they determined speedily to raise
new

Now the Army being furnished, fearing least the Islands and Sea-townes of the
A new Army of the Venetians.
Ionian and Aegean Seas should be unfurnished of Garrisons, five and twenty
Galleys were sent thither under the command of Marco Basseio. These likewise
scuffling with the enemies on the Hellespont, called at this day the straight
of Gallipolis, the issue thereof proved as unfortunate, as the other at Corfu:
The fight is reported to have been cruel, and that after great effusion of
blood* the Venetians good fortune altered, and how they lost sixteen Galleys,
with their boats and mariners, who were taken by the Genoueses, and how the
rest scatteringly scaping from the midst of the throng, speedily fled out of
the Genoueses sight. This new loss was much The Venetians defeated at the
str^ight of Gallipolis.
less than that at Corfu, by reason they did not fight with so great number of
vessels. Cydon in Candy taken by the Genoueses.
For after he had oftentimes renewed his forces, he fought sundry times with
the enemy with different success.

But neither the Historians whom we follow, nor the Annalists make any mention,
in what place, or at what time, or with what success it happened: so as we may
An enforced peace betwixt the venetians and the Genoueses.
hatred still continued. Albeit the Authors whom we follow make no mention how
long this Ligusticke war lasted, nevertheless I gather by diverse
observations, that it lasted not half so long as the former. Yet sure it is,
though it were much shorter, it was more cruel: whereupon (as has been said)
both parties did willingly listen to a peace, not with an intent wholly to lay
by their Arms but only because at that Buconio, which happened before the
other of Tepulo, being much more cruel.

There dwelt in the City at the same time one named Marino Buconio, who was
Buconio his conspiracy.
neither of the Senators degree, nor yet of mean estate, but holding a middle
rank, and other-waies audacious and prompt to all mischief. This man being
impatient The conspirators desseigne.
to kill the Prince and diverse of the Senate. But it is not known whether they
did it to usurp the Segniorie, or else for envy to see Gradonico in such a
dignity, who some years before had been elected by the Senators against their
wills* and therefore had determined to murder him with the Authors of his
creation. This conspiracy being Marino and his accomplices, who being taken and
convicted of the deed, were according The punishment of the guilty.
to their deserts hanged betwixt the two Pillars.

There happened again certain strife with the Paduans, who had fortified a
place New ^ontention with the Paduan^.
in the Lakes, which lie betwixt Chioggia and Albana, named Patabubula. For it
is certain that the Paduans intended so soon as they should have builded the
Fort, and left garrison therein, to make goodly salt pits thereabouts in
despite of the Venetians. But the Senate having sent certain troops of
soldiers thither for the purpose, did forth with raz^ the Fort. The Paduans
took this heinously, but daring not to stir at that time, they did for a
while show themselves neither friends nor enemies to the Venetians.

Some Authors write, that at the same time they made war on Paleologus
Emperor (...) venetian Army against the Emperor Paleologus.
of Greece, because he refused to pay the Venetians a great sum of money
Iustiniano was made General, who speedily sailed into the Ponticke Sea, where
he took diverse Greek sh^ps (I know not whether it were by fight or surprise)
and hanged up all the Greeks that he found in them, because (as I think) by
their malice the Venetians and Baldwin were certain years before driven from
Constantinople. From thence spoiling all along the Seacoast, which lies from
Pera to Argire, he put all to fire and sword, Peace with Paleologus.
whereat the enemy was so amazed, as having paid the sum which was due, he
in a manner with heaued-vp hands obtained peace of the Venetian. The victorious

This victory had in some sort restored the Commonwealth, which languished
after the losses received in the second Ligusticke war, and by her homebred
conspiracy, with hope of better fortune hereafter: at what time the troubles
of Ferrara did How great mischief^ the Emperors abs^nce out of italy has
caused.
throw it head long into a greater danger. It came to pass by the Emperors
ouerlong absence out of Italy, that diverse new Lords had seized on the most
famous Cities of Cis-alpine Gaul, as those of Escalla on Verona, the Gonsagos
on Mantua, and those of Este on Ferrara. Whose ancestors threescore years
before this happened, having driven Salinguerra from them, did in the Popes
name govern the City; then being become masters of Modena, and of the places
near adjoining, Charles the second, King of Naples, married his daughter
Beatrice to Azzon of Este, who at that time was very famous. This man had a
bastard named Frisco, whom he had by another man s wife, who the same year
that his father married Beatrice, surprised him by ambush, and shut him up in A
det^stable act of a bastard.
prison where he died. Azzon being dead, this detestable young man being
favored by the Bishop of the place, and by certain Ferrarois, would have
assured to himself the principality of Ferrara, gotten by parricide, and
seizing almost on all, could not make himself master of the Castle which was
seated on the river of Po, on Bolognia side. To besiege the which (because that
without ships he could not overcome The venetians help the bastard.
the garrison within it for the near neighborhood to the river) he had
recourse The Venetians masters of ^rrara.
among themselves, cried out that they would rely upon the Legates promise,
whereupon followed a great tumult of such as favored the party of the Church,
and their own liberty: This sudden alteration of the inhabitants, did
greatly trouble the rest, and principally Frisco: But the Venetians were so
far from being amazed with this new tumult, as on the contrary having on a
sudden fired the Ferrarois ships, which the tyrant had assembled to besiege
the castle, and given a more sharp The Fort taken by the venetians
assault, they ceased not, till having broken the bridge they entered the Fort
of Thealdo: Frisco being incensed against the Ferrarois, for that they had so
suddenly forsaken him, sent from the strongest places horsemen into the City,
who set fire thereon in diverse parts. The townsmen then seeing themselves
environed with Arms and fire: so soon as the tumult was appeased, they
submitied themselves to the Venetians, making no mention of Frisco, whom they
hated to the death. So soon as they yielded, they had no more outrage done to
them.

The Venetians albeit they would willingly have kept the City for themselves,
which they had received under their protection, nevertheless because they
would Frisco, they kept him in the City: Pope Clement who was then in France,
after that he had understood the misfortune of Ferrara, being vexed to see a
feudatorie City of the Church of Rome to be so unworthily handled by a tyrant,
and at last made subject to the Venetians, he forthwith employed spiritual
Arms against them, and excommunicated them* publishing The venetians
excommunicated by Pope Clement.
over all Europe, that it was lawful for any man to kill the Venetians
wheresoever they could find them, as being excluded from the Communion of
Christians, and enemies to the Church of Rome. This do the Annals make
mention of. But that which strangers write thereof, as it is more gentle, so is
it likely to be more The tenure of the excommunication.
true; That the Venetians were interdicted from the use of the Sacraments: his
Holiness What miseries this excommunication brought to the venetians.
merchandise of great value, wereby commandment of the Princes and Lords
miserably spoiled. As likewise in Calabria, and the marches near to the Sea.
In such sort as the Venetians having every where lost all that they had, were
very badly entreated, and some of them likewise slain. Whereupon it happened
during that time that they abstained from traffic with strangers.

The Popes Legate in the mean time, after he had levied great troops, and
received certain companies of horse from the Florentines, marched to Ferrara
against the Venetians and Frisco. The townsmen at the first news of the
coming of the Papal The City of Ferrara reconered by the Popes Legate.
enter the Fort of Thealdo. The town being recovered, the Legate suddenly
commanded to besiege the Castle. The Venetians (notwithstanding that they had
already sent to the Pope to treat with him about the yealding up of Ferrara,
and that the business could not suddenly be effected in regard of the distance
of the places) fearing to receive some greater loss, did freely yield up the
Castle which held out with a strong garrison.

The Commonwealth being thus afflicted, was assailed by a cruel conspiracy,
The conspiracy of Tepulo.
the which was likely to have overthrown both the liberty and the state.
Baiamonti Tepulo, issued from a noble and illustrious family, but bearing a
devilish mind toward his country, and such peradventure as did Catiline in
time past to his, making use (as it is to be thought,) of the times calamity,
wherein he perceived the commonwealth to be tossed up and down with so many
miseries, conspired against it, together with diverse of the same quality and
means, whom he had dealt with, and made partakers of his dessigne. It is
reported that they concluded at a certain day appointed for the purpose to
enter the Palace by force with all their friends and confederates, and then,
the Prince and Senators being in an instant murdered, The conspirators purpose.
to make themselves masters of the Commonwealth, and after the division betwixt

It is reported that upon the appointed day (as if heaven would be the
foreteller of Strange prodigies happened that day that the conspi^acie should
have bee^e executed.
of so damnable an enterprise) there arose a horrible tempest, intermingled
with hail and rain, the air being filled with lightning and thunder. But the
conspirators making use of this prodigious tempest, in steed of being amazed
thereat, ran armed with great noise to the Palace. The enterprise being a
little before reported to the Prince and Senate in great fear, did much amaze
them. The alarm was suddenly given over the whole City by men sent for that
purpose, who cried out aloud, that it behooved all men to take Arms, and to
run speedily to the Palace to the rescue of the Prince and Senate, if they
desired to preserve the Commonwealth. They r^n thither from all parts, but the
conspirators in the mean time had filled the great and large Mark with armed
men, and without delay assailed the Palace. Then the Senators (for diverse were
with their weapons already run to their rescue) The conspira (...) (...) the
Ducall palace.
did not only sustain the conspirators assault, but did valiantly repulse
them. There was a sore fight. Liberty was the ma^ke they aimed it* On the
oneside, these traitors had their weapons in hand against it: And on the other,
the Prince and Senate would either die or preserve it. In troth it was a
lamentable spectacle to behold a City founded in liberty, grown up in
liberty, to maintain the which those ancient Venetian Fathers founders of the
same, had so often sought with barbarous and cruel nations, and shed so much
blood by Sea and Land, to have at last taken Arms against it self, and to
desire by those Arms to ruin it self, and to call Baiamont The death of
Baiamont.
perceiving it not good for him to tarry there, as he was going home to his
own house through the Mercers street, a woman forth of a window threw a
mortar on his head, with which blow he fell half dead to the ground, and being
there stayed by his hurt, was slain outright by those which pursued him, who
soon after The pun^shment of the conspirators.
returned to the Palace. Some of the conspirators which were Patricians by
birth being taken on the Dice bridge, and brought back into the Princes
presence were forthwith beheaded. Whereupon that place has ever since borne
the name of Maupas. And that the memory of these wretches might be utterly
extinct, it was decreed in all places to deface the Arms of Baiamont and his
accomplices: and that on pain of life no man to be so hardy as to keep or set
them up in any place whatsoever. A p^ntion gi^en to the woman who slew Baiamont.
Their houses were razed to the ground, and all their goods confiscate: Some
say that Baiamont his Palace stood in the same place, where at this day the
Hall of the shambles of Rialto stands. There was likewise a pension appointed
out of the public treasury for the woman and her heirs, who with the blow of
the mortar stayed Baiamont. The City was delivered from this conspiracy (as
some say) on Vitis the martyr, whereupon in memory thereof every year on the
same day, the Clergy do go in procession to Saint Vitis Church being
accompanied by the Prince and Senate, to give thanks to God for the
preservation of the Commonwealth, and at their return, a solemn banquet is
made in the Palace. Another opinion concerning the ^ssue of the conspiracy.
Some Authors say that the issue of this conspiracy was different from that
which we have spoken of, and that the Prince was aduertized of the whole matter
before they went to Arms. VVhereupon Michaeli and Gu^do Canuto were sent from
the Senate to Baiamont, to entreat him not to attempt any thing against his
country, and that the conspirators did hardly suffer these men to return with
their lives. And after they had taken arms, and burnt and spoiled certain
places, they fought openly Hugolino Iustiniano (who at the same time was
Podestate of Chioggia, who came with troops of soldiers to the rescue of the
Prince) Baiamont and his adherents (who fortified themselves on the otherside
of Rialto) being daunted, did yield themselves upon the Prince and Senates
word, on condition, that all those who were guilty should depart forth of the
Venetian territory, and by that means there was almost no City of Cisalpine
Gaul, nor village on all the Seacoast of Flaminia and Forli, wherein some of
these banished conspirators were not. But the former opinion is most true.

Those of Zara presuming on these calamities did revolt the sixth time, having
The sixth rebellion of Zara.
chased away Michaeli Morosini the Governor. They forthwith sent forces to
recover it under the command of Belletto Iustiniano. In the mean time the
Prince deceased in the twelfth year and ninth month of his government. His
body was honorably Cyprians Church.

MARINI GEORGIO, the 50. Duke of Uenice.





MArini Georgio surnamed the Holy, did for his wisdom succeed him. All the
time of his Principality which lasted not a full year the Venetians were
interdicted by the Pope by reason of the affairs of Ferrara, which caused the
Commonwealth to receive many discomodities as well at home as abroad. For we
have already said in what danger the conspiracy of Tepulo had put it: And
then soon after, the Army had no good success before Zara.

Bellet was gone into Dalmatia with the Venetian troops, among which were a
thousand horse, who by the Senats appointment were commanded by Dalmasio a
Spaniard, a valiant man, who being at Ferrara in the Popes pay, had
constrained the Venetians to leave the City, and to retire into the Castle
with great loss. The Venetian Army being encamped in the next Island to the
City, this Dalmasio landed all his Cauallerie on the firm land, and encamped
very near to Zara, fortifying his camp with good Trenches and Rampires.
Bannus commanded in the City with a good Garrison. He coming forth of the
City likewise with his troops, did lodge within a mile of Dalmasio. The whole
Summer was almost spent without any memorable action: And Harvest already
drewnere without any hope alat to tak the Bannus propounded certain triuiall
conditions of peace: which taking none effect, he began to use his cunning,
and dealt secretly with Dalmasio, to make him leave the Venetians party and to
enter into the City, saying, That so soon as he should come thither, he
should receive ten thousand crowns, and should command therein with great
entertainment so long as he would; and that the inhabitants should defray his
charges for corn and all other necessaries for his expense. And that when he
should please to return into Italy or else where, they would furnish him with
ships, for himself, his followers and their baggage.

This thus concluded. Dalmasio made show to be weary of so long a siege, and
determined Dalmation the Spaniard proue^ a traitor to the Venetians.
the next day to give a general assault to the City: then having imparted his
design to diverse of his trusty friends, he willed them that when they should
come to the assault, they should secretly bring from the Camp whatsoever they
made most account of, and should place it and themselves in the foremost
ranckes, to the end that without any impediment they might retire into the
City. The next

All men did infinitely wonder (as has been said) of this sudden change of
Dalmasio, and were afraid least this perfidious Traitor had practiced some
worse matter against them, whereupon in haste, for that they would receive no
greater loss, (for it was to be feared that those of the City joined to the
troops which Bannus commanded not far from thence would make some sallie
upon them) they retired all their Cauallerie to the ships. Dalmasio being
come into the City, and to show The treaty of peace broken.
and understanding likewise that the inhabitants did suspect him, leaving off
his negotiation of peace, and not desiring to endanger himself any longer
there, he embarked himself in the vessels which were promised him by the
agreement, and sailed toward Apulia. But being in the maine Sea, a terrible
tempest arose on a sudden, Dalmation divinely punished for his treachery.
by the which being tossed here and there, and part of his ships being dashed
Marini lasted makes me think, that the siege of Zara was not discontinued,
but that it held out till they yielded: which was (as I find it) under Prince
Souranza. Marini in the mean time builded at his own coast a great Church and
Covent to Saint Dominicke, where he founded a College for students in
divinity: He built hard by The godle de^ds done by Prince Marini.
that place an Hospital which he endued with rich rents, to the end that those
who Mark, unto whom for these purposes he left the managing of all his wealth.
After these godly works accomplished, he deceased the tenth month of his
government, and was buried in the Church of the Twins.



GIOVANNI SOVRANZA, the 51. Duke of Uenice.





GIouanni Souranza a man of a very ancient family, gentle and courteous, was
chosen in his place: soon after his election, hereceaued those of Zara under
his obedience, but with such liberty and gentle conditions, as diverse thought,
that thereby he ministered matter unto them of a Zara reduced under the
Uenetians obedience.
seventh revolt. Vitalis Michaeli was sent thither as Governor. About the same
time the number of the Procurators of Saint Mark was increased to six, being
before then much less. It is said likewise that at the same time the
foundations were laid at Capesalina as far as the Church of the Trinity: and
that at the same time The Authors discourse on the doings of the Pope and
Dandulo.


The City, which till then was interdicted by the Pope, was freed from it by
the most charitable affection of Francisco Dandulo sent for that purpose to his
Holiness. This man (as it is reported) being with great difficulty admitted
to the presence of Pope Clement (who did infinitely hate the Venetians about the
Ferrara business) by a wonderful example of piety toward his country, and
with zeal to Religion, continued a long time prostrate on the ground before
the Popes table, with an Iron chain about his n^ke like a dog, until his
wrath being appeased, he took away that note of infamy from his country,
whereupon, ^uer since, he The great piety of Francisco Dandulo.
was surnamed the Dog, which title was given him abroad and at home, because
Dandulo was not so religious, as that of the Popes was bitter, (I will not say
proud) to suffer (not being moved thereat) a noble man, sent from the most
Christian people, the noblest of Italy, to entreat him to blotte out a
public infamy, to couch so long like a dog at his feet. Sure I am, the
example of our heavenly King (whose Vickar and Vicegerent he named himself)
might have moved him, who did not deny pardon to the miserable thief, so
soon as he demanded it. It may be thought that the Venetians had endured
misery enough for seizing on the Castle of a neighbor city (though
peradventure Frisco being their Allie, than upon any promise or desire of
booty) having been lamentably robed and spoiled in all the faires of Europe,
lost a great quantity of gold, and (which is worse) diverse among them brought
into bondage, and diverse likewise murdered. He satisfied his haughty wrath,
with the infamous estate of this man. But whether he were satisfied or no by
this act, posterity nevertheless shall for ever much more extol the patience
of the one, than the ouer-great severity of the other: He dealt hardly with
him (as I have said) because it was in his power so to do, and this man made a
religious use thereof, for that it so pleased him: Some peradventure, but not
very many, will approve the Popes deed; but assuredly all men will not only
prefer this man's piety, but highly admire it.

The City likewise was not unthankful to him, but gave him public
demonstration, that it held nothing at so high a rate in her Citizens as
meekness and clemency. They were not long ere they recompensed him. For they
dealt so carefully, Clement, his wrath being appeased, showed himself
afterward truly meek and clement. For, besides the abolishing of the
interdiction, he decreed Dandulo his piety acknowledged
likewise, That the Venetians should never afterward be excommunicated by the
Popes for the like occasion, or for any other whatsoever. And his pleasure was
that this his declaration should be enregistred.

About the same time Iustiniano surnamed Justinian, went to Sea with fourteen
Galleys* He had commission to scour the Sea and to meet with eleven Galleys
of Genoa, (who as it was reported) had run to diverse faires in Europe to
reprise, and False reports against the Genoueses.
such as desired novelty, and to see these two people at odds. The Genoueses
who dwelt in that City, fearing under this pretense that the Venetian would
hurt them, promised him by solemn oath all (...) and assistance. Iustiniano
thinking it A deed worthy of a General of (...) Army.
most unjust to hurt those who had not offended them, without offering them any
hurt brought back his Army safely to Venice.

This was done abroad. But in the mean^ time at home in the City, they began
somewhat to enlarge the old Arcenall, which being since then greatly
augmented, Description of the Arcenall.
seems a far off a little City, so that it may be more properly called a
Repositorie of all things, than an Arcenall: For, besides an hundred Galleys,
which are there always ready, and have never yet wet Ankor, but are only
supported by their bridges, there is to be seen almost as many half made up,
and some of them almost made up, with an infinite number of other small boats,
and so great quantity of of all kind of Armor and munition, as a very huge
Army may be casily furnished therewith.

It is thought that about the same time a nauall Army was sent forth for the
guard of the Islands and Seacoast of the Ionian and Aegean Seas, which
nevertheless Iustiniano who certain years before had been with a Fleet in
the Chersonessus of Tauris, was commanded the twelfth A new Army against the
Genoueses.
year of this Princes government to go forth with forty Galleys against the
Genoueses: who sailed into the Ponticke Sea, where he sunk diverse ships of
war of Genoa to the number of four and thirty, who had invaded the
dominions belonging to the Venetians. Those of Pera being danted at the ruin
of their fellows, and desirous quickly to fortify themselves, filled certain
ships full of earth and other weighty matter which they suncke before the
City. Iustiniano nevertheless came and besieged the town, and caused wooden
castles and other engines of war to be set up in the ships, to batter it.
Which the Genoueses perceiving, and well Those of Pera censtrained to sue for
peace.
weighing the great danger which threatened them, turning their defense to
entreaties, they besought the Venetians to cease the battery; saying that they
would recompense the losses which the Venetians had sustained by them, together
with the expense of that great Army. On these conditions peace being granted
the Army returned safe (...) Venice.

Much about the same time, or soon after, there arose a new rebellion in
Candie. New stirs in Candie soon suppressed.
Iustiniano, who in the last voyage to Greece made an approach to Pera with the
Venetian Galleys, commanded the Island. So soon as he had levied all his
forces against th^se new tumults, he used such diligence, as in a moment he
suppressed them, and reduced the fearful Candiots to their former obedience.
In the interim of these affairs in Grecia, they treated in Italy with the
Paduans, about the turning back of the ordinary course of the Brent into the
Sea. The Paduans were at the same time molested by Mastin of Escalla. Wherefore
Clement, the Venetians never had worse enemies than the Paduans: And because
since then, there had been no reconciliation betwixt them, the Paduans, being
vanquished by those of Escalla, were brought into bondage: But the Venetians
never ceased, till they had driven the Tyrant forth The Venetians restore the
Paduans to their liberty.
of the City, and restored the Paduans to their ancient liberty, committing
the government of the City to Marsilio Carrario, who afterward did carefully
cherish the friendship and alliance of the Venetians. This is all which
happened abroad or at home during the Principality of Souranza. Some
nevertheless say, that in his time Marks Church where the Font stands.

FRANCISCO DANDVLO, the Duke of Venice.



FRancisco Dandulo surnamed the Dog (as has been said) was chosen in his
sted.

At the beginning of his government, victuals being very dear in the City,
he dispatched certain Galleys and ships of burden into Nicholao Phalerio,
who brought home such quantity of wheat, as in few days (to the peoples great
contentment) the scarcity c^assed. At the same time eight Galleys of Genoa
took two Abundance of Corn in the City.
of Venice, returning from France in trade of Merchandise. The goods within
them were taken by the Genoueses: but the sailers, and mariners (for that they
must either die or be taken prisoners) leapt into the Sea, and by swimming
saved themselves on the neighbour-shoares: The Polani and the Valesians, who
had bin The Polans and Val^sia^s brought under the obedience of the Uenetians.
a long time subject to the Patriark of Aquileia, did voluntarily yield
themselves to the Venetians: whereat the Patriarch being incensed, did
speedily levy troops of Soldiers to surprise them: The Venetians on the
other side (because they would not seem to abandon those who of their own
motion had lately come to their obedience) sent great forces into Histria under
the command of Iustiniano surnamed Justinian. The Patriarch of Aquileia,
knowing himself not of force sufficient Agreement with the Patriarch of
Aquileia.
to with-stand the Venetians, did without any memorable fight, resign unto
them Pola, and Valles, upon certain conditions whereof the Authors make no
mention.

Six Genoa Gallie^ fought with eight of Venice conducted by Thomaso Viari,
deputed for the guard of the Islands and Sea-coastes; in which fight the
Venetian was defeated with the loss of five Galleys, and the other three
escaped, and came home to Venice. With this loss the Senate was much
displeased: who being informed that it happened by the negligence of Viari,
committed him to prison, where Viari confined to perpetual prison. The great
incursions of the Turks.
(as it is reported) he ended his days.

The Turks in the mean time not satisfied with driving the Christians forth

The Venetians at the pursuit of Pope John the two and twentieth, had dealt
with the French King, unto whom were sent Philippo Bellegno, Blazio Zeni, and
Marino Morosini, to conclude a voyage against the Turks. Some Annalles in sted
of Pope John set down Pope Nicholas; but they err greatly therein, seeing
that from Pope Nicholas the fourth till that very time, there was no Pope of
that name.

In this Treaty made with the French King concerning the recovery of Syria,
The enterprise against the Turks broken.
affectionate to Christian Religion) the preparation of this goodly enterprise
by little and little vanished into smoke. The Barbarians waxing more insolent
Pietro Zeni was made General. This man pursuing the Barbarians in The Turks
p^ to flight by the Venetians.
all places, did with marvelous good success free the whole Sea-coastes and
the Islands near to Syria, from the incursions and spoils of the Turks:
Diverse others likewise did with good success fight for Christendom with that
cruel Nation; but chiefly the Venetians, who took from them an infinite
number of ships, when by Zeni his command all the Prisoners were forthwith
hanged.

It is reported, That at the same time the Sun suffered a marvelous eclipse
A wonderful eclipse.
at noone-daie for the space of three hours. Prince Dandulo caused a new coin
to be stamped, called Mediani. The power of those of Escalla was at the The
power of those of Escalla.
same time wonderfully increased, in such sort as all men far and near over
all Lombardie stood in awe of them: For besides Verona, Vincenza, and Bressia,
which they before possessed, they had newly seized on Parma, after they had by
treachery driven thence the Rossi: And they had already surprised Feltre,
Belluna, and Ceneda from John King of Boheme. Treuiso likewise (according to
some Authors, namely those which have written the Venetian History) did obey
them. Blondus nevertheless says, That Treuiso belonged to the Venetians, at
such time as they began the war against Mastin of Escalla. But I can hardly
approve his Mastin; whereof we are to speak. They had likewise (to the end
that nothing might be wanting to their happiness) subjected the City of
Padua, a little before the war began. For Marsilio, named by others Vbertino
Carrario, being not able to preserve that City in her ancient liberty, by
reason of their civil dissension, suffered it to fall into bondage; whereunto
because he had so easily consented, Escalla Carrarians to command the City in
his name. Mastin waxing proud with this good success (following humane
covetousness, which knows less how to behave it self in prosperity than in
adversity) resolving to disturb the Venetians, speedily built a Fort in the
lakes near to Petabubula, which he manned with a strong Garrison. The
Venetians, knowing whereunto his dessignes tended fortified The course of the
war with those of Escalla.
a place likewise which they held, not far from thence. Afterward they
consulted by what force or means they might tame and daunt this infestuous
Tyrant, who having ouerthrown the neighboring forces panted (as it were) with
desire to master theirs. And therefore there was some likelihood, that after he
had assured his own estate, he would forth with make war on the Venetians.

To prevent Mastin of his purpose, (for he was the eldest of all the family
of Escalla) the Venetians hastened the war. His forces, as they were the
greatest of all his neighbors, so were they the most maligned: For worldly
matters have this property, That there is nothing which so much procures
envy and hatred, as too great felicity. Although the number of those who
envied him were very great, The Venetians nevertheless, had least caus^ of
all men to look after him, in respect that holding nothing as yet in the firm
Land, they had till then satisfied themselves with being strong at Sea, not
caring for more, esteeming their fortune great enough, in regard of their
Sea-traffike: This then being truth, the Venetians had no cause to fear the
Tyrant, although his forces were terrible to others, as to Obisso of Este,
Philippo Gonzaga, Azzo Vis-conte, and the Florentines in Tuscanie: who because
he had taken the City of Luca not far from them, stood in great fear of his
power.

Pietro Rossis of Parma, with his brethren, all valiant and brave men, were
capital enemies to the house of Escalla, for that Mastin, under pretense of
future alliance, had driven them forth of Parma, and laid plots for their
lives, which they having notice of, fled to Pontremolla, where Mastin did
straightly besiege them, at such time as the Venetians with others, confedered
themselves against him.

After diverse Ambassages sent from party to party, the Florentines and all
the Ledgue and alliance against the family of Escalla.
Princes of Trans-alpine Gaul, who were jealous of the forces of those of
Escalla, Mastin and his whole family* But some Authors affirm that the
Florentines alone did allie themselves at the beginning, and that the rest came
after the war was begun. John King of Bohem did likewise join with them, for
the recovery of the Cities which were taken from him in Italy: Yet for all
that the Venetians were the first motives of the war. It is reported that
they never undertook war with more courage; not for What moved the Venetians
to make war on those of Escalla.
fear or envy to them, being free from both these passions, (as has been
said) but because they thought it well beseeming people, borne in liberty,
mighty and rich, to defend as well the liberty of others, and chiefly of
their neighbors, as their own.

The end of the first Book of the second Decade.
THE SECOND BOOK Venice.
The Contents of the second Book of the second Decad.
PIETRO ROSSIS, the Parmesan, being made General of the Army of the League,
defeateth the Cauallerie of those of Escalla, near to Luca in Tuscanie.
ESCALLA recouereth Vderza, which he had a little before lost. ROSSIS, so soon
as he had received the Enseignes of S. MARK, comes and encampeth before La
Mot. The Venetians mercenarie Soldiers slain by treachery at Mestra. ROSSIS,
having with his Army passed the River Burnt, seizes on the enemies camp. The
Venetian Army scattered here and there about the Country near to Padua; with
the encounter which it had near to Verona. Those of Cognilian yield to the
Venetians. Sedition in Padua. Diverse Ambassadors arrive at Venice at one time
to treat of peace. Padua restored to her ancient liberty; the faction of
ESCALLA Padua given to the Carrarians. PIETRO and MARSILIO DE ROSSIS, soon die
one after another. Diverse battles won from the enemies on the confines of
Vincenza, and Cremona. GALEAS Visconte takes Bergamo and Bressia, from those
of Escalla. Peace with those of Escalla after the loss of the City of
Treuiso, and diverse other places. The City afterward protected from a great
inundation at the intercession of S. MARK.

THe league against the Tyrants being concluded, the War concluded against
those of Escalla.
Senate commanded that all those who were able to bear Arms, should be
enrolled. It is reported that People come from all parts to the Venetian Army.
and Italy, to serve them, who being desirous to take the Venetians pay, after
they had trauersed Tuscanie and Flaminia (the passages through Lombardie being
shut up) arrived at Rauenna. For all places on this side and beyond the Po,
with whatsoever lies under the Alps, (Bolognia and Ferrara excepted) were
against the Venetians. For neither Luchin Visconte who commanded in Milan, nor
Philippo Gonzaga, had as yet showed themselves to be against Escalla. And
albeit the Bolognians were at the same time divided among themselves, and
excommunicated by the Pope, because they had driven the Legate Apostolical
forth of the City, they did nevertheless freely suffer the Venetians, to
levy Soldiers in their Territories, with whom soon after, they also joined
their forces.

Ostasio Polentano, at that time Lord of Rauenna, affecting the Venetians, did
willingly receive the Frenchmen, who arrived in the City, and sent them
speedily in small boats to Venice. There was provision made in the City, near
to the Church

There lived at the same time Pietro Rossis of Parma, accounted among the
Noblest Pietro Rossis declared General of the Uenetians Army.
families of Italy, a man most skillful in martial discipline. The Venetians
(notwithstanding he was absent) elected him General of their Army. This man
albeit he was straightly besieged by Mastin, imagining nevertheless that the
time was come, with other men's forces to revenge the wrongs done to himself
and his brethren, determined because he would not loose such an occasion (for
the Venetians had already entreated him by letters to come thither) to pass
in disguise through

There lived with him his wife, a very virtuous and chaste Lady, who loved her
husband dearly, and was not ignorant of his most secret affairs. She
considering with her self, into what danger he exposed his life, and how great
the attempt was which he undertook, casting her self weeping at his feet,
entreated him after this manner.

The complaint of Pietro Rossi's Wife.
FOr Gods sake (dear husband) and by the love and bond of Matrimony, desist
from this dangerous enterprise, and weigh with your self how your estate
stands, and in what place you leave my wretched self with your Daughters.
(It is reported that he had six Daughters, who coming all about him, drenched
in tears, made the same request like their Mother.) Alas (said she) what
shall become of me, if, thou being taken by the enemies ambush (which God
forbid) I should lose thee, and of these poor wretches likewise, who besides
God, have none other hope but in thee? Do you think the arrogant enemy will
omit such an opportunity, or will not rather attempt by some sudden assault,
to win both this place and us, destitute of thine aid? who doubts but he
will soon win all? But, alas, what shall then become of me, and these poor
Wenches? Do thou think they will spare the honor of thine, who have not
spared thy life. This unruly enemy will leap for joy, when he shall have
power to quench his hatred toward thee by the dishonor of thy Daughters, or
else he will command his Soldiers to torment them: He will spoil, rob, and
burn, those poor means which Fortune has left us. Who doubts but that then
their condition will be better, which shall not live to see any of these
mischiefs. I poor wretched and unhappy creature shall see it. But what did I
say? see it? nay, rather shall feel whatsoever poor prisoners are wont to
expect from a cruel and merciless enemy. If the fear of thine own life
moves thee not; this at the least which I have spoken ought to move thee: All
this which I have spoken, I do as verily believe will come to pass, as I hold
that to be true which I see before mine eyes: Tarry then here still, dear
husband, and with those small means thou have continue to defend thy self and
us, let me entreat thee to put off thy journey till our affairs stand on surer
terms. I hope so soon as the enemy shall have notice that the Venetians have
entered his territories beyond the Po, that he will speedily depart hence, and
then thou may safely go to thy charge. Thus did she speak.

Pietro Rossis answer to his wife.
THe husband being moved with her tears, albeit he was valiant and courageous,
gave her few words: he knew all that she had said was true, but to comfort her
thus afflicted, and to put her in hope. He entreated her to be comforted, to
hope the best, telling her that she should shortly see him return with place
of command to overthrow the power of those, who by treason had driven him from
his dignity, and had attempted against his life, and those of his family.
That he did verily believe that the enemy would soon depart thence, but in
the mean time he entreated her to remain firm and constant, and to look
carefully to his children, and to the affairs of his house: As for the Guard
of the Fort, he told her, that he did repose so much trust in the fidelity and
valor of his own soldiers, as that they would sufficiently defend her, and
maintain the siege so long, as the enemy should at last whether he would or
no be enforced to raise his camp: Besides, that he was of necessity to make
have, least he should seem to contemn so honorable a charge, That the
passing through the enemies camp was not so dangerous a matter as she thought;
For diverse great Captains had in times past, not only gone through their
enemies camp in disguise, but had likewise stayed there for a time till they
had carefully enquired of the state of the enemy: He willed her then to cease
weeping and lamenting, and no more to entreat him to the contrary, because he
was of necessity to depart. He said moreover, that men being incited by
virtue, did attempt diverse great enterprises, but that necessity made them to
execute greater: And thus after he had recommended her, himself, Sentence of a
great Captain.
his children, and household, to his friends whom he left in Garrison, he gave
order for his departure.

Some Authors say, that he left one of his brethren to guard the place, and
others think that he sent them before to Venice, where after that their
brother was chosen General, they were made Gentlemen of Venice. Thus after
that he had embraced Rossis departs in disguised habit.
all his people, about midnight he departed in disguised habit, accompanied
with one only faithful and valiant friend, and went through the enemies camp
to Florence, where he was received with great joy of all men. But being
diligent, and

Five hundred horse sent by Mastin to guard the City, sallied forth on the
other side of the town, and came galloping into a forest, through which they
knew the enemy must pass at his return, where they ambusht themselves. As he
returned, Rossis first exploit.
those of the Ambuscado breaking forth with great cries amazed those in the
Vantguard, who conducted the booty, and did defeat and put them to rout:
diverse Rossis being very quick and sudden, after he had sharply rebuked them
for their flight stayed them, and commanded them to follow his ensigns, and
take courage; then did he bravely receive the enemy, who being joyful for his
imaginary victory, came toward him. The fight began very cruel, but the
Captains presence turned the fear of his soldiers upon the enemies, who with
great slaughter were defeated, and pursued to the City, where the booty and
ensigns were not only rescued, but those of the enemies Pietro Rossis his
first victory.
were taken, the which Pietro returning victorious to Florence, commanded
Escalla should by his conduct be in short time abared, judging him worthy of
the place which was given him.

In such reputation was Rossis: who being ready to march toward Venice,
tarried for the troops which the Florentines promised by their agreement to
send, when as the Venetians in the mean time had begun the war, but not with
so good success as was done in Tuscan. Gerard Caminensis, an allie of the
Venetians, having Girard Caminensis takes Uderza.
taken arms against those of Escalla, departed about midnight from the City
of Metta, (commonly called the Motte) and seized on Vderza. Mastin upon report
of the taking thereof (some say that it was Albert, who made this journey)
marched speedily with his troops toward the enemy: and being come into the
territory of the Vderzans, he sent his best armed horse before the City, and
himself with the residue of his troops followed a far off, with an intent
to enclose the enemy if he came Escalla suddenly issued forth, and enforced
the Garrison to fly toward the City: Then the horsemen by the tyrants
commundement alighted, and assailing the City on every side, they greatly
amazed those that were within, who were few in number, in respect of the
largeness of the place: so soon then as those of Escalla came to the assault,
the Garrison distrusting their own small number, forsook the walls and fled*
Then the assailants, after they had broken up the gates, entered and slew the
enemy in all places. Gerard made one of the number.

Vderza being recoueted, the enemy marched toward Camino, which he likewise
Albert of Escalla recouereth Vderza.
took in few days, after that he had corrupted the Garrison with money: It is
thought that if he had gone to the Motte, he might with ease have taken it. But
by his negligence which commonly follows a great conquest, the soldiers
wanting Want of a General.
victuals and a warlike Leader to conduct them, running here and there without
observing martial discipline, for sooke their ensigns. The Venetians in the
mean time stirred not. For Marsilio, who at the beginning came to Venice,
deputed by his brother, was leauying forces, and being not yet strong enough,
he durst not march Marsilio was left by his brother in Pontremolle to sustain
the siege. And the Venetian Annalists write, that he was at the same time in
Venice.

Mastin of Escalla sent commissioners to Venice to demannd a peace, offering to
Mastin beggeth peace of the Venetians.
withdraw his Garrison, and to raze the Fort which he had builded in the lake
near to Petabubula. But they obtaining nothing of the Venetians, returned
without any peace. Rossis in the mean time with fifteen hundred horse, namely
eight hundred which he had received of the Florentines, three hundred from the
Bolognians, and the residue of Obisso of Este, passing through the country of
Ferrara, came to Pietro de Rossis arriueth at Venice.
Chioggia, where embarking himself with a few of his followers, he came to
Venice. A troop of Senators at his landing went to receive and gratify him,
and brought him directly to the Prince, who spoke thus unto him.

The Princes speech to de Rossis.
GEnerous Pietro, thine excelllent virtue so much renowned every where, has
been the cause, that being to make war on the Lords of Escalla for diverse
injuries received from them, we have esteemed thee alone among all the
Captains of Italy, worthy to assist us, chiefly in so difficult a business.
We have thought it fit from the beginning to elect a General, to whose hands
we might commit our forces to fight on the firm land. But according to the
common report, we have found no man, I will not say that surpasses thee, (for
that cannot be) but that can in any sort equal thee, either in counselor
valor. We therefore have chosen thee being absent, and busied in a trouble
some war, to command all our forces: Being assured that it will come to
pass if thou be such an one as all men report thee, and we hope that thou will
prove, that so soon as thou shall have subjected unto us this proud enemy,
thou will free both thy self and thine from this war, and bravely revenge
all the wrongs which thou have received from him. It is almost incredible to
tell how great the hope is which we have conceived, that our affairs will
prosper, having thee for our General in this war, which have as much reason
to sight for us as for thy self. It is no matter whether an enemy be
overthrown by reward or hatred. His ruin then being as profitable to thee as
to us, this our exhortation may seem needless. We entreat thee nevertheless
well and faithfully to govern what shall be committed to thy charge, as
becomes an associate and a good General. Opportunity the mother of all
things will show thee time and place fitter for thy designs: And we on the
other side will furnish thee with soldiers, victuals, munition, and abundantly
with the principal sinue of war, which is money. Take then these public
ensigns which to thy self and to the Commonwealth likewise we pray may prove
most fortunate, the which shall Rossis receives the ensigns of Saint Mark.
follow thee wheresoever thou shall command, and thy soldiers them. And we
beseech God to favor thy proceedings, to the end that thou may bring them
back unto us, not only safe, but victorious.

So soon as Rossis had received the signs of his office, he answered in few
words the Princes speech, leaving behind him a greater hope of himself, than
if he had used many words in his own praise: and presently he departed with
all his troops. Blondus writes that he came first to Treuiso: thinking
thereby that the same City was then subject to the Venetians: Others think,
that it was on the confines of Padua and Treuiso: and some who are most worthy
of belief (for the enemy then held all those places which they name) affirm
that the Rendeuous of the whole Army was at the Motte. In that place he made
the general musters of his Army, A general reuiew of the Army.
and found that he had, besides the succors of the Allies, four thousand five
hundred horse, and six thousand foot, besides great numbers of victuallers,
soldiers boys, and such like people which follow a camp. The Earls of
Colalta, who before had held the party of Escalla, came to the camp well
accompanied, as did diverse others from the confines of Forli, from beyond the
mounts, and out of

Mastin, so soon as he understood the departure of Pietro Rossis, and what he
had Mastin raises his camp from before Pontremolle,
done at the same time before Luca, whilst he remained at Florence, raised his
camp from before Pontremolle, and resolved first of all to succor the Luquois,
and to put a strong Garrison into the City, for he feared least his furious
enemy should snatch that town from him. But having notice that he was called
to Venice, and learning by his spies what abundant warlike preparations the
Venetians made, he speedily came to his Army at Verona. Albert brother to
Mastin, had in the mean time placed a strong Garrison in Padua, and did
nothing without the advice and Vbertino Carrario, whereby we may perceive that
it was Albert, and not Mastin, who was far from thence (as all authors
affirm) which recovered Vderza. Thus Mastin being careful to epsy all means
how to frustrate the Venetians first attempts, or if that could not be, at
leastwise to foreslow them by some hindrance, not being able to do it by open
force, had recourse to deceit.

A certain man called Thomasino commanded at the same time in Mestra, an
inward Treachery practiced by Mastin
friend of Spineta Malespina, who was in Mastins camp, in whose name he held
that place, situated on the Treuisan territory near to the lakes of Venice.
This man by the counsel of Spineta, enterprised a villainous act against the
Venetians. He agreed and promised to yield the City to the Venetians, provided
that they Albert and Spineta entered the town at midnight with certain troops
of horse and foot. The Venetians, albeit they held the traitor sufficiently
bound unto them in regard of the hostages, thinking that they ought not to be
ouer-credulous, would not suffer any natural Venetian to be of that
night-enterprise. Five hundred stranger-Souldiours were sent thither, upon
whom so soon as they entered the City a little before day, the Soldiers of
Escalla breaking forth of of their Ambushe made a furious assault. The number
of the prisoners was few: as those whose lives, fortune and danger had rather
saved, than the intent of the enemies; all the rest were slain: Then causing
his Cauallerie on a sudden to sallie forth on those which were without, very
few escaped. Albert thinking he had given the Venetians a great blow, leapt
for joy, and mocked the prisoners, as if they had been natural Venetians. But

Rossis in the mean time being in the Treuisan territory, ready to march
against Peitro Rossis his ^ration of his soldiers.
the enemy, spoke to his Soldiers in few words, exhorting them chiefly to
show themselves in all occurents, valiant and courageous, and diligently to
observe martial discipline, saying that he desired no mutinous or careless
Soldier, but such as were valiant upon the enemy, patient in travel, and
obedient to his command: And therefore if there were any amongst his troops
that would not be such, he

Mastin being aduertized that the enemies were dislodged, fearing least they
The suburbs of Mestra burnt by Mastin.
would seize on the suburbs of Mestra, commanded them all to be burnt upon a
day, to the great grief of the inhabitants. Rossis after he had passed the
River of Anaxus, marching through the Treuisan, and perceiving a far off the
flames and

The Venetian Army was already on the banks of the River Burnt, when Brave
resolution of a great Captain.
news came suddenly to Padua, that the enemy approached. The Paduans hereupon
began to murmr, and scorning the Tyrants told them, that they should do
well to go and take arms to hinder the Venetian from passing the River, if
they would be accounted so valiant as they made show for; They on the other
side being loath to give any token of fear, commanded the Soldiers
forthwith to arm themselves. Albert having made choice of a selected troop
marched forth of Albert of Escall sleeth.
the City, to oppose himself against the enemy. But Rossis after he had
passed the River by night, had raised his Camp before day from the further
side thereof; and afterward marched cheerfully in order of battle against
the enemy, who was said to approach, thinking that the hour was come wherein
he should revenge so many injuries received from those of Escalla, or else in
performing the part of a good Captain die valiantly fighting. Albert having
certain notice of the enemies passage, and that he marched toward him with an
intent to fight, being therewith daunted did suddenly turn back: which being
perceived by those that were with him, dispersing themselves here and there,
they forsook their Camp which was newly victuailed in abundance. The
Venetian, after he had made good cheer The Sacceans yield to the Uenetians.
therewith, ran furiously to the veriegates of the City, burning and
spoiling all places near about, the General having forbidden his Soldiers
to murder or ravish. But whilst they thus so spoiled far and near, those
of Pieue de Sacco came weeping to the Venetians, beseeching them to take
compassion on them, offering to do whatsoever they should command, and freely
to furnish the Army with victuailes. The Sacceans being received upon their
oath were enjoined to bring victuailes to the Camp which lay near their
City: From thence Rossis sent an Herald of Arms to Mastin, (who upon the
report of the Venetians march was come Rossis challenges Mastin.
to Padua) to acquaint him with his desire to fight with him with displaied
enseignes: And that if he were so valiant and experienced in Arms as he
boasted of, he would wish him not to refuse the battle, but rather to come
forth into the field, and to make proof which of them were most valiant.
Mastin made no reply to this challenge.

Rossis perceiving he could not draw his enemy to fight: without any longer
stay Anthenor laid the first foundations of Chioggia
tarried at Chioggia, joined themselves by little and little to the Army. This
place is almost on every side environed with water. It is thought that Antenor
the Troyan laid the first foundation thereof.

Diverse report, that so soon as Rossis was known to be in the field, the
cauallerie which stayed at Chioggia was mightily increased, and that the
Rendezuous Rossis resolved not to stir from thence till he had in some sort
discovered the enemies intent, whom he knew to be so politic, as he would
attempt nothing but upon sound advise. The Annals affirm that which we first
said, and further add, that by the advice of The Venetian build a Fort at
Bubulente.
Rossis they builded a Fort at Bubulente, wherein they left a strong Garrison,
both by land and water. For he had observed that the situation of that place
was very commodious for the Wars, as it fell out by experience. For the
Venetians from thence did many times make roades on the Territory of Padua.

Rossis departing thence gave an alarm to Padua, and riding near to the Gates
and Walls of the City, he called the enemies to the fight, and with
reproachful Marco Lauretano was arrived, with the nauall Army: whereupon by
mutual The Venetians besiege the Fort of the Salt pits.
consent the siege was advanced. The Garrison within it were first sounded,
whether they would voluntarily yield without enforcement; which they refusing
to do, the Venetians did furiously assail them. The engines were already
planted against the Walls, and the Soldiers mounted on the enemies Rampire, at
such time as Spirituello Governor of the place having received an hurt,
suddenly died thereof. They of the Fort being amazed at this accident, craved
truce for eight days, Mastin came within that time to raise the fiege, they
would still hold it for him, and withal faithfully promising, if they were not
relieved before the Truce were expired, that they would yield it up to the
Venetians. This being granted, they sent to Padua to entreat Mastin to come
himself and to raise the siege, or if he could not come, at the least, to send
forces sufficient to constrain the enemy to raise his Camp: But he promising
them nothing, but willing The Fort of the Salt Pits taken.
them rather to seek their own safety, the Castle was yielded, which was
forthwith razed by the Venetians.

About the same time those of Cognilian, yielded to the Venetians, and were the
way-leaders to diverse other Cities, and associates of Mastin to revolt from
those of Escalla, as it afterward happened. The tyrants at the beginning had
made great Great insolences of the Lancequenets.
as by deflowring of maidens and rauishing of wives: so as it is to be thought
that these vilanous actions were the first and principal motives of the
Paduans rebellion. Mastin being thereby constrained to disperse them here and
there, under show of going to Garrisons, sent fifteen hundred of them to
Aeste, who by a marvelous unruly license, did outrage the inhabitants thereof.
There arose likewise in Padua (for those that remained there continued their
old trade of life) a great sedition, and the Townsmen and the Strangers were
ready to have fought in the midst of the City, had not Mastin by his timely
coming appeased the quarrel already begun. The cause why the Paduans revolted
from those of Escalla*
It is certain that the Paduans were by this injury meruailously withdrawn
from the friendship of those of Escalla, and that by reason thereof, they
already tended to rebellion.

Mastin was determined to call back the Garrison at Aeste to the City, had
not Albert dissuaded him from it, saying that he ought not to charge the city
with any more strange Garrisons, and that he had no cause to fear the Paduans
nor Marsilio, whose truth and fidelity he held for assured. Rossis in the
mean time fought with good success against those of the Garrison of Aeste,
and taking three hundred of them, after he had stripped them, he sent them away.

Those of Escalla perceiving their affairs exceedingly to decline, sent their
Ambassadors to demand aid of all their friends and allies, as well within
Italy as abroad, and namely to the Duke of Bauiere. But the Paduans because
they would not seem altogether to betray the tyrants, sent at the same time
their Commissioners to Venice, who (if it were possible) should mediate some
good agreement betwixt Mastin, Threescore Ambassadors, from threescore
Ambassadors sent to Uenice to procure a Peace.
Princes or Commonwealths, came at one time for this purpose to Venice.
Marsilio Carrario was sent thither from their enemies, who at his arrival (as
it is reported) was pursued by the common people and beaten with stones: But it
was not so much in hatred to Marsilio, as to the tyrants whom the people
mortally hated: some think that it was done of purpose, to the end that those
of Escalla should have no cause to distrust him who came to speak secretly
against them to the Venetians, The Venetians propositions concerning a peace.
like the other Ambassadors. The Venetians demanded that Padua, Treuiso,
Accio Visconte, of Philippo Gonzaga, and others, made a league with the
Venetians against Secret practice of Marsilio Carrario with the Venetians.
those of Escalla. Marsilio dealt secretly with the Prince about the yielding
up of Padua, which soon after ensued. Some Authors write that in the presence
of all the Ambassadors, he spoke softly to Dandulo^, and said, What will thou
say Prince if we give thee Padua? And that the Prince dissembling at the same
time both in gesture and speech, that which was in question, answered, We will
make thee Governor thereof. This I rather believe, than that which is commonly
reported, That a long time afterward an Ambassador from Carrario spoke this
openly at a banquet on the Feast day of Saint Vitis, (as the manner was) albeit
I grant it might well enough be spoken in a banquet. But the person of the
Traitor discovers the error committed therein. For it is certain that the
Government promised at the first, was afterward given to Marsilio; but he whom
they nominate, had no recompense.

Whilst these things were done at Venice, Rossis took certain Towns in the
Rossis at the Gates of Padua.
Territory of Padua from the enemies, and then bringing his troops near to
the City, he set fire on one of the Gates, called Al-Saints. Moreover those of
Mestra Mestra yielded to the Venetians
daunted a while after with a new siege, wherewith they were environed,
yielded. From thence coming to Treuiso, he burnt in a night two of the City
gates. The Inhabitants were so amazed in this night-assault, as diverse running
fort' of the City in the dark, on that side where the enemy was not, saved
themselves by flight, but many of them having lost their way, fell into the
enemies hands, among whom the noble wife of Caminensis was slain in the habit
of a servant. This being done, Cami^ensis wife, slain in the habit of a (...).
they made no farther attempt against the City, I know not whether it were
because they despaired of taking it (being ignorant of the great fear and
amazement of the Citizens) or rather because they would speedily go to take
Serrauall, which Serrauall under the Uenetians obedience.
(according to some) came at that time under the Venetians obedience.

Mastin and Albert his brother having understood that besides the loss of so
many Cities in short space, their associates likewise had forsaken them, and
taken arms to offend them: (for it was reported that Luchin Visconte having
attained to the principality of Milan (by the death of Accion his kins-man)
and Phillip Gonzaga were already in the field against them, or else in a
readiness so to do) being environed Mastin on a sudden with the greatest
part of his forces left Padua, committing the guard of the City to his brother
Albert, and came to Verona.

In the mean time Marsilio Rossis; after he had passed the River Adice,
marched with those troops which he had received from his brother directly
toward Mantua, where joining with Philip Gonzaga, and Luchin Visconte, they
consulted together of the whole matter, and after marched into the field,
resolving first to assail The Territory of Verona spoiled
Verona. Now having forraged the Country, they entered the Territory of
Verona, where they made great spoil round about the City, which with great
clamours they besieged; bringing thither all things necessary for a siege. It
is reported that Charles son to the King of Bohemia, lay at the same time
before Feltre Charles son to the King of Boheme encamped before Feltre.
with a great Army of Germans, by means whereof those of Escalla were at one
time affailed in three several places. Mastin being thus uncertain by what
means to oppose himself against the enemy, after he had a while ruminated
with himself, determined like a mad man to do it by Arms, and to fight with
any that he Resolution of a desperate man.
should meet with. But before he would give battle, he Knighted his son
Francis who was yet very young, Spineta Marquis, Guiao Corregiario, and Paulo
Aligerio the Rossis made a retreat, so did the rest, not meaning to fight,
thinking it more available for them to draw the War out at length, the which
by all likelihood Mastin could not long maintain, than to hazard the whole by
the event of a battle. In this sort making a fair retreat, not giving show
of any manifest A wise retreat
flight, they held on their way toward Mantua.

Mastin as proud of this retreat as if he had won the battle, returned
speedily with three thousand horse and certain foot companies to Padua, and
from thence to Bubulente, where the Venetians Fleet lay. At his arrival he
surprised Mastin encam. peth to shut victuals from the Venetians.
depart thence, and he encamped two miles beneath the River, with an intent to
shut up the passage of the victuals which came from the City by water. It is
thought that he might with more ease have executed his determination if he had
encamped betwixt Bubulente and Mestra. Rossis, to cause him dislodge, commanded
a great quantity of woad (an herb belonging to Fullers) to be pounded and to
be thrown into the River, to make it unsavory and bitter to be drunk by
those of Escalla. But victuals waxing scant in the Venetians Camp, by reason
that the enemy lay so near, the arrival of Marsilio called thither for the
purpose (as I

Pietro Rossis likewise being often provoked by the enemy to fight, did
purposely A discreet resolution of a General.
refuse it: For he perceived that Mastin could not long hold out, and that he
should do indiscreetly, to hazard the fortune of a battle, knowing that the
enemy was already half vanquished, and there was no doubt but that he would
be overthrown without bloudi^ied. Whilst he lay in Camp near to Bubulente,
thinking greatly to hinder the enemy by keeping of the passage of the River
from them, he had notice Bressia besieged by Luchin Visconte.
that Luchin Visconte had straightly besieged Bressia, which news he very
badly d^ested, and marched with speed through the Territory of Padua and
Vincenza to relieve Bressia, which whilst he attempted, more fearful
tidings were brought, that Padua was lost and his brother taken prisoner with
the whole garrison.

This loss did in such sort abate the tyrants pride, as he never after hoped
for Marsilio Carrario, so soon as Mastin was departed from the relief Padua
reuolteth from those of Escalla.
of Bressia, had forthwith given notice thereof to Pietro Rossis, and leaving
open the Gate of the crooked Bridge, gave entrance to him and his whole forces,
which they of the City perceiving (for there was no hostile act committed) all
men with great joy ran to meet him, calling him their deliverer, and
infinitely praised him. But Rossis with the general consent did in the
Venetians name give the government of the City to Marsilio Carrario. Albert,
and Risse Foranensis with diverse other friends and servants of the Tyrants were
taken prisoners, and their goods spoiled. Albert was soon after brought to
Venice. Rossis gave leave to five hundred Almaine horse that were found in the
City, freely to depart thence with their Arms and

Mastin, being daunted with so many losses, received fresh news that Charles
had The City of Feltre taken by the king of Hungary
taken Feltre with other Towns; and anon after that Luca was besieged by
Orlando Rossis, Captain general of the Florentines, and that it was not yet
certainly known whether those of Luca were revolted or not. But that which
did most of Bressia and Bergamo taken by Luchin Visconte
all afflict him, was, when he understood soon after that Bressia whither he
had so speedily marched, was taken: and in this sort bad tidings coming daily
unto him, the end of all was, that Luchin had seized on Bergamo.

Those of Escalla being wholly chased from Padua, the Venetian Ambassadors
came thither, namely, Marco Lauretano, Iustiniano surnamed Justinian, and
Andrea Morosino; who coming into the Marketplace where the people were
assembled, Lauretano in the name of the Commonwealth, used this
congratulatorie Speech unto them.

The Venetian Ambassadors Oration to the Paduans.
WE cannot but exceedingly rejoice, that ye being now freed from so cruel an
enemy, have recovered your ancient liberty lost by the malice of Mastin: And
therefore by the Senates appointment we confer the government of the City on
Marsilio: whose courage and valor, by how much more it is famous and known to
all men, by so much more do the Venetians highly esteem it for the good and
commodity of the Paduans, adding thereunto his singular vetue and wisdom,
which cannot but bring great and desired quiet to his fellow-Citizens. For the
Venetians very well know, and namely by experience, that a Commonwealth is
most happy which is governed by a wise and discreet person. Attend therefore,
and perpetually receive your Citizen Marsilio, to obey his commandments, and
heartily to defend justice, seeing ye are not ignorant how grievous a thing
tyranny is: And thou likewise Marsilio, albeit we are all well persuaded of
thy virtue, thou art nevertheless to think that we have called thee to this
place, not only to command over thy country, but to bring it all help and
succor. If peradventure thou shall doubt what course to take for the
wellgouerning thereof, and by what means to make thy self regarded without
envy among thine own people: take example by the Magistrates of our City,
which will easily teach thee: who whilst they are in office, are respected for
the honor of the Commonwealth, and their charge being expired, they live
equally with the meanest, knowing very well that this equality is the only
bond of a Commonwealth. It remains now, that this City followiag thine
example, do highly account, honor, and respect the friendship of the
Venetians, as well in general as particular. The which duly and religiously to
observe the novelties happened in your time may incite you, we having twice
within few years freed you from the cruel yoke of bondage. For that man is no
less foolish, than ungrateful, who cannot be moved by benefits received. A
notable sentenc^.


The exhortation of Lauretano being most true, was likewise most pleasing ^o
the people, and chiefly to Marsilio; who after he had given great thanks to the
Venetians, Marsilio his answer to the Venetians.
said. That he would in such sort rule, as no man^in time to come should have
occasion to complain of his government, much less to desire (and if he were a
lover of the public peace) any change. And that above all things he would
take order,

This did he speak, which was with a general consent approved by all the
people: Then followed mutual embracements and congratulations, the whole City
leapt for joy, all things on a sudden were changed. For in steed of fear and
envy, wherewith it was before filled, nothing was then seen, but joy and
contentment.

But the course of the fortunate success of the Venetians affairs was
interrupted The death of Pietro Rossis.
by an accident happened to the two brethren of Rossis, who in few days died one
after another. For Pietro after the taking of Padua being come to the siege of
Moncelesse was mortally wounded: whereupon being carried to Padua, he died so
one after to the great grief of all men. He was a man of a goodly stature, a
great warrior, How highly Pietro Rossis was lamented.
and an excellent Captain, being an enemy to cruelty, and when he went to
the wars, he forbad his soldiers to murder in cold blood, and to enforce
women. He was so well beloved of his soldiers for his gentleness, as the
Almaine horsemen, who were very many in his camp, called him their father,
and he was beside so liberal, as (his horses and Armor excepted) he gave all
his wealth among his soldiers. Marsilio his brother, who not long before was
sick of a sever The death of Marsilio of Rossis.
being brought to Venice, died there within six days after, being fifty
years of age.

Their brother Orlando Rossis, who at the same time held Luca straightly
besieged, was in his absence chosen General of the Army, and being sent for,
came so one after Orlando Rossis chosen General of the Army.
to the camp at Moncelesse. For the siege was not discontinued, although the
General was dead: At his arrival he took part of the Army, and came by the
confines of Este, and made roads on the territory of Verona, where putting all
to fire and sword unto the gates of the City, he brought a very great booty
to the camp: A treaty of peace broken.
were propounded to Mastin as were in the former, and that he stoutly refused
them, all the commissioners departed from Venice without any conclusion. Mastin
perceiving that he was not yet freed from this war craved aid of the Duke of
Bauier, Mastin imploreth the aid of the Duke of Bauiere.
adding diverse great promises to his entreaties. This duke promised to send him
great supplies, provided that he might have good caution for what he promised.
Mastin delivered into his hands the City of Pescata, wirh his son Francisco,
and diverse other children of noble families. But the Duke failing of his
promise, so so one as Mastin perceived himself deluded, he came on a sudden
and recovered the City, Marsilio Carrario died in the mean time, leaving (by
the consent of the Venetians) Vbertino his near kinsman for his successor,
having sent a hundred thousand crowns to Venice to build a Church in a part of
the Jury, and to enrich it with diverse inheritances.

At the same time the Army approached Montfort, and from thence diverse roads
Mastin defcated before Montechia.
were made on the territories of Vincenza and Verona. Mastin in the mean time
battered Montechia, whither Orlando came unlooked for, defeated him, and drove
him thence: Not long after Mastin came into the field to execute a new
enterprise, the which had as bad success, as that of Montechia. The Paduan and
Almaine horsemen were encamped in the Isle of Longare. Mastin thinking to
surprise them, did speedily march thither with his forces. The Island being
assailed by land and water, was not only well defended, but with the loss of
his ships he was ignominiously driven thence. Vbertino on the other side
having with money corrupted the Moncellesa taken.
Florentio the Governor thereof. Mastin in another place attempted by
treachery to recover the town of Montagnane, but this design fell out
unluckily. Spineta Mariqus, and Guido For anensis were commanded with great
secrecy to go with their forces to the appointed place: whereof the Venetians
having notice, placed five hundred Almaine horse not far from Este in
ambuscado, so that the enemies marching forward, (having sent no discouerers
before) were surprised and assailed by those of the ambush, and at the first
brunt (throwing down their Arms) betook themselves to flight. The number of
the slain was great, but that of the prisoners greater, among whom were Guido
and Gilberto his brother, and with them two hundred men at Arms. Andrea
Morosino, for that he had valiantly behaved himself in that encounter was
afterward knighted. The siege of Vincenza.


Orlando was at the same time in Padua, from whence he speedily departed with
his troops, and came to Vincenza, where approaching the city near to Saint
Felix gate, he lodged in the suburbs. The poor inhabitants were then more
terrified than before. For being on every side shut in by the enemy, they
lost all hope of getting any victuals, especially from Verona, by reason the
Venetians possessed Brendola and Montechia. Diverse with their wives and
children being driven forth of their houses by the men at Arms of the Garrison
were constrained to beg. At the last the Tyrants pride being abated, peace
ensued very opportunely.

It is reported, that being not able to raise the siege before Vincenza, he
harkened Mastiu being ensorced, accepts of peace on any conditions.
to a peace, about which having sent his Commissioners to Venice, he obtained
it on these conditions: That Feltre, Beluna, and Ceneda should remain to
Charles of Boheme; Bergamo, and Bressia to Visconte, who possessed them;
Treuiso, with the villages and Castles of the Treuisan, to the Venetians, with
the Castles of Balde and Bassan, with free liberty to traffic on the river
Adice; and four Cities of the territory of Luca to the Florenitnes.

It is reported that the Florentines being discontented with this agreement,
because The Florentine^ discontented.
Luca which they demanded was not yielded to them, sent to Venice about Albert
with the rest of the prisoners were set at liberty. The Venetians gave the
Castles of Balde and Bassan to Vbertino Carrario: whereby we may see that the
Venetians did not seek by this war to enlarge their estate. upon what cause
the venetians did make war upon those of Escalla.
For besides the breaking of the tyrants forces, whom they could wholly have
overthrown, and by arms have appropriated all that to themselves which they
had taken from him, they gave the renowned City of Padua (which they might
have held by right of war) to Marsilio Carrario a private Citizen, and
afterward to Vbertino Blondus affirms it to be most true, that the Venetians
had never any desire to increase their dominions, but only to prevail so
far (which happened as they desired) as to be able to abate the tyrants pride,
and to make him glad to sue for peace with heaued-vp hands, who a little before
had disquieted all Italy, and who was not satisfied with the command of all
which lies on this side and beyond the Po, within the continent of the Alps,
but would besides have enthronized himself in Tuscanie, and have attempted at
the last, not to take away (for that he could not do) but to molest the quiet
possession of the Sea, which the Venetians of a long time had purchased with
much labor and travail.

This then is the fruit, as pleasing as great, which they reaped by this
victory, thinking that they had done enough and very much, to have trodden the
tyrants pride under foot, unto whom in the end being daunted and basely suing
for a dishonorable peace, his demand was not only granted, but they made him
a Gentleman ^astin is made a Gentleman of Venice.
of Venice. Dandulo after he had fortunately abroad and at home governed

BARTILMEO GRADONICO, the 53. Duke of Uenice.





BArtilmeo Gradonico was his successor, and chosen by the forty. I find in
some Authors that about the same time the great Hall was builded, where every
eight days and sometimes oftener, all the Gentlemen are assembled about the
creating of new Officers: And that they began at the same time to send
Magistrates to Poueggia, Palestrino, and Malamoc.

Moreover on the five and twentieth of February in the night, there arose a
sudden A prodigious storm at Venice in a night.
tempest, which caused such an inundation in the City, as the waters stood
Believe this who list.
night: which was thus. So soon as he perceived the storm, in a great fear
he drew up his little Boat near to Saint Marks Church, and standing not
far from thence out of the rain and wind, three men came to him, who, as if
they had some carnest business, entreated him in all haste to Ferrie them over
to Saint Nicholas Church A wonderful apparition to a poor Fisherman
on the shore; which he refusing to do for fear of the storm, they on a
sodainc went into his Boat, as though themselves would guide it: which the
Fisherman perceiving, entered into it, (though against his will) and guided the
Boat. But being come to the Church, they turned toward the mouth of the
Haven: where Georges; and the third returned to the place where they took
Boat: of whom the poor old Fisherman (albeit in regard of what he had seen,
he thought him some Divine Person) demanded his hire, who answered him: Thou
shall go (quoth he) to the Prince and Senate, unto whom having declared in
order what thou have seen this night, they shall liberally reward thee. The
Fisherman replied, they will not believe me, and I know certainly that they
will jest of me, and so I shall become the laughing stock of the people for my
rash report: whereunto this divine personage answered him, and said: Take this
pledge (and gave him a Ring which he had on his finger) let the Duke and
Senate understand, that by our means the City has been this night preserved
from a terrible flood: And because thou shall not fail but do this, know that
he whom thou Who those were that appeared.
did see enter into his Church, is blessed Saint Nicholas, which ye
Mariners do so highly reverence; the other is Saint George, who is gone to
visit his Church; and I am Mark the Evangelist the patron of your City.
This being said he vanished.

The poor Fisherman, emboldned by this pledge, so soon as it was day came to
the Palace, where saying that he would speak to the Prince concerning some
important business, he was presently brought into his presence, who was
accompanied by the Senate, where he declared in order all that he had seen
and heard; then for a witness to his speech, he drew forth of his bosom the
Ring which the holy Saint had given him over night: They were all greatly
amazed at this miracle: then they caused diverse solemn Prayers to be made, as
well in private as in public

About the same time the Ambassadors of Edward King of England arrived at The
King of Englanst crauet^ aid againg the French King.
Venice, craving aid by Sea against Philip the French King, whom the Genoueses
favored with all their power, but notwithstanding all their promises on their
Kings behalf, they could obtain nothing: Their excuse was, in what great
danger their affairs stood at Sea, which they were constrained to defend from
the ordinary incursions of the Turks, who by the carelessenesse of the
Christians were grown so mighty, as they could in a moment Arm two or three
hundred Galleys if need

At the same time certain Lords of Candie revolted, who being retired into
Certain Lords of Candie rebel.
some Fortes and Castles in the mountains, did disquiet the greatest part of
the Island. Nicholao Phalerio, Iustiniano surnamed Justinian, and Andrea
Morosino, with good forces were sent against these men; who were embarked in
the Galleys which went to traffic in Ciprus. Being arrived in Candie they
assailed the enemy in three places, and giving them in a manner no time to
breath, they took from them all means to rob and spoil. They did moreover
propound great rewards to any whosoever should kill any one of those Rebels, or
could bring him alive to Reward propounded against the Rebels.
the Venetian Magistrate, having set down a certain rate for every head; but
the Caudie is appeased by the Rebels punishment.
Lords, to return on a sudden to their due obedience. The Island being quiet,
the Generals of the Army ( Nicholao Phalerio excepted who died there) returned
to Venice. Victuals were very dear in the City, during the principality
Great dea^th in Venice.
of Gradonico, which was very short; for it lasted but two years and nine
Months, which time being expired he died. Marks Church.

The end of the second Book of the second Decade.
THE THIRD BOOK Venice.
The Contents of the third Book of the second DECAD.
A Great Army prepared against the Turks. The foundation of Saint ANTHONIES
Zara against LEWIS King of Hungary. Thereddition of Zara. The City of Venice
much shaken by an Earthquake. The same City terribly afflicted by the
Pestilence. Truce for five years with LEWIS King of Hungary. Cape-histria
rebelleth, which causes the Venetians to pass over thither. The cause of the
third Ligusticke war. The Venetians take ten Ships of Genoa in the Haven of
Cariste. The Genoueses take Nigrepont in the absence of the Venetian Army. The
Venetian and Arragonian Fleet greatly tossed by a tempest on the Ionian Sea.
The prosperous battles which the Genoueses had at one time against three
mighty Armies near the Bosphorus. The Venetians and Arragonians overcome the
Genoueses on the lower Sea. The Genouses in anger Parenza. The Genoueses take
diverse Ships of burden from the Venetians at sundry places. The Genoueses
defeat a great Army of the Venetians in the Isle of Sapientia. Prince
PHALERIO affecting tyranny, is with his accomplices worthily punished.



ANDREA DANDVLO, the 54. Duke of Uenice.





A Ndrea Dandulo succeeded Gradonico, a man certainly of rare and singular
learning, and as eloquent as could be wished, in one of his years: For it is
reported that he wrote the Venetian History in two styles; the one more amply,
and it may be therefore less eloquent, and the other more succinctly, and
thereby (as says Carosini) more beautified and adorned. He was besides of a
meek and liberal disposition, whereby he Comifino: And that was the reason
(as I think) why before he was of competent age, they made him Procurator of
S. Mark, and soon afterward Prince. For the manner was, not to name any one
to that dignity, but such as were already of good years; and all Authors
(almost) are of opinion, that he was not above six and thirty years of age,
when he was named for the sovereign Magistrate. We find in some Authors,
that at the beginning of his Principality, according to the league made with
Pope Clement, and other Christian Princes The Pope, the Venetians, and other
Christian Princes in league against the Turk. Smyrna taken.
against the Turk, the Venetians armed sixteen Galleys, and gave the command
of them to Pietro Zeno, who after he had sunk diverse ships of the Barbarians,
did by a sudden assault take the City of Smyrna, and where having slain the
Inhabitants, The Venetians, Rhodians, and Cypriots defeated by the Turk.
with the Turks, where diverse of both sides were slain. But at the last the
Venetians with their Allies being defeated and put to flight, part of them
being afrighted escaped into the City, the rest being enclosed by the
Barbarians, were all slain.

At the same time Nicholao surnamed Giouanni, was sent by the Senate to the
King of Babylon, to treat with him concerning the Venetian Merchants free
traffic into Egypt. The Barbarian granted their request, bnt on certain
conditions, the which seeming not to be allowed of, without the Popes
permission, it was not thought lawful to traffic with the enemies of the
Christian faith, Marini Phalerio Andrea Cornario, were sent to his Holiness,
who granted that the Venetians The Pope permits traffic with Infidells.
should for five years following traffic to Alexandria with six Galleys:
Souranza, by virtue of this permission, was the first that undertook that
voyage with two Galleys, wherein Pietro Iustiniano went Consul. Two years
after, Iustiniano surnamed Justinian, obtained of the Pope in the name of the
Commonwealth to traffic into Syria, and the time of these two trafficks was
prolonged for ten years. At the same time they began in the City to build
St. Anthonies Church, (the beginning whereof is attributed to one Iannotto a
Florentine, of the family of Abbi) upon a little Rock, where was first
builded a little Chapel of wood. In the same place at this day is to be seen
a great void place, or rather The building of Saint Anthonies Hospital.
an Island, made by a continual heaping together of earth, which the water in
process of time has brought thither; It has a delightful prospect toward
the Lakes, and besides the Church which is fair and large, there stands near
to it a new sumptuous building, which serves for an Hospital.

About the same time those of Zara revolted from the Venetians the seventh The
seventh rebellion of Zara.
time. The report was, That they had sent to Lewis King of Hungary, to
certify him, if he would come into Dalmatia, they would deliver their City,
Haven, Lands, persons and means, as well public as private into his hands.

The Senate presently upon these news, gave five armed Galleys to Pietro
Canalis, who sailed into Dalmatia. Being come near to Zara, he received Marco
Cornari the governor with all his family, and diverse other Venetians, into
his vessels, who were in the City when it revolted, from whence he presently
departed: For, to have besieged the City with so few vessels, and by Sea
only, would have been as Canalis sent to Venice. Soon after having fortified
the place, he took with those few Galleys which he had, diverse vessels of the
enemies which lay near to the Islands: But whilst by these means he went
about to hinder the Zara invested by Sea and Land.
Zaratines: Marco Iustiniano came by Land with his Army, and encamped at the
Fountain next to the City, where he suddenly caused his Soldiers to build a
Fort. Then, from thence, he did with his engines batter the City, beat down
the walls, overthrow the houses, and made all things very incommodious to the
enemies. If

Thus stood the affairs of the Zaratins, when Andrea Morosino and Simon
D^dulo, the Princes brother, arrived at the Camp to provide and take order for
whatsoever should be expedient for the Commonwealth: and I think, this was
the cause, why from the beginning they called these Magistrates Prouiders; but
we will A general assault given to Zara.
always call them Prouidaetori. At their arrival it was resolved to give a
general assault to the City by Sea and Land. It may be they had notice that
Lewis King of The Venetians are beaten from the assault.
of battery breaking at their first approach, made all the Venetians attempts
bootlesse, which the General perceiving, commanded to sound the retreat. After
Lewis arrived with six score thousand men, and encamped not far from Zara;
who, to free the City which was given unto him from the siege, gave a sudden
assault to the Venetian Camp. The Hungarians with fearful cries made an
attempt on the Venetians Fort, not thinking to meet with trenches and rampires
that were able to keep them out. The Zaratines likewise made a sallie, and
together with them assailed the Fort. The Venetians did not only valiantly
defend it, but repulsed the enemies far from thence with great effusion of
blood. In the mean time those in the Galleys hearing the noise, and fearing
that their fellows were assailed, leaving a sufficient number of Soldiers for
the guard of their vessels, they came on shore, and marched in a close
battalion to the relief of their countrymen: which they in the Fort
perceiving, presently issued forth upon the enemy. There was on either side a
cruel fight near to the Fort and much bloodshed: But the Hungarians who at
the Venetians first coming had begun by little and little King Lewis defeated
before Zara.
with great amazement into the City. The King thus repulsed, with loss of a
great part of his Army, returned (in manner of a flight) into Hungary. But
because it was scarce credible (to speak truly) that so great an Army should
be defeated by so small a number: It is most likely that Lewis brought but
twenty thousand men into Dalmatia, and that the Printersr and not the
Historians have greatly erred in the number: yet whatsoever their Army was
(for undoubtedly it was great) the Venetians got that day a glorious victory
of the enemies: And besides, the slaughter of the enemies was so great, as the
air being corrupted with the infection of so The reddition of Zara.
granted them: The messengers being come to the City, craved mercy,
committing themselves and their City to the mercy of the Senate. Zara being
recovered Iustiniano was made Governor: The chief of the City who had been
the Authors of this seventh Rebellion, were by the Senate for ever banished
the

We may by this gentle punishment perceive how great the Venetians clemency
has still been, who were contented to punish a City that had so often
Rebelled, and been thereby so troublesome to the Commonwealth, by the only
banishment of a few of her inhabitants.

The ordinary judges of the City of Venice not being able in regard of the
multitude New magistrates created.
of causes which was daily pleaded before them, to have any fit leisure to
intend the appeals sent up by inferior judges to their audience: The Senate
created three Auditors to look to that business, who according to the large
extent of their jurisdiction, were called the Ancients. Three others were
likewise created to hear the causes of strangers.

Besides, Prince Dandulo caused all that which had been abolished from the
ancient customs to be reduced into one volume, together with all the decrees
made by the Senate, since the principality of Giacomo Tepulo, until that
present, and having divided them into Chapters, with a large Table, he named it
The sixth Book of the Cities decrees. And having moreover whilst he was
Procurator of Saint Mark carefully gathered together all the judicial acts
and decrees of the great Council, The Prince causes all the decrees of the
City to be gathered into one form^.
he set them down in order, and noted, who had been the Author of every of
them, and under whose Government each of them had been received and allowed.

There was at the same time great scarcity of victuals in the City, which
began Graedonico his time, by reason whereof Galleys and other vessels were
sent into Apulia and Sicil to fetch corn under the command of Marco
Iustiniano. We may hereby easily perceive that this voyage for corn, was
before the siege of Zara, the which likewise some Authors do not deny. For it
is certain that this Iustiniano in that war of Dalmatia was general of the
Land-Armie, and that after Zara was was recovered, he was made Governor of the
City. Now (as all men know) it could not be that one man alone could at one
self same time execute two so different offices. It is reported that two
ships of those which went for Corn were lost by a sudden tempest as they
returned homeward, and that they were never after heard of. Others say that
four only escaped out of this storm. The residue of the ships laden with
Corn, did fortunately arrive in the Haven: by means whereof the dearth ceased.

But this mischief being taken away, an other presently ensued: For upon the A
wonderful Earthquake.
day of Saint Paul his conversion, about one of the clock after noone, there
happened Siluester, Vitalis, Saint Giacomo de Lorio fell down, together with the
top of Saint Angelo his Church, and the left side of that of Saint Basil. The
Babylonians thought, (for I see diverse that demand from whence this fearful
motion of the Earth does proceed) that it happens by the force of some
Planet, meeting with the Sun in the Region of the Earth. Anaxagoras has
thought that it is engendered in the Earth by process of time, and restraining
of Air. Possidonius affirms that it is a wind shut closely up in the bowels
and concauities of the earth. Pliny says, that the earth never quaketh, but
when the Sea is very Sundry opinions on Earthquakes.
calm, and the air so still and clear as birds can hardly bear themselves
up therein, and at such time as the winds are enclosed in the veins and
entrails of the earth. By this speech of Pliny it seems that the winds are
the cause of this shaking, the which diverse Philosophers do likewise affirm.
He adds by and by after; An earthquake (says he) is nothing else but as the
thunder in the air, or an ouerture or creuase in the earth, or as the
lightning breaking forth violently from the midst of the clouds, the wind
enclosed therein striving to burst forth by force. The Stoics Diverse sorts of
Earthquakes.
set down diverse sorts of earthquakes, opening of the earth, swelling of the
water, and the boiling up of the same, the which is very true. For at some time
the earth falls down very low, at other times it is much lifted up, and
puts forth great The signs which fore-runne an Earthquake.
sometimes like to the roaring of a Bull, and then like to the lamentable cry
of some humane creature, or like the clattering noise of Armor, according to
the quality of the matter which is enclosed, or according to the fashion of
the cave and hole through which this wind passes, which resoundeth (as it is
said) in vaulted and hollow places, waxes hot in sharp and dry places, and
causes great defluxions in moist and humide places.

The City of Venice is not so much subject to earthquakes, as some do
imagine, Of all Earthquakes the agitation of the waters is most dangerous.
seeing among all the motions of the earth, that of the waves and floods is the
most dangerous: For lightning is not so hurtful, nor the shaking of buildings,
nor namely when the earth is puffed up, or falls down by an interchangeable
motion, because the one keeps back the other. The safest buildings are those
upon vaults, the corners of walls, and on bridges, leaning one against another.
Besides, brick buildings are less dangerous in such accidents than are
others: Those which are at How men may foretell an earth quake, either at Sea,
or on the Land.
Sea can foretell these earthquakes, at such time as they perceive the waves to
swell on a sudden without any wind, and those which are on Land may likewise
foretell them, when they see birds, as it were, in amaze to stay their flight,
or when the water in Wells is more troubled than ordinary, having a bad taste
and stinking smell, Pherecydes the Syrian, drawing water out of a Well,
foretold an earthquake which happened there. Anaximander Milesius did by these
signs declare to the Lacedaemonians, that an earthquake was at hand, for
otherwise, he was no God to know things to come: And the truest signs of all
are, when the winds blow not, or when the Sea is marvelous calm. For an
earthquake never happens, when the wind blows, or when the Sea swells
with waves: for when it blows, the motion cease, otherwise it lasts forty
days, and some times longer, some have lasted two years. But this earthquake
whereof we speak lasted fifteen days more or less, whereupon How long the
Earthquake lasted at Venice.
all Women that were with child, being touched therewith miscarried, and died
soon after of the contagious sickness that forthwith ensued.

This dangerous sickness (as it is reported) came from Scythia, and from
thence From whence the contagion came to Venice.
glided along the Pontick Sea, and the Hellespont; and at last at the same time
that this great earthquake happened, it infected, in a manner, all the West.
Some Authors Great desolation in the City of Venice.
and more, those that were infected therewith, of what age and condition
soever, fell At what time the infection began and ended in Venice.
Spring, and increased daily till May Day, being then at the Prime, and so
lasted to the great loss of all men till the Month of June, and then it
began by little and little to decrease, namely when the number of the living
was so few, as it found no more matter to work on.

The City being thus bare of Inhabitants (for there were none to be seen in
the streets) for the repeopling of the empty and void places, which did
greatly deforme the City, the Senate made a decree, That as many as would come
and dwell at Venice, Strangers that would come and people the City, were made
Citizens of Venice.
after they had remained there two years, should be held for Citizens of the
same. The Senate moreover fearing that Lewis King of Hungary making use of
this misery of theirs, would again invade Dalmatia (for he was come at the
same time Ioane his wife, had put to death) sent three Ambassadors to him,
Marco Iustiniano, Andrea Morosini Knights, and Nicolao Gradonico: who either by
entreaties, or fair promises, did so alter the Hungarian, as he not only
promised, not to attempt any Truce taken with Lewis King of Hungary.
thing against the Venetians, during their adversity, but made a truce with
them for ten years (as some say) or for eight according to other Authors.

But because the Venetians should be never freed from some foreign war, those
Those of CapHistria revolt.
of Cape-Histria revolted soon after the recovery of Zara. The Venetians,
though it were in a very unfit season, did nevertheless levy forces, and
under the command Pancratio Iustiniano, sent both by Sea and Land into Histria,
to reduce them unto The Histrians reduced to the Venetians obedience.
their obedience, the which, so soon as he arrived in the Province, he easily
did. The Authors of the rebellion were sent to Venice, and commanded on pain
of life not to depart thence without the Senates leave, because they should no
more raise any new stir in their City.

At the same time likewise, Albert Prince of Croatia, robbing, and spoiling the
Province of Histria, constrained the Venetians to take Arms against him. New
forces were raised for that purpose, and the war being thus proclaimed
against Albert, two Senators were sent thither for Generals of the Army. The
Croatian being daunted at the first report of the marching of the Army,
demanded safe conduct of the Generals, and obtained it, that he might go to
Venice to the Prince and Senate, where being arrived, he threw himself
prostrate at his feet, who although they had just cause to be offended with
him, yet nevertheless observing their ancient custom, they pardoned him,
after they had first taken certain places Albert Prince o^ Croatia pardoned.
Those punished which did not follow the Senates commandment.
from him, which by the Senats commandment were razed, to the end they should
be no more a retreat for thieves and robbers. Carosino (who only makes mention
of this Dalmatian war) says, that those two Generals at their return to
Venice, were condemned and deprived of their place of Senators, because they
had not in the same war followed those directions which were commanded them.

Soon after ensued the third war with the Genoueses, but it is thought that
the cause of the war proceeded (as oftentimes before) from them. They
possessed certain Cities on the Ponticke Sea, and therefore ever since
Paleologus drove the Venetians from Constantinople, they attempted by all
means to deprive the Venetian What was the occasion of the third ^igusticke
war.
merchants of the traffic of those Seas. Whereupon there and else where, they
offered them sundry wrongs, but especially near to the City of Protospera,
which they held on the same coast. Meeting in that place with certain Venetian
and Candiot ships, they fell upon them, and having taken them, they constrained
them to return by Capha to the great hinderance, and more shame of the
merchants. Carosin says they were taken and spoiled in the ^auen of Capho. The
Senate sent to the Genoueses to demand restitution of that which had been
taken from them: which being denied, they provided a mighty Army against the
Genoueses: Some galleys were armed in Dalmatia, Ca^die, and Nigrepont, and
diverse were likewise stayed at Venice, who were ready to go forth for
traffic; and Marco Morosino the The Venet^ans Army against the G^noueses.
with certain galleys, they made up the number of five and thirty, the which
were given to Marco Rucino: but diverse Authors in steed of Rucino set down
Nicolao Pisano.

This man leaving Venice with an intent to assail the enemies, who were
reported to be abroad at Sea, was constrained by a sudden tempest to enter
into the Haven of Cariste, which lies toward Nigrepont. It fell out
fortunately for the Venetians, that fourteen Galleys of Genoa rode there at
the same time at an Ankor, laden with merchandise, and store of Armor, with
diverse soldiers, who were bound for Pera, to fortify it, to the end that
their countrymen who dwelt there, turned their prowes to that side which the
Venetians had left without any Four Genoa Galleys escape.
guard, being aided by their sails and oars they betook themselves to
flight: And four of the Galleys had in this sort escaped one after an other,
when Marco Morosino Admiral of the Adriatike sea, being vexed therewith,
commanded one of those Galleys which he had received the year before, for the
guard of the Gulf, to run athwart the fifth Genoa Gallie which was ready to
escape, which was so speedily done, as the same being taken, the residue which
were ready to follow being amazed Ten Genoa Galleys taken.
ran upon the next rocks, and were easily taken: And because they were laden
with richmarchandize the soldiors and sailers bourded them, and being busied in
pillage suffered the other four to escape with ease (who were already in the
maine Sea) A discreet act of the General.
an opportunity through the covetousness of his people, commanded to set fire
on five of the Galleys which were taken, and had not been yet pillaged. He did
it to the end to enforce his Soldiers, (who were thereby deprived of their
hope of more spoil) to pursue the enemies. For so soon as they left off to
spoil, they followed the chase.

The Genoueses in the mean time were far enough off, yet nevertheless,
ten of their Galleys, with the General of their Army, and threescore and
ten Gentlemen were taken, not accounting those of meaner quality, who were
many in regard of the number of the Galleys, The victorious Venetian after this
victory at Chariste, Why the feast of the decollation of Saint John is
celebrated at Venice.
holidaies at Venice. It is thought that upon this occasion; the day of the
decollation of S. John is till this day celebrated, which before then was no
holiday. Others say that it was upon S. Victors day the Martyr.

The Venetians making no long aboade at Nigrepont, after they had scoured the
The Venetiandare not assail Pera.
certain days in the straight of Gallipolis, they surprised diverse vessels of
Genoa.

In the mean time, those four Genoa-Gallies which had escaped from Chariste,
Philippo Doria, having notice of the departure of the Venetian Army, came with
all speed to assail Nigrepont. Thomaso Viari who at the same time was
Governor of the City being affrighted so soon as he descried the enemy a
far off, fled, with the Prouidatori out on the other side of the City which
lies toward the Channel. The Genouese The Genoueses take Nigrepont
at his arrival, having assailed the City, wondered at the sudden flight of
the officers, and did in a moment take and spoil it; then after he had set the
prisoners at liberty, and brought thence great numbers of the inhabitants, he
burnt the City. Doria being exceeding glad to have in this sort revenged their
loss lately received, departed from Nigrepont, and from thence came soon
after and seized on the Isle of to Venice. The report of the great booty which
the Army brought home, and answered The Army returns to Venice with great
booty.
all men's expectation, made his return most welcome. Some Authors affirm that
the spoil which was brought to Venice, amounted to the value of four hundred
thousand crowns, and others say three hundred thousand.

The same year that the war began, the King of Arragon, unto whom the
Venetians The Venetians in league with the King of Arragon.
had sent Mihaeli Steno, joined his forces to their against the Genoueses. The
Senate being strengthened by the alliance of such a Prince, hoping to execute
some great design, commanded a very mighty Army to be set forth, and
appointed five and twenty of the chief among them to make provision in the
City of all things necessary for the war. Nicolao Pisani being chosen
General of the Army, departed Nicolas Pisani General of the Venetian Army.
from Venice with twelve Galleys, and with him Giouanni Delfino, who went to
Constantinople to make a League with the Greek Emperor against the Genoueses.
Pisani being arrived in Dalmatia, received one Gallie from the Corictani, an
other from those of Ragusa; then he commanded three others of Venice to follow
him, who met him at Nigr^pont; Giouanni Delfino, who came from Venice with him
went The greek Emperor in league with the Venetians against the Genoueses.
on his Ambassade to the greek Emperor, who allied himself with the
Venetians against the Genoueses.

But whilst the Greeks prepared their ships of war, thirty Venetian
Galleys departed from Venice under the command of Pancratio Iustiniano,
Admiral of the Gulf, who sailed toward Sicilie to join with the Army of
the Arragonois The Uenetian^ join with the Arragonois.
being on the maine, such an horrible tempest arose, as in the memory of man
was never the like seen. The Fleet was meruailously beaten, and in great
danger, one of the Galleys was drowned, and diverse others striking on the
shore were split in pieces, but without any great loss of men, by reason they
were so near Land. At the last the tempest ceasing, they sailed toward Modon,
whither Nicolao Pisani came within a while after from Nigrepont. The Genoueses
a few days before had given him chase with forty Galleys, from the maine even
almost to Nigrepont, whither he speedily retired himself, and sunk certain
ships at the entry of the Haven,

But whilst these exploites were done about Nigrepont, a Gallie of Genoa left
the The Genoueses before Nigrepont
Fleet and went before to discover, who meeting with a Venetian Gallie which
was commanded by Giouanni Moro (or Memo as some say) assailed one another, but
the Venetian was overcome, by whom the Genoueses understood, that the Venetian
and Arragonois forces were not far from thence, whereupon returning with speed
Pagano the General of the Genoueses Army being P^gano General of the Genoa
Army.
troubled with these news, left Nigrepont, and speedily sailed with all his
forces to Pera.

It is reported that before his departure thence he reuewed his Army, and
found fifteen hundred men to be wanting, who for the most part had been
slain before Nigrepont. Pisani being freed from the siege came (as has been
said) to Modon, where after he had conferred with Pancratio Iustiniano, and
with Ponce General to the (for it was in the midst of winter) they were
constrained to remain for a time in the same place, where the wind had stayed
them. But victuailes beginning to wax scarce, they returned toward Candie; from
whence, forty days after, about the beginning of the spring, being furnished
with victuailes and other necessary munitions, they sailed against the enemy.

The Venetian Historians say, That the two Armies passed on to Constantinople
without any tempest; that being there joined with the Greeks forces, they went
furiously against the enemy; that there was a bloody fight near to Pera; and
that they departed one from another with equal vantage. But in this they have
very What the Thracian Bosphorus is.
negligently, (I say not licentiously) spoken against the Venetians reputation.
For the most credible Authors affirm that the issue of this battle was very
different, saying That they fought near to the Bosphorus of Thrace, which is a
straight three miles distant from Constantinople, having Europe on the one
side, and Asia on the other, looking one upon another by reason of their
neighbor shoares, so as they may be perceived to have been in times past but
one Land, being divided by an earthquake, which made a very straight passage
to the Sea. So Plato thought That Atlas having cut through Calpe opened the
passage of the Ocean to the Mediterranean Sea.

Now at the mouth of this straight, (which in regard of the narrow space thereof
that Oxen do easily pass over, is called Bosphorus, surnamed of Thrace, by
the name The Greeks base flight.
consisting of forty Galleys, so soon as the fight began, at the very first
shock of the enemy, basely gave place, and in a maze returned home. The
Genoueses being quit from them, turned all their forces upon the Venetians and
Arragonois, who fought in the front. They fought there (according to all men's
sayings) very fiercely, and for two hours space it was not discerned unto
which side fortune inclined. But at Sunne-set the wind arose, which greatly
troubled the Genoueses, who notwithstanding would not give over, but fought
more courageously; and for all it was night they would not leave the battle,
choosing rather to dye than to give place. The Venetians on the other side
being mindful of their reputation, were ashamed that they had not at the
first overcome them, being the stronger in ships: For besides forty Galleys
of their own, the Arragonois had thirty. Other Authors nevertheless A cruel
nightflight.
all night even till day. The night made the dangers of the fight more
terrible. There was nothing to be heard but groans and pitiful cries,
clashing together of Galleys, and clattering of armor; and both the shoares
ecchoed with the horrible noise. All that dark night as, has been said, (and
that which is most to be admired) in winter, the fight continued. It is
thought that in the dark, the Genoueses ran upon their own fellows, the
Venetians on Venetians, and the Arragonois, on their own countri-men. But when
it was day, the Sea being dyed red The Arragonis General slain in the
battle.
and darts, and with diverse abandoned Galleys which hulled up and down
without Soldiers or conductors. At the last, Ponce General of the Arragonois
being slain and they by reason thereof being retired, the Venetians likewise,
(because they were able to do no more) quitted the place to the Genoueses.

The enemy likewise being satisfied that they had given him place, reputing it
for great honor, and imputing the victory to himself, did in like manner
with his people retire to his Camp. In this battle were slain Stephano
Contareni Procurator of Saint Mark, Giouanni Steno, Benedicto Bembo; and
Pancratio Admiral of Who dyed on the Ventians side.
the Gulphe, dyed within few days after of his hurtes. The Venetian Annalists
affirm, That the one half only of the Venetian Fleet fought at this
battle: which makes me think that the straightness of the place was the
cause thereof; and that therefore the Genoueses would not stir from thence.
It seems likewise the victory

Giouanni Delfino who was present at this battle (according to some Authors)
reported at Venice, That the Venetians in this fight had the better; that they
took eight and twenty of the enemies Galleis; that the Soldiers and Sailers in
them were all slain, with great numbers of others who diversely perished: and
that the Venetians had lost but four Galleys. But foreign Historians report
the matter to have happened in the same manner as we have already mentioned at
the Bosphorus of Thrace. But because no man should think that we have
concealed or dissembled What Petrarch delivers concerning this battle.
ought, chiefly in that we said that they fought all the night: Francisco
Petrarcha the Blondus besides says That the battle continued all night even
till day without any intermission, and that which is most to be admired, in the
midst of winter. Soon after this battle, Pisani surprised two Genoa
ships laden with victuailes which were going How the Senate disdained the
loss of this battle.
the City: But the Senators were more ashamed than sorry, being highly
displeased with the rashness of those who would fight in so discommodious a
place, being accompanied with the forces of two mighty Princes, and yet could
not vanquish the Genoueses whom they alone had so often overcome, and which is
worst of all, they had quitted the place as though they had been vanquished,
with great Four new officers created in the Army.
for the Commonwealth. Giouanni Delfi^no, Marco Cornari, Marini Grimano, and
Marini Phalerio were sent thither in the same nature. These men being come into
Candie, certain Galleys were sent to scour the Ponticke Seas, who having
surprised certain of the enemies ships laden with corn and other
merchandise, returned into the Island. After whose return Paulo Lauretano,
surnamed the Great, was commanded to go to Cyprus with nine Galleys, from
whence he brought to Venice diverse Merchants with rich merchandise.

Whilst these things were done near to the Islands, four Genoa Galleys
entering The Genoueses make roades to Histria.
the Gulphe, came on boote-haling even to Histria: upon these news Marco
Michaeli was commanded to hasten spedily thither with five Galleys to take them
if it were possible: but whilst he made preparations for his journey the
enemy went back as speedily as he came. Much about the same time eight
Galleys were sent to Sea under the command and of Giouanni Sanuto, and not long
after, nine others; of both which Pisani (...) of the (...) Army.
Pisani was made General. Who after he had sailed the Aegean and Ionian Seas,
and being come as far as Pera, did with admirable speed surprise diverse
ships of Genoa, among whom were two Barzes, laden with rich merchandise, which
were judged to be worth two hundred thousand Crowns, wherein were nine
Gentlemen of Genoa with diverse Merchants. This being fortunately achieved,
upon report that the Genoa fleet was coming, Pisani thought it ever better to
go and assail the enemy, than to wait for him, and to make war, rather in
a foreign Country than at home. Wherefore having chosen out of the whole
fleet twenty Marco Michaeli with the residue for the guarde of the Gulphe, and
Pisani ioynet^ with the Arragonois.
came with a prosperous wind into Sardinia, where he joined with the Army of
Arragon, which was of forty Galleys and three Barzes, under the command of
Bernardo Caprari. The Arragonois did at the same time besiege Algiers: the two
fleets being there joined together, came to the Sea of Caralitana.

The Genoueses being puffed up with pride for the battle at the Bosphorus,
departing from Genoa with three and forty Galleys, commanded by Anthonio
Grimaldi Grimaldi General of the Genoueses.
went to seek the enemy. Some say they fought near to Cyrna; and others, at
Callaris, which is a part of the Isle of Sardinia, from whence it is thought
that the Gulphe took the name, and some say at Congeria. But wheresoever they
fought, In what place the battle was fought.
it is certain, that so soon as the two Armies got sight one of another, they
forthwith fell into order of battle, and set forward with great courage to
the encounter. The Genoueses calling to mind how that not long before they had
vanquished them, albeit they were stronger than they, thereby promised to
themselves the victory: The Venetians attributed it to the incommodiousnesse
of the place, rather than to the enemies valor; all of them resolving, that
day to revenge the disgrace and loss which they had sustained, or else to die
in that place. Their Allies were of the like mind: whereupon they fought with
as great courage as force. Some say that the Genoueses having descried the
Venetian ensigns, were afraid: For hearing that the Venetian was coming to
join with the Arragonois, they were In what manne^ the Venetians fought.
desirous to fight with the Spaniards, before the Venetians should arrive. Now
the Venetians with their Allies being ready to fight, determined to tie and
make fast all their Galleys together, (ten choice Venetian Galleys excepted)
which were committed to Giouanni Sanuto, to execute some enterprise, if need
should be. By this we may easily imagine with what courage the Venetians
fought that day. For having in this sort chained their Galleys together, they
had determined either to vanquish, or die there, having taken from themselves
all hope of flight. Some say that Giouanni Sanuto did first receive the enemy
with his ten Galleys, and that the maine Army with the Barzes followed after,
But it is not credible that such a battle was so slightly begun, or that
ten Venetian Galleys would oppose themselves to three The battle betwixt the
Venetians and Genoueses.
him most busied in the fight, and that by this means it fell out, that the
Genoueses being assailed in front and in flank, were the more easily
vanquished. But how soever it was done either by policy or force, or rather
by both of them together, it is not certainly known. Yet it is most certain,
that they fought the same day very fiercely, and that at last the Genoa forces
being wholly broken, after they had valiantly The Genoueses defeated.
rescued Grimaldi their General, out of the thickest of the press, they fled
as vanquished, and lost fifty ships of war; which being in possession of the
Venetians Great cruelty falsely imputed to the Uenetians
Mariners and Soldiers sunk: because they meant altogether, if it were
possible, to extirpe the name of Genoa; which they affirm to have read in the
Genoueses Histories. But in regard the quarrel betwixt them was not about men's
lives, but only for enlardging of their Dominions, and that in all the time
past it was never seen, that either of these people did inhumanely murder
their prisoners, it is hard to believe, that they did put them to death, as is
reported; but that rather they sought to cover their own disgrace by other
men's faults.

The Venetian Histories make mention of two and thirty Galleys taken from the
enemy, and of great numbers of men slain in the fight: And as for the
prisoners, among whom were diverse Gentlemen, That some of them were sent to
Venice, and the rest of them into Spain by the Arragonois.

Grimaldi with those vessels which he could gather together, retired with all
speed to Genoa, where the report of that loss, being spread abroad through the
City, caused The great lamentation made at Genoa.
so great sorrow and desolation, as though the City it self had been taken.
The two victorious Armies after the battle, came and assailed Sardinia, where
by force they took two Cities from the Genoueses; and afterward departed the
one from the other, they returned to their own homes.

The Genoueses being daunted by this only ouer-throw, which was exceeding
great, not being able of themselves to vp-hold their estate, had recourse to
foreign forces. They sent their Ambassadors to Giouanni Visconte, who at the
same time The Genouesis commit themselves to Giouanni Uisconte, Duke, and Arch
Bishop of Milan.
governed both Spiritual and Temporal matters at Milan. The sum of the
Oration with the chief of the Ambassade made, was in a manner such as
follows: That the Genoueses fortune by one only defeat, was in such sort
altered, as being

We cannot sufficiently admire and grieve, to behold the mightiest people of
Italy The Authors discourse.
nexe after the Venetians, and those who had purchased so much honor and
reputation at Sea, thus on a sudden through despair, not only foolishly, but
shamefully to have subjected themselves, loosing their ancient liberty, which
from the

Visconte did willingly accept of their offer, and having courteously
entertained the Visconte his answer to the Genoueses.
Ambassadors, he entreated them to be of good cheer, and told them that he
with his Allies would take an order, that so long as the Viscontes should
prosper, the Genoueses should never repent to have implored their aid: with
this hope then he dismissed them, saying, That the assistance and aid of that
family, which they had

These news being brought to Venice, (there being some likelihood of great The
Venetians make new alliance.
war with the Viscontes, by reason of the Genoueses) the Venetians began
forthwith to fortify whatsoever they possessed in the firm Land; and allied
themselves with the Carrarians, those of Escalla, of Aeste, the Gonzagues, and
the Florentines in Tuscanie. Some Authors say, that Visconte, as well in his
own name, as on the behalf of the Genoueses, did by his Ambassadors seek to
procure a peace, in which Petrarke Ambassador for the Milano^s.
negotiation they nominated Francisco Petrarcha for the chief Ambassador, and
that he could not obtain it, though upon great conditions; and they think
that it so happened by the will of God, in regard of the famous and memorable
victory, Victory of the Uenetians over the Genoueses i^ Morea. The Genoueses
make incursions into the Adriatic Gulf.
which the Venetians soon after obtained of the Genoueses in Morea. The
Genoueses, albeit that they had so unfortunately fought, would nevertheless
persist in their obstinacy; For four of their Galleys did within a while
after enter the Venetian

The Senate being moved at these news, commanded fourteen Galleys to be
speedily armed, and Nicholao Pisani to hasten with them to meet the enemy:
But the Genouese was gone forth of the Gulphe, before this Army arrived.

Pisani, to the end his journey should not be altogether unprofitable; sailed
toward Pisani the Venetian General retires to Dalmatia.
the Pontick Sea, where meeting with no memorable action, he retired into
Dalmatia. Ten Galleys which were armed at Arbi came to him thither, which being
joined to the residue, made up the number of four and twenty. It was reported
A new Genouesan Army commanded by Pagano Doria.
(for a whole year was past since their loss on the lower Sea) had set forth
five and twenty Galleys under the conduct of Pagano Doria; and that they were
already departed from Genoa. Pisani having joined ten other Galleys of Giouanni
Sanuto to ^he four and twenty of his own, sailed speedily into Sardinia to
prevent the enemy. Doria, (whether it were that fortune would not have the two
Armies meet, or whether he did it of set purpose, which I rather believe)
having shunned the Venetian Army, so soon as the Venetians were gone from
home, entered furiously Doria spoileth the Adriatic Gulphe.
into the Adriatic Gulphe, to war rather on other men's streams, than on
their own, where in few days he surprised diverse vessels, who met him
unlooked for. The Genoueses take Parenza.
taken thence the bodies of S. Mauro, and S. Charles, he burnt it.

The enemies coming into the Gulphe, with the taking of Parenza, occasioned
The fear which was in Venice for the enemies coming.
a great fear and amazement in the City, no less than if the Genoueses had
been at their gates. Therefore, they speedily chained up their Haven, and
placed a strong Garrison there, because they thought that the enemy would come
directly to the City, who knew that their maine Army was abroad. They planted
Sentinells and Corps-de-guard over all the City, and sent forth light boats to
discover the enemies deseigne: and this fear lasted till certain news was
brought that the Genoa Army was dislodged. Doria departing from Histria, met
with a Venetian Barze on the

The Senate were greatly vexed that the Genoueses after so notable a loss
received the year before, had in so short time raised themselves again, in
such manner, as the Venetians could hardly assure any place abroad, nor yet
their Gulphe at home. And because they knew that the Genoueses were thus
strengthened by the The Venetian Senate displ^ased with Visconte. They make
alliance with the King of Boheme.
aid of Visconte, they resolved to wrap him in a Domesticke war, to cause
him to Charles King of Boheme, with whom not long before they were allied
against Mastin of Escalla. That being done, it was concluded that he should
pass with a mighty Army into Italy against Visconte. And in the mean time
the Venetians exchanged prisoners with the Genoueses.

Andrea Dandulo having governed the Commonwealth almost twelve years,
deceased. After his death the Commonwealth was greatly afflicted abroad, and
at home, during the most dangerous government of Phalerio who succeeded him.
For besides the sundry losses which it sustained at Sea in his time, it was
assailed by two insupportable mischiefs, famine, and pestilence, and with
terrible Earthquakes: And it escaped narrowly from loosing her liberty
likewise, by his Deuilish conspiracy. Dandulo died the sixth of September, and
was honorably buried in S. Marks Church, near to the Font.

MARINI PHALERIO, the Duke of Uenice.





MArini Phalerio Knight, and Earl of Val-Marine, being absent, was declared
Prince. He was at the same time Ambassador for the Commonwealth, to the Pope:
At the same time as the Senate were busied about the election of a new Prince,
news came that three Genoa Galleys were taken by the Venetians, near to the
Islands of Greece: The enemies Army likewise entering the Adriatic Gulf took
certain Merchant ships, and having in a short space gotten a great booty,
departed as speedily as they came.

After the election of Phalerio, Pisani who commanded abroad for the
Commonwealth, Doria, General of the Genoueses came thither so soon as he,
The Venetian Army in the Isle of Sapientia.
with an intent to fight. Blondus says, that they fought at Sea near to the
Island, and that after a long and dangerous combat, the Genoueses got the
victory: Pisani being taken prisoner with five thousand beside. If they did
fight, and employed their whole forces, the fortune of Pisani and the rest is
to be excused, because the events of war are diverse and uncertain, and in
mine opinion he is to be praised, in that he rather chose to die, or to be
taken, than basely to fly. But the Venetian Histories The Venetian Army
surprised
say, that the whole Army was lost that day without fight or slaughter, one
Galley excepted, which escaped. If it be so, we may assuredly think that the
Venetians were surprised by the Genoueses in the same manner, as the Venetians
did the Genoueses certain years before at Chariste, under the command of the
same Pisani, (as some say) and that he was taken in his own snare, and that
the loss was much greater to the Commonwealth than the enemy knew of.

It is reported that the day before this unfortunate loss, diverse prodigies
appeared (...) (...) (...) the (...) of the (...).
to them* and among the rest a great number of Crows fought over the fleet,
part of which were so beaten by their adverse party, as the feathers and blood
dropped down abundantly into the Venetian galleys: Besides, a sayler leaping
out of one gallie into another, was on a sudden swallowed up by a sea monster.
The City being Great discomfort in Venice.
troubled at the report of this loss, the people said that they never received
a greater: and they did believe that their state would have been wholly
overthrown, if the victorious Genoueses should at that instant have come
directly to the City. Where The Genoueses General his error.
beaten him forth of the haven, and to have defended the Citizens? They would
have been wholly ruinated, if the enemy (as it often happens, not knowing
how to make use of his victory) had not sailed some where else, as of a
certain it fell so out. For victorious Doria satisfying himself with his
fortunate exploite, returned with his whole Army to Genoa: where being no
less admired for this notable victory, than for the booty of which he
brought home, he was welcomed with great joy, and general applause of all men.

But the Venetians (as their constancy in adversities has ever been
admirable) The Venetians diligence.
did not spend this small time of relaxation from war in idleness, but did
forthwith Tr^ce taken with Visconte.
from Candie to Venice, which would have greatly molested the inhabitants of
Histria and Dalmatia, if their attempts had not been speedily resisted.

In this state stood their affairs, when as on the landside truce was taken
for four A great bravery of a G^noueses g^lley.
months with Visconte. But in the mean time a galley of Genoa called
Grimaldi meeting on the coast of Morea with the same Venetian gallie, which as
we said did escape from Sapientia, took it, then soon after another wherein
was Guido Tre^sano the Governor of Candie, and soon after, another in the
haven of Frascane: Nicholao Iustiniano, who with those forces went to expulse
the enemy.

Phalerio in the mean time having governed the Commonwealth nine whole The
manner of Phalerio ^is conspiracy.
months, was possessed with a desire to make himself king thereof, whereunto
this wicked man had almost opened the way. This enemy to his own country,
and to the Senate who had elected him to the dignity, did determine to seize
upon the seignorie, A day appointed for the execution.
the enemy was at hand, and that his galleys were already before the haven,
at which rumor the Prince should forth with command all men to take Arms,
and cause the great bell of the high Tower to be rung. At which signal, those
of the conspiracy and then Phalerio should no more be called Duke but Lord.
Some say that they resolved so soon as they should have disanulled the order
of the Senators, to commit the government of the City to the people.

But it is most certain that a Commonwealth well governed has still been
beloved of God, and much more when it is governed by justice, so, as of all
earthly governments, Aristocratia repu^ the be^ of (...).
I think the same to be most pleasing unto him which Plato calls
Aristocratia, which does not obey the commandment of one alone, and which
being most good, (as well in opinion of that learned man, as in the judgment
of all wise men,) has ever beeene esteemed most worthy of praise: Because it
is a true agreement and union of the chiefer sort; and such is the government
of the state of Venice: Beltrand a popular person, By what means the plot was
d^scouered.
and one of the chief of the conspiracy. He the very night before this
massacre should have been committed, being provoked (as it is to be thought)
with repentance for so horrible a crime, came secretly the evening of the same
night to the house of Nichalao Leon one of the Senators, and his gossip, and
having taken him aside, discovered the whole matter: telling him, That being
stirred up with love to his country, and with an exceeding great affection to
the Senate, he could not conceal Phalerio, he be sought him that he would have
him in remembrance, that it might not be imputed to him for a fault, that he
had at the beginning consented to the conspiracy against the Senate and his
country. Leon was amazed, and with the heinousness of the matter, could not
for a time make him an answer, but the fear of the public and particular
danger awaked him. Beltrand being gone home, he speedily sent for the chief of
the Senate, those of the council of the ten, and other officers of the City to
come to speak with him. So soon then as the Senators were come to his house,
and such of the common sort as had not been named by the accuser to have been
acquainted with the plot: those sixteen which were chief of the conspiracy,
The chief conspirators punished. An excellent Architect punished with the rest.
were the same very night apprehended, and being convicted of the crime, were
murdered, and with ropes let down from the top of the Palace upon the
Columns. It is reported that Philippo Calandriero was one of the number, who
was one of the best architects and engrauers of his time, whose skill the
Senate had used in their public buildings. It is thought that the new
buildings as well in the ducall Palace as in the marketplace, which does much
exceed the old, was of his workmanship. I would have concealed his name, if I
had not thought it a cruel deed to deprive so excellent a wit of his praise.
For in this matter, whereof we now spoke, I am so Why the Author does not name
those that were guilty of the conspiracy.
far from mentioning the names of the conspirators, as on the contrary, I
think those that have named them, to have done indiscreetly, who in thinking
thereby to Diana in Ephesus, who being demanded wherefore he did it; answered
that he determined by some notable villainy seeing by virtue he could not) to
leave some memory behind him after his death. It is said, that for to raze
out his remembrance, it was decreed that none should set down his name in
histories: The which was wisely done. For it was a greater punishment to quench
his memory, than to take away his life. Domesticke examples might have
remembered our Citizens of their duty: For after Tepulo his conspiracy, the
Senate expressly forbad, that none should dare to write, paint, or engraue, the
name or arms of Baiamont, nor of any Phalerio his pict^re razed out in the
great hall.
in order in the hall of the great council: to the end that the picture of
wicked Phalerio should not be seen in the rank of Princes, they decreede that
his place should remain void, and be covered with a black veil. Their
opinion was that they could no sharplier punish those who had transgressed
against the Commonwealth, than wholly to blot out their remembrance. And we in
like manner, having named the authors of the conspiracy, because it should be
known who had in times past conspired against the country, have expressly
concealed the name of the rest for to punish them thereby, as we have done
others.

Phalerio likewise was by the Senates commandment the same day punished
Phalerio is put to death.
with death, his body was carried into a little boat to the Church of the
Twins, being accompanied by eight Sergeants, who carried torches. It is
reported that Sundry punishments of the conspirators.
commissioners who were appointed to enquire of this matter, did discover in
eight Phalerio his Palace was given to the Church of the holy Apostle.

He which discovered the conspiracy was not only pardoned, but they gave The
discouerer of the conspiracy recompensed with his discontent.
him a yearly pension of a thousand duckates, and besides, a Senators place:
But he thinking it a mean recompense for such a piece of service, did
publicly accuse Marco Cornari vice-Duke during the trouble^
whence departing before the prefixed time, he died in his journey toward
Hungary. During these troubles Marco Cornari governed the Commonwealth as
Vice-Prince. Then at the next assembly Giouanni Gradonico surnamed Naso, was
chosen Duke.

GIOVANNI GRADONICO surnamed the 56. Duke of Venice.



ABout the same time Bernardo Iustiniano, departed from Venice with seven of
them, and with their allies, and Arms were laid aside, as well by Sea as Land,
Peace betwixt the Venetians and the Genoueses with their allies. A religious
and godly act.
against Bernabo and Galeas Viscount who succeeded John. Then the prisoners
taken in the wars were on each side set at liberty: whereupon the Genoueses
to the number of two thousand being delivered on the feast day of Marie
Magdalen, went by couples, carrying each of them a burning taper in his hand to
give thanks unto God at the Church of the same Saint. This spectacle moved the
whole City to devotion, so as ever since, that feast day has been
solemnized, which before then was not observed.

The end of the third Book of the second Deead.
THE FOVRTH BOOK OF THE SECOND DECAD OF THE HISTORY Of Venice.
The Contents of the fourth Book of the second Decad.
THe truce being expired, LEWIS King of Hungary allieth himself with the
Carrarians and the Patriarch of Aquileia, and at one time assaileth the
Venetiaris in Italy and Dalmatia. The same King returns into Hungary,
having spent some time in vain before Treuiso, and leaves certain troops
there to continue the siege. The Paduans forbidden to traficke at Venice. A
troop of mercenarie Almans defeated by the Hungarians near to the River
Burnt. The Generallreuolt of Dalmatia from the Venetians in favor of King
LEWIS: Peace with the same King. Two Venetian Ambassadors sent to the
Emperor, are taken in Germany by thieves. The Duke of Austria rescueth those
Ambassadors, and brings Candie revolt from the Venetians. LVCHIN VERMIO
goes into the Island with great forces. The Venetians vanquish the Greeks
near to Mount Strombula, who retire to Candace. The Venetians recover the
City of Candace. The Island being quieted, Tilts and Turneyes were made in the
City for joy of the victory. The King of Cyprus in the company of the
Venetian Army takes Alexandria in Egypt. A new sedition in Candie worse than
the former, so soon as the troops were gone forth of the Island. Those of the
Island being a long time very much molested, and their forces at the last
broken, submit themselves to the Venetians obedience. The rebellion of the
Thriestines. The Venetians victory over the Duke of Austria at Thrieste.
Strife betwixt the Venetians and Paduans concerning their limits.

Arms being laid a side by Sea and by Land, and the The Venetians restored to
their usual traffic*
City restored to her ordinary traffic, diverse ships sailed to Cyprus,
and to other Faires and Martes of the Aegean Sea, who for their more safety
(for albeit they feared not the Genoueses, yet the incursions of the Barbarians
kept them in much awe) had certain armed Galleys for their conuoy commanded by
Bernardo Justinian, who having brought them to a safe Port, returned The
Earldom of Val-marin fallen to the Uenetians by Phalerio his death.
speedily into Dalmatia: from whence having taken order for the affairs of the
Province he brought Giouanni Baldo was the first that was sent to govern
Val-marin: that Earldom being fallen to the Venetians by the death of
Phalerio.

This year about the Springtime (because the rumor was that Lewis King of
Hungary made preparations against the Venetians) Marco Cornari, and Marin
Grimani were sent into Hungary, from whence they returned within a while
after, having found the Hungarian disposed to Wars. Some Authors affirm that
the cause of the Kings hatred to the Venetians, was, because they denied him
shipping The cause of the war betwixt the venetians and the King of Hungary.
for the passage of his Army into Italy, at such time as he would have made
war on Queen Ioane. But it is most certain that this King was vanquished by
the Venetians at Zara, before that he began any war in Italy. But whether
it were on this occasion, or for any other, as some say (for we know not
herein whom to follow) without all doubt the Ambassadors were sent into Apulia
to the Hungarian who (as some Authors say) made truce with him for eight
years, and as others say Charles the fourth caused him to give over, who
commanded him to stay till the truce was ended: whereupon he deferred the war
till this present: which the Senate plainly foreseeing, made them (as it is
thought) to hasten the peace with the Genoueses, the which they had before
denied them, when they stubbornely craved it: to the end that being freed from
the Genoan war, they might with more ease intend the other, as they had done.

Some Annals make mention how that Cornari and Grimani the Ambassadors, What
tribute the King of Hungary demanded of the venetians.
might at the same time have easily shunned that war, if they would in the
Commonwealths name have promised him, a white horse, as a yearly tribute for
Dalmatia. The Venetians not intending thereby to wrong their right to Dalmatia
refused it, whereupon so soon as the truce was expired, he entered furiously
into Dalmatia, without farther denouncing of war. It is reported that at his
first coming, The King of Hungary his great Army in Dalmatia.
he brought so great an Army, as at one time he besieged Zara, Scia, Spalatra,
Trahu, and Nona. The Venetians (who do nothing rashly) measuring the enemy by
themselves, did not imagine that he would so soon have been in the field, by
reason whereof they had not furnished the Province with necessaries. But when
they heard how that all the Cities almost of Dalmatia were besieged by the
Hungarians, Francisco Carrario, he passed into The King of Hungary allieth
himself with Carrario.
Italy with a hundred thousand fighting men, without the great supplies of the
Duke of Austria, and the Patriarch of Aquilea, and came and encamped on the
Treuisani. The Earls of Colalta with diverse other Lords, did on a sudden
take part with the Hungarian, who in a short space took Coniglian by
composition, where Zachary Contareno was Governor, after that Sacilla, and
from thence he came and The King of Hungary besieges Treuiso.
besieged Treuiso. The Venetians albeit they were sufficiently busied in
Dalmatia, yet nevertheless upon the first news of the Kings coming into
Italy, they fortified Treuiso with victuals and munition, and sent thither
Marco Iustiniano, Giouanni Delfino, and Paulo Loretano, that they might
together provide for the affairs of the war. The King in the mean time
having published the alliance with Prince Carrario, forbad on pain of life
that none should forage or spoil the Territory of Padua upon any occasion
whatsoever.

The Commonwealth being thus wrapped in so great a war, Prince Gradonico
died, having governed one year and two Months, and was honorably buried in

GIOVANNI DELFINO, the 57. Duke of Uenice.

GIouanni Delfino being absent was subrogated in his sted. He being called The
Duke of Venice is denied a passe-port.
King was incensed against the Venetians: yet nevertheless he came forth of
the City at the same time, on the backside thereof, being well accompanied.
It is not certainly known whether the City were assailed before or after the
Dukes departure: Those whom we follow do greatly vary herein: All Authors
agree in this, that the King having made an approach, with his engines of
battery did Treuiso bravely defended.
furiously assail the City; and that at this assault diverse of his Captains
died there, and among the rest, one of his own near Kinsmen, and that the
City was bravely defended by the Venetians.

The King being wearied that his affairs went no better forward, and out of
hope at that time to take the City, leaving certain troops to continue the
siege, he returned into Hungary. The Venetians being incensed against
Carrario, called home The Venetians incensed against Carrario.
Marini Morosino their Magistrate from Padua, (for that City ever since it was
freed from the Tyranny of Mastin, had still a Venetian Magistrate,) they
commanded moreover that none should carry them any salt, and the Citizens were
forbidden to traffic any more with the Paduans. Then they levied forces in
Germany, the The Almaines defeated through their own default.
who dreamed on no such matter. Their attempt was not vain: For the whole
company by the unexpected coming of the enemies, was broken and put to
flight, and the greatest part of them slain on the place.

In the mean time Marco Iustiniano, surnamed the Great, was sent to Treuiso to
Giouanni Delfino's sted. Not long after, five and twenty Senators were
appointed to ouer-see the affairs of the War: And shortly after truce being
taken with the enemy for five Months, Ambassadors were sent into Hungary to
Peace refused on unjust conditions.
the King, to treat of peace, namely, Andrea Contareni, Michaeli Phalerio, and
Bonitendio the Secretary: But they returned without effecting what they went
for. In this interim, the truce being expired, the enemy took Serrauall. But
the Commonwealth received a great loss in Dalmatia. For the maine war being
in Italy, the Senate were constrained to draw the greatest part of their
forces forth of the Province, and not being able by reason of their Domestic
war, to raise the siege of Spalatra, Sacco, Trahu, and of diverse other small
Towns not far from thence, they were all yielded to the King. Enona wherein
Giouanni Iustiniano commanded A City bravely defended.
was bravely defended, and famine it self could not daunt the courage of the
generous Venetian, to cause him in any sort consent to yield. It is reported
that the scarcity of all necessaries was so great in Enona, as the Soldiers
abstained not from Carrario; yet nevertheless the Castle held still out for
the Venetian.

Now the Venetians holding the affairs of Dalmatia for lost, and those of
Treuiso having been a long time in great hazard, they resolved again to send
Ambassadors to the King to conclude a peace with him on such conditions as
they could. The Venetians enforced to sue for peace. A peace more necessary
than honorable for the Uenetian.
Pietro Treuisano, Giouanni Gradonico, and the Secretary Bonitendio were sent
thither, who obtained peace on these conditions, That whatsoever the Venetians
had till then possessed from the Fanatic Gulf, even to Durazzo, should
remain to King Lewis: and that the Venetians should wholly give over their
right to Dalmatia: As The King infringeth the peace.
bring thence their goods, albeit it was expressly mentioned in the treaty of
peace, The Venetians wisdom.
wrong, rather than to revenge it by a new War.

Peace then being made with Lewis, three Ambassadors were sent into Germany to
the Emperor Charles; Marco Cornari, Giouanni Gradonico, and Lorenzo Celso. The
Historians make no mention why they were sent. Two of them, having left Celso
with the Emperor, returning homewards without effecting what they went for,
and passing through Germany, were surprised by a Prince of the Country, and
The Venetian Ambassadors taken prisoners in Germany.
basely carried away by force into a Castle, an absolute place of retreat for
thieves. Celso understanding what had happened to his fellows, came by an other
way to Seigna, and from thence to the Seaside, from whence he safely sailed
to Venice. Within a while after he was sent with an Army for the guard of the
Gulphe: About the springtime of this year, the contagious sickness began
again: The Summer following, Prince Delfino died, the fifth year of his
Government scarcely expired: and was buried in the Church of the Twins.

LORENZO CELSO, the 58. Duke of Venice.

LOrenzo Celso being absent was chosen in his place. Twelve of the Senate
Victor Pisani was sent in his sted to guard the Gulf It is reported that the
Princes Father did for a time forbear to come and see his Son, because he
would not be enforced to salute him bare-headed, as though it had been an
unseemly and vnheard-off matter, to see a Father inferior to his

About the same time, the Duke of Austria came to Venice with the Ambassadors,
The Duke of Austria comes to Ueni^^*
which were (as has been said) surprised in Germany. His coming thither was
reported to be but only to see the City, which as he had heard was builded on
the marshes. The Prince with diverse of the Senate did honorably receive him
in the Bucentauro, and brought him to the Palace of the Cornari, near to
Saint Lucies Church, prepared for him by the Commonwealth: who so soon as he
had seen the singularities of the City, and given them thanks both in
general and particular, for the courtesies which he had received, he returned
into Germany.

In the Wintertime of the same year, the King of Cyprus attended by a Royal
The King of Cyprus comes to Venice.
train, arrived with three Galleys at Venice; who being received likewise by
the Commonwealth, and brought to the same lodging, where some few Months
before the Duke of Austria had lain, did the morrow after in S. Marks Church
Knight Andreola, surnamed Giouanni, who was appointed Governor of Treuiso:
Then departing for France, he was accompanied by Prince Celso, with the most
part of the Senate as far as Marghera.

In the Month of September the next year after that these two great Princes
had been at Venice, a great rebellion happened in Candie by the Venetians, who
Great sedition in Candie.
dwelled in the Island, whereby the Commonwealth had like to have lost it. The
Senate had decreed in regard of their excessive charge for the wa^s to raise a
certain tribute on the Candiots. At the publishing of this decree, all the
Gentlemen almost The Governor of the Island imprisoned.
(a few excepted) did on a sudden revolt, who laying hands on Leonardo Dandulo
the Governor of the Island, and the Prouidatori, they surprised all the ships
of burden that were in the Haven, which were come thither for the vintage,
with all the merchants that were in it. In this ^umult they hastily chose Marco
Gradonico surnamed Bayardo for their Captain, who was (otherwise) a very
discreet person.

Dominico Michaeli, who at that time guarded the Gulf, having notice of this
Commissioners sent into Candie to app^ase the troubles.
as they should think most expedient. Pietro Souranza, Andrea Zeno, and Marco
M^rofino were sent thither.

It is reported that five more did soon after follow them: but the first and
last Ambassages were to no purpose, those of the Island not only refusing to
give them audience, but to receive them. The Ambassadors perceiving that war
must needs end the business, determined to depart thence in the Venetian
galleys, who returning from the Fai^es of Grecia, were by chance arrived there.
The Captain of the galleys being ready to hoist sail, did furiously seize
upon the inhabitants whom he

The Senate upon the return of the Commissioners, resolved by a general
consent, to make war upon those perfidious Colonies, and the residue of the
Island, who had openly revolted from their obedience, and did particularly
banish diverse of the chief of the rebellion, whom they had proclaimed enemies
to the Commonwealth: Ambassadors sent every where against the Candiots.
But first of all, they dispatched messengers to the Pope, the Emperor
Charles, Lewis King of Hungary, Ioane Queen of Sicily, and to all Christian
Princes and people almost, to let them understand of the treacherous and
unworthy rebellion of their Colonie in Candie; and to entreat them if they
would not Advertisement to Christian Princes against the Candiols.
give them aid and assistance to revenge such an injury, at the leastwise not
to hinder them from doing it, and that they would not aid their rebels, though
they should request it; That they knew well enough that it was notorious to the
whole world, that the City of Candace in Candie was a Colonie of the
Venetians, and that the Venetians were scattered over the whole Island. That it
was lawful for Fathers when their children are stubborn and disobedient, and
that they cannot by entreaties nor threatenings reduce them to their obedience,
to use the rod to chastise them. That the Venetians meaning was, seeing they
could not by gentleness and fair means bring the Candiots to the remembrance
of their duty, to attempt to do it by Arms: the which they did soon hope to
do, if they were not aided

The Ambassadors were in all places friendly heard and entertained, and there
The entertainment given by the christian Princes to the Venetian Ambassadors.
Dominico Michaeli General of the venetians nauall ArmieLuchin Vermio of
Verona, General of the land-Armie. The number of the land-Armie.
was no man, but in detestation of the Candiots fact, did liberally offer them
all assistance. In the mean time they levied a mighty Army, and made
Dominico Michaeli General thereof, who was before, Prouidator of the Gulf;
and the land-Armie was committed to Luchin Vermio of Verona who was expressly
sent for to Venice for the same purpose: He having received his oath from the
Prince well and faithfully to serve the Commonwealth, did forthwith receive the
public ensigns: Great sums of money were levied on the Citizens, as well to
begin the war as to continue it. Vermio, so soon as all the troops were
assembled, and the fleet ready, to the end he might not be ignorant with what
forces he fought, made a general muster

The fleet which consisted of three and thirty galleys, and eight ships of
burden, The number of the fleet.
leaving Venice on the ninth of April, arrived about the seventh of May at
Fresca, a place very near to Candace. But during these preparations, certain
Gentlemen of Candace, having by chance understood what had been concluded at
Venice after the return of the Commissioners, and being certified that they
were not of the number of the banished, hoping of pardon began secretly to
favor those which remained faithful and obedient to the Venetians. For diverse
at the beginning not allowing of such a wicked practice absented themselves
from the City, and retired The rebels fear
revolt, considering the great danger which threatened them, not only from
their enemies, but from their own Citizens, were afraid least those whom they
perceived to waver, would by some good offices practice somewhat against them
by the aid of those which were absent. For there was likelihood that those who
at the beginning had opposed themselves against their designs, would forthwith
upon the arrival of the Venetian Army fall upon them: And notwithstanding
that many of them were of sundry opinions, yet no man durst propound that
which one alone by the advice of one particular person must presume to execute.

This man whosoever he was, dealt with one named Calergo, the Pneumaticke,
Calergo consented thereunto, and came first of all to Mopsilla, a pleasant
country house, where he assailed Andrea Cornari, The miserable death of Andrea
Cornari.
and slew him. It is reported that Calergo had in times past been his guest,
and had been ever succored and desended by him: And that so soon as Cornari
saw him come armed, he did on a sudden demand wherefore he came: who made
answer that he was sent to kill him. Whereupon he put him in mind of his
ancient hospitality, and other good turns which he had received from him, for
which, he entreated The pretense of a murderer to execute his enterprise.
him not to kill the man unto whom he was so infinitely bound. The murderer

After Cornari his death, he did in sundry places pursue diverse other
faithful servants Diverse slain by the same murderer.
to the Venetians. Gabriel Veniero, Marini and Lorenzo Pascalis were slain,
one at his farm at Pulla, and the other at Melissa; Lorenzo Gritti, at
Pestria, then Zannachio Iustiniano, and Leonardo Abraham with diverse others,
who tasted the furious cruelty of the murderer.

The Greeks waxing more bold by means of Calergo his executions, came with
Demand of the Greek multitude.
great arrogancy, and assailed the Nobility, saying, That they would have ten
natural all the Venetian prisoners that were there, that they might murder
them. Threatenings of the Candiots.


In the mean time he that suborned Calergo, intending wholly to raze out the
Latin name in the Island, sent for his murderer to come to a certain place
two miles distant from the City to confer with him about the betraying of
the City: wishing rather that the government of the Island should fall to
Calergo and the Greeks than to the Venetians. Upon the way he fell into the
hands of those whom Marco Gradonico the Governor had sent for to take him. For
the Governor with others, so soon as they heard tell that they had slain the
Venetian Geutlemen, whereunto not any but one man had consented, did presently
send to seize upon Calergo. For they feared that this Greek having committed
such a villainous deed, Calergo the mur therer taken. Exemplari^ punishment of
Calergo.
would still practice greater cruelty. This wicked man being taken, and
brought to the City, in revenge of the Venetian blood which he had spilt, was
thrown down from the top of the Palace upon the point of swords, and his
body being cut into diverse pieces, was cast upon the City dunghill.

This spectacle was very pleasing to the people. Whereby we may observe, how
The lightness and inconstancy of the multitude
great the inconstancy of a multitude is, which depends on the very least
motions: and that their love or hatred respects not the deed, but only the
fortune of him whom they follow. A little before, those of Candace favored
Calergo, but so soon as they saw him drawn to execution, they wholly forsook
him, and judged him worthy of death. The nobility being daunted with those
mischiefs and The Candiots resolve to yield to the Genouese.
alone were held fittest for it, as well for their power by Sea, as for the
ancient envy which they did bear to the Venetian greatness. And therefore
they concluded to send ten Ambassadors to Genoa, the one half Italians, and
the other Greeks. Two of these being entreated to deliver their opinion, did
boldly answer that they thought it fittest to send to Venice to the Prince and
Senate, offering (if A free speech of two Senators of Candie.
they thought good) that they would not only be of the Ambassade, but rather
to take the whole charge upon themselves if need were, assuring them in so
doing, they should obtain a general pardon, to their great profit, and for
the honor and dignity of the Commonwealth.

On the contrary, others being moved with envy said, that it behooued them to
^arco Gradonico murdered in the Palace.
send to Genoa. It is reported that Marco Gradonico, one of those who was of
opinion to send to Venice, being called into the Senate, under pretense of some
public matter, was murdered by some of the contrary part, who were hidden in
the Chapel of the Palace. And the residue who did in any sort seem to lean
to his opinion, were in danger likewise to have been murdered. They were
diverse days The Candiots send Ambassadors to Genoa. Georgio Molino Bishop of
Ca^on.
was resolved on for Genoa. Wherefore having made ready a galley for the
Ambassadors, it happened by chance that Georgio M^lino, Bishop of Coron, a man of
singular affection toward his country, was at the same time in the Island,
who having understood of the Candiots revolt, was come thither to procure (if
he could) a peace, and as he was returning thence, (by reason he could not do
that he came for) one of those who at the beginning were of opinion to send to
Venice, did secretly wish him to aduertize the Prince and Senate, that they had
sent to Genoa to deliver the Island into their hands. The venetian Prince and
Senate send Ambassadors to Genoa. The Genoueses answer to the Candiots.


This being known at Venice by Molinos letters, Ambassadors were speedily
dispatched and particular, that it was not lawful for them to succor so noble
an Island, and (as they understood by that Ambass^de) which did greatly affect
the Genoueses. They wished them therefore to depart, and to seek aid
elsewhere, and not to expect any from them: in regard they had sworn to the
contrary.

The Candiots being dismissed without any hope of aid, returned home to their
houses. The Venetians in the mean time had made have, and were come (as has
The venetia^ Army at Fresca.
been said) about the seventh of May to Fresca. Between that place, and the
City, there is a very high hill, called Strombula, and near to it two
others, so near the one to the other, as a far off you would not think them
to be three hills, but one. Almiron.
which place the Islanders call Almiron. Those warers are reported in VVinter
to be somewhat fresh, in regard of the streams which fall down into them from
the neighbor mountains, which make a small river (serving for the use of
certain milles) which a mile thence on the North side enters into the Sea.
From the mouth of the river to the City by Sea, is but an open shallow Road.
The Army The Candioti cruelty to the venetians.
reproach did more incense the Venetians against the Greeks, than the slaughter.

Michaeli so soon as he had landed his troops, went with the fleet, and
besieged the City. Luchin before he passed any farther, spoke to his soldiers
in this manner.

Vermio his Oration to his Soldiers.
I Persuade my self that ye are not ignorant (having sailed so large a
distance of Sea) of the cause why at this time ye are sent into this Island.
We are come hither to punish the disloyalty of the new inhabitants of Candace,
who have strayed from the natural condition of Venetians, and also to chastise
the audacious rashness of certain Greeks. Now therefore by how much more the
Venetians cause is most just, by so much the more ought we to strive to get the
victory for fear (which I would be sorry) least if we be over come through our
own negligence, the Venetians cause will be reported to be no better than
their Army. Ye are to fight with an enemy, who by nature is no soldier, nor
experienced in Arms, who has not thrown himself headlong into this war
for any trust he has to his own forces, but by his own retchlesse temeritie.
Besides, they have neither cauallerie, Armor, nor foreign aid, nor indeed
any thing wherein they may hope, saving in their own folly, by which they will
be as easily overthrown, as they have inconsiderately cast themselves into
this danger. One thing we may fear, which is, that being shut up in their
walls, they will thereby for a while deprive us of our victory. But being as
they are proud and presumptuous, I hope they will sallie forth, which if they
do, and you being such as you ought to be, the victory is ours. The place
besides where we are, does constrain us to fight: for this Province is
environed with the Sea, and in it we have no place of retreat. Our fleet so
soon as we were landed, hoysted their sails, and is gone to besiege the
City. We must then either die betwixt the shore and these that we must not
only fight valiantly, (for our cause is better, and we are valianter than
they) but, whether we will or no, if we desire to live, we must show our selves
courageous in regard of the difficulty of these places. Moreover the wealth of
this Island does exhort us to win the victory, whereof if we become masters,
we may hope for a most rich booty. Furthermore, the Venetians are, and have
always been rewarders os brave and valorous men, who being mindful of your
worth, will or daine perpetual pensions for the best amongst you, and indeed
for all, if you do all show your selves worthy men. To conclude, if no other
thing inuit you to play the men, yet ought the example of your Captain to
provoke you thereunto. I command you then to go out with the self same
courage as ye shall see me your Captain to march with. He is not worthy to be
termed a soldier, but a base Bisonian, who whilst his Captain shall fight,
does shamefully retire from the battle. For my own part, if I shall perceive
any one to ma^ch fearfully to the fight, I will be as great an enemy unto
him, as to the Greeks against whom we fight.

Vermio having spoken thus to his Soldiers, commanded every one to be in a
readiness to march against the enemy. The Greeks in the mean time who were
sent to guard the streights of the mountains, waxing more proud for their last
victory The Candiots error.
(as I think) leaving the hills with a desire to fight, came down into the
bottom to assail the Venetians. Vermio would not loose so fair an advantage,
but suddenly set his forces in order of battle. The Candiots were at the
first brunt in a manner broken, and so narrowly pursued by the victorious
Venetian, The Candiots defeated.
to do in those streights) as they sought to escape by manife^t flight. The
Italians followed them at the heels and slew them every where, so that more
were slain in the flight than in combat: diverse having thrown away their
Arms escaped into the mountains, but greater numbers did with an headlong
race draw the enemy near to the walls. It is reported that the Venetians
followed them so courageously as they lost many of their people at the City
gates. Those of Candace being The City of Candace yielded
daunted with this loss, and perceiving themselves to be besieged by Sea and
Land, despairing of foreign aid, began forthwith to treat of yielding.
Wherefore after they had taken the Venetians faithful promise, that the poor
inhabitants Michaeli and to the Prouidatori. Vermio being commanded to enter
The Venetians Soldiers ready to mutiny.
with a few troops; the gates were shut after him, so as the Soldiers were
deceived of the booty they hoped for. There had like to have been a mutiny
in the Camp; and there wanted no setters on to cause them not only to mutiny
but absolutely to revolt, accusing Vermio, and Michaeli the General of the
Sea-Armie, for depriving the Soldiers of the booty which they had won by
their valor. Vermio app^aseth it.
But Vermio having understood their coffeehouse, came amongst them, and
after he had sharply rebuked the Authors of the mutiny, he so far
prevailed with the Prouidatori, as they presently gave them double pay, and by
this means the The rebels punished.
same time were returned by chance from Genoa, falling into the Venetians
hands, were punished according to their deserts.

The news, first of the victory and then of the taking of the City of
Candace, Great joy at Venice for the recovery of Candy
did greatly rejoice the Senate and the whole City. Thanks was given to
Almighty God in the Churches. prisoners were set at liberty; and diverse poor
maids were married with the public purse. Tilts and Tournaments continued for
certain Mark by young Gentlemen, with sumptuous preparation, who were five
and twenty in number, each of them furnishing five hundred crowns for the
scaffoldes and other expenses. The King of Cyprus being returned forth of
France was present at it, and fought at Barriers with the son of Vermio, a
brave young man, and of great hope. Some say that Vermio himself was one of
the Judges at the Tilt. If it were so we must not believe that this public
show was so soon made. It is reported that one named Pascalis Who won the
honor at the turn^y.
M^not, who came with the son of Vermio, wanne the glory of the turney, and
that the victory was adjudged to him: which was a Crown of gold, of the value
of three hundred and threescore Crowns.

The Island being quiet and reduced under the Venetians obedience, the
victorious Army returned to Venice. But the alliance made with the King of
Cyprus, was the occasion of setting forth a new Army, wherewith the Cypriot
soon after surprised and spoiled the famous City of Alexandria in Egypt. But
he could Celso after A new commotion in Candie.
he had governed three years and ten months died. His body was buried in
the Caelestines. Marco Cornari was chosen in his place.

MARCO CORNARI, the Duke of Uenice.



AT the beginning almost of his government a new revolt happened in Candie,
fiercer than that whereof we now spoke. Diverse Greek Gentlemen, who in the
last stirs had in some sort favored the rebels, Vermio his troops, and
the nauall Army were gone forth of the Island. For having then fortified the
places which belonged to either party, and then from day to day practicing
other novelties, they did not cease to disturb the peace of the Island, until
they had caused all places to Arm against the Venetians.

It is reported that John Calergo was the Author of the troubles who was one
Who was the Author of the new commotion.
of the noblest families of the Island. He having set up the ensigns of the
Greek Empire proclaimed every where, That it was done for the protection of
the Isle of Candie, exhorting all those who loved their liberty to follow him.
Diverse being amazed, took Arms. Those which followed him, first of all swear
to destroy the Nicholao Dandulo, and The death of Nicholao Dandulo and his
brother.
his brother; and having murdered them they seized on their Castles. Nicholao
Iustiniano Prouidator, and Dominico Molino, leaving the City, to resist
Calergo his attempts, took certain places from the rebels which they burnt.
Those of Calergo his faction on the other side being suddenly come to the
Suburbs of Castel-nouo The spoils made by the Candiots.
which belonged to the Venetians, which were newly inhabited, burnt them to
ashes. But the Town being bravely defended by Pietro Treuisano the Prouidator,
they were shamefully put to flight; and from thence they came and seized on
Rethimna: Those which were within it for the guarde thereof, despairing of
ability Rethimna taken by the ^ehells.
to defend it in regard of their small number, leaving their horses behind
them, went to Sea and came to Candie. The Greeks after they had driven away
the Venetians from diverse places who had newly inhabited the Island, pursued
the course of their victory, and ceased not till they had made all that which
lies toward the West from Thalis unto the Promontorie of Spatha, to revolt
from the Why the Venetians were troubled at this new s^irre.
at Venice put the Senate in marvelous care to begin the war again; which
was the more grievous unto them, by how much they had thought the affairs of
Candie to be safer than at any time before. The Prince and Senate commanded
those who were in the Island to levy forces from all parts, and to procure
horsemen out of Licia, Caria, and Ionia, if they could get none elsewhere. They
sent The Popes indulgences against the Candiots.
likewise to the Pope (the which they easily obtained) to entreat him to grant
plenarie Indulgences of all sins commitred till that time, to all those, who
would take Arms against those perfidious Candiots.

This was done in Italy, whilst the Islanders being vanquished by Nicholao
Iustiniano The Ca^diots defeated.
they were diuerted from their attempts. For their meaning was to have seized
on the mountains; but I know not whether it were to save and defend
themselves, or rather from thence to assail their enemies by a sudden and
unexpected coming upon them. Moreover, the Greeks all the winter made sundry
and different attempts, against which the Prouidatori did with great diligence
opportunely oppose New Prouidatori sent with supplies to the Isla^d.
themselves. Giacomo Bragadino, Paulo Loretano, Pietro Mocenigo, Lorenzo
Dandulo, and Andrea Zeno were sent into the Island as new Prouidatori: They had
commandment likewise to levy Soldiers as well horse as foot from all
places.

Having received the old bands, and added new supplies to them, they were
ready Giacomo Bragadino speedily marched against The Candiots defeated and put
to ^light by Ciacomo Bragadino.
them with four hundred horse and fifteen hundred foot; they fought there
very fiercely: where those of the Island being broken and defeated, diverse
were slain in the battle, but the number of the Prisoners exceeded who were
all hanged;

Thus stood the state of the Island when on a sudden the inhabitants of
fifteen Fifteen villages revolt.
Villages revolted, who fearing to be defeated in open field retired with their
wives and children intto the mountains of Lasithes where they were forthwith
assisted by the cheifest of the Rebellion. Diverse others did the like, who for
their more safety betook themselves to those mountains.

The forces of the Greeks being thus augmented, they were not satisfied with
defending Great boldness of the reb^lls.
themselves, but trusting to their great numbers, they came cheerfully Pietro
Mocenigo perceiving the whole Island almost to be infected with this fury, and
to tend to a general revolt, and that he could by no means fight with the
enemy who kept still in the mountains, brought back his troops to Candece,
intending to keep the City and to repress the enemies violent eruptions. Then
he certified the Prince and Senate of the state of the Island, Mocenigo his
resolution.
and requested them to send more forces if they desired to see the enemies
treachery daunted; that his fellows and himself had with much ado gotten
five hundred horse out of Asia; that they wanted greater numbers both of horse
and foot, which of necessity must be sent to them, if they intended to reduce
the Island under their obedience. And therefore he besought them to take
speedy order that supplies might be forth with sent from Italy.

Before Mocenigo his letters came to Venice. Pantaleon Barba, Giouanni Zeno,
Nicholao New Prouidatori and new supplies sent into Candi^.
Treuisan^, Andrea Zeno, and Nicholao Iustiniano, departed from the City with
certain troops of footmen, who came into the Island as new Prouidatori. They
being arrived the old ones returned home ( Pietro Mocenigo excepted) who
remained still Governor. Those that came last having received the old troops
and assembled all the forces which were in the Island, caused them to be
embarked in three Galleys and two ships of burden, and sailed to
Milopotamus. From thence they forthwith marched toward the enemy; against
whom, being shut up in strong and inaccessible places, Andrea Zeno, one of the
Prouidators, being courageously provoked with a desire to fight, and entering
with his forces into a dangerous place, The death of Andrea Zeno.
was slain by those who defended the passage from above. He being dead, they

In this manner the new Prouidatori began the war with the enemy, when a
great number of footmen being come from Italy, in three ships of burden,
did maruelously strengthen the Venetian Army. Whereupon, the Prouidatori made
diverse attempts upon the enemy, but of small moment, for the Venetian could by
no means draw the enemy to fight. But the spoils and burning up of houses
here and there in the Island, was the cause of a great dearth. Howbeit at last
the scarcity of victuals was much greater in the Candiots Camp than in that
of the Venetian, because the Venetian Galleys did from all parts bring them
plenty of corn and all other kind of victuals. Whereupon, those in the
mountains enforced Iustiniano, who lay The rebels enforced by famine yield to
the venetians.
encamped not far from thence, they submitted themselves unto the Venetians
obedience. Those that were guilty were forthwith punished. The reduction of
these men did in such sort daunt the courage of the Greeks, as all that which
lies from mount Strombulo stretching Eastward even to the midst of the
Island, did in short space yield to the Venetians: whereupon the whole burden
of the war fell on a sudden on that part of the Island which lies toward
the West* Diverse Venetians who had been Authors of those reuolts, to make
themselves more acceptable to the Greeks, renounced the Latin name and
promised to observe the Greek ceremonies.

Iustiniano hoping to do some exploit, in regard of the enemies amazement,
took on a sudden four hundred Horse and foot, of those who had continued
faithful to the Venetians; and departing with them from Candace, he marched
against the The Siuerites vanquished by Iustiniano.
Siuerits, where having beaten down the enemies Fortes and defenses, which
they had encompassed with a high Wall made without mortar, the event was
fortunate. They fought with the like good success at the same time at
Milopotamus and in other places: The Lithernians being provoked by these
attempts, did The Lithernians return to the venetians obedience. The rebels
executed.
deliver Alexis Calergo, with his brother and his children, to Cressio Molino,
who after Zeno his death at Milopotamus, came into the Island: He caused them
to be safely conducted to Candace, with Zannachio Molino a kinsman of his
own, who Georgio Calergo, and his children, falling at the same time into the
Venetians hands, had the like end.

Iustiniano, and Nicholao Treuisano, desirous to pursue the enemy who was
half broken, joined their forces together near to Anopolis, where were diverse
enemies both Greeks and Latins. The place was strong by nature, and the
situation thereof The situation of A^polis.
inaccessible. There was but one way to come to it; and but one only means to
batter the enemy: Namely, for the Venetians to seize on the Hill which
commands the Town. The which being soon done by the Prouidatori, in few
days Aonpolis taken.
they became masters of the place: Giouanni and Georgio Calergo with diverse
Venetians of the number of the Rebels, were there taken and brought to Candace.
It is Ra^esse of a rebel.
reported that Georgio being found with his brother Giouanni hid in a Cave, did
attempt by the shot of an arrow to kill him, who came foremost to surprise him;
but A merry answer of a soldier to one of the rebels.
to his wounds; the Soldier who was next him, told him that his wounds needed
neither Chyrurgion nor plaster, jesting openly at the poor prisoner, who was
shortly to loose his head.

The enemies being every where put to flight, Candie became quiet, whither came
Giouanni Dandulo, Paulo Loretano, Pietro Morosini, Giouanni Fuscareno, and
Thadeo Iustiniano, being sent by the Senate to enquire of the state of the
Island, and to Cornari being oppressed with age, having governed two years and
eight months, died, and was buried in the Church of the Twins.

ANDREA CONTARENI, the 60. Duke of Uenice.





ANdrea Contareni succeeded him, who hy some apprehension of future matter did
for a time refuse this dignity, and had of purpose retired himself to a house
of his own in the territory of Padua; resolving not to return to the City
until they had chosen a new Duke. But How hardly Contareni accepted of his
dignity.
by no means yielding to come to the City neither by the Senates letters, nor
yet by those of his familiar friends, certain of his kinsmen were commanded
to go and tell him, That if he continued in his wilfulness, the Senate
determined to confiscate his goods, and to banish him for ever from the
Commonwealth. It is reported that then, the fear of his own particular loss
made him obey and return to Venice. If he did this feeling himself not to be
fit for such a What those ought to do that are called to public offices.
Commonwealth: the profit whereof he ought chiefly to respect whosoever he be
that is called to such a dignity. For it ought not to be accepted so much for
a man's own particular gain as for the common good. They therefore which
aucupate public honors, ought to examine themselves what they are, and what
their sufficiency is; and if they feel themselves unfit for such place, let
them know, that it shall be as profitable for themselves, as for the
Commonwealth to make an honest Contareni his fault inexcusable.
excuse. But Contareni was not guilty of such a fault who wanted neither
wisdom, nor skill to govern. But if he did it (as I perceive) to avoid the
labor and

So soon as he had accepted the charge, the Thryestines revolted. The
Venetians The Thryestines revolt.
kept an Armed Gallie in Histria for the guard of the Toll. The Thryestines,
who along time before had hatched alterations, fell on a sudden upon the
Venetians who were there by chance, and picking quarrels with them, slew the
Committie of the Gallie, and having hurt some others they would have

The Senate perceiving whereunto the Thryestines dealings tended, and A
Venetian Army against the Thryestines.
knowing that they ought no longer to temporize, did speedily send an Army
thither; which besieged those mutinous people both by Sea and Land. The
Land-Armie was committed to Dominico Michaeli; and that by Sea to Cressio
Molino. It was then the midst of winter. And because it was to be feared that
if the Venetians should procrastinate, the enemies might fortify themselves
with New supplies comes to the Army.
thither, and new Prouidatori; Paulo Loretano succeeded Dominico Michaeli; and
Thaddaeo Iustiniano, Cressio Molino: who brought two thousand Treuisans to the
Camp.

The Thryestines being daunted to see the Venetian forces daily to increase
began The Thriestines resolve to yield to the Duke of Austria.
to bethink themselves whence they might be relieved. They resolved to have
recourse to the Duke of Austria, to implore his favor and assistance, and to
deliver their City, means, and estate into his hands. To this purpose they
sent Ambassadors to him, by whom they yielded themselves to his protection, and
on a sudden they set upon the top of the highest tower the Dukes ensigns.
The Duke soon afterward came thither with ten thousand horse, and great
numbers The Duke of Austria brings aid to the Thryestines.
of foot. The Venetian in the mean time having spoiled round about, had
brought all the towns near to the City under their subjection. The Almaines
at their first arrival came and besieged the Venetians Camp with such
vehemency as in a moment they seized on the trenches. The Camp would hardly
have sustained this assault had not the Soldiers and Mariners who were a
far off hearing the noise ran to the rescue of their fellows. Those of the
camp were so encouraged A base retreat of the Almaines.
by their arrival as they did not only drive the enemies forth of their
trenches but with great loss constrained them to retire. Truce for a day was
granted to the Almaines The Thryestines return to the Venetians obedience. A
new war with Francisco Carrario. The cause of the war.
aid, did on certain conditions return to the Venetians obedience, which
being done, the victorious Army returned to Venice.

The City was not long at rest. For a new war was raised against Francisco
Carrario: the cause thereof proceeded (as is said) from Carrario, who usurped a
certain place near to the lakes, the which belonged to the Venetian. The
Venetians being moved with this injury did forbid the Paduans the traffic
and commerce of Commissioners appointed on, both sides to enquire of their
strife.
of Hungaries Ambassadors came afterward for the Carrarians: (for they said
that they were under the protection of King Lewis) and those of Florence and
Pisa for the Venetians; and by their means truce was taken for two months.
The Venetians deputed five commissioners; and the Carrarians as many, who
should debate the matter, and search out their bounds in friendly sort and
afterward mark their limits. But they could effect nothing.

At the same time the Venetians were informed that the Tyrant had practiced
Carrario his purpose discovered.
with certain bad persons to murder diverse of the Senate. Diligent search was
made for them over all the City, and some of them were found and taken in the
house of a poor woman named Gobba. The woman's life was saved, because she had
freely confessed the truth; but she was confined to prison for ten years. All
the rest were punished according to their deserts being drawn through the City
with horses, and then cut in quarters at the Colummes. Their hostess son who
had promised to show the murderers those whom they should kill, was hanged in
the same place. Not long after, others being convicted of the same crime were
punished in the same manner. The Senate fearing, that by these murderers the
Commonwealth might Carrario, should be guarded by Armed men from their houses
to the Palace. They commanded besides to look carefully to the wells, for
the report was, that he intended to poison them, and by that means to undo
the whole City.

The Senate were not yet freed from care, when as a new fear surprised them.
Traitors in the Senate, known and punisted.
For they suspected that some of their own company did by close intelligence
advertise Carrario, of whatsoever was secretly done in the Senate. Inquiry
here of being made, they found certain Senators to be guilty of that fact.
Whereupon those who were found least faulty were dismissed from the Senate,
and were declared to be for ever unworthy to execute any public charge, the
others were condemned ^arre prepared against the Carrarians.
and down from all sides, could not prevent a future war, which the
Venetians perceiving, they made speedy preparations for the same.

The end of the fourth Book of the second Decad.
THE FIFTH BOOK Venice.
The Contents of the fifth Book of the second Decad.
RAYNIERO General to the Venetians, gives over his place soon after the
beginning of the War with the Paduans. The Venetians receive a great
overthrow by the Hungarians, upon the banks of the River Anaxus, called at
this day the Piaua. The Venetians victory against the Transiluanian, with the
taking of him. Peace with the Paduans. The Duke of Austria begins a new
war with the Venetians. They fight with the Almanes near to Longina: Feltre
besieged, and the siege forthwith raised by the coming of LEOPOLDE. The
Austrian Merchants are prisoned at Venice. Peace with LEOPOLDE. The cause of
the fourth Ligusticke Tenedos. The Venetians drive the Greeks and Genoueses
from Tenedos. The Venetians War (almost at one time) with King LEWIS, the
Bishop of Aquileia, the Genoueses, and the Carrarians. The Genoueses being
vanquished at Sea near to Ancia, lost diverse of their Galleys. The Venetians
bad success in Cyprus at the siege of Famagosta. The taking of Catharra by
VICTOR PISANI. The Genoueses refuse to fight on the Sea of Tarentum. The
Paduans besiege Mestra. VICTOR PISANI takes Sabenico. Trahu is twice besieged
in vain. How hardly they made provision for victuals in the Winter, and the
loss of a great part of the Venetian Army by extremity of cold. PISANI
having lost his Army at Pola, is imprisoned at Venice. The Genoueses being
proud of this victory, having greatly augmented their Army, lay siege to
Chioggia.

IT was very likely that in these great warlike preparations by land, there was
need of some one man who should be well experienced, diligent, and a trusty
friend to the Venetians, unto whom they might (as very often in former times
they had done in the like troubles) safely commit the charge of their Army.
Whereupon they concluded for this purpose to Rayniero Uasco General of the
Uenetian Army
send for Rayniero Vasco forth of Tuscanie, one of the best Captains of his
time; and in the mean time to Dominico Michaeli to the Army to command there
until his arrival. They sent with him Andrea The rendezuous of the Army at
Mestra.
Zeno and Thaddeo Iustiniano for Prouidatori. The Rendez-uous of all the
troops was at an appointed day, assigned at Mestra. From thence the Army
first marched against the Paduans. The Venetians entered the enemies Country,
and having made diverse skirmishes with good success, they filled all places
where they came with fear and terror.

In this mean time Rayniero arrived at Venice, where having received the
public Ensigns, he hasted with greater forces to the Camp, which he
forthwith caused to march; and having passed the river Burnt, he forraged and
spoiled the Paduans Territory which was next him, unto the river of Brentello.
Carrosino says, that he could not foord that river, because it was greatly
swelled with the rain, and that therefore he led his Army through the
Territory of Vincenza toward Padua, The retreat and dismission of the
General.
the Brentello to be the nearer to assail the enemy, the Prouidatori would
by no means suffer him to do so: whereupon he being moved with choler, that
he might not manage the war as he pleased (saying that the ignorance of the
Prouidatoridid snatch a goodly occasion forth of his hands) gave over his
charge, calling God and men to witness, That their wilfulness did hinder him
from obtaining the victory.

The Prouidatori were suspected to have been corrupted by the enemy, and by
that means to have endammaged the Commonwealth. Yet nevertheless the
Venetians affairs prospering, and having taken certain Towns from the
enemy, that suspicion ceased. The enemy perceiving that without foreign aid
he could not long resist the Venetians, called the King of Hungary to his
aid, with whom ever since the siege of Treuiso he had been in league: Some
Authors think that this league was sworn at the beginning of the war. But
the Venetians having notice that the Hungarian made preparations both by Land
and Sea (which he The Hungarians come to aid the Paduans.
might easily do having taken Dalmatia from them) the Senate decreed to set
forth besides the Land-Armie, a fleet by Sea, whereof Michaeli Delfino was
made General, and the Prouidatori were Pietro Iustiniano, Procurator of S.
Mark, and Pietro Cornari. This fleet being gone to Sea, kept all the
Seacoasts safe for the Venetians during this war.

The Paduans affairs stood at the same stay as I have said, at such time as
great numbers of Hungarians came to their succor. Their first arrival was on
the Treuisan, where they put all to fire and sword, respecting neither age nor
sex, and their murder still increasing, they fought at times with bad
success. For Thaddeo Iustiniano at the first report of the enemies coming, to
resist their attempts did speedily encampe on the river of Piaua: But the
Venetians discouerers being surprised by The Venetians vanquished by the
Barbarians.
the enemies, the Hungarians were sooner seen than heard of: whereupon they
fell Justinian, who hasted after the fugitive enemy, who having put themselves
in order on the river banks, the fight began more cruel than before:
whereupon the Hungarians became victors, and the Venetians being vanquished,
very few of them escaped from the battle: the number of the dead was great,
and that of the prisoners small.

On the report of this loss, the residue of the Army retired on a sudden to
the Treuisan: The enemy soon followed him thither, and in his view presented
him the battle. But the Venetians keeping themselves in their Fort, and the
enemy Albert Duke of Austria, an Associate of King Lewis in that war.

Some Authors say that Carrario gave those Towns to Albert, to procure him to
take Arms against the Venetians: wherein the German showed himself very
indiscreet, seeing that a while before, the Paduan in the treaty of peace had
offered them to the Venetians, who refused them, because they would not do any
thing to displease the German.

Delfino General of the nauall Army, having gone round about the Lakes in
certain The Venetians build two Forts on the takes.
light boats, commonly called Ganzarioles, came and builded a Fort at Lupa
Podoana, and then an other near to the same: by means of which, the Venetians
might more commodiously break the enemy, and offend him near hand. Rayniero
Vasco who (as we have Diverse opinions concerning Rayniero his dismission.
said) did voluntarily give over his place, was shamefully driven from it.
Giacomo Moro being sent to command the fleet, having stayed a while at the
Forts which Delfino had builded, fell sick, and was carried home to Venice.

Rayniero being gone, Alberto Carrario came to command the Land Army: At this
Alberto Carrario in Rayniero his place.
arrival with Leonardo and Andrca Dandulo, and Pietro Fontano Prouidatori,
they fought in the Lakes with no great success. They fortified a place which
was very commodious for the Venetians very near to Delfino his Forts.
Carrario came unlooked for, Stephano the Transiluanian, General of the
Hungarian horsemen, marched in battle against the Venetians to hinder their
work: Leonardo Dandulo went forth to meet him, resolving to fight with him if
he had been so contented: But the Transiluanian as if it had been of set
purpose did the same day abstain from the Pietro Fontano whose lot was that
day to command (for he and Carrario commanded the Army by turns) did by the
break of day very courageously embattaile the Army, the enemy for his part
did the like. The battle being concluded on, the Venetian commanded the men
at Arms to alight from their horses and to fight among the footmen, and as he
was putting them in order, The venetians victory over the Hungarians.
he exhorted and entreated all of them to resolve either to die or get the
victory, protesting to hold him for an enemy, and to kill him which should
but only make show of flight, and that himself would be in the foremost
ranks, not so much to encourage them, as to note and observe every man's
valor. The Soldiers being animated Fontano his exhortation to his Soldiers.
by this speech, gave a brave onset, and fought so valiantly, and with such
feruencie, as having broken and defeated the enemy, they purchased that day a
goodly Bonifacio and Antonio de Lupes, with diverse other Paduan Gentlemen. King
Lewis his ensigns with those of Carrario being thrown away in the fight, were
taken by the Venetians.

It is thought of a certain that if the Venetian had narrowly pursued the
enemy, The venetians error.
he might have entered Padua with him, and have made a very great spoil every
where and gotten great booty. The Paduans being daunted with this loss, did
accuse the Carrarians as Authors of the war, hating and detesting them.
Francisco Carrario in the mean time, to hinder the Venetians, did by promise
of great pay Giacomo M^ro went to meet them as far as Verona. Marsilio
Carrario brother to Francis was with him, who after the loss of the battle
having offered himself to the people to mediate a peace, could by no means
cause his brother to condescend thereunto, whereupon he with diverse others did
bend themselves against him: But considering Marsitio Carrario forsak^th his
brother.
the great danger he incurred among his own people he fled to Venice: His
flight increased the peoples hatred to Francisco, and did so greatly animate
the Citizens against him, as he had as many enemies in the City as abroad.

King Lewis having notice of the loss of his people and of the Transiluanians
The King of Hanga^ie (...) on peace.
fortune, sent to command Carrario to harken to a peace upon any conditions,
and that he should not hope for any more aid from him. The enemies obstinacy
being overcome, he sued for peace, which he obtained on these conditions. That
the Prince and Senate should appoint five commissioners, to bound the limits,
for which Francisco Carrario or his son, should come into the presence of the
Prince and Senate, and humbly crave for pardon: That Castelnouo should be razed
with all the Forts thereabouts: That the tower of Corania with seven miles
compass round about should remain to the Venetians: That Marsilio should
enjoy the possession of his goods, and that his revenue should be brought him
to Venice: That all prisoners taken in the wars should be released: That
Carrario should forthwith dismiss all the foreign troops that were come to
his aid: That he should yearly send to offer at Venice three hundred Mark:
That they should restore to the Venetians all the inheritances with the profit
received of them, which had been taken from them on the Territory of Padua
during the war: That the Paduans should not build within three miles near to
the mouths of any Rivers: That he should not fortify any place nor maintain
any Garrison.

On these conditions peace was concluded with the Carrarians which they
received Nouello son to Francisco comes to swear to the peace at Venice.
as more necessary than profitable. Nouello son to Francisco came to Venice
to confirm and swear to it: who being brought into Saint Marks Church, swore
upon the high Altar, as well in his own name as his Fathers, that he did
accept of whatsoever had been of late agreed on by his Father and the
Carrarians, that they

After this Paduan war, the Commonwealth was three years at rest. This The
Duke of Austria makes new war on the Venetians.
quiet was disturbed by a sudden coming down of the Germans. Leopold Duke of
Austria having entered Italy with four thousand horse without any warlike
summons, did tumultuously seize on the Treuisan, where putting all to fire and
sword, he encamped before the City to the great terror of the inhabitants. It
was not The Almains retreat.
that the enemy marched toward them, raised his camp and retired to the
Territory of Belluna. The Almain merchants imprisoned in venice. Giacomo
Caballa General of the venetians Army by Land.


The Senate in the mean time being provoked by this loss, caused all the
German Giacomo Caballa one of the best experienced Captains of his time in the
art Military to be General of their Army. But whilst these things were done
at Venice, Pietro Hemo Governor of Treuiso, sent five hundred horse and foot,
to spoil the Territories of Feltre, and Belluna. These being conducted by
Marini Souranza to fetch booty forth of the enemies Country, after they had
made great hauock and carried away with them a great prey, retired into a place
of safety for fear of the enemies, whom they understood were marching toward
them.

Giacomo having received the Generals place marched to Treuiso, where he stayed
a while till the troops were levied from all places, and till his Army were
complete as he desired, with which entering suriously into the enemies Country,
he came first The enemies put to flight before Longina.
and encamped at Longina, where ioining fight with the Almaines having slain
diverse of them, he went on his way as far as the Piles of the victory.
There is Gerardo Caminensis did greatly appear in this Gerardo Caminensis.
assault.

Leaving a Garrison in this place, the Army came toward Feltre: where at
their Feltre besieged by the venetians
first arrival they took the Suburbs, and furiously assailed the City:
Leopold having notice of the Feltrian danger, ran speedily with great forces
to their aid to raise that siege. Upon report of the enemies approach, the
Venetian retired to Treuiso having fired the houses next to the City, wherein
the Soldiers did lodge at their first coming. Leopold being come as far as
Belluna, understanding that the enemies were gone, was highly discontented,
having lost the opportunity of abattaile: whereupon returning to recover the
Galleys which he had lost, he attempted first to drive the Venetians from the
Tower of Baldina, which Caballa had possessed during the siege of Feltre.
Giacomo as soon as he had intelligence of the enemies The venetian Generals
son taken with diverse others. The prisoners sent home upon their word. Truce
with Leopold.
with more than an hundred brave men, besides the residue of the company, but
he suffered them forth with to depart upon their promise, that if peace did
not ensue, they should return and become his prisoners: Then having recovered
the Tower, he brought back his troops to Belluna.

At this stay stood the Venetians affairs, when by the mediation of King Lewis
truce was taken for two years with Leopold: But in the mean time (as the
minds Carrarians against them. The Senate having intelligence that a secret
war was practiced against them, and that the truce with Leopold was almost
expired, thought it very necessary to make an agreement with him, and to make
a peace by all means, because they would not be entangled in so many wars
at once: whereupon Leonardo Dandulo, and Pietro Cornari were sent to An
absolute peace with Leopold.
Leopold, who having yielded up unto him all those places which they had taken
from him during the wars, and set the Almain Merchants at liberty, they
concluded a peace with him. Soon afterward began the fourth war with the
Genoueses: The cause of the fourth war with the Genoueses.
which being the cruelst and most dangerous that ever the Venetians had until
then, I do likewise find it to be most amply described by Historians. But
before we enter into the discourse of the matter, we must set down the cause
why this war was renewed.

Caloianes was Emperor of Greece, and a great friend to the Venetians, who
among The punishment of an ungrateful son to his father.
other children had a son named Andronicus, who being convicted for that he
had maliciously conspired against his father, had his eyes put out by his
commandment, and was for ever confined to Pera. The Genoueses who of a long
time had badly digested, that Caloianes did more esteem the Venetians than
them, caused first of all this young man to be looked unto by Physicians, and
then perceiving that he had half recovered his sight, did vilely solicit him
to seize upon his fathers Empire. This rash and audacious young man, did
willingly embrace this mischienous counsel, whereupon, with the help of those
of Pera who were in a manner all Genoueses, having on a sudden seized on the
old man with his kins-folkes and Great ingratitude of a son to his father.
to be imprisoned. Some say that Caloianes was deprived of the Empire by
Cantacusin a Greek by Nation, and was afterward restored to his former
dignity by Francisco Catalusia a Genouese, and that the Emperor in recompense
there of gave him the Isle of Lesbos. But those Authors whom we follow do
affirm Andronicus to be the Author and motive of all these troubles, whom I
rather follow, because it is most certain that this young man was afterward
besieged with the Genoueses in Pera.

Andronicus had then at the first promised the Isle of Tenedos to the
Genoueses, The Isle of Tenedos promised to the Genoueses
with whom being desirous to keep his word, he did write to those who kept the
Andronicus letters, The Governor of the Island ref^seth to obey the
commandment of the rebellious son.
answered that the Island belonged to Caloianes and not to his son, and that
they would yield it up to no man whatsoever, unless he that ought it would
command them. It is reported that the Empire being yet at quiet, the Governor
of the Island and the inhabitants were commanded that if the old man should
happen to be driven from the Empire (which God forbid) by any sinister
accident, they should deliver the Island to none but to the Venetians. Those of
Pera being frustrate of their hope to get Tenedos, went to Constantinople.
Marco Iustiniano was at the Caloianes, fearing least the Venetian Galleys who
were gone on to traffic toward the Ponticke Sea should in that changeable
season receive some displeasure by the Genoueses, having conuoied them to the
very entrance of that Sea, after he had crossed the straight, arrived at
Tenedos, resolving to tarry there till the spring time and to attend the
return of his Galleys. He stayed there with the Fleet all winter. Then going
at the spring to the Bosphorus of Thrace, to receive the Venetian Galleys which
returned, he went back again to Tenedos, where having acquainted the
inhabitants with the dangers which threatened them, as well from the Genoueses
By what means the Isle of Tenedos came into the Venetians possession.
as from others, the Island and the Fort were by a general consent yielded up
into Iustiniano leaving Donato Troni and diverse others there with forces to
guard it, he returned with his Fleet to Venice.

The yielding up of the Island to the Venetians, being known every where, the
Genoueses as well for their ancient hatred and emulation, as for that they
perceived whilst the Venetians should possess that Island, the free
navigations for their Merchants sailing into the Ponticke Sea would never
afterward be safe, did never cease to stir up Andronicus anew against the
Venetians, who was already no great friend The Venetians in Constantinople
wronged.
of theirs, to injury those who remained at Constantinople. He being prompt to
all mischief, imprisoned Pietro Grimani with the Venetian Merchants, and
seized on a Barze, lying in the Haven which was returned from Tanais.
Iustiniano being Diverse opinions in the Senate concerning the taking of Te^eaos.
Island which he had of late brought under the Venetians subjection: the same
was diversely taken by the Senate; some not allowing thereof for fear of the
war; and others praising the deed for the commodiousnesse of the place, said
that it was well done, whereupon two Galleys were appointed for the guard of
the Island, wherein Antonio Veniero went for Governor of the Isle, and with
him two Prouidatori, Giouanni Gradonico and Pietro Cornari.

Whilst the Island was mand with this Garrison, the Genoueses came on a sudden
The Genouese^ surprise the Isle of Lemnos.
with eleven Galleys, and seized not in their own name but in that of
Andronicus on the Isle of Lemnos which the Venetians had taken from the
Greeks, so soon as they understood how the Emperor had wronged their
countrie-men. Afterward having made ready three and twenty Galleys near to
Pera, and with them two ships of burden, they departed from Constantinople
and landed in the Isle of Tenedos. Andronicus was there in person, by whose
commandment the Genoueses Carolo Zeni was at the same time Governor there, a
diligent and courageous person (for Veniero was not yet come thither, and I
think The Greeks and Genoueses defe^ ted by Zeni at Tenedos.
Donato Troni was already departed from thence) this man did not alone with
great courage defend the walls, but made a sally with certain choice troops,
and disordered the enemies whom he did beat back to their ships with great
slaughter: in such sort as Andronicus having lost all his pieces of battery
was enforced to dislodge to his great shame.

It was thought that the Genoueses being desirous to ruinate the Venetians The
Genoueses allie themselur^ against the Uenetians wirh the King of Hungarit, the
Bishop of Aquileia, and the Carrarians. Victor Pisani General of the
Venetians. War denounced to the Genoueses.
power, not being able of themselves to do it, did ally themselves with Lewis
King of Hungary, Francisco Carrario and the Bishop of Aquileia. The Senate
perceiving that Victor Pisani, with all authority at Sea, and gave him
Panthaleon Barba and Lodouico Loretano for Prouidatori. Fourteen of these
Galleys being armed at Venice and the rest in Candie, departed from Venice the
four and twentieth of April. But Victor was commanded not to atempt any
hostile act against the Genoueses, until such time as war should be
denounced. It is said that Nicoleto a Citizen of Chioggia, one of the
Secretaries of the Senate, was sent to Genoa for this purpose.

The nauall Army leaving the Gulphe, and having coasted Sicilie sailed
directly toward Genoa, in which voyage it took in few days diverse of the
enemies ships, Lodouico Fiesca of Genoa to revenge this shame went to Sea with
ten armed Galleys with an intent to fight with the Venetian. Victor was at the
same time at Ancia, a Sea-towne of Italy, who having notice of the enemies
coming did suddenly embattaile his Army, commanding his Soldiers to be in
readiness, and at the first sound of the Trompet to arm themselves, at the
second all Soldiers and Mariners to keep their ranckes, and at the third
furiously to set forewardes toward the enemy. The Genoueses Battle at Sea
with the Genoueses.
were already insight, when the Venetian because he would fight on the maine
advanced toward them. They had scarce begun the fight, when as on a sudden
a terrible tempest arose with great showers of rain, which did in a moment The
Genoueses put to flight.
forth of the throng) the residue were taken with Lodouico their General, one
of which dashing upon the neighbor shoares fell into the enemies power.
Eighteen Gentlemen of Genoa were taken, and more than eight hundred Soldiers
and Sailers, with six-hundred slain.

The victory was likewise very bloody to the Venetians, having lost diverse
of Zacharia Gisio, Fiesca and the other Gentlemen, with the moytie of the
prisoners were sent to Venice, and the residue Victor carried with him to
Candie. But being come unto Morea near to Modon, he met with the six Galleys
which (as we said) were sent to Candie to be armed, and joining them with his
own, he sailed to the Island: From whence departing soon after to in^rap ten
Genoa Galleys which had remained all the precedent winter at Constantinople,
and being come as far as Nigrepont, he had notice that the enemies Galleys
were passed already, and almost at Genoa, whereupon he returned, and did for a
while make after them, who by their diligent speed were gotten into a place of
safety.

Whilst these things were done at Sea, Prince Carrario as well in his own
name Carrario begins war against the Venetians.
as in that of King Lewis had begun the war with the Venetians, saying that
he did nothing contrary to his oath nor to the Law of Nations in taking arms
against the Venetians, because he was whether he would or no to obey King
Lewis, under The Bishop of Aquilea denounces ware in like manner.
them. Thus at one time did diverse arise thinking to overthrow the power and
State of the Venetians, who had no succor nor allies, but Bernabo Visconte and
Petrino King of Cyprus, to bear off so many storms and assaults of the
enemies, and yet the King of Cyprus aid did never stand them in any steed, but
that of Bernabo did avail them which did spoil and scowre the Sea of Genoa.
The Venetians nevertheless so long as the war continued did alone defend
themselves with their own forces, without the help of any other, the which was
scarce credible at the beginning.

Now at one time the Paduans on the one side, and the Forlani on the other
entering Gerardo Caminensis Gerard Caminensis takes the enemies party.
who was thought to be a friend to the Venetians, by reason that he had married
the daughter of Pantaleon Barba, at the first beginning of the war, left them
and went to the enemies, having first taken the Motte from his brother
Richardo. This was done on the Venetians territories, whilst the Lords of
Carretta assisted by the forces of Bernabo and the Venetians took certain
towns from the Genoueses.

The enemies in the mean time were not idle, for they surprised Famagosta,
Famagosta taken by the Genoueses.
the goodliest City of the Kingdom of Cyprus. Historians say that the
occasion of the taking thereof was, that young Petrino son to King Petro,
being slain a little before by the conspiracy of his own subjects, having
invited to the feasts and solemnities The cause of the taking of Famagosta.
than them. They drew their weapons in the midst of the Royal Palace: and
the Cipriots favoring the Venetians, certain Genoueses were slain and diverse
hurt, and the residue were driven shamefully from the banquet. The Genoueses
being moved with this injury did forthwith depart forth of the Island with all
their wealth. Then returning within a while with a nauall Arrnie they did on a
sudden The Genoueses revenge.
in detestation of the death of the late King, and among others, the Kings
brother, and spoiled all their goods. The King and his mother for fear of the
Genoueses escaped in this tumult forth of the City. In this manner did the
richest merchant City of the Kingdom of Cyprus fall into the Genoueses hands.

The young kings mother was suspected to have delivered the City unto them to
revenge her husbands death: and that which makes me to believe it, is the
death of those who slew him, and the spoiling of their goods, as also, because
the Genoueses attempted nothing against her nor her son. Now whilst the
Genoueses Visconte had in the mean time betrothed his daughter to the young
Visconte of Milan gives his daughter to the King of Cyprus.
king, and being desirous to send her to Cyprus, he dealt with the Venetians to
arm six galleys, with which his daughter might pass safely into the Island,
and that he on the other side would levy eight thousand horse, and a great
number of footmen at his own cost, to ouerrunne and spoil whatsoever belonged
to the Genoueses. The Lady being brought to Venice, was lodged in the Palace
of the Cornari. Uisconte his daughter comes to Uenice.
Then departing from Venice with six Venetian galleys, and ^iue which the king
of Cyprus had sent, she safely arrived in the Island.

The king lay at the same time at Ceraunia called at this day Cernia, where
after An agreement betwixt the Venetians and the king of Cyprus.
he had with great magnificence received his wife, he dealt with the Venetians
for a great weight of gold which he promised them, that they would with the
five galleys which he had in pay assail the haven of Famagosta: the which
being taken, they gave an assault to the City on the same side, whilst he
with the greatest forces he could levy, should scale the walls on the other
side. The Captains of the galleys (...) Miani, Francisco Bocoli, Pietro
Quirini, Francisco Foscolli, Grouanni Barba, Francisco Mocenigo, who had each
of them apart armed one several galley at their own charge. These being
moved as well by the kings offer, as for their general hatred which they did
bear to the Genoueses, with the five galleys, which as we have said were sent
from the king to Venice, beginning to fight at the entry of the haue^, were at
the first repulsed by the Genoueses, whereupon they retired to Sea, til their
soldiers and mariners were refreshed. The Genoueses had placed three ships of
burden at the mouth of the haven to hinder the enemies approach: The Venetian
The venetians take the haven of Famagosta.
returning again with his mercenaries to assail the Genoueses, came not as at
the former time to assail the havens mouth but the sides, and emptied so much
The venetians repulsed from the City and haven of Famagosta.
hoping to enter, did in the midst of the enemies cries, and arrows, mount to
the top of the wall. The Genoueses whose numbers were great in the City,
making a furious sally on the assailants, did first with great slaughter beat
them from the wall, and then from the Haven. Diverse do think that the same
City had been taken that day, if the Cyprio^s had assailed it as courageously
on the other side as did the

Some of the authors say, that it was not Pietro, but Bugon of Lusignam, which
Diverse opinions concerning the taking of Famagosta.
was father to Petrino, and that he was not slain by his own subjects, but
that it was one called Pietro, brother to the young king: Besides that the
Genoueses were not iniuried by the Venetians, but that by the kings
commandment, some of them were thrown forth of the chamber windows, where
the feast was kept, and other some slain in the City, and over the whole
Island, so that none were left alive to carry the news to Genoa: That the
Genoueses coming into the Island with a great nauall Army conducted by Pietro
Fregosa did take the City of Nicosia by assault with the King and Queen, and
after they had put all the Island almost Spinereggio laden with most rich
merchandise: and returning on a sudden toward the Adriaticke Gulf, did join
themselves near to Zara with the nauall Army, which was conducted by Pisani.

Whilst these things were done in Cyprus and Syria, Victor Pisani, with
eighteen The venetians take the city of Catharra.
galleys took the City of Catharra by force which belonged to Lewis, king of
Hungary. At their arrival they summoned the inhabitants, who made a very
proud answer, adding diverse reproachful speeches which did greatly offend the
Venetians. Pisani in regard thereof being enflamed with choler, landing his
troops did come and assailed the City. The soldiers and mariners did at the
first with such violence win the defenses, and afterward the walls, as in a
moment they made themselves masters of the City: which being taken and
spoiled, those which The sort of Catharra yielded.
were in the fort, being daunted with the sudden loss of their fellows, did
forthwith yield. The booty did enrich the soldiers and mariners. The
General did speedily aduertize the Senate of the victory by a galley which he
sent away of purpose.

Pisani his Army being increased which was already of twenty five galleys,
upon report that the Genoueses galleys were coming into Dalmatia, and that
they were already departed from Genoa for that purpose, and had commission
after they The situation of Tarentum.
a little before had sailed toward Calabria: whereupon having coasted all the
shores, he did not miss of the enemies Army at the place above said: and for
to enforce him to fig^t, he encamped at the mouth of the Gulf near to the
mount Lacinia, which is just opposite to that of Salentina. These two
mountains looking one upon an other make this Gulf to be of a very dangerous
approach. In that is situated the City of Tarentum. I said the Venetian did
rather encampe near to Lacinia, than

At the last the enemy being come forth of Tarentum, so soon as he perceived
The Genoueses fly from the venetians.
the Venetians to come toward them, did speedily put to sea-ward, and turned
forth of the way. The Venetian nearly followed him, hoping speedily to
overtake him when as he saw himself to be deceived with a new trick of war.
The enemy made show as though he would fight, and as if he were out of al hope
to escape. And turning on a sudden toward the Venetian, he feined to make all
things ready in A s^ratagem of the Genoueses to (...) the fight.
his galleys for a battle: which Pisani perceiving, made a stand and
commanded his soldiers and mariners to arm themselves. The Genouese so
soon as he saw the Venetians in a readiness, the soldiers laden with Armor,
and the galleys all pestered with warlike engines, he gave a sign to his
people to set sail. Ye should have seen then these two fleets sailing very
differently the one from the other. For the Genoueses who had their mariners
ready, and vnloden, seemed to fly upon the Sea with wings, and the Venetians
not able to stir, by reason of their weight and pestering. By means whereof
he escaped at his pleasure, and took the direct way into Dalmatia. Pisani
having no place of retreat near, turned on the left hand toward Apulia.

At the same time, five galleys being armed by the Senates command, after the
taking of Catharra departing from the City with the same which brought the
news of the victory, to go unto the Army, met with three Genoueses galleys
near to Berisone. These three had scoured for a time up and down to the
Venetians loss, and had taken as occasion served, diverse ships laden with
merchandise. The Venetian so soon as he had perceived them a far off, sailed
directly toward them to take revenge. But the Genoueses without any stay
betook themselves to flight, The flight of three Genoueses galleys.
and the one ceased not to pursue, and the other to fly, until they were in
view of Zara, for then the Venetian galleys giving over their pursuit retired
to Brandissa, where so soon as they understood that the Genoueses fleet was
arrived in Dalmatia, Description of the haven of Brandissa.
they stayed in that haven, fearing if they should pass on their journey, to
be surprised by the enemy. The haven of Brandissa is by nature great: the
mouth thereof contains diverse and sundry havens which are not subject to Sea
tempests. There are within it diverse pleasant places of retreat where ships lie
out of danger. The structure thereof is like to the horns of an Heart, whereof
the City in times past took the name, because the haven with the residue of
the City is made in the form of an hearts head which in the Messapian tongue
is called Brandissa.

The Venetian, having then received of the Governor and the inhabitants of the
City, the towers which lie at the mouth of the haven, did man them with good
garrisons, then they sent by land to Pisani, who was said to be in Apulia with
a great Army, to certify him that they stayed in the Haven of Brandissa,
fearing to meet with the enemy who was not far from thence. Victor
understanding the danger of his Countrymen came with speed to Brandissa. And
there adding the six The number of the Venetian Army.
speedily sailed into Dalmatia to surprise the Genoueses going to Zara, who
having notice thereof did suddenly retire to Trahu.

But whilst these things were done at Sea, the Venetians on the firm land
took The Cities of Cesalta and Saligetta taken.
the City of Saligetta from Gerardo Caminensis and soon after Cesalta which
was burned, and the other wholly ruinated. The enemies in the mean time were
not idle: for Prince Carrario having assembled, as well of his own, as of the
Hungarians, the Bishop of Aquileia, and of other Princes of the league to the
number of sixteen thousand men, came and furiously besieged the City of
Mestra: and to take from Mestre besieged by the Carraria^s.
the inhabitants all hope of succor and victuals, he placed a strong Garrison
on the river which leads from Mergera to Mestra: within a while after the
enemy seized Mestra relieved by the Venetia^s.
more sharply assailed. The Venetian sent three hundred brave Soldiers to
relieve Mestra under the command of Nicolao Galianico the Luquois, and Hircio
Pisani, who passed through the enemies watch, each of them carrying a bundle of
arrows on his horses crouper. Afterward they made diverse skirmishes all along
the dike. At the last the enemy desplayed all his forces, and battered the
City more furiously than before.

Francisco Delfino commanded within it, who by his valor and good counsel
did The siege of Mestra raised.
and within a while after to raise the siege and depart. Diverse of the enemies
being infected with the air of the marshes, fell into a deadly sickness:
whereof being returned home to their own houses they soon died. These are the
exploits which were done that summer.

Six^ galleys returning from forage brought news to Victor Pisani who was
encamped before Zara, that the Genoueses Army rode at an Anchor in the haven
of Trahu. Victor departing thence to go and fight with them, and passing by
chance not far from Sicco a Sea town, he thought it fit before he went
farther to take it by assault. Yet nevertheless he would first of all summon
the inhabitants to Pisani being stung with this brave answer of the
inhabitants, trusting A brave answer of those of Sicco.
to the great number of his Galleys (which were seven and thirty) made have to
assail the City. Whereupon entering the haven on a sudden, he commanded his
Soldiers to land, and to march furiously to the assault. The Soldiers went to
Sicco taken by the Venetians*
the greatest number of whom were retired with their wives and children to the
Palace, where for a while was a bloody fight. But that place being likewise
forced, great cruelty was used on all sexes and age whatsoever: diverse were
slain, and some were thrown headlong down from the top of the Palace. There
was a Castle in one of the corners of the City which was strong by nature and
art, into the which diverse had retired themselves, who presuming on their great
numbers, did dare to make a sallie on the enemies, and to fight in the midst
of the City. The fight lasted for a time doubtful, and more blood was shed
there than in any other place. But the Dalmatians being at last overcome, were
constrained to retire again into the Castle, which Pisani would not of purpose
besiege, fearing if he should stay long in that place, the enemy would be
gone into the haven of Zara.

The City then being spoiled and burnt, and diverse prisoners carried thence, a
The Venetian Army near to the haven of Trahu.
at the same time gone into Apulia for victuals; from whence returning, they
entered the Haven on the other side not being perceived, which Pisani having
notice of, did divide his Army into two parts, to shut in the Genoueses on
every side: Then to molest them in sundry places, he landed certain troops
of Soldiers. It is thought Victor being impatient of so long stay came and
assailed the City, but all The Venetians assail Trahu in vain.
his attempts were in vain. For he was so far from entering, as on the
contrary he was beaten back by the Genoueses (whose number in the City was
very great) and constrained to retire with great loss to his Galleys. Luca
Valerosa a Venetian Gentleman died in this assault. Victor being frustrate of
his expectation, and victuals beginning to fail, not hoping to recover any
force from Venice, the dearth of all things being very great there, he raised
his siege and came and encamped before The Venetian before Zara. The Albanois
reduced under the Venetians obedience.
Zara, where he did more fear than hurt the inhabitants. He sent besides ten
Galleys to the Albanois to know their minds, who being daunted with the mishap
of Francisco Contareni was sent thither to command the City.

The Senate being aduertized that the Army was dislodged from before Trahu,
The Uenetian Army returns before Trahu.
did forthwith arm five Galleys, and laded them with victuals, which were
sent to Pisani who lay before Zara, who was commanded to return instantly
before Trahu: and not to stir from thence till either by force or famine he had
taken the Genoueses Galleys which lay there. But the Genoueses after the first
siege, had with greater labor and travail than before, fortified the haven: by
means whereof this last attempt was as vain as the former whereof we now
spoke. The Army for certain days lay at ankor before the haven. But Pisani
being enforced by hunger and cold The Soldiers (...) with hunger and cold.
here and there without any leave searching for victuals, and left their
Ensigns badly attended. Diverse likewise died with hunger, and others with
cold. And because victuals were scarce in the City, they concluded to send
diverse ships that winter into Apulia to fetch corn, and that Pisani should
convey them for fear of being Pisani sent diverse of them empty to Venice, to
the end they might be furnished anew against the spring time, if the Senate so
pleased.

Eleven Galleys newly armed at Venice were sent to Pisani, with diverse other
The Senate sends new supplies to Pisani.
vessels, laden with victuals, and among the rest, a great ship of burden,
full of armor, and other equipage for ships: the which Pisani commanded to be
forthwith carried into Candie, to furnish those Galleys which the Senate had
appointed to be made ready in the Island. The Army departing from Pola where
it had wintered, and being come into the maine, a terrible tempest arose on the
sudden, which scattered The Venetian Army separated by tempest.
them here and there. This ship of burden which was full of Armor, was by the
force of the wind carried safely into the Haven of Ancona, where it met with

The Venetians suspecting the truth, and that they were Genoueses, would forth
The Venetians being deceived by the Anconitans, were taken and spoiled by the
Genoueses.
with have vnloden their ships, and determined to carry their best and richest
wares into some place of safety, but the Towns men would not suffer them so
to do, saying that their Haven was a safe retreat for all men, and that they
needed not there to fear the Genoueses, nor any whatsoever, protesting that
they should do no worse than themselves. The Venetians on this assurance did
not unload. The Genoueses in the mean time entered the Haven, and kept
themselves quiet for a while,

Pisani in the mean time was come into Apulia, and the Venetian Galleys took
in their lading of corn, at Barletta and Siponto. Those who loded at Barletta
quarrelling A quarrel against the venetians at Barletta soon appeased.
with the Inhabitants about a small matter, were in great danger of their
lives, but the tumult was appeased by the arrival of those who commanded the
Galleys. The Venetian in the end having laden, departed from Apulia, and met at
Sea with fifteen Galleys of Genoa. So soon as Pisani descried them, he
bethought himself after what manner he might assail them, whether it were
best to do it on the sudden, or after the accustomed manner: He knew well
enough that the Genoueses A battle at Sea betwixt the venetians and Genoueses.
he commanded his warlike engines to be set in order in his Galleys, and being
come within bow-shot one of an other, each of them began to provoke his
adversary by shooting of arrows. The General of the Genoueses Army died at
this encounter. The Venetian Historians, nor those Authors whom we have
followed do not name him; Victor Pisani was hurt likewise with the shot of an
arrow.

The enemy perceiving that to dissemble in this fight would no whit at all
avail The Genoueses sly from the sight.
him, trusting to the lightness of his vessels, he got forth of the throng,
and sailing directly toward Dalmatia, the Venetian forthwith lost sight of
him, whereupon he Pisani arriving in Histria, and bringing his fleet into the
Haven of Pola, he sent the ships which were laden with corn to Venice.

Whilst these things were done abroad, the Senate sent five Galleys well
armed from Venice, to scour the lower Seas. It was reported that there was no
armed Galleys at Genoa. It was the springtime when they sailed into the maine
Sea, where they remained all that Summer, Harvest, and a part of the Winter, in
which time they did greatly molest the enemy.

Pisani after he had sent (as has been said) the ships laden with corn to
Venice, The Uenetian Army (...) at Pola.
he remained at Pola with one and twenty Galleys, five of which for that they
were slower than the rest, he caused to be drawn a shore to be trimmed and
made clean, that they might thereby become more light and apt to fight. But in
the mean time fourteen Genoa Galleys were on a sudden descried within a mile
of the Haven: Those which were within them, did brandish their naked swords,
and The Genoueses challenge the Venetians.
challenged the Venetians to the fight: Ten other Galleys of supplies were come
unto them from Zara, of which the Venetians had no notice, the enemy had
placed them in ambuscado behind a little hill near to the Haven, and
commanded them that after the battle should be begun, and when they should
perceive their fellows by little and little to retire, and the Venetians to
follow them, then on a sudden with great noise and cries to come forth upon
the enemy. Pisani not dreaming on this Ambush (because he plainly saw all
the Galleys which the enemies were wont to have) having commanded speedily to
prepare those five which were on the strond, sailed directly with the residue
of his Army toward the enemy.

They ran at one an other with great fury, and fought for a time without any
The battle at Sea.
ods, but the Genoueses Admiral Galley striking on that of Pisani, (and
Luciano Doria the General of their Army being dead, whom Donato Zeno slew)
she was lost: The death of the Genoueses General. Those of the ambuscado come
forth upon the Venetians.
whereupon the Genoueses in the heat of the fight began a little to give
back, not so much for fear, as of set purpose, and being come to the place of
the Ambuscado, the enemies rushing forth with great clamours did much amaze the
Venetians. Pisani perceiving his five Galleys, which at the beginning of the
battle were on shore and being now armed did issue forth of the Haven toward
the fight, did courageously receive the enemies running fiercely upon them:
(But those Galleys who The flight and defeat of the venetians.
were appointed for rescues, perceiving the number of the enemies Galleys, and
their fellows to be enclosed on all sides, refusing to come to the fight, did
forthwith fly Pisani being to his great grief drawn by force forth of the
throng, did with all speed direct his course toward Venice, leaving a
glorious victory to the enemy: fifteen Venetian Galleys with all their
furniture were taken: very few escaped to the Land. Two thousand men were taken
in this defeat, among whom were diverse Gentlemen, the residue were slain or
hurt. This loss happened on the sixth of March, on which day the Venetians in
a manner lost all their Sea-forces.

The news of so unfortunate a battle brought extreme sorrow to the whole
Pisani, with the Captains of the five Galleys are imprisoned at venice.
City. Pisani, with the other Captains of the five Galleys, which had refused
to come to the fight, being condemned by the Senates decree in a very great
fine, were Pisani because he fought, before he had sent forth to make
discovery. The The people are displeased with Pisani his imprisonment.
people took Pisani his condemnation very impatiently, but much more his
shameful imprisonment. The report was, that the envy of some of the Senators,
rather than his offense, was the cause of his imprisonment.

The Genoueses being puffed up with pride for this one victory: and hoping to
execute greater exploits, being come to Zara, did commit their captives to
close prison, some of the meaner sort excepted. Then causing their Galleys
which were much broken at this battle to be repaired, they filled the
Venetian Galleys with Dalmatian Mariners, so as in a short space they armed
eight and forty Galleys with all The number of the Genoueses Army.
things necessary. But before this loss at Pola, six Galleys were set forth
from Venice under the command of Carolo Zeno, to molest the Genoueses on the
coast of the lower Sea. These five having ouer-taken those six far from
Venice, did diverse great exploits as well in the higher as lower Sea, all the
residue of that year until the midst of Winter, at which time, after the
loss of Chioggia, they were by the Senates decree called home.

The Genoueses in the mean time having a great number of Galleys, took
sixteen Humaga, Grada, Cao^li taken by the Genoueses.
forth of the Haven of Zara, and came at the same time and seized on Humaga,
Grada, and Caorli: Then giving chase to a ship laden with Merchandise, they
came even almost to Venice, and were in the view of the City, when Thomaso
Mocenigo, who was Owner of the ship, not being able to approach the Haven by
a mile for want of wind and water, did on a sudden with those who were in his
company leap into a Galliot or small Gallie, (for the enemy was very near)
and so escaped into a place of safety. Whereupon three Genoa Galleys did
enuiron and The Genoueses spoil and burn a ship in the view of Venice.
they had so done, they burnt it. This was the greatest disgrace that the
Venetians sustained during this war, to behold one of their ships which was
returned from Syria richly laden, to be pillaged and burnt by the Genoueses,
they not daring to stir, or make any resistance.

The enemy departing thence, went and took Pelestrina by assault, the which
having Pelestrina taken by the Genoueses.
found for the most part to be abandoned by reason of the wars, they forthwith
spoiled and burnt it: Then they sailed toward Chioggia, where they landed, and
without any difficulty seized on that part of the City which looks toward
the East, called by the inhabitants Little Chioggia, the which likewise being
desolate The Genoueses before Chioggia.
they forthwith burned. The Garrison which lay in the City being much offended
thereat, made a sudden sallie upon the enemy. The Genoueses attended them
beyond the bridge, where they fought courageously on both sides, but the
enemies number still increasing, the Venetian being overcome, was constrained
to retire with great loss into the City, and the Genoueses to their ships,
who after that directed their course toward Ancona, where they stayed to
refresh their Soldiers and Mariners, and from thence, having with great mirth
dragged the Venetians military The Genoueses error.
ensigns gotten at Pola through the Sea, they returned triumphing to Zara. It
is thought that the Genoueses might easily have taken Chioggia at the same time
when they burnt part of it, if they had known the situation of the City.

The Venetians being in a short space afflicted with so many mischiefs,
considering that the means of the Commonwealth were not sufficient to levy
an Army strong enough to oppose against the Genoueses, and that the cause
thereof was partly The venetians resolution.
by reason of the late loss of their Army, and partly likewise because diverse
armed Galleys were from home, they resolved for that time to defend their
City: Therefore they appointed fifteen Galleys for the guard of the Haven
under the conduct of Thadeo Iustiniano. But they could hardly manne six of the
number, by reason that How the Mariners loved Pisani.
they wanted rowers, every man refusing to serve, in hatred to the Senate, who
had imprisoned Victor Pisani, who was beloved of all men.

They did afterward fortify the Haven in this manner. They did first of all
build The Haven of Venice fortified.
two Castles of wood, of a very hard, and strong substance, at each end one.
These two Castles were filled with great quantities of arrows and darts, and
beneath were placed warlike engines to keep the enemy far off. Then they
crossed over an iron chain three double, supported by very strong Sandoni
(for so they call certain ill trimmed vessels) every of them being fastened to
two Ankors, to the end they might not be shaken by the waves of the Sea: And
they did cover the entry thereof with iron bodkins, and made strong defenses
on each side. Three great ships strongly fastened together were set against
those chains, who, being furnished above with hurdles, did represent an
inexpugnable Fort. They made a trench at Saint Nicholas on the shore, from the
waters which are within the City, and there they builded a Fort Cab^lla of
Verona General of the venetians footmen.
the enemy from coming into the Lakes, whereby they might greatly endanger
the City. Caballa of Verona was made General of all these Garrisons. The
Ports being thus enclosed and fortified, Thadeo Iustiniano General of the
nauall Army, did keep sometimes within the Forts, and sometimes abroad.
Diverse other vessels well victualed for a good while, were ready, and
expected when they should be commanded to sail against the enemy, if need
should be.

The Genoueses likewise were not idle in so fair an advantage: but departing
from Zara the sixth day of August under the conduct of Pietro Doria with eight
and forty Galleys, and diverse other small vessels, they sailed beyond the
City of Venice, and came furiously into the Haven of Chioggia, which being
taken the Army approached the City. Prince Carrario, who was before
aduertized (as being allied to this A memorable enterprise of Carrario.
a great Prince. For having assembled a great number of husbandmen, from
daybreake till noone, he caused a trench to be made of five hundred paces long,
even to the channel called Nasariola, so deep, as the vessels with the
troops might easily pass through it, by means whereof he forth with
constrained the Fort of Nasariolas The Fort of Nasariola taken.
to yield.

Giouanni Chyurani being sent the same day with many vessels to hinder the
Paduans Carrario his attempt till night, and then either by fear, or
negligence rather, forsaking the Carrario ioineth himself with the Genoueses.
business, he went to Chioggia. The enemy in the mean time came at his
pleasure and joined al his troops to the Genoueses Army, with his munition
and victuals, having left a Garrison at a Fort built of purpose at the mouth
of the River, to the end that the passage thereof might be assured to his
people coming from the Chyurani for not doing his duty, is condemned to
perpetual imprisonment.
firm Land. The Senate commanded Chyurani who was at Chioggia, to come home,
who because he had not performed his duty in the Service of the
Commonwealth, was condemned in a great fine, and to

The end of the fifth Book of the second Decad.
THE SIXTH BOOK Venice.
The Contents of the sixth Book of the second Decad.
THe Genoueses take Chioggia: The City is greatly affrighted at the report
PISANI is set at liberty by the Senates Decree. The General of the Armies
place is divided betwixt THADEO IVSTINIANO and VICTOR PISANI. The City
fortified near to the Haven, and in diverse other places. King LEWIS sends
CHARLES to besiege Treuiso. The treaty of peace begun by the Hungarian, is
broken off by reason of his unjust demands. The Genoueses besiege Malamoc: They
fight upon occasions on either side, as well on the shore as in the midst of
the marshes. The Senate resolve to levy a great Army. Diverse particular
persons do diversely aid the Commonwealth. The Genoueses raising their
Malamoc, do retire to Chioggia. CAROLO ZENO his exploits against the enemy,
as well in the higher as lower Sea. The Venetians besiege Chioggia on every
side. How valiantly they fought at Brondoli near to the Haven with the enemy.
THADEO IVSTINIANO loses part of the Army at Siponto. The Genoueses being
vanquished and almost daunted in a set battle near to Chioggia, yield
themselves. The Prince having given the Soldiers the spoil, does recover the
City with all the prisoners.

CHioggia is seated in the midst of the marshes, environed almost round
about with channels, and has The description of the City of Chioggia.
within it like to Venice, brooks that are nauigable, is a mile distant from
Chioggia, did not forthwith assail the City, who being encamped near to the
Haven, great forces in few days came to them. For besides the Paduans, and the
mercenaire Soldiers which Carrario brought, the troops likewise Supplies
come to the Genoueses.
of the Bishop of Aquileia, with those of the other confederates came thither
to them. These perceiving their bad success in that place, resolved to assail
at one time the Fort and the ship: Having then put 12. Ganziarolles forth of
the Haven, after they had a while rowed up and down here and there, they came
to the shore of the little Chioggia, where great numbers of men drew them by
maine strength over little hillocks which hang downwards on the shore, into
the inner channells. They placed moreover warlike engines on the shore, to
batter the Fort at one time, The Venetians enforced to retire into Chioggia.
enemy should have no use of them, retired into the City. The Paduans with
those which were on the opposite shoares, so soon as they perceived the
Venetians to leave the place, cried out that the Venetians were vanquished and
undone, that their pride was daunted, and that they together with their name
would be buried in the waves. But they not being any jot amazed, placed three
ships of burden well armed and furnished near to Saint Dominicks Church, to
hinder the enemies

There were three thousand five hundred Soldiers in the City besides the
inhabitants, who were commanded by Balba Gallucio the Bolognois, Nicholao
Gallicano, Hircio Pisani, and Nicholao Darseria, all of the valiantest and
famousest Captains of those times: Pietro Hemo was Governor, and Nicholao
Contareni with Giouanni Mocenigo The enemies cunning.
said that to their force they added cunning; for the enemy having brought
near to the bridge a small ship-full of vine-twigs and other dry matter, that
being set on fire, the smoke did first choke those which fought above, and
the flame and heat afterward did enforce the Venetian to leave the place. The
enemy would not loose such an occasion, but having once seized on that place,
they did press the Venetian so nearly, as giving back by little and little,
they entered pell mell with them

The inhabitants and the rest did then begin to fly on every side: Pietro
Hemo being for saken by his people, did with fifty Soldiers for a time
bravely sustain the enemies assault on the bridge near to the Palace. But at
the last all things falling out desperate by reason of the great multitude of
the enemies, he with his Soldiers did shut themselves up in the Palace, which
soon after being yielded fell into the enemies hands. The Army afterward
entering, the City was utterly The Genoueses take and spoil Chioggia.
spoiled. The Genoueses ensigns, with those of King Lewis, and of Prince
Carrario, were set up in the highest place of the City, and those of the
Venetians were thrown down and trodden under, foot. All the noble women whose
honors those which fell to the Paduans, and the Forlani, were carried
elsewhere.

Chioggia has on the south side, a small Island of the breadth of five hundred
paces stretching as far as Brondoli. This space of ground is almost wholly
tilled with great labor by the inhabitants. Therein there is a goodly vineyard
to be seen, and very large gardens. The inhabitants make great profit thereof,
notwithstanding that they give themselves to salt making, and to fishing. They
make great ditches about their inheritances, their grounds being always wet
and moist. There are likewise diverse houses in it here and there, some of them
builded with moorish matter, and the rest with mortar and brick. The Genoueses
drew a great many prisoners forth of these places, which being on all sides
environed with water could

Six thousand men were slain at the taking of the Tower; the most of whom The
number of the dead on the Venetians side. Carrario his cruelty. A divine
punishment.
were either Townes-men or Venetians. In this sort we find that Chioggia was
taken by the Genoueses. Nicolao Gallicano and Balba Gallucio being with money
redeemed from the Genoueses by Francisco Carrario, were beheaded. But they
which received the price of humane blood falling into the hands of the enemies
before the end of the war, did dye more miserably in prison, than those whom
they had sold.

The guard of Chioggia was given to the Genoueses. Prince Carrario with part of
Giacomo Porliano. Pietro Hemi paid three thousand crowns for his ransom, and
lost the worth of as much in mooueables when the town was taken. The Genoueses
after the taking of Chioggia, came with Ganziarolles and other lesser vessels,
and a few Galleys to seize on the Castle of Loretta, and the tower of Bebia.
Those which were in the new tower having notice The Genoueses take Loretta and
the tower of Bebia. Cap. darger taken by Carrario.
of the taking of those two neighbor Fortes, not tarrying till the enemy
arrived burned their Fort, and retired with great fear to Cape-darger a Town
belonging to the Venetians: but it continued not long in their obedience. For
Carrario approaching with his forces the inhabitants forthwith yielded, which
they of Montauban

The Venetians being thus shut in by Sea and Land, began on a sudden to
want victuailes and other necessaries: For Chioggia being taken, with all the
Towns and Fortes which they possessed on the Rivers and Lakes, they had no
hope to get victuailes from any place but from the Treuisan, from whence they
furnished the City with a little corn and flesh by the River Sylla.

The news of the loss of Chioggia being brought at midnight, the enemy
entering into it at Sunset* did in such sort trouble the Senate, that so soon
as it was day the whole City was in alarm: At which noise all men ran with
their arms to Marks Church, was filled with them. Then by the Senates
commandment they gave notice to the people of the loss of Chioggia with as
many as were in it. It is reported that at these words there were such Great
sorrow over all the City for the loss of Chioggia.
cries and lamentations made among the people, as greater could not be if the
City had been taken: ye should then have seen honorable women to walk up
and down the City hanging down their heads full of sorrow, and then on a
sudden lifting up their eyes and hands to heaven, knocking their breasts with
their hands: The men on the other side bewailed their common fortune, saying
that the State of their Commonwealth was overthrown. Every man lamented his
own particular

They certainly believed that the victorious Genoueses would ere long be at
their gates, and after the overthrow of their State would wholly abolish their
memory. Every one thinking all to be lost, thought on nothing but their own
particular Some sent away their gold, precious stones, jewels, money,
apparel, and other rich mooueables, to them which kept their farms in the
country, others hid them in Churches, and old monuments. In a word the whole
City was filled with The common complaint of the people.
fear and weeping: diverse did believe that if the enemies Army had in this
amazement come into the City (which Carrario after the taking of Chioggia did
oftentimes counsel the Genoueses to do) it would have been taken that very
day, or at the leastwise brought into great extreamitie. But God has not
given all to one man: Many men have known how to vanquish, but few that could
make use of their victory. The Garrison which lay at Malamoc being called
home, came speedily to Venice, having razed their Fort and brought away the
ships.

Besides, almen complained, that there was no man who by speedy counsel and
exhortation could raise the courage of the Citizens daunted with sorrow, and
who for his good service had such credit among the people, as all men would
gladly entertain him, and be desirous to have him for their Captain in such a
danger: all men saying that their State was lost, and their lives in great
hazard, unless some one would show himself to relieve their afflicted
country: That there was none but Pisani in the whole City, who being beloved
of all men could by his valor preserve the Commonwealth in so dangerous a
season: but that he was in prison and kept in darkness, yet if he were set at
liberty, his only presence would encourage

These speeches were publickely pronounced, and some times in the Senates
hearing. This being reported at the Palace, the Senators did suddenly assemble
to determine Pisani is set at liberty by the Senates decree.
thereon. They decreed that Pisani and all they who were imprisoned for the
same fact, should be set at liberty: which being diuulged in the City, a
great multitude of people ran on a sudden to the Palace. But he like a
discreet and modest person would needs lie the night following in prison, and
in the mean time sent for a Priest to hear his confession. Then so soon as
it was day, he went up to the Palace Pisani his great modesty.
and heard Mass at Saint Nicholas Altar, where he received the Sacrament
giving Contareni his feet, the Prince spoke thus unto him. The Princes speech
to Pisani in open Senate.


Victor, we have for a time observed the rigor of the Law: it now behooved us
to use mercy and favor: by our commandment thou were imprisoned for the
loss which the Commonwealth received at Pola under thy conduct: we have at
this time thought good to set the at liberty: Let me entreat thee not to
dispute which of

To this speech Pisani answered. Most excellent Prince there has nothing
befallen Pisani his answer to the Prince.
me either from your self, or from those who with you do govern the State of
the Commonwealth, which I take not in good part, as becomes a good Citizen.
I know that all things are well and wisely done which are concluded for the
service of the Commonwealth, whereunto I assure my self that all your
Councels and decrees do tend. Concerning the injury I have received of some
particular to believe, that I bear them no less good will than to my dearest
friends, and that they shall never by me, nor for me receive any displeasure
whatsoever, but I will on the contrary strive to perform all offices of love
and kindness toward them. As for your charitable affection, and inuiting me
to the service of the Commonwealth, I do most willingly undertake the defense
thereof, and I would to God I were a manable in these dangerous times, to
relieve it in any sort either with counsel or industry, but howsoever, my
love shall never be wanting. This being said, he was embraced by the Prince,
and by all the Senators, whose eyes were full of tears, and then he went home
to his own house.

It is reported that as he walked in the streets among great numbers of people
The joy of the people when they beheld Pisani at liberty.
who came to congratulate him, the whole City in a manner following him, they
clapped their hands in sign of joy, and there were some, who at randon said
that he ought to be Prince, and not a private Citizen; but he mildly
reprehended them, telling them plainly that those praises ought to be given to
Saint Mark the Cities Patron, and to the Prince, and not to an humble Citizen.
And because the Senate had given him charge of those troops which were near
to the haven, that he might together with Caballa the Veronois advise what
should be most expedient for the Commonwealth, the common people thought that
he had been restored to his office of General of the nauall Army. Then did
all the religious Orders, all the Colleges, the companies and fraternities of
the City come to offer themselves Nicolas Church against the enemies
incursions, the which as unprofitable, he caused to be beaten down, and made
others of better form. But when the people knew that he was not restored to
his former office: ye should have seen in an instant how they stood affected
to him, and taxed the wilfulness of the Senators, The peoples talk in favor
of Pisani.
done for the good of the Commonwealth, but only to satisfy the envy of a
few particular persons. These or such like detractions of the common sort being
reported at the Palace, the Senate did again assemble, where they propounded
the small danger which at any other time the peoples murmuring against the
Senate could import; but that it was most necessary at that present to be at
unity one with another, inregard the safety of the Commonwealth was then in
hazard. VVhereupon by a general consent, Victor was admitted to his former
office. It Pisani is restored to his former office.
was presently blown abroad the City, how that by a new decree of the Senate,
Pisani was declared General of the nauall Army, and that he was with his
forces to lie betwixt the City and the Paduan confines: Great numbers of
people did forth with run unto him, and in three days six galleys were
armed, and many more might have been made ready if need had been, every man
striving who should first enroll his name for that service.

Many Ganzarioles and other small vessels were added to these galleys. All
which being ready to depart: Pisani came with the nauall Army to the Haven,
where In what manner Pisani fortified the City.
he conferred with the General of the land troops, to change the Fort which
had been builded at the first into a brick wall, and to build at both ends two
small towers Pisani, Thadeo, The diligence which was used in the fortifications.
Iustiniano, Caballa, and diverse other noble men, having laid the first
foundations. Then they began the wall in the same place where the trench was,
the which being drawn from one tower to another, was ended in fifteen days:
great numbers of townsmen, soldiers, and mariners laying their hand to it.
The ruins of this building are at this day to be seen on the left side of the
Haven. There was afterward a great iron chain drawn near to the Iewrie to
hinder the enemies incursions, and four great covered ships were there placed
to serve for a defense. Then without they made a trench from the new wall unto
Saint Martins Church, where diverse light boats were placed, who all night long
went the round, least the enemy entering secretly, should burn the buildings
next to the City. They did besides in the night time place diverse
corpes-de-guard, for fear least the City should receive some harm by a
surprise.

VVhilest these things were done in the City, diverse persons in light boats
made The venetians daily incursions.
incursions beyond Montauban and those places from which men go from the firm
land to Chioggia, where they assailed diverse boats which went up and down,
which being easily taken, with the profit that arose by them, did encourage
diverse others to do the like. There passed no day but some vessel or other
was taken, so as in a while after none durst go from Padua to Chioggia. The
Genoueses soon perceived that if the passages were shut from them, victuails
would fail. Wherefore to stay these incursions, or rather hoping to execute
some great exploit, they came with their galleys and diverse other armed
vessels, furiously to possess the Haven of Malamoc, and to encampe there; and
having builded a Fort in the same place where

The Venetians being aduertized of the enemies approach did shut up the
channels which came from Chioggia to Venice with two ships which were sunk one
near to the other, a little beyond the Church of the holy Ghost, and on the
side of them another greater than they lying at Anchor, with store of archers in
it. The enemies galleys being come thither. Thadeo Iustiniano who lay at the
foresaid Church did with five galleys every day give them alarm, where they
fought more with arrows and darts, than with hardy strokes. The Venetians
light boats coming on the one side with their warlike engines and arrows did
infinitely torment Diverse and sundry encounters where the venetians had still
the better.
had still the better. For Caballa the Veronois was most skillful in the art
military, and had good troops of horse, which the enemies at Poueggia, and
Malamoc had not.

During these combatesand encounters at the Sea, Charles son to Lewis, (as
some say) or according to others, son to that Charles who defeated Manfred
king Charles son to Lewis king of Hungary comes before Treuiso.
of Apulia, came with ten thousand Almaines before Treuiso. Before his arrival
Nicolao Morosino, Giouanni, and Zacharia Contareni were sent thither to consult
with the Hungarian concerning the Commonwealth. For it was reported that he
had express commission from his father, to give audience to the Venetians
Ambassadors, The venetian Ambassadors come to the camp to treat of peace.
came to the camp which lay near to the Church of the forty Saints. And
though they were expressly commanded by all means to accept of peace, though it
were on unjust conditions* yet nevertheless the demaundes were such and so
hard on all sides, as if the Venetians wealth had been four times greater
than it was, The enemies unjust demands.
it would not have been sufficient to satisfy the insatiable covetousness of
the enemy.

This treaty of peace lasted certain days, but the enemies shameless demands
caused the Venetians by no means to condescend to such dishonest conditions,
choosing rather to endure all extremity than by such baseness to dishonor the
Venetian name: Prince Carrario in the midst of this parlie returned to Padua,
having left Arcuan Buccecarino to command the troops which he had brought to
Charles. After his departure the matter was a while debated on. But the enemies
meaning to take all from the Venetians, and to leave nothing to the vanquished
but their lives, the which they would have them to enjoy of their special
favor, the despite of that disgrace being converted into choler, the Senate
commanded their Ambassadors to give over the business, and without any
conclusion at all to return to Venice. They being gone, Charles, after he had
lain in Camp two months before The treaty of peace broken.
Treuiso, perceiving that it was to no purpose, dislodged and returned into

Whilst these things were done on the Treuisan, the Venetians armed fifty
Charles returns to Hu^garie.
small (...), and came about six or seven of the clock in the evening, to
surprise the enemies Fort. There was in the dike which Carrario had hastily
made near to Montauban, one Gallie commanded by Bartilmeo Vsiere of Sauona,
with two other small boats, which served for conuoy to those which went up and
down. The Venetians having suddenly assailed it, took it in a moment, the
enemy making greater shows than deeds. The Venetian Archers wanne it, who
passing over the otherside of the dike, did shoot directly into it being very
near to the shore: but being taken and spoiled, because by reason of the ebb
they could not bring it

This victory did greatly rejoice the City, and so much the more, because
this fortunate success did put courage into the Citizens, who were daunted
with so Secret speeches of the people.
many losses, and caused them to hope for better fortune. For after these
exploits, diverse speeches full of discontent were every where heard, How that
the City was become careless and fearful, that it durst not fight with the
enemy in a set battle, that the Venetians did greatly degenerate from the
valor of their ancestors, who had so often over come the Genoueses, having
more Galleys than they* That a while before, the Genoueses had no place of
retreat in all the Sea, to retire themselves in safety for fear of the
Venetians, but that now the same Venetian vigor The Citizens resolution.
they concluded to Arm forty Galleys of which Prince Contareni should be
General: And Captains for those Galleys were speedily appointed. This decree
being published, did greatly rejoice the people; and it was executed with such
affection Carolo Zeno, which they daily expected. Prince Contareni in the mean
time, so soon as the Rowers were gone into the Galleys; for to practice them
in rowing (for they were almost all artificers) he did daily make them to row
from the Iewrie to Saint Nicholas Church. He did it of purpose as well to
accustom those new and unskillful people to the oar, as also to delaie the
battle if it were Zeno: Because it was against reason to oppose to the
victorious Army of the enemies, one lesser in number, and weaker in forces
than they.

But because the scarcity of all things did in such sort oppress them, as it
was impossible to draw the matter out at length for fear least that delaie
might cast them headlong into some greater danger, they resolved to fight
notwithstanding that Zeno was not returned. And because in so great a dearth
they might be able to feed such an Army, before they did set forward against
the enemy, it was published by a decree of the Senate, That whosoever among
the people would relieve the nauall Army or the troops, with money, victuals
or Soldiers: so soon as the enemies A new decree of the Senate in favor of
those who should rele^e the City.
should be defeated, thirty of those who should be thought to have best
deserved, should be received into the number of the Senators, which honor
they and their posterity should for ever enjoy: And besides, that the Senate
would yearly distribute five thousand crowns among those who could not
attain to that dignity.

More than threescore families did relieve the Commonwealth at this need, so
as by how much any man was esteemed rich, by so much more did he strive to
deserve well of the Commonwealth: by means whereof great relief was
gathered, whereupon diverse were made Senators. But in reading all that above
mentioned in some Authors who have been careful to collect this history, one
thing has greatly moved me, which though it be of no great importance, does
nevertheless show a great affection and love toward a man's Country.

It is reported that one whose name was Matheo Fasceolo a Citizen of Chioggia A
liberal offer made to the Senate by a Citizen of Chioggia.
(this man after the taking of the City retired to Venice with his children)
came to the Senate, and told them how that at the taking of his Country he had
lost all his wealth, which amounted to many thousands of Crowns: and that if
they were again in his possession he would franckly employ them for the good
and profit of the Commonwealth: But that he had nothing left but his life, and
two children, the which he freely offered to the Senate and his Country: And
if they would employ them either by Sea or Land, they were ready for the
service of the Commonwealth to expose that only jewel which fortune had left
them of all the rest.

The Genoueses having notice of the great preparations of the new Army,
fearing The Genoueses fear.
least the Venetians, being driven forward by the flowing of the Sea, should
about midnight surprise the entry of the Haven which they held, and being once
entered, that those of the City coming to assail them in small boats before
and on the sides would enuiron them, and by that means enforce them to fight
in round and so cut them in pieces, they raised their siege and returned to
Chioggia, thinking that the Venetians being shut from victuals by Land and
Sea, would The Genoueses do wholly ruinate Malamoc and Poueggia.
yield. But before their departure, they razed the Fort and ruined Malamoc and
Poueggia down to the ground.

Soon after, four and twenty Genoueses Galleys went into Friul to get
victuals, Victor Pisani departing from the City with three hundred small
boats and fifty Ganziaroles, came and ambusht himself among the reeds near
to the tower thinking to surprise them, but being descried a far off by
means of his slags which were not taken down, the Genoueses on a sudden
returned amain toward Chioggia. The Venetian not being able gate Mariana, and
the fight was already begun in the channels when on a sudden these three
Galleys arrived. The Venetians being assailed by the enemy, An enterprise
attempted with bad success.
before, behind, and on the sides, were enforced speedily to retire to their
enseignes. Prince Contareni his son in Law died in this encounter a brave
young man and of the family of the Gradonici, and diverse others likewise with,
eight vessels taken by the enemies: And by this means the matter falling out
unluckily the Army returned to Venice. The Genoueses Galleys in the mean time
who were The Genoueses fortify Chioggia.
returned from forage, understanding what had been attempted in their
absence, did resolve to fortify Chioggia, and to beat down all the buildings
near to the salt pits, and those likewise which were upon the Walls: to
rampire the market Carolo Zeno who was abroad with the Army, was not yet
returned, and that there was no likelihood that the Venetians would attempt
any thing before his coming, fearing by that means nothing less than their
arrival, they wrought but lasily in those fortifications. What Charolo Zeno
did after his departure from Venice.


Carolo Zeno (as has been said) departing from Venice with five Galleys at
such time as Pisani was defeated at Pola* met near to Sicilie with Sicilians
ships, diverse

In this happy journey of his, four Galleys departing from Candie came and
joined with him: These likewise before they came to him, had taken three
Genoueses Barzes, one between Candie and Morea, the other at Sapientia, by the
aid of Carolo having of five Galleys made a fleet of nine (for he was still
Zeno make^ spoil all along the River of Genoa.
General of them all) sailed speedily toward the River of Genoa to spoil
there, where after he had made furious incursions, torn up Trees and plants by
the roots, he made all things desolate from Porto-venere even to Genoa. He
would not tarry to besiege any place for fear of six of the enemies Galleys,
who still followed him.

This spoil being made, returning to the maine Sea, he seized on a Sicilian
ship laden with corn, and other vessels going to Genoa, he brought away the
ship, and suncke the rest. These exploits did Zeno on the lower Sea. But
near to Trinacria Micheleto Iustiniano who with four Galleys had lain in the
straight, besides other ships taken from the enemies on the Propontide Sea
and the Bosphorus, he took a Neapolitan Barzeloden with Genoueses merchandise
which was sold for eighteen thousand ducats.

The six Galleys likewise which departed from Venice at the same time in a
manner, or a little before Zeno, were not idle. For soon after their departure
they surprised two ships of Amona, unto whom upon their word, they restored
what they had taken from them, and within a while after departing forth of the
Gulphe they met with a Turkish Gallie which they suncke, and slew all that were
in it. Then they came and made certain light assaults on the Isle of Chios
where they burnt the

Afterward, he drew near to Constantinople. Caloianes had at the same time
recovered his Empire, and driven his son Andronicus into Pera. But he was not
yet master of the Castle, which did greatly vex him. Therefore he never ceased
Caloianes earnest entreaty to the Venetians for succor.
to importune the Venetians, until he had drawn them as well by entreaties as
promises to assail three hundred Genoueses which kept it. It is reported, that
melting into tears, he besought the Venetians not to forsake him in so evident
a danger, protesting that if by their means he were restored to his Empire,
that the Venetians, and not he (as in time before) should bear the name of
Emperor of Constantinople. The Castle being taken by the Venetians valor,
Caloianes recovered all The Venetians take the Castle.
the places of the Empire (Tenedos excepted.)

But whilst the Venetians were near to Constantinople, they surprised two
Genoueses ships laden with Syrian merchandise, within the which were eight and
twenty Genoueses; and diverse other small vessels, which for the traffic did
ordinarily frequent the straight, and the Ponticke Sea. Pera likewise in hatred
to Andronicus The Uenetians besiege Pera in hatred of Andronicus.
was straightly besieged, and during the siege, the four Venetian Galleys in
favor of Caloianes did never stir thence.

About the same time Zeno came to Tenedos, where in few days nineteen
Venetian Galleys arrived, trusting to whom he took a Barze of Naples wherein
were diverse Genoueses. Whithin a while after he departed from Tenedos with
fifteen Galleys, having left two for the guard of the Island, and sent the
residew to the siege Bertucio Pisani, brother to Victor. As he passed along he
would needs have seized on Andria a City belonging to the Barbarians, where
being stricken with an arrow he fell down dead. Carolo came from Tenedos to
Rhodes, and going from thence he took two Genoueses ships. Then he arrived in
Cyprus, where near the Island he took a Barze of the enemies laden with
corn, after that, an other which was very rich. From Cyprus he sailed into
Syria, In what place Zeno received news of the loss of Chioggia and the
Cities siege.
where refreshing himself in the Haven of Beritha, a Candiot-Gallie arrived
sent by the Prince and Senate, bringing news of the loss of Chioggia, and of
the Cities siege, who commanded him to return speedily into Italy, to raise
the enemies Camp: whereupon he suddenly left Syria and sailed to Rhodes to
take in victuailes. Nicholao Zeno, Micheletto Iustiniano. Giouanni Barba were
sent before with three Galleys to make expedition for whatsoever should be
necessary for their journey. They found in the Haven of Rhodes a Genoa Barze
called Pichinione, the goodliest that in those days sailed on the Seas. The
Genoueses mistrusting that which followed, that the residue of the Army would
quickly come thither, (the Venetians in the mean time not daring to assail
it for the bigness of the vessel) went forth of the Haven, and took the
direct course toward Ionia, having but a scant wind. But it was not very
long ere Carolo arrived. There was by chance at the same time in the Haven, a
strange Barze, with an other of Spain strongly armed, but A great Barze of
Genoa taken.
somewhat lesser: Zeno with these and the residue of the Army, came and
ouertooke

It is reported that the Genoueses never had a greater or richer ship. They
found by the merchants books of accounts, that the goods within it were worth
five hundred thousand crowns. They sold thereof to the value of foure-score
thousand A Genoueses ship esteemed to be worth five hundred thousand crowns.
to such as bid most: the residue not being set to sale.

Carolo, after he had caused the great ship to be unladen, and the goods to put
in smaller vessels, suncke it in the maine sea, and then passed into Candie. In
that place (as some Authors say) he received the first news of the Cities
siege by Marco Morosino, who was sent thither with a Gallie of purpose by the
Prince and Senate.

But during these exploits at Sea, the City being tormented daily more and
more with the scarcity of all necessaries, Prince Contareni departed by night
from Venice in the midst of Winter, with four and twenty Galleys, and
diverse other Vessels which carried Victuals: the Horsemen, and Archers, came
by day-breake, and seized on the Haven of Chioggia: And then on a sudden he
sanke two Barzes at the The Prince with his Army in the Haven of Chioggia.
mouth of the Haven, which he had dragged thither for that purpose, thereby
wholly to take from the enemies all means of making any incur^ions* having at
his arrival left forces at the place, where he meant to sink them, to see
that those who had the charge thereof should speedily execute it. Then the
Mercenarie Soldiers being landed, and tickled with a desire to fight, marched
toward the City: Those within The Genoueses beat back the Venetians to their
Galleys.
bloody and fierce on both sides: But the enemies multitude still increasing,
the Venetian was beaten back, and with great loss driven to his Galleys.
Diverse were slain fighting, but more flying: For whilst the troops arrived
on the shore side, striving to enter into the Galleys, diverse in that amazement
were slain, and many taken: who being brought to the City and disarmed, were
all murdered. Hn cio Pisani who had an honorable place in the Venetian Army,
died in this assault. The enemy by this victory being become more insolent,
did forth with arm diverse small vessels, and came against the Venetian
Barzes, the which being not defended, The Venetian Barzes taken and burnt by
the enemies.
the Galleys not being able to come near them by reason of the strength of the
flood, were presently taken and burnt: wherewith the Venetian was better
contented than if the enemy had kept them and placed Garrisons in them; For if
they had so done, they would have wholly hindered the Venetian from shutting up
the haven.

The Venetian did not greatly esteem these two losses, having his nauall Army
still whole and sound, for of all his Rowers, Pilots, and Mariners, not one
came on shore to fight. He speedily sent two Galleys to the City to bring away
two other Barzes. But whilst all these preparations were making ready:
Frederico Cornari Cornari seizes on Brondolli.
went with four Galleys by the Princes commandment to Brondolli, to shut up
at one time all issues from the enemy. Being come thither he suddenly sanke
two ships Blase his Church, in the way from Chioggia to Ladice, and the other
in the very Haven.

But whilst Cornari was occupied in this business, Prince Contareni, because
he would loose no time, caused the bottomes of those two Barzes* which the
enemies had burned to be drawn forth of the water, and filling them with flint
stones, he put them in the self same place from whence they had been drawn:
Then the next day he did without any impeachment sink in the same place the
two other Barzes which came from Venice, being filled with earth and
flint-stone. And because the entrance and coming forth of the Haven, should
be still free to the Venetians, they fortified that part thereof which looks
toward the City; the which

The enemy fearing that if the Haven should be shut up, he might be brought to
The Genoueses determination fearing to be shut up.
the last point of all miseries, which is famine, caused fourteen Galleys to
be prepared to carry part of the troops from thence by Sea to Brondolli,
intending to return at the spring, to free his Countrymen from the siege,
after he should have reenforced his Army at Genoa. The Venetian Galleys which
Cornari had brought thither (as has been said) did come before them to S.
Blase his Church. The Channel was so straight as two Galleys could hardly go
in Front; the which did Cornari perceived that the enemy sought to draw them
up from thence, and to make themselves a passage, he aduertized his fellows
thereof, who lay three miles from thence, by a smoke. Contareni perceiving
this signal, instantly commanded Thadeo Iustiniano to go with four Galleys
to relieve Cornari. At his arrival the enemies left off a little. Victor
Pisani being sent after Thadeo with six Galleys, The Passage of Brondolli shut
up to the Genoueses.
caused two other ships to be sunk, almost in the same place, and shut up the
passage with a chain made of Masts and Saile-yards, builded in the form of a
Rampire.

Victor was made General of the Galleys which were sent to Brondolli: whereat
Ielouzie betwixt Pisani and Thad^ Iustiniano.
Thadeo being offended (for there was already some suspicion of jealousy
betwixt them two) forthwith departed thence in his Galley, because he would not
be enforced to obey him, and came to the Prince. The residue which were
thirteen remained in the Garrison, where the Venetians had much to do, the
enemies hourly Victor which perceived it (for the enemies Galleys were removed
from the other side) he commanded Giouanni Barbadico to pass speedily upon the
enemy with light Vessels (whereof great numbers were from the beginning sent
unto him) whilst himself with his Galleys drew as near as he could to the
same side which the Genoueses intended to take. For it is most certain that
the enemy possessing both the sides of the Haven, the Venetian Galleys would
have A sharp sight in the Haven of Brondolli.
Water in the midst thereof, but it is nauigable on both sides near to the
shore. Now the Genoueses possessed already (as has been said) one of the
sides, and had fortified it. If he had shut in the going forth on the left
side, as he had determined, the Venetian Galleys had been undone. They rested
not in any sort in so great a danger: they fought fiercely in the midst of
the Haven, whereby the Venetians endured much, in regard of the great numbers
of arrows which the enemies shot on them from the opposite shore. But the
greatness of the danger made the Venetians resolved, or rather obstinate in
their determination, so that at last they brake the enemies deseignes; and
being become Masters of the place, they builded a Fort

Georgio Caballa, Son to Giacomo, was sent with a good troop to guard that
The Venetians and the Geno ueses lodge at one time in one Haven.
place; and by this means the Genoueses and the Venetians possessed one Haven
at one time. Whereupon there were daily skirmishes, the engines of war
throwing from one side to an other. The nauall Army was likewise much molested
day and night, by the warlike engines which the enemy had in the Nuns
Monastery. During these exploits, near to Chioggia, the Stellani, in favor
of Bernabo Visconte, ouer-ranne the whole Country of Genoa, thereby to divert
them from the War of Chioggia. For besides other exploits of war, four
thousand horse came at times The Stellani ^rre on the Genoueses The Genoueses
defeat the Stellani.
under the conduct of Asturo their General unto S. Francis Church, near to
Genoa, filling the whole Country with fear and terror. But the Genoueses
making a sallie forth upon them the latter time, wholly brake them, and took
them all prisoners; their Captain excepted, who escaped by means of a Peasant.

The forces likewise of the Emperor Caloianes did somewhat aid the Venetians,
who did greatly molest those of Pera by ordinary incursions, and sometimes by
furious assaults: But so soon as his Son Andronicus had placed Misians and
Turks that were come to his aid, in a place near to the City, for fear of
danger he gave over the Venetian party.

This was done far from the City. But on the Venetian Territory, The
Genoueses The Venetian attempts to binder the Genoueses escape.
the stream which separateth little Chioggia from the great, and from thence
conducted them with great danger to Brondolli, where being sufficiently
furnished with men and Arms, they remained before the Fort, expecting a fit
time to sallie forth. The Venetians on the other side not to suffer the enemy
to escape without punishment, kept good guard near to the Haven, to beat him
in if he should attempt to make any evasion. But whilst the enemy watch this
time, and the Venetian continued to attend on him, the Venetian Galleys were
greatly molested by the enemies Archers, in such sort as the Mariners like
desperate persons cried out, that they were of necessity to dislodge, unless
they would have them which were in the Galleys, to die before Chioggia. Those
likewise which were in guard on the shore, fearing that Carrarto would send his
troops to assail them on their backs, entreated that they might raze the Fort
and depart thence. Pisani exhorted and entreated Pisani exhor^eth his murmuring
soldiers.
them all to have patience for a while, and that it could not be long ere
Carolo Zeno would arrive; and that then being strengthened with Men and
Galleys, they would easily daunt the enemies boldness.

The like despair was in the Princes Army* For cold and hunger, and the
danger of arrows which were continually shot into the galleys had so daunted
them, as the soldiers with those which were in the Haven, thought more on
flight, than on resistance. The Princes presence only, and entreaty did stay
them, who laid before The great respect which the soldiers did bear to the
Princes presence
them the great disgrace, and evident danger which their country was like to
incur if they departed thence without effecting some worthy enterprise: That
without doubt the Genoueses would pursue the Venetians at the heels, if they
dislodged

But neither entreaties, no^ exhortations could persuade the soldiers, who
were wholly daunted, to continue the siege, so as at last they resolved within
two days to raise their camp from both places: But Zeno on a sudden, as if
he had been sent from Heaven, about noone entered the Haven of Chioggia with
fourteen galleys well armed.

The Senate on the first of January, so soon as they descried him on the
maine sailing directly toward the City, about three of the clock after noone,
sent to command him to go and meet with the Prince, who lay before Chioggia.
His coming Zeno was forthwith commanded to go to Brondolli with twelve
galleys to meet Pisani.

His arrival brought great contentment to the Venetians, who wept for joy. The
Garrison which was on the shore perceiving the arrival of their galleys,
took Two and fifty galleys in the venetians Army by Sea.
fifty galleys, did no more fear the enemies attempts. Carolo resolved to lie
at Anchor without the Haven, and not to enter before night: But a sudden
tempest a rising before sunset, he returned with five galleys to the Prince,
having wind and tide with him. Thadeo Iustiniano who had remained still with
the seven, having been grievously tossed, lost two galleys* one near to the
Fort which was broken on the Sea-banks, and the other near to the mouth of Po.
Carolo being sent back again with nine galleys Carolo Zeno arriueth in the
haven of Chioggia.
to Pisani, entered the Haven as he was commanded and joined with him. Two
galleys were placed as sentinels near to the place, where the enemies would
have escaped.

The Genoueses faining to escape by night, came and assailed one of those two
galleys, and by the help of the Garrison of Brondolli drew it on shore. Those
within it feeling themselves to be drawn forwards by cables and iron chains*
did presently leap into the Sea, hoping to save themselves by swimming, but
being kept down by the waves, they were all drowned, and those who strove
against the waves were slain by the enemy. Giouanni Miani Captain of the
galley was taken with a rich booty. For this galley Carolo had brought home
from his voayge.

The enemy being proud of this exploit, would needs attempt to get forth: For
he certainly knew that so great a multitude of people shut up in a place, would
soon be famished if speedy means were not found to separate them. Whereupon
the Garrison which was at Lupa near to the haven, which the Venetian
determined to assail; and the other which meant to escape at Brondolli, came at
one time to encounter the Venetian. They fought fiercely in both places, and
the Genoueses were repulsed with great loss; but much more at Lupa than at
Brondolli. The Venetian A new fight with the enemies.
after all these attempts, to take all hope of escape from the Genoueses,
caused two great ships of burden to be brought from Venice, and sanke them
with an iron chain in that place, (though very straight) which remained open
to the Genoueses. Then they placed five galleys for the guard of the passage
commanded by Francisco Bocolli, in which place before there were but two.
Carolo Zeno was commanded to keep near to the Fort with seven galleys; and
five others were placed in the way to Bebia: Victor with the residue of the
Army encamped near to Saint The venetians attempt to hinder the enemies
escape.
Blase his Church.

In these places they remained all day: in the night they came near to
Brondolli, and set boats in sentinel, to the end they might be soon
aduertized if the enemy Loretta recovered.
manner the new Tower which had been burnt at the Genoueses first arrival,
was repaired and manned with soldiers for the guard thereof.

About the same time that Loretto was recovered, the Tower of the Monastery of
the Nuns which the enemies possessed near to to the Haven, being shaken with
a sudden stroke of a Piece of battery, was for the most part overthrown,
where Pietro Doria General of the Genoueses Army was crushed in pieces. Some
say that he was slain as he was putting his vessels in order of battle, and
that (he The death of the Genoueses General.
And that thereupon the victorious Venetian pursued the enemy in his flight as
far as Chioggia, and that there they fought again before little Chioggia:
whereupon the Genoueses being again vanquished with great slaughter, and
having lost the one half of the bridge, they retired confusedly into the
City: that the same day likewise more than six hundred Genoueses were taken,
and almost as many slain, of whom besides Doria of whom we now spoke, Thomaso
Goti a man of great repute, was buried in the ruins of the bridge. But
Chinatio sets down the matter otherwise, whom herein we rather follow as we
have done in other matters. He says that all that which we have spoken of, did
not happen in one day, but at sundry

In the mean time they were not less infested near to the City. For they
skirmished daily near to little Chioggia, as occasion served. The Genoueses
being shut up in this manner, men began to come to Venice by the river of Po,
from La Marca, Romagnia, and Ferrara. By means whereof the dearth of victuals
soon ceased. The price whereof had been so high, as the City was almost
brought to Great scarcity of victuals in venice.
the last extremity. For corn was sold at the same time* at a fourefold
rate, and so likewise all other necessaries.

The Paduans by stealth in small covered boats carried victuals to the
besieged. The Senate to reenforce the troops which were before Chioggia,
levied five thousand The Genoueses design to get forth.
foot: The Genoueses for their last attempt, would try if by any cunning they
could put their Army forth which lay at Brondolli, seeing by force they could
not do it. Wherefore having drawn a great and broad trench from the Fort,
even to the shore, they were in great hope to be able in the darkness of the
night unknown to the Venetians to put forth to Sea, whereupon twenty galleys
made account to get forth in that place, whom they thought to be sufficient to
molest the Venetians coast, and chiefly the City of Venice, so as they being
at Sea, the Venetian should be enforced whether he would or no to raise his
camp. But the Venetian having discovered the enemies design, all the
soldiers thereabouts were sent for to the Princes camp, where they resolved
to assault Brondolli at one time by Sea and land.

All the forces in a manner being reduced into one body for this purpose,
there arose a quarrel betwixt the Italians and the mercenarie strangers which
were in the camp: who falling to blows, diverse in a moment were slain, and
it would greatly have endangered the Army, had not the Princes coming
suddenly appeased Tumult in the venetian Army:
the matter. This tumult, with the fear likewise, least the enemy should draw
his trench even to Brondolli, caused the Venetians to make have, and not to
tarry for John d'Agons a wise and valorous Frenchman, whom in his absence they
had named John of Agons ^ French man.
for their General by land. Carolo Zeno being sent with the residue of the
forces which remained round about Brondolli, was commanded to bring those
troops which had still lain encamped under the public ensigns before the
City near

Pisani was already commanded carefully to attend the signal: and that so
soon as he should be aduertized that his fellows fought at Brondolli, he should
likewise come on the other side, and that having brought his galleys as near
as possibly he could, he should land his troops, and assail the enemy on
that side next to the Port. All things were ready for the assault of
Brondolli, when as the exploit falling out fortunately at little Chioggia made
them to alter their determination. For the Venetian fearing that the enemy
would come on their backs, would first before they went to Brondolli assail
the Fort which the Genoueses held in that place:

It is said that fifteen hundred came forth of Brondolli, and about eight The
Genoueses come and assail the venetians in set battle.
as issuing from an ambush, and fell upon the Venetians. Zeno bravely received
them, and the fight was very cruel. At the first they shot such great store
of arrows from both sides, that the air was darkened as with a great cloud.
The noise which was heard from the shore, and from the ruins of little
Chioggia, together with the clashing of Armor filled every place with terror:
in which fight the number of the dead was great, but that of the wounded much
greater.

In the mean time that great squadron of eight thousand men came forth of the
City, and came forward in a close battallion like a torrent upon the Venetian,
who was busied in fight with the first comers. Zeno likewise turning toward
them, did them to be spent and tired in the fight with the footmen, did easily
break and The Garrison of Brondolli broken and defeated in the fight.
put them to flight with great slaughter. Diverse casting themselves into the
water near to S. Katherines Church were drowned, as well because they could
not swim, as by the weight of their Armor.

The victorious Venetian being freed on that side turned all his forces against
the squadron of the City, which being amazed at the mishap of their fellows,
had already begun by little and little to give back. Against these being of
themselves disordered, the Venetian furiously marched. The enemies being then
affrighted, loosing their judgment with their ranks, perceiving fortune to be
contrary, began openly to fly: every man shifting for himself, endeavored
to get over the bridge Giacomo Rouccio a valiant Captain. The Tower which
before the battle was begun to be assailed, did likewise presently yield.

Four hundred Genoueses were taken at the same time, among whom were diverse
The great loss which the Genoueses sustained that day.
gentlemen: with a thousand ensigns of the Paduans and Genoueses:

The night after the battle, the Genoueses that were at Brondolli having set
fire on their Galleys retired in great amazement to Chioggia. So soon as Victor
had notice of the enemies flight, he presently drew near with his Galleys,
where he saved two Galleys of Genoa from the fire, ten of them being burnt, and
the residue drawn Victor entered Pisani enters into Brondolli.
into Brondolli, where he had intelligence by certain spies, that ten Genoa
Galleys strongly Armed, lay not far from thence for the guard of the Mills,
whither he presently sent certain small boats, to discover whether it were so
or no. But the Genoueses descrying them, and being terrified with the news of
the loss of their Army, left their Galleys, and leaping into the water
escaped by swimming to the next shore, by means whereof these Galleys without
any resistance at all were possessed by the Venetians, which to the great joy
of the people, were brought to Ten Genoa Galleys taken.
were taken in them.

Carolo Zeno, having by the Princes commandment drawn his troops from the
lesser Chioggia, came and encamped before the Haven of the City, by the way
which leads to Brondolli, near to Saint Francis Church, where he caused his
Soldiers to make a great Trench. The Genoueses then perceiving that they were
The Genoueses put all unprofitable eaters forth of Chioggia (...) passages
leading to Chioggia are shut up. Pisani fortifieth Brondolli.
more straightly shut in, did put all the women and children, with other
unprofitable eaters forth of the City. Prince Contareni sent that wretched
company to Venice. Besides, the Venetian enclosed all the passages from the
firm Land to Chioggia, with strong rampires. Pisani likewise by building a
Tower and a rampire at Brondolli,

In the mean time, upon report that a new Army was providing at Genoa, and
that of a certain Prince Carrario made great preparations of Armor and
shipping, and perceiving besides, that they should not spedily recover
Chioggia, the Senate to prevent the like scarcity of victuailes, as that
wherewith the City was a while before afflicted, decreed that certain ships
of burden should be sent into Apulia to fetch corn, and that Thadeo
Iustiniano with twelve Galleys should be their conuoy. Iustiniano it sent to
Apulia for forage.
He sailing toward Histria did without any great difficulty recover Grada,
where surprising diverse Forlani, he sent them all bound to Venice. He departed
thence with a fair wind, and came to Manfredonia, where he had intelligence
that the Genoueses Army was not far off, being commanded by Maruffo Doria;
he Manfredonia, where (because the enemy was at hand) he caused all his
Galleys to be disarmed, and their tackling and furniture to The Genoueses*
assail Iustinian^ at Manfredonia.
be carried into the Town, which done, he suncke them in the Haven. Then
barricadoing his troops on both sides the entry of the haven, to the end they
might fight in covert, he resolved to hinder the enemies entrance. Some say
that Guido Foranensis the Cities Governor, counseled Thadeo to leave the
Haven and to retire with

At the enemies first arrival, there was a cruel fight for two hours space:
then both sides made a pause whilst they refreshed themselves, and soon after
they returned to the combat with greater fury. The Haven had been bravely
defended, if the Venetian had not been enforced to fight near together, and
in a round figure, by reason that some of the enemies were landed, they
nevertheless for a while bravely sustained all their assaults: But being
beaten thence by the enemies great multitudes, they fled. The City being not
far off was the cause that the slaughter was no where else but in that place
where they skirmished. Thadeo with a hundred of his Iustiniano taken by the
Genoueses
Soldiers were taken by the enemy.

The Genoueses having broken as much of the sunk Galleys as appeared above
water, sailed to Ficulan, where six other Venetian Galleys were reported to be,
five of which by the enemies rash entrance escaped and came to Venice, and the
other being not so swift as the rest, was taken. The slaves of those Galleys
which were lost at Manfredonia, came to Chioggia by Land. Where, at the very
same time as all this happened far from Venice, the Venetians fought with
good success on the Lakes, with fourscore of the enemies vessels, eight of
which were taken, and the residue being put to flight retired with great fear
to Chioggia. But the assault A great fight on the lakes.
which was within a while after given to the Genoueses Fort at the Mills was
not so fortunate. For the Venetian was not only shamefully beaten thence, but
the son The venetians repulsed from the Fort of the Mills.
of Lodouico Loretano a valorous young man, with diverse other Venetians of note
were there slain. The Venetians coming again the morrow after to enuiron the
Fort, The Paduans desea^ed and put to flight.
and crossing the Lakes they made have to overtake the enemy, whom on a
sudden near to the shore they defeated and put to flight.

The enemies esc^ping into the neighbor Marshes, all their vessels to the
numper of fourscore were taken, and with them threescore prisoners, among whom
were diverse Genoueses, They were not idle in Zenos Camp, for they still fought
as occasion Demands of the besieged.
then the Genoueses, craved that they might depart from Chioggia with their
goods; the which was flatly denied to either of them.

Not long after, the Venetians having intelligence that the Genoueses Army The
Venetians propositions to the besieged.
was arrived in Dalmatia, and of the preparations which Carrario made on the
frontiers to relieve his associates, and to raise the siege; sent word to the
besieged, that whosoever would have their lives saved should forthwith leave
Chioggia (for the Historians mention no set time) and come and yield their
bodies at the Prison gates in Venice, otherwise they should not expect any
mercy.

It is reported that the enemy did so contemn this proposition, as not one
among The resolution of the besieged.
all their great number would embrace it. They had been aduertized of the
coming of their Army, and therefore hoping that the siege would soon be
raised, they resolved still to hold out, and to endure any extremity rather
than to

On the fourth of June about three of the clock after dinner the Genoueses
Army The Genoueses Army calls the Uenetians to the fight.
presented it self before the Haven of Chioggia, being three and twenty
Galleys in number. They came within a mile of the City, and with great cries
called the enemies to fight. But the Venetians not stirring at all, made
themselves ready to receive the enemies assaults: And in another place great
number of light boats kept watch on the lakes to discover the Paduans
proceedings. The Genoueses Contareni and the other Captains continued still
firm in their resolution, by no means to fight. And yet they sent forth
certain small boats which by their swiftness did greatly molest the enemies
Galleys.

Pisani at the last contemning the enemies small number, did by the Princes
permission The Genoueses dare not attend the Venetians.
sallie forth of the Haven with five and twenty Galleys, and being come
somewhat forward at sea, he did on a sudden turn the prowes of his Galleys
upon the enemy at Fossoni. The Genoueses durst not attend them, but having
retired the

The besieged at the same time would needs attempt one means more to escape,
having for the purpose made a hundred small boats of the wood of houses, each
of which had ten oars. They had determined (for their fleet within few days
after was returned to their old place of abode) that so soon as their Galleys
should approach the Haven, and with their great usual noise make all men
attentive to behold them (for they had received new supplies from Genoa and
Dalmatia) three of their Galleys should come as near as they could to the
shore right over against Granello of Pera was the Conductor of this
enterprise. He when all things were ready, gave a signal to his people to
come forth. Those of Zeno's Camp having discovered the The Venetians sudden
arrival hinders the enemies escape.
matter, did speedily aduertize the Prince that the enemy was ready to
depart. Diverse light boats were forthwith sent to hinder their coming forth,
who having crossed the water, and being come to the place where the enemy was
already come forth, did on a sudden so affright them, as in a moment they
were defeated. Fifty of their boats were taken, diverse of them were slain,
and fourscore prisoners Granello their leader, and the residue by flight
escaped into the City

Blondus says that the Genoueses made an attempt to cut a sunder the chain
which crossed the sunk Argoseis at the entrance of the Haven, at which time
Maruffo the General of their Army came at the flood, and gave in upon the
Venetian Gal^ies and that these kirmish being begun, he busied the Venetian
in fight, whilst his people took away that hinderance: but that both their
attempts proved vain. For those who would have come forth, and those likewise
who came The enemies are every where ill entreated.
and assailed them at their backs, were in such ^ort beaten by the Engines of
war and by arrow-shot, as they were basely enforced to fly.

The Genoueses being daunted with the loss of their people returned to their
usual aboade. Those in the City perceiving that neither their own attempts
nor those of their fellows did any whit avail them, did set all the prisoners
at liberty, and bringing them to the City gates, sent them to the Camp. It
is thought that they did it for fear, least if they should have died in
prison, they themselves in like

Then they tried another means to get forth. They sent messengers to the
Captains The Genoueses policy to get forth of the City in despite of the
Venetians.
in Zeno's Camp, who promised them all the gold, silver, and Armor of the
Genoueses with the City to boot, on condition that the Venetians would permit
them to depart thence home to their houses without any harm at all. To this
form of yielding they did all hearken; But Zeno opposing it, did aduertize the
Prince thereof by an express messenger. Pietro Hemo his Counceller was
forthwith sent thither, for besides diverse things which would have been taken
from them by this kind of yielding, the Venetians should have received a great
disgrace, if the Genoueses Hemo his An in what conditions the Genuoueses
designs were broken.
advice then it was concluded, that the spoil of the City should be given to
the Soldiers, and that as many as took the enemies pay should become their
prisoners; and the Genoueses, Paduans, Forlani, Dalmatians, and Greeks, being
more apt to tug an oar than to bear Arms, should with the City fall to the
Venetians share. The Captains being by these Articles put in mind of their
duty, did promise and swear to Zeno, that they would never again accept of
the Genoueses offers, nor in any sort harken to their messengers, entreaties,
or promises whatsoever. The matter being thus appeased, Roberto de la Marca,
who held a very honorable Roberto de la Marca is hanged at Uenice.
place in the Army, continuing still wilful in his opinion that the Genoueses
offers should be accepted, did labor all he might to have it done, til being
brought into Zeno's presence, he was by a general consent committed to
prison, and two days after being convicted of treachery was hanged at Venice:
and thus by the death of one only man the whole tumult was appeased.

The Genoueses first design proving vain, they endeavored still to raise some
sedition in the Camp, as they had done at the beginning, by making greater
offers to the Soldiers. But the Captains sent their messengers to Zeno,
assuring them A discreet answer of the mercenarie Captains to the enemies.
that the Genoueses lives and deaths were in his and the Venetians hands, and
that they were to entreat and beg their lives of them, and to use no more
means to Carolo, into whose presence they being come, they could by no means
change his determinat on.

Having then lost all hope, falling to tears and entreaties, they sent the
chief of The Gen^eses on their knees at the Princes feet beg life.
all their troops to the Prince, who weeping and falling at his feet,
entreated him for the love of Almighty God, and in pity of their calamities,
to take commiseration of their present misery; confessing that they had till
then like enemies executed diverse enterprises against the Venetians, as well by
Sea sa Land, but that it was only for dominion, and not for greediness of men's
lives: which might be easily testified, in regard that during the wars all
prisoners on both sides, had all men, had been slain. And that besides, they
had never refused to give any man his life that had requested it. That
victuals beginning to grow scarce, they dismissed their prisoners, fearing
least they should be famished in Prison. They did not deny but that they had
tried all means before they wou^d yield; which nevertheless they had not
done so much for any hatred they did bear to them, as because they would not
be counted Bisonians and cowards among their Countriemen. And that now being
vanquished rather by famine than by Arms they did not request to carry away
with them their own gold, silver, or moueables, but only their lives: the
which if it should be denied to men unarmed, and who did humbly crave it,
would for ever be accounted a deed both cruel and inhumane: The reply made
unto them.


To this there was no gentle reply made, but only that they might be sure to
be soon imprisoned, and that then the Senate would at leisure determine of
their life or death: That in the mean time, it was both just and reasonable
that Famine enforces them to yield.
they should speedily dispatch what they had to do. Being returned to the
City they brought news of nothing but sad calamity, how the loss of their
goods, imprisonment, and their lives were in danger, But being grievously
afflicted by famine (for there were some among them who of a long time had
seen no bread) they resolved to yield howsoever rather than to die with
hunger. Therefore setting up an Ensign on the highest Tower of the City, the
Genoueses fleet came forthwith from their usual place of aboade into the
Cities view, but the besieged

The Captains in the mean time sent into the City to separate the mercenarie
Soldiers from the Genoueses, and to put the richest booty into a certain
place. Four thousand prisoners fell to the Venetians, three thousand of whom
were Genoueses, two hundred Paduans, a few Forlani, and the residue Dalmatians
and Illirians with some Greeks, who were all brought prisoners to Venice. The
Soldiers being disarmed, were let go. The whole spoil being laid on a heap
in Saint Mary's Church was for the space of two days sold to such as bid most:
the money was distributed among the Soldiers, and the City was by the
Captains yielded The Venetians recover Chioggia
to the Venetians. In this manner did the Venetians recover Chioggia, ten
months after it had been taken by the Genoueses. Prince Contareni, Victor
Pisani, Carolo Zeno, and the chief of the Army entered it on the four and
twentieth of June: and having in all places erected the Venetian Ensigns, they
brought home to the Commonwealth ninteene Genoa Galleys well armed, with
diverse ships, and a marvelous great quantity of salt.

The end of the sixth Book of the second Decad.
THE SEVENTH BOOK Venice.
The Contents of the seventh Book of the second Decad.


THe Venetians recover Bebia with all the other Forts on the Lakes soon after
the reduction of Chioggia. The Thryestines reuolting take part with the
Genoueses Cap-Histra is taken by the enemies. The Genoueses passing with their
fleet before the Haven of the City come into Histria. The Venetians mighty
Army recouereth Cap-Histria. The Genoueses take Arba. VICTOR PISANI dies at
Manfredonia. CAROLO ZENO is made General of the nauall Army. Treuiso is a
long time besieged by the Carrarians. The Venetians attempt in vain to relieve
Treuiso with men and victuals. The Venetians give the City of Treuiso to
LEOPOLD Duke of Austria. CAROLO ZENO Genoueses prisoners were in, upon the
news that the Venetian prisoners were all stain at Genoa. What great harm
three Genoueses Galleys did to the Venetians. LEOPOLD comes into Italy with
ten thousand horse. Peace with the Genoueses and their associates by means
of the Duke of Sauoy. The Venetian Dames relieve the Genoueses prisoners with
clothing and money for their journey. Diverse who above the rest had succored
the Commonwealth during the war, are made Senators.

CHioggia being recovered in this manner, the Venetians The Venetians besiege
Bebia.
because they would not stop the fortunate course of their victories, did
forthwith send to besiege The Genoueses take certai^ venetian ship^ laden with
corn^
all places near to Venice, did near to Corbolles set upon diverse ships laden
with corn, who tarried in that place till such time as the Genoueses Fleet
were removed (that they might with more safety go to Venice) the which at the
first they took, and furnishing their Galleys with corn for their own
provision, they threw the residue into the Sea, and then failed into Histria.

The City of Thryeste at their arrival (being before solicited by the
Forlani) Thryeste reuolteth and (...) to the Genoueses
did revolt from the Venetians. The Genoueses placed a choice troop of Archers
for the guard thereof. The Thryestines having taken arms, did first of all
seize on the Palace, then on the person of Donato Troni Governor of the City,
and imprisoned all the other Venetians, whom they first despoiled of their
wealth. After that, they assailed both the Forts, (for there were few people in
them) which within The Castles of Thryeste are razed by the Inhabitants.
two days yielded, and were presently razed down to the foundations.

Prince Contareni having provided for the affairs of Chioggia, left Carolo
Zeno for the guard thereof, and making Pisani Admiral of the Sea, he returned
to Venice where he was generally welcomed with signs of great joy. The news
of the Thryestines rebellion being brought at the same time to Venice, did in
some sort interrupt their mirth. For at the Princes arrival the City was
troubled thereat: But on the very day of his entry, other news no less
distasteful arrived, how that Cap Histria taken by the Genoueses.
mightily increased, as besides the Galleys (which were forty in number) they
had diverse other small boats of two ranks of Oars: and that the enemies after
they had taken the Town, had wholly spoiled it, certain houses of banished
men excepted, by whose means and treachery they had surprised it, but that the
Castle did still hold out for the Venetians, into the which Crispolino Azo of
Treuiso perceiving the City to be lost, had with certain troops entered.

The loss of these two neighbor Cities, brought great coffeehouse to the
The Senate much troubled with the loss of these two Cities.
whole City: And then the great Army which the enemy was reported to have,
did much trouble the Senate. For it was very likely, that unless their Army
were

But during these preparations at Venice, the Genoueses having restored
CapHistria Cap-Histria is given to the Patriarch of Aquileia.
unto the Patriarch of Aquileia, departed thence with their Galleys, and
speedily encamped before Brondolli, where so soon as they had viewed the
fortification of Chioggia, and perceived how all passages were shut up from
them, they sailed toward the City. The Fleet remained in order of battle
for a time before The Genoueses fleet before the Haven of the City.
the Haven, but not with great assurance. For diverse light boats going speedily
The enemies Army before Piarna.
assail the City, because the inhabitants and the Soldiers would not consent
thereunto: But being bravely defended, the enemy was with great disgrace
beaten thence.

The Genoueses did likewise at the same time assail Parenza, but their
attempts as well there as at Piarna were to no purpose. The enemy departed
thence, and came to the Frontiers of the Carnori where they trimmed their
Galleys in the Haven of Marran.

The Venetians did at the same time recover the Fort of Bebia. It is certain
^ebia recovered.
that the siege lasted for a while: for threescore Genoueses were within it,
who at the first did valiantly defend the place, but when they perceived the
Venetians who were entered into their defenses, to beat down the Fort, thirty
of the besieged by swimming over the River escaped, and fled to Padua: Those
which continued within, having valiantly defended it were either all slain or
taken: Those likewise who kept the Tower would never yield till they perceived
it to be set on fire.

Bebia being recovered, all the other Forts and Towns which are in the Lakes
or at the mouths of Rivers, were recovered by the Venetians, Cap-darger
excepted Carrario. On these terms stood the Venetians affairs, when Pola is
taken by the Genoueses.
on a sudden news was brought that the Genoueses had taken Pola, and burnt it
for the most part. This caused the Venetians, sooner than they had determined
to The Venetian Army in Histria
pass over with a mighty Army into Histria: At their arrival the enemy
being danted, (for the report was that they had seven and forty Galleys, and
many boats of two ranckes of oars) having spoiled the City, did retire to
Zara. The Venetians Army being come into the Province, was forthwith increased
by many Galleys The Venetians have a nauall Army of one hundred vessels.
from the Piarnes, Parenzanes, and other inhabitants of Histria, who had
continued loyal to the Venetians, so as it amounted to an hundred warlike
vessels. The Venetians never had a better furnished nauall Army, For every
Gallie had fifteen men at Arms, besides the rowers, Archers, and other
mariners.

Pisani commanded this mighty Army. Caballa of Verona was there likewise, who
had been (as has been said) at the beginning General of the Army by Land.
The Venetians being come into Histria, sent forth two Galleys in the evening
toward Michaeli Delfino and Petrucio Maripetro commanded those two Galleys.
These being assisted by the night, did break the bridge which the Patriarch of
Aquileia had made from the City to the firm Land. For being thus broken there
was some likelihood that the Venetians being encamped before it, those within
could not hope for relief from any place. Diverse of the Bandetti who had been
the cause of the taking of the City, so soon as the bridge was broken did the
same night escape to the firm Land, by the foordes near to the City. By
day-breake the residue of the Army approached: the light vessels went before
being followed by the residue with great The Uenetians recover Cap. Histria.
cries. Those who kept the Castle would not loose so fair an occasion, but
presently Nicolao Spilinghergo Governor of the City, and Simon Pampergino.
The City in detestation of the Bandetti was wholly spoiled, and then left to
the guard of the inhabitants who were not then (in regard of the misery of the
time) very many: they placed a good Garrison in it to defend it with them,
fearing least the enemy should again seize on it, by reason of the small
number of the inhabitants.

Cap-Histra being recovered, Pisani would have directly gone to Pola, but that
he tarried for an express commandment from the Prince and Senate, to know
their pleasures, whether they though it fit that he should pass with his Army
over the The Venetian Army before Pola.
Fanaticke Gulphe: which being granted him, the Army soon after drew near to
Pola. The Genoueses in the mean time were not idle: For whilst the Venetian
Galleys remained at Cap-Histria, they brought theirs to the Isle of Scardona,
near to Liburnia, where they enforced Arba the chief City of the Island to
yield, having for a time sustained a siege. They yielded on these conditions,
That if the Inhabitants would deliver to them all the Venetians which were in
the City with On what conditions Arba was delivered to the Genoueses.
Lodouico Contareni their Governor, the residue of the Inhabitants should have
no harm. The Arbians did ever till then affect the Venetians, and had often
been besieged during that war, choosing rather to endure all extremity than
to quit their obedience.

Chinatius who more than any other Author has curiously written the last
Genoueses war, says, that the Arbians did not for many days eat any bread,
living only on flesh and white meats* but that at last being daunted by the
cruel assaults of the enemies, they yielded on composition, not such as they
were resolved to have done, but on such as they could obtain of the enemy.
The Genoueses entering into it, left three Galleys for the defense thereof, and
afterward departed thence. The Paduan^ besiege Trenis^.


This was done at Sea, at such time as the Paduan came and besieged Treuiso,
having builded two bridges on the River, one at Casal, and the other nearer the
City, where Carrario in have had builded a Tower. He did resolve at first, to
tame the Venetian Soldiers and the Tre^isans by famine, by shutting up all
the passages of the

At this stay stood the Venetians affairs at Treuiso, when Pisani being come
near to Zara, and having begun to batter the Haven, understood by spies, that
twelve Genoueses galleys were a while before gone from thence into Apulia to
fetch corn. Pisani pursues twelve Genoueses Galleys into Apulia.
Having intelligence hereof (notwithstanding that he was sick of a Fever which
had held him from the fifth of August) because he would not loose so fair an
occasion, he departed from Zara and went after the enemies whom he ouertooke
on the coast of Belligion, but the darkness of the night at their very first
encounter made him to loose sight of them. Catharino Corberio Captain of one
of the Galleys was slain at their first meeting.

The Venetian having lost the sight of the enemy, retired to Manfredonia,
where Pisani dies and is bewailed of all men.
Victor sonoe after dyed to the great grief of the whole Army. It is reported
that Lodouico Loretano commanded the Army in his sted till such time as the
Senate had provided another. Pisani his body being brought to Venice, was with
a great pomp brought by the Senate with a great concourse of people to Saint
Anthonies Church. His Tomb is at this day to be seen near to the high
Altar, bewtified with Marble and guilding. Pisani is honorably buried at
Venice.


There was never any funeral more followed with tears and sighs than this, so
greatly was he beloved of all men. The Senate gave his place to Carolo Zeno,
who was commanded to depart speedily to the Army, two Galleys being made ready
Carolo Zeni is General of the Army in his sted.
for his conduct.

But whilst the City thought on this business, the Venetians had not
forgotten Treuiso, where the passages being shut up they were brought to all
extremity for want of victuailes, whereat the Senate being highly displeased,
did attempt to open them and to send provision to the besieged. Therefore they
made an engine of ships which should pluck up all the Piles which had been
driven into the After what manner the Paduan had enclosed the passages toward
Treuiso.
River, which was accompanied with four and twenty Ganzarioles, and with
diverse other vessels well armed, with part of the troops which were at
Chioggia, and of those which lay about the Haven of the City: the managing
hereof was committed to Marino Carrauall a diligent and valiant person, who had
charge of the opening Sarazino Dandulo commanded those troops which were to be
conducted to Musestra, by the shore opposite to the enemy. Musestra is within
a mile of Casal, where the enemy had a Fort. Being come to this place, this
engine of ships well armed with all necessaries did suddenly move toward the
enemy, having for conuoy on the shore a good troop of Soldiers, and being
come to the enclosure, they were busied two full days, in plucking up two
ranckes of Piles, in which mean time they fought bravely with the enemy.
There was nothing to be seen on both sides but Arrows and Darts flying in
the

The Paduan troops which besieged the city ran to Casal at the Venetians first
arrival, under the conduct of Girardo Caminensis, so likewise did all the
Soldiers nere to Padua, who were called thither in have: by means whereof
they often fought at Musestra: but in every encounter, the enemy had still
the better. Diverse Venetians were slain, but more taken, among whom was John
surnamed le Grand, 2 The Venetians enforced to give over the enterprise retire
to Musestra.
French man of a very noble house: whereupon the fleet gave over the
enterprise,

The Venetians perceiving their encamping in that place to be to no purpose
departed thence some two hours before day, and came to Mestra, to make trial
whether they could relieve the Treuisans by land, seeing by water they could
not. Dandulo in the mean time fell sick, and was constrained to go home to
his house, in whose steed Pietro Hemo was sent by the Senate. The fleet
likewise so soon as the footmen were departed from Musestra, was brought back
to Venice. Now when the Venetian fleet was dislodged, the enemy brought back
his troops to the camp: Then, fortifying the Tower with men and victuals (for
he had no other safe place of retreat) fearing some encombrance from the
Venetians, who were encamped at Mestra, he dislodged, and in all have besieged
Noualla which he began Noualla besieged by the enemy.
forthwith to batter with his engines.

Mean while the Treuisans being at times relieved with victuals by those of
Mestra, Great dearth in Treuiso.
the dearth was in some sort diminished. For the scarcity was so great in the
City* as the ordinary measure of corn was worth four crowns, and in regard
thereof, diverse of the common people did voluntarily abandon the City, the
most part of whom retired to Venice. The enemy having no good success at
Noualla, being wearied with so long a siege, and being out of hope to take the
City, raised his camp, and returned to the Paduan territory. Where because
winter drew near, he disposed his army into diverse garrisons, and sent them
away to winter. This is all that was done on the firm land that Summer, and a
Lauretano approached with the nauall Army near to Ancona, and afterward
sailed into Histria* But soon after, departing thence Bressia and Senia taken
by Loretano.
he took Bressia and Senia on the frontires of Liburnia by assault which he
spoiled: howbeit through an unfortunate fire at that time happening in Senia, the
whole booty was almost consumed.

At the report of the coming of this great Army, the Goritani being
affrighted forsook the City, and retired with their wives and children to the
highest hills What Loretano did after Pisani his death.
in the Island. The Bishop of the place came to the Venetians, and offered them
the City, and humbly entreated Loretano, not to suffer his soldiers to commit
any hostile acts in a City that yielded. Whereupon there was no outrage done,
Lewis took all Dalmatia from them. From thence he came to Bocharis: which
being taken by force, he wholly burnt and spoiled it. Then he departed toward
Pola, where by the Senates letters he was aduertized that Carolo Zeno was
appointed General of the nauall Army, whereat all men highly rejoiced: For,
besides his valor, he was next to Pisani the Zeno arriueth in the Army.
most popular man. From Pola he came to Parenza, wherein few days after Zeno
arrived.

Having mustered the Galley-slaues, he found that many were wanting. Whereupon
Caballa of Verona entered with the troops of the land-Armie, being called home
by the Senate by reason of the war of Treuiso. Three of these galleys being
come to Venice were presently armed and given to Marco Phalerio for the defense
of Romagnia, and La Marca. For the Genoa galleys making daily incursions near
to Ancona, had in such sort turned the merchants from commerce with Venice, as
the dearth began already in the City. But Phalerio his arrival restrained
the enemies

The passage at sea being assured to the merchants, Phalerio by the Senates
decree went with his galleys to Zeno in Dalmatia. The Army after diverse
passages to and fro through Histria and the frontires of Dalmatia, not finding
the enemy any where, was brought back to Venice, about the first of November,
having done no memorable matter, leaving only four galleys to guard the
Province.

Within a while after Carolo departed from Venice with three hundred small
Zeno besieges Marran a town of the Forlani.
vessels well armed, and came and besieged Marrana a sea-towne of the Forlani.
By the way he met with threescore well armed vessels of the same sort,
belonging to those of Grada and Piran, who came to him at the haven of Lignana,
wherewith having joined his own, he gave a furious assault to the City: But,
it being circled on every side with the Sea, and well fortified, their
attemptes proved bootelesse: The Venetian having viewed the place, perceived
that he should but loose his labor. But because he would not seem to depart
thence for fear having brought Zeno retired without any further loss.

The great expenses of the war had exhausted the public treasure, when as
the The venetians treasure wholly exhausted.
Senate being enforced by the dearth commanded six Galleys, and sixteen
boats with two ranks of Oars to be prepared to go into Candie, to fetch
thence the richest wares of certain particular persons, to the end that they
being sold by their consent, the money might be employed for entertainment of
the Army, being lent for a time to the Commonwealth. At the beginning of the
spring (for sooner they could not by reason of the tempestuous VVinter) the
fleet went to sea under the conduct of Simonetto Michaeli. But I find in the
mean space that these preparations

The Garrison which the Venetians held in Castell-Franco, having received no An
unworthy Act of a garrison for want of pay.
pay for certain months, first chaced away Andrea Paradiso the Cities
Governor, and afterward assisted by the inhabitants received Carrarto into
their walls. This revolt caused diverse others on the Treuisan shortly after to
do the like. The news of this loss being brought to the City, another soon
followed. For the Hungarians that were encamped on the mountains, and who from
thence did ouerrunne the County of Ceneda, had imprisoned Gulielmo Caminensis
an associate of the Venetians, Caminensis with all his family should retire to
Conigliana.

The Venetians affairs being in this sort brought to all extremity on the
firm land, and not knowing from whence to be supplied, either for victuals or
money, to sustain the charge of the war, the Senate resolved to send to
Leopold Duke of Austria, and in the Commonwealthes name to offer him the City
of Treuiso, with her The venetians are enforced to offer Treuiso to the Duke of
Austria.
confines, which if the Paduans should not hereafter desist to molest, it was
certain that the Almaine would on a sudden come into Italy with the greatest
forces he Pantaleon Barba was by the Senates decree sent to the Duke.

In the mean time, above a thousand horse of those at Mestra for want of their
pay went from the Venetians to the enemies side. Those who remained after the
others departing, did in the night bring some victuals to Treuiso, and in their
return thence were surprised by the enemies ambush, whereupon, some of the
horse being taken, and the residue put to flight, went first to Treuiso, and
afterward to the camp, so as all the troops which were at Mestra, were in a
short space brought to nothing. The Venetians being daunted with so many
losses, sought means Carrario, referring themselves to the arbitrament of
Alberto d'Este. And to this purpose they sent unto him Frederico Cornari, and
Pirrino Rotta, the one being his Procurator, and the other his Goship, and
ancient friend. But they could procure him by no means to deal in the
business, so mischieuously at the same time were their neighbors bent against
them.

And because the report then was, that they were already mounted on the
carriages, The venetians* hated of al their neighbors.
the Venetians on a sudden made great Causies and Rampires on the banks of
Mussiona, as men go by water to Mestra, thinking that all the enemies
practices were wholly bent to surprise and invade Mestra. But his designs were
elsewhere. For Carrario being come to Noualla, began furiously to batter it,
and having broken down the cawsies round about Moggiana, on which men went to
Treuiso, and placed a strong Garrison at the breach, he took from the
Treuisans all hope of relief. The Garrison in Treuiso being aduertized of the
Ambassade sent to Leopold (for all men certainly believed that Pantaleon Barba
was sent to offer Treuiso with her confines to the Almaine:) The garrison of
Treuiso mutineth for want of pay.
fearing in this alteration to be defrauded of their due, and having received
no pay of a long time, they chose Horatio Malespina a discreet person, to
undertake and debate the soldiers cause. They did all swear and promise to
accept of agreement, truce, war, peace, or whatsoever he should conclude;
saying, that at his command they would take and lay by Arms, so that he would
only take their cause in hand, and take such order for them, as they might not
bestow so great labor and travail as they had endured for nothing. This
Horatio being a wise and discreet Gentleman, came with all the Captains to the
Venetian Magistrate. Leonardo Dandulo was Governor of the City, Marco Zeni
chief Justice, and Andrea Venieri

Malespina his speech to the Magistrates of Treuiso.
IT is reported for certain, my Lords of Venice, that the Prince and Senate
have sent to Leopold Duke of Austria, to offer him in the name of the
Commonwealth the City of Treuiso with her confines, the which which we may
suppose, (if he be not senseless) that he will willingly embrace. Who
doubts but that when he has accepted thereof, he will soon come hither with
forces, and commit the guard of the City to his own soldiers? or (that which
I can hardly beeleeue) if delaying to come, he should afterward arrive in
Italy too late, Carrario is here, unto whom whether we will or no, we must of
force yield, he having shut up all the passages, and taken all hope from us as
well of victuals as of soldiers: Now because we are jealous of them both, and
unwilling to loose so many months pay which is due unto us, we have
determined, respecting the Venetian dignity, and the faith of soldiers, to
look to our affairs in time, and gently to demand our pay. And because we
will do nothing rashly, we are resolved to contain our selves a while longer
in our duty, till such time as one of you shall go to Venice, to take order
that our due be sent us. In the mean space you may safely rely upon us. But
herein we will endure no delay, nor have the Senate advertized hereof by
letters or messengers: one of your selves must needs go thither, to the end
all may fall out prosperously. We will expect the return of him, whom ye
shall send, so long time as we shall think to be sufficient to provide money:
For there needs no long determining in matters that are just. The fault shall
be in you, if we be not such hereafter as we have hitherto been, or if ye
enforce us by injuries to commit ought against your profit and reputation. For
we will keep our faith and promise with you, even so long as ye shall please.

This uncivil demand of the Soldiers greatly amazed the Venetians: for
there was no man but easily knew whereto their deseignes tended. Albeit they
made a gentle reply, yet every one fearing as much his own particular danger
as Dandulo goes to venice about the soldiers demands.
that of the Public, they concluded betwixt themselves that Dandulo should
forthwith at a stand by what means safely to convey it thither: For they could
not do it without great danger, the enemy possessing all the passages;
besides, they had no forces ready to convey it thither. Therefore they
concluded to write to Zeno that he should deal with the chief of the City,
that some of them would in the Commonwealths name pay the Soldiers their
due; saying that they were ready to make over the same sum into what Banco
they pleased: But in regard of the length of the war those who were thought
to be best monied, said that they were so far from having any sums of money
lying by them, as on the contrary they had not one penny; that their
continual losses one upon another, had in such sort stripped them of all means,
as they were in a manner ready to beg. Whereupon The Garrison of Treuiso are
paid their due.
leaving the Towns men they dealt with two strangers who did put forth money to
interest: who on the assurance of the Commonwealths word did presently tell
down the money, and by this means the Soldiers were paid.

But whielest these things were done at Treuiso, the enemy having assembled
all his forces from diverse places, came and besieged Asil, where there was no
great Venetian Garrison. Francisco Delfino Governor of the place, and those
that were with him, distrusting their small number retired into the Castle. The
enemy coming to besiege them, having battered it with engines of war, and
undermined it in sundry places, did in fifty days take it by force. Some say
that eight and forty of those that were within it were slain by the enemies
arrows and engines. But the Delfino being thereunto enforced, capitulated in
this manner, That it should be lawful for himself and as many as should
follow him, safely to depart thence with five and twenty wagons which the
enemy should furnish them for the carriage of their stuff and furniture. The
Castle being in this Asil yielded to Carrario by composition.
sort yielded, Delfino going toward Venice, near to Crespiniano met with
Leopolds troops, who came to free them from the siege. Some Authors affirm,
that at the same time Lofinastro Calderio General of those troops, was
corrupted by Carrario: and thereupon he slackt his journey, till such time as
he imagined the Castle was The Garrison of Noualla for want of payment yield
it to Carrario.
want of pay, did yield up the place to Carrario.

The Tower of Corania being assailed at the same time by the enemy in the
marshes, was not only bravely defended, but diverse Ganzarioles were taken from
them and brought to Venice. Arcuano Buccecharino came at last from Prince
Carrario with great forces and besieged Treuiso, lying encamped near to the
Church of the forty Saints: Diverse and sundry exploits were made on both
sides, and at times more than forty Horse were taken from the enemy; which
was the best atchieuement The City of Serrauall follows the example of
Treuiso.
that was there performed.

The Gitie of Serrauall following the example of the Garrison of Treuiso
incurred Nicholao Velleresso the Governor, and seized on the Castle.
Afterward they dispatched messengers to the Senate at Venice, to excuse
themselves for what was done, laying all the fault on their want of victuailes
and payment, both of them having been badly supplied to them, whereupon they
had been enforced whether they would or no, to enterprise novelties; and
withal demanded their pay: which if within eight days they might receive,
the Garrison and the Castle should continue obedient to the Venetians: or else,
otherwise providing for themselves they would let all men know, that there is
nothing The Senates answer to the Garrison of Serrauall.
more dangerous for such as make war, than to detain the Soldiers pay.

The Senate was not greatly moved at these news, being certain that Pantaleon
themselves from the danger which threatened them. Hereupon those of Serrauall
(for they were resolved to endure all extremity rather than to bear
Carrario's tirannous yoke whom they extremely hated) sent Francisco Lardonio
to the Governor of Belluna, to request him, That seeing by the Venetians offer
made to Leopold* they were his vassalls, that he would defend them from the
danger wherein they were: telling him that the Soldiers possessed the Castle,
who demanded their pay, which unless they might speedily receive, it was
certain that they would soon deliver it to Carrario; whereunto as the Tyrant
had a long time aspired, so he would now do any thing to obtain his desire:
And that therefore it behooued him to make have, least (as it often happens)
some

The Governor who would not seem to abandon their new subjects, forthwith
caused money to be delivered to the messenger, which was paid by Giacomo
Spiritello of Belluna a man of exceeding great wealth, who did it for the
Governors sake. Chinatius says, That three thousand five hundred Crowns were
sent to Serrauall, which being given to the Soldiers, they did forthwith
quit the Castle. This is that which was done on the Treuisan: whilst the
Venetians (upon report that the Genoueses had newly taken Arms* and were
already departed from Genoa) fearing least the Galleys which Simonetto had at
the spring time carried into Candie should be met with by the enemy, caused
eight Galleys Zeno, who was made Admiral for a year, who with them put out to
Sea.

He first directed his course, as he was commanded, toward Candie to the
succor of his Countrymen. But going along the Coast of Dalmatia, he met with
twelve Zeno takes twelve ships of Genoa.
Genoa ships, which he took and spoiled, and then burnt them* Soon after,
near to Morea, he espied a great ship of Genoa, laden with rich merchandise,
which he took and sent into Candie. From thence he sailed toward the
Promontorie of Mailles, where he resolved to tarry for the Galleys which
returned from Candie: Within few days after Simonetto came thither with ten
Callies: which were forthwith The (...) fleet of thirty Galleys.
followed by the residue of his fleet, so as in few days, he had thirty
Galleys. And Zeno resolved to leave five Galleys at Modon with the merchandise,
and with the residue to make toward the enemy.

Two days after he descried the Genoueses Fleet nere to Ionia, the which
(avoiding The Genoueses fleet flies.
the fight) he pursued in vain all that day till night, when by reason of the
darkness he lost sight of it. The Venetian being come to Ancona, sent ten
Galleys for the guard of the City, and with the residue he determined to
rauage the River of Genoa, where having with good success crossed the
Adriatic, Ionian, and Tuscan Seas, being entered on the enemies confines he
descried six Genoa Galleys, to whom he gave chase for a time. But having given
over his pursuit, he was likely soon after The Genoueses fleet of four and
twenti^ Galleys.
who having intelligence of the Venetians coming into the lower Sea, were
speedily come from Dalmatia to resist their attempts. Two Venetian Galleys
which Zeno sent forth to discover, hardly escaped from the mouth of the Haven:
but making way by the strength of their oars they soon came to their Fleet,
which from thence went to Liuorna; then on a sudden they returned to Morea,
where receiving a new supply of five Galleys from Lodouico Loretano, they
sailed again toward the lower Sea, intending (as I think) to fight with the
enemy if he could meet with him; if not, to spoil all the Coast* Towns on
the River of Genoa.

Whilst the Venetian ran thus up and down, the enemy was not idle. For, so
soon as Carolo departing from Ancona, sailed toward the River of Genoa:
having Cap-Histria taken by the Genoueses.
made ready seven and twenty Galleys, he came and besieged Cap-Histria, which
in a moment he took, spoiling and burning it for the most part. The Castle was
defended by means of the Garrison within it. But having intelligence that Zeno
was gone to rauage the River of Genoa, fearing that the Frontiers being without
Garrison, the Venetian might wholly spoil them, having left six Galleys in
Dalmatia to molest the Venetians, he came speedily with one and twenty to the
relief of his Country. They were those with whom the Venetians met (as has
been said) at Porto-uenieri, and which had like to have surprised two of his
Galleys.

Whilst these things were done at Sea, on the Treuisan Conigliana had like to
have been taken by treachery. Two Captains of the Garrison had intelligence
Treachery of 2. Captains of the Garrison of Conigliana.
with the enemy who had the guard of the Hill, aduertizing him to come in the
night with ladders, which they should without any resistance rear against the
walls, The traitors punished.
and eight and twenty of the Traitors were apprehended: who being convicted
of the fact were hanged, to serve for an example to others.

About the same time the Bishop of Verseil, sent by Amadeo Duke of Sauoy, The
Duke of Sauoy a mediator for peace.
arrived at Venice, and in his Masters name requested the Senate to send
Ambassadors Lewis and their associates, whom he did not doubt but that they
would accept of peace.

Upon this offer, Michaeli Morosino, Giouanni Gradonico, and Zacharia Contareni
were sent Ambassadors to the Sauoyan, who accompanied the Bishop: The
Ambassadors being gone, the Senate were aduertized by letters from Pantaleon
Leopold accepts the Uenetians offer.
that Leopold had accepted the offer of the City of Treuiso, whereupon the
Leopold with his forces were arrived.

News was brought at the same time that the Venetian prisoners at Genoa were
so hardly dealt with by the enemy, as more than three hundred and fifty of
them were in few days dead with hunger, whose bodies they had inhumanly flung
into the Sea: Some thought that they had been poisoned in regard so many of
them died at one time. Upon this report all men were so enflamed with choler,
as they presently ran to Terra-noua to the public prison, where The Genoa
prisoners in great danger at Venice.
more there. Their ordinary pittance was but bread and water and that very
sparingly: But the City did soon after remember their accustomed elemencie,
and all that had been taken from those poor creatures, was by a public
decree restored unto them.

Whilst these things were done at Venice, and on the confines of the firm
Land, The Genoueses took 14* Uenetian vessels laden with wine.
three Genoa Galleys did in the Haven of Pisauro take fourteen Venetian
vessels What harm three Genoa Galleys did to the Venetians.
from Pisauro even to Chioggia, they did infinite harms to the Venetians, in
the Havens, and at the mouths of Rivers.

Having afterward taken fifty vessels laden with Merchandise, they sailed
toward Ancona, and from thence, fearing least the Venetians would come to
their rescue, they sent them speedily to Zara.

Upon report that the Genoueses Army was greatly increased, Zeno in the mean
time being with the Galleys far from home, the Senate fearing least the
enemy would on a sudden come and assail the City, did speedily fortify the
Haven, and the forces being called from Mestra, which since the yielding up of
Treuiso were there to no purpose, they appointed a Camp at S. Nicholas on the
shore. They had besides eight Galleys in a readiness to sail whither need
should be under the conduct of Nicholao Michaeli.

In the mean time* the siege of Treuiso was not discontinued but daily
augmented by new supplies which the enemy sent thither. Arcuano Buccecarino
the Princes brother in Law commanded there: whereof Leopold being aduertized,
came within Leopold with ten thousand horse before Conigliana.
few days after his people had taken the possession thereof with ten
thousand horse, and encamped on a sudden before Conigliana. He was reported to
have in his Army besides that great number, more than four Hundred Knights
and great Lords. Arcuano having intelligence of the Almans coming, sent
speedily to his Camp to treat with him about some matters. But he was so far
off from hearing Leopold his proud answer to the Paduan.
the messenger, as he would not vouchsafe to see him, but commanded him
speedily to return and tell the Paduan* That he attended him: and that the
next day they Arcuano did soon perceive whereunto those words tended:
whereupon fearing to be overthrown by his sudden arrival, the morrow after
by break of day he raised his Camp, and fled thence. Which Leopold having
notice of, was highly displeased that he had lost so fair an occasion of a
battle, who soon after departing thence, caused his troops to pass over
the River of Piaua, and came and encamped near Treuiso, in the same place
where the enemies had been. And he with the chief of his Army entering into
the City, Leopold enters Treuiso.
brought thither such abundance of corn and wine and all other necessaries, as
the City was in an instant delivered from the siege and famine.

In this manner did the Venetians loose Treuiso, forty years after they had
taken Ambassadors sent from Venice to Treuiso to Leopold.
was so great, as they sent Ambassadors to Leopold, to congratulate his
welcome and entry into Treuiso. Giacomo Delfino, Pietro Hemo, Bernardo
Bragadino, Marini Memo, and Alberto Contareni were sent thither.

Prince Carrario albeit that at Leopold's coming, he had raised his Camp
from before Treuiso, did not cease for all that to molest and make incursions
on the Treuisan, where he took certain* Towns since the Almains arrival,
saying openly that he did it by the King of Hungaries commandment, albeit
Leopold was newly allied with the same King, and at his entrance into the
City, had caused his royal Arms to be set above his own. It was thought
that King Lewis had special regard Leopold's profit, but because he would not
seem to abandon his associates* he entreated them to take Carrario his
wilfulness in good part: whereupon he did often entreat them by Ambassadors
(the which he might have done by force) and chiefly the Paduan, to desist from
his enterprise. But neither entreaties nor threats could make him to abstain.

Zeno who (as has been said) was of late come from Morea to the lower Sea,
arriving at the mouth of the River Arno, was aduertized by the Senates Letters
that peace was concluded with the Genoueses: whereupon being sad and displeased
to see Peace betwixt the Venetians and the Genoueses.
himself snatched forth of the enemies throat, he went back again toward
Morea, and from thence by the Senates commandment, he returned with his Army
to Venice.

By the mediation then of the Duke of Sauoy, peace was concluded with the
Genoueses, King Lewis, and their allies: six years and four months after
that this last war began. The conditions of the peace were: That the
prisonners of war on The conditions of peace.
both sides should be set at liberty: That the Paduan Prince should deliver
Cap-darger and Morensana to the Venetians: That he should raze all the Fortes
which he possessed in the Lakes, and near to the Rivers: that the Venetians
should give him the Tower of Corania: that Alberto D'Aeste should be judge of
the controversy betwixt the Venetians and Paduans concerning their limits:
that the Venetian should withdraw the Garrison that he kept in Tenedos, and
that the Duke of Sauoy should have the keeping of the Island for two years,
and that it should be kept at the Venetians and the Genoueses charges: that at
the two years end the Fort should be razed, if the Genoueses thought it fit to
be done, and that the Venetians Lewis, who in regard of the said sum should
be bound to free the Sea-cost of Dalmatia of all Pirates; and that no Sclauonian
nor Dalmatian should make any salt. But Chinatius of Treuiso who has more
truly than any other written of this war makes no mention of any tribute
given to the King.

Some say that on the same day that the peace was published, a child was borne
A monster borne at Venice. Charity of the venetian Dames toward the Genoa
prisoners.
in Venice which had four Arms and four Legs, and did live till it was
baptized. The Venetian Dames made a collection of money to relieve the
Genoueses that came forth of prison half naked, with cloakes, shirtes, hose
and shoes, and other clothing according to every man's need, and did besides
furnish them with money to bear their charges home, to the end they should not
be enforced to beg by the way. Those that went thence were above fifteen
hundred persons, the residue dyed with the stentch of the prison, and others
with too much filling their bellies. Besides it was found that above eight
thousand natural Genoueses, did dye in this war, and of the Venetians half
as many. The Senate being freed from this Chinatius says that Caballa of
Verona for his great and notable service done to the Venetians in this war,
was honored with the same

The end of the seventh Book of the second Decad.
THE EIGHTH BOOK Venice.
The Contents of the eighth Book of the second Decad.
HOw greatly the difficulty in delivering up the Island of Tenedos did trouble
the Venetians. The Thryestines in favor to LEOPOLD do revolt. The Carrarians
by LEOPOLDS permission, become masters of Treuiso. A law against murderers.
Prince ANTONIO VENIERI suffers his Son to die in Prison for wronging a
Senator. The Venetians aid GALEAS VISCONTE against those of Escalla and the
Carrarians: whereby they recovered Treuiso and raised the siege before Mantua.
The Paduans for saking GALEAS return Carrarians subjection. The Duke of
Austria and the French Kings Nephew come at sundry times to Venice. The City
newly beautified. The Genoueses nauall Army coming forth of the Higher into
the Lower Sea, does for a time keep the Venetians in suspense. The Genoueses
being overcome in battle before Modon, do wholly loose the possession of the
Sea. The Carrarians possess Verona by deceit. VINCENZA, BELLVNA, and FELTRA
are reduced under the Venetians obedience. The cause that moved the Venetians
to war on the Carrarians; who pursued them by Sea and Land: War for a time
against those of Aeste, because of the Carrarians. The Venetians take Verona
from the Carrarians. A brief description of the City of Verona. The
Carrarians (Padua being taken) become subject to the Venetians, and afterward
by the Senates commandment are strangled in Prison. The Ambassadors of Padua
and Verona arrive almost at one time at Venice, which did greatly rejoice the
people.

PEace being thus established by Land and Sea, the yielding up of the Isle of
Tenedos did for a while The Venetians are troubled about the yelding up of the
Isle of Tenedos.
trouble the Venetians: Mutatio was at the same time Governor there, who being
too indiscreetly transported with the love to his Country, had almost hazarded
the public credit of the Commonwealth. The Senate had given commission to
Pantaleon Barba who was sent thither for that purpose, to deliver the Fort of
the Island according to the agreement into Bonifacio, Deputy to Amadeo Duke of
Sauoy. The Genoueses Agent was come thither to see it done, and to pay the
Soldiers that were there.

Mutatio having received the money which the Venetians and Genoueses had
Mutatio his answer to the Venetians and Genoueses.
brought, declared to Boniface and the Commissioners his own determination
with that of the Islanders, saying; That they had heard how in the Articles of
peace it was expressly mentioned that the Fort of the Island, their only refuge,
should be razed, wherein both the Genoueses who had requested it, and the
Venetians who consented thereunto, had carried themselves basely: But he told
them that the Islanders would look to their own affairs, and that therein
they should do wisely: That they had never yielded to the Venetians on that
condition, that their Fort being razed, their Island in time should become
desolate. And therefore calling now to mind that which concerned them, they
were resolved to hazard all, rather Then was there a great noise made by the
Soldiers, and the Inhabitants of the Island, calling Mutatio their Lord and
Captain: who commanded the Venetians and Genoueses speedily to depart thence.

Some say that Mutatio made a show that this came wholly from himself, to
Lewis, and the other associates should hear that the Island was not delivered
to the Sauoyan, they holding the covenants of peace to be broken, would
forthwith take Arms: They therefore decreed to send to Mutatio and the
Islanders.

Carolo Zeno was sent thither, who neither by entreaties nor threats could
alter Zeno is sent to Tenedos, who likewise effected nothing:
his determination. At Zeno his entrance, because by one man's rashness the
Commonwealths promise should not be infringed, they decreed to proceed by
Arms; whereupon a speedy levy of Soldiers was made, unto such a number as
was thought sufficient to subdue the Island. Fantino Georgio was made General
of these A venetian Army to subdue the Isle of Tenedos.
forces. He departing from Venice with six Galleys well Armed, and arriving at
Tenedos, landed his men, and in an instant gave a furious assault to the Town
and Castle.

There were great numbers of Archers in the Camp, so was there in the Castle,
by means whereof at every assault and sallie, diverse died on either part: Some
say, Cruel War at Tenedos.
taken he was forth with hanged, or else being put into one of the engines of
War, was in sted of a stone thrown into the Camp, and so from the Camp into
the City: whereby it plainly appeared that it was neither the Prince nor
Senates fault, that the Island was not delivered according to the treaty of
peace; but only through the wilfulness of Mutatio.

The siege lasted above seven Months: but victuals failing, they yielded on
these conditions; That neither Mutatio, nor those who were with him should be
On what conditions Tenedos was yielded.
called in question for detaining Tenedos, to the hindrance of the
Commonwealth: That the Inhabitants should depart forth of the Island, with
their gold, silver, and

The Castle being recovered, Fantino entered it with two hundred Archers,
dismissing The Fort of Tenedos razed.
the residue of the Army. Giouanni Memo by the Senates decree did afterward
succeed him. The residue of the Articles being performed, and the Inhabitants
being gone, the Fort was at the last razed.

The Thryestines who in the hottest of the war were revolted from the
Venetians, fearing that so soon as they should be at quiet both by Sea and
Land, they would on a sudden come and invade them, did yield to Leopold. Soon
after King The Thryestines yield to Leopold.
Lewis died. At the first it was thought that his death would in some sort
abate the pride of Prince Carrario, who till then had never ceased to molest
the Treuisans: but on the contrary in sted of desisting, he assailed them more
furiously than before, and Leopold renders Treuiso to Carrario on conditions
gave them so many assaults and overthrows, as Leopold despairing of being
able to defend the City, did on certain conditions give it over with her
confines to the Paduan, who in a manner was Conqueror.

All this happened almost three years after that peace had been established by
Sea and Land. But in the mean time Prince Contareni died, after he had
governed fourteen years, and was honorably buried in St. Stephens Church.

MICHAELI MOROSINO, the Duke of Venice.



MIchaeli Morosino succeeded him. At his entry into the Government, A law
against murderers.
man, should loose his head, whereas in time before they who were convicted of
such crimes, were hanged according to the custom of the Country. It was
thought of a certain that if his Principality had lasted any long time, he
would have beautified the Commonwealth with sundry holy Laws and Statutes:
But by how much the hope thereof was greater, by so much was his Regiment
shorter. For about four Months after his Creation he deceased, and was
buried in the Church of the Twins.

ANTONIO VENIERI, the 62. Duke of Uenice.





ANtonio Venieri being absent was subrogated in his sted, a man who besides his
ancient Nobility, was of a meek and gentle disposition, and beloved of all
men. Being called home from Candie where he remained, he arrived the thirteenth
of January at Venice, on S. Nicholas shore, where the whole Senate, and a
great part of the people received The peoples great joy at the Dukes arrival.
him; and from thence after diverse reciprocal embracements, going into the
Bucentauro he was with great joy brought to the Ducall Palace: His presence was
the more welcome to all men because by reason of his long absence it had been
so much desired: He had been seven years absent with his family, and had
well governed

He had a Son named Lodouico, who was enamoured on a Senators wife. But as
Severe justice of a Father on his own Son.
it often happens, some jealouzie arose betwixt the two lovers, whereupon
this young Lord by chance, in disgrace of his Mistress, whom he then hated,
caused horns to be hung up at her husbands gate. Inquiry thereof being made,
the Prince being

The same year at sundry times the Marqueses of Aest, and Mantua, came to
Venice, with diverse other Princes, and Princes Ambassadors to treat with the
Senate concerning great affairs of State, albeit some of them came but to see
the City. A while after, peace still continuing abroad and at home, great
war and contention arrising between Antonio Escalla of Verona, and Francisco
Carrario the elder, Antonio of Escalla is defeated by Giouanni Galeas Visconte.
Giouanni Galeas Visconte (whose power was at the same time very great) at
Carrario his entreatie did make war upon Escalla, and having vanquished him,
he took from him Verona and Vincenza. Then, (as the desire of getting does
increase when prosperity does follow us) he did as furiously assail Padua, as
he had not long before Galeas Visconte takes Padua.
done those of Escalla. Some say that Carrario attempted to set Bernabo his
Allie at liberty, whom Galeas, his Son in Law and Nephew, Son to his
Brother, kept prisoner in the Castle of Trecy, because he had been aduertized
by Katherine his wife, that Bernabo had laid wait to kill him, whereat
Visconte, being moved, made war upon him.

The Venetians in this war^e joined their forces wish Galeas who assailed the
Paduan, and having armed four hundred boats under the conduct of Giacomo
Delfino, did in a manner selze upon all the Cities, Forts and towns which
Carrario possessed on the lakes (...) at the mouths of rivers. Galeas likewise
on the firm land, did not alone (...) all the Cities of the Paduan territory*
but likewise in few months that the (...) lasted, the very City of Padua.
Where after he had taken the elder Carrario imprisoned in the Medociatnewer.
Carrario* (...) imprisoned him in the Medozian prison. His son surnamed
Nouello, escaped into Germany: Galeas would not stand still in so fair a way,
but pursuing

At the last, Carrarios forces being broken, and wholly overthrown, Galeas by
Carrario his lands divided.
agreement had Padua, (...), and Belluna; the Venetians Treuiso, and the
Marquis of Aest, who was one of the associates against Carrario, recovered all
the towns which did belong to his ancestors. Then not long after, Galeas
having proclaimed war on the Bolognese and Florentines, and his forces being
already suspected of all the people and potentates of Italy: The Venetians,
Florentines, Bologneses, Francisco Gonzaga, the Marquess of Aeste, and Carolo
Malateste, entered into league League against Galess Visconte
against him. Robert Duke of Bauaria was entreated to be of the number (with
Nouello remained and to march with his forces into Italy against the troops of
Visconte.

Galeas leaving the Bolognese, came and furiously besieged the City of Mantua,
Galeas besieges Mantua with forty thousand men.
and pre^ming on the great number of his soldiers (for his Army was reported
to be forty thousand) he environed the City by land and water. The Venetians
armed a great ^mber of boats against him, to deliver a friend and confederate
City from the siege: and because Gonzaga was more molested by water than by
land, the Venetians having added certain galleys to their fleet, this
audacious enemy Galeas is repulsed by water and land.
was repulsed with great loss from the City by the Venetians aid, on the
same side of the City, by which the enemy had thought to have taken it. And
soon after Malatesta General of the land Army near to the village of
Gouern^lla, and being broken and defeated by him in a set battle, he was with
great disgrace chased far from thence.

Nouello remained not idle in so fair an occasion. For Robert using delays,
he returned Nouello son to Carrario recouereth Padua.
into Italy in disguised habit unknown to the Venetians and their
associates. And by that means he en^d Padua and enjoyed it. The Almaine,
following him afterward with a great Army, came and besieged the Castle of
Padua, which held out for Galcas. Those of Verona being amazed by their
neighbors example, took Arms, and having expelled Galeas his Garrison, they
sent for Antonio of Escalla from Tuscan, but they understood that he was dead a
while before: Vgoletto Blanchardo, who Verona pillaged.
commanded Viscont his Army in the country of Cremona, and having obtained
pardon of him for their revolt, and for the obtaining of it paid a great sum
of money under the name of lendings for the soldiers, they received him into
their City: ino the which entering ^umultuously, the soldiers desirous of
booty could not be kept from spoiling. The wife of Galcas being sorry for the
mishap of so excellent a City, commanded three days after they began to
pillage, to spoil no more. Robert in the mean time being discontented for
that he was deceived by his associates of his promised reward, raised his camp
from before the Castle of Padua, and went back with his forces into Germany.
The Florentines did at the same The Castle of Padua recovered for Nouello.
time send John Hancute, one of the famous Cstaptains of his time, with forces
to aid Nouello by whose valor the Castle was in few days recovered: diverse
and sundry attempts were made on either side, but because they do no whit
concern the Venetians (for they were done on the firm land, and far from
the Sea) we do of purpose omit them.

At the last, peace being concluded for ten years was as acceptable to
afflicted Peace for ten years. The Duke of Austria and the French kings Nephew
come to venice to be transported to the holy Sepulcher.
Lombardie, as pleasing to all men else. At the same time the Duke of Austria
arrived at Venice, where being bountifully entertained, he remained till such
time as two galleys were made ready to carry him to the Sepulcher of our
Lord. The same year the French kings Nephew arrived there, who had the like
entertainment as had the Almaine: he made ready a Galley there at his own
charges to transport him into Syria for the same purpose, as the Austrian was
gone thither.

In process of time, all things being quiet by sea and land, news was brought
that an Argozie of Genoa of marvelous bigness was gone forth to rob at Sea.
The Venetians upon this report rigged forth three great ships of war, which
were

The Ci^tie during this long peace, was beautified with diverse public works.
The The market place of Saint Mark paued with brick.
marketplace of Rialto, with that great and spacious place before Saint Marks
Church, were paued with brick, and with square stone. At the same time Prince
Venieri died, the eighteenth year of his principality. His funeral was
accompanied by great multitudes of people to the Church of the Twins.

MICHAELI STENO, the Duke of Uenice.



MIchaeli Steno Procurator of Saint Mark succeeded him, who being

The people did never do the like honor to any of his predecessors as to him.
All the Trades of the City every one apart, did prepare costly Diverse
publik^ shows made in the City for love to the Duke.
shows for his sake, each of them inuenting new, so as no holy day passed in
the whole year, but some show or other was presented: And that whole year
would have been spent in mirth and pastime, if the unexpected loss of
certain Citizens had not marred the sport. Six galleys laden with foreign
merchandise under the Leonardo Trenisano returned to Venice about the end of
Autumn, but it fell out, that near to the Islands of the Egean sea, at Irene
(called by corruption of language Turin) four of them (which had seldom
happened) being beaten with a tempest suffered ship wrack. Yet nevertheless
few of the men perished the merchandise being scattered here and there was
with great labor recovered. The Viari, Four Venetian Galleys lost by tempest.
Delfino, Sourance, and Sagreda, were lost. Cornari and Gradonico resisting the
seas fury earne safe to Venice.

The year following three Galleys departed from Venice: the Duke of Austria
Ladislaus crowned king of Hungary.
had prepared two of them, and Prince Carrario the third, to fetch and conuoie
from Apulia the sister of King Ladislaus, who being newly restored to his
kingdom, was Crowned King by Barthimeo Iuliari, Cardinal of the Sea
Apostolic, sent from Pope Boniface. This sister was promised to one of the
Dukes of Austria. But these Galleys came back to Venice, by reason that
Ladislaus refused to send his sister.

Some Annals make mention how that the Emperor Robert with his wife came
Ladislaus defeated by Galeas Uiscont.
with diverse rich presents. But those Authors whom we follow conceal the cause
of his coming. I find in some, that Robert being vanquished by Galeas in the
Territory of Cremona, having in a manner lost all his Army, retired to
Trente, where having levied new forces, he came to Padua, and from the firm
Land to Venice, where being courteously entertained, after he had familiarly
discoursed with the Prince and Senate of the wrong which Galeas had done him,
he returned into Germany: But because mention is made of his wives being there
with him: we must think that he left her at Venice, because himself went on
pilgrimage to Rome. For it was the year of our Salvation one thousand four
hundred, at such time as Pope Boniface the ninth celebrated the great year of
Jubilee.

The same year the bridge of Rialto was reedified. In this manner did the
Commonwealth peaceably flourish, and the greatest care of the inhabitants was
set on trade of Merchandise. But this quiet was interrupted by the Genoueses
new stirs. They had about the same time armed one and twenty Galleys, and
sixteen great Argosies: Some Authors make no mention of Argosies. The report
was, That Boucicault a Frenchman General of the Genoa Army.
this preparation was made against the King of Cyprus. Boucicault a Frenchman,
was General of the Army. The Genoueses had been for a time, as they were
then, under the French Kings protection, and the most part of their Galleys
were manned The Genoueses great loss.
there so great a loss, as of all the Gallie-slaues in one and twenty
Galleys, there were not so many left as would furnish eleven. Departing
thence, they sailed into Syria, where surprising Barut, they ransackt and
spoiled as enemies all the Venetian ships, and others, who by chance were then
in the Haven. From Syria they sailed into More^.

Carolo Zeni whom the Senate, at the first report of the Genoueses
preparations, A new Geno^ Fleet.
had sent with eleven Galleys into the Adriatic Gulf, having at Sea narrowly
pursued the Genoueses Fleet, had special care that they should not attempt on
any place belonging to the Venetians: (for their Army spoiled all places where
they Both the Fleetes dissemble.
in aw, and the Genoueses the Venetians. But both of them staying near to
Modon, they made show of other matters than they had done at the beginning.
Zeni fearing least by his patience the Venetians affairs might incur some
great danger, did on a sudden set forward toward the Genoueses Fleet, who
under color of The two Armies fight.
taking in fresh water, lay betwixt Modon and Ijonches. At Carolo his
unlooked for arrival, there was a sharp-fight, and the Venetians fortune was so
much the worse, because the Genoa Galleys were better manned than theirs.

It is reported that every Gallie had besides the ordinary bank of Rowers,
forty The Venetians in danger, before the coming of Hermolao.
men at Arms, and all Frenchmen, who fought furiously with the Lance and
sword, after the manner of their Country. And the Venetians did but in a
manner bear off the blows, at such time as Hermolao the Lombard returning
from a long voyage, came thither opportunely with two Galleys. He perceiving
the danger wherein the Venetians were, did with great fury turn the prowes of
his Galleys upon the enemy who was busied in fight, and struck one of their
Galleys with such force, as he ouerturned it into the Sea with the Soldiers
and Mariners. At Hermolao his arrival fortune suddenly changed.

For the enemy who had already in a manner won the victory, for the loss
of one Gallie began to faint: The Venetian on the contrary being strengthened
by these two Galleys, did valiantly renew the fight. Their fortune hung for
four hours space in equal balance: at the last three of the enemies Galleys
being sunk, and as The Geno^eses Fleet^ defeated.
many taken, the residue which were five, betook themselves to flight. More
than

It is said, that, after the victory, certain Captains of the Galleys were
disgraced and noted of cowardice for coming too slowly on the enemy at the
beginning of the fight, and because by their baseness they had endaungered the
state of the Commonwealth. Others, among whom was Gyles the Black, were
honored with great Gyles the Black greatly honored
rewards, because they had bravely borne themselves in that conflict. The five
Genoueses Galleys which fled from the fight, encountering with a Venetian Gallie
laden

Within few days after, a Frenchman, of the number of those who were taken A
French man punished for indiscrecte speaking.
prisoners in the fight, being wearied with imprisonment, said in choler, That
he hoped one day to wash his hands in the blood of the Venetians. This cruel
presage being reported to the Senate, did so highly offend every man's ears,
as they all with one voice commanded that he should be hanged betwixt the two
Columns.

In this mean space Nouello Carrario commanded in Padua, where he was some few
years before replanted by the Venetians. This unthankful man did hate the
Venetians The hatred which Nouello did bear to the Venetians.
more than ever his Father had done. He practiced day and night against them
and their state; he dreamed on nothing else, and all his attempts tended to
that purpose. The Venetians, having knowledge of a long time how he stood
affected to them, had I know not by what means, discovered all his practices,
and understood by the French prisoners, that he had been^ the cause of the
setting forth of the last Genoa Fleet that was defeated. They knew likewise by
letters found in the coffers of Galeas Visconte lately deceased, the traps
which those Tyrants had laid for them. And besides all this, after Galeas his
decease, he had earnestly solicited William of Escalla, Perfidious treachery.
to recover the Principallitie of Verona: whom after the recovery thereof, he
perfidiously poisoned: notwithstanding that before he had sworn and protested
all love and friendship to him, and relieved him with Arms and Council. After
which having surprised Antonio, and Brunora of Escalla his children, he caused
them to be murdered. The race of Escalla being thus extinct: Francisco caused
his son Giacomo, or according to some, his brother, to enter Verona, the
Ensigns of the Empire Verona possessed by the Carrarians.
and his own being displaied before him, and created him Prince of the City:
Yet not being satisfied with so great a Principality, he besieged Vincenza,
having first spoiled the Vincenzans Territory.

The Vincenzans detesting the name of Carrario, resolved to endure all
extremity, The Carrarians make incursions on the Vincenzans.
rather than to submit themselves to their Tyranny. They speedily sent to
Katherina, widow to deceased Galeas (for Carrario already made hauock of their
country, to get that by force which he could not obtain by right) and
entreated her to assist them against the violence of the Carrarians, giving her
to understand their great danger, unless they were speedily relieved:
alleging for instance, That on the one The Vincenzans advertisement to Galeas
his widow.
side they had Padua for neighbor, where the Tyrants made their retreat; and
Verona on the other which they had lately seized on, having vilely murdered
their hosts; and that being environed and shut in on every side, they were
openly pursued as enemies, because they would not open their gates to the
Tyrants* and that the Vincenzans knew not of whom or from whence to expect
relief, but from thence where the power of Galeas had been in force and
Authority. Earnestly therefore they entreated her presently to send them aid,
or if she had not the means so to do, yet to send them word in what manner
she would will or command the Vincenzans Carolo son to Bernabo after Galeas
death began to (...), and diverse petty Princes of Italy had seized on the
Cities which belonged to her husbands Dukedom, so as she had business enough to
keep Milan) for resolution in these difficulties assembled her Council: by
whom it was concluded, That, The resolution of the Counselors of the widow of
Galeas.
in regard they being so straightly pressed, could not continue in her
obedience, it was much better for Verona, Vincenza, Feltre, Belluna, Collogna,
and Bassan with their dependances to be given to the Venetians, than to leave
them for a prey to those wicked Tyrants.

The Venetians, albeit they had already refused the offer which the Vincenzans
had made to them of their City, not that they did it to gratify Carrario, or
were unwilling to help their poor afflicted friends, but only for that they
were ashamed to possess the goods of an other man without just cause: so soon
as they perceived the offer to be made, contrary to their expectation, by the
true Lord (albeit they knew that great war would follow with Nouello) they
would not loose so fair an occasion. Therefore they courteously entertained
the Vincenzans Commissioners The venetian: entertain the vincenzans
commissioners*
(the chief of whom was Giacomo Thyeni, sent with the Cities keys) and willed
them (after they had received their oaths of fidelity) to be of good cheer,
and not to doubt but that they would deal in such sort, as if this Paduan, who
filled all places with Mark, (whom they besought to be favorable to them
both) and to erect them in the public places of their City, assuring them
that the Prince and Senate would take order for the rest.

In this manner were the Commissioners sent home. Giacomo Suriano followed A
venetian garrison sent to vincenza.
them soon after with a good troop of Archers for the Cities guard. They sent
likewise to Carrario to signify unto him in the name of the Commonwealth that
he should abstain from further molesting the Vincenzans, because they were
become subject to the Venetians. But all this advertisement notwithstanding so
far off was he from giving over his enterprise, as on the contrary, in
contempt of them, Carrario wrongeth the venetian Ambassador*
and against the law of Nations, he caused the Ambassadors Nose and Ears to
be cut off, and willed him besides, to tell the Venetians, that it was too
saucily done of them to prescribe laws unto those, who were commanders in
possession: That they should do well to contain themselves within their small
enclosure of the Sea, and leave Cities to those who from their Ancestors had
received the power to govern.

The Senate being moved by the Tyrants arrogant answer, would (before they
proclaimed open war) contract alliance with Francisco Gonzaga. In the mean
The venetians allie themselves with Goazaga.
time, the Feltrians, the Bellunois, and Bassans, following the Vincenzans
example, voluntarily submitted themselves to the Venetians. Colognia gave
occasion of a great battle. The Paduan every where opposing himself against
the Venetians attempts, did greatly molest them. The Senate on a sudden caused
great forces to be levied, and gave the charge of them to Carolo Malatesie of
Arimini, who was Carolo Malateste of Arimini Gene rall of the venetians land
Army.
sent from Flaminio for that purpose. The Army was reported to be of thirty
thousand as well horse as foot.

Howbeit Carolo stayed longer than was expected, yet being come to Venice he
was entertained with great joy, and received the public Ensigns in St.
Marks Church. Then marching toward the enemy he came to Mestra, which was
the Rendes-uous of all the Venetian troops, and diverse great personages were
in that Army who received good pay of the Venetians. The General at his
arrival made Malates^e gives over the Generals place.
Authors whom we have read give no reason why he did so.

Whilst these things were done on the firm Land, the nauall army had no
better success on the Lakes. Marco Grimani General of the Fleet which the
Senate had sent forth against the Tyrant, having remained for a time on the
Lakes near to the enemies, and caused a great number of light boats to come
thither, did violently force certain of the Garrisons: but being assailed on a
sudden by the Paduan, The Venetians nauall Army defeated.
near to the Church of Saint Hilarie, he was defeated, having lost the
greatest part of his vessels, which the enemies drew on shore with hooks of
Iron; and himself

Malateste his dismission being known at Venice, they began carefully to
consider, whom they should appoint for their General. At the last among so
many* Paulo Sabello a Roman, General of the venetians Army.
noble persons as were then in great number in the Army, Paulo Sabello a Roman
Gentleman for his valor and great experience was alone thought worthy of that
place. By his conduct diverse places were in short space taken from the enemy,
and the Venetians began to have better success under this new General. But
the Tyrants arrogancy did no whit diminish: whereby they knew of a certain
that he was to be dealt with in more places than one. And therefore they levied
new forces, and a new Camp as great as the former, which should spoil and
overrun the territory Francisco Gonzaga, their associate in this war,
General Francisco Gonzaga General of another Army of the venetians.
of that new Army. He coming suddenly on the Veronois, did spoil all
places, and brought away with him a great booty, as well of prisoners, as of
Cattle; he burnt the Farms and Country houses; he took certain strong
places, and among the rest Hostilio; and in a word, he left the enemy in a
manner nothing. Carrario being then assailed in two several places, that great
usual heat of his began by little and little to cool. For he could not intend
both places together, nor were his forces sufficient being divided into two, to
resist the enemies attempts. His affairs therefore were of necessity to go
backward in both places, or at the least in one of them. Albert of Aeste
makes war on the ven^tians in the behalf of Carrario.


In the mean time Prince Albert of Aeste being moved with compassion of his
friend and allie, proclaimed war on the Venetians, who were ready enough to
accept it. He first sent aid to the confederates, and after drove the Venetians
forth of the Pollesin. Some Authors say that it was Nicholao son to Albert,
which made war on the Venetians, to whom Carrario had given his daughter
Liliola to wife. But whether it were he, or the other (according to the
Venetian Annals) who at the Accio of Aeste is repealed from Ca^die to make
war on Albert.
same time relieved the Carrarians; the Venetians being displeased thereat did
repeal Accio D'Aeste from Candie, whither they had in time before confined him
in favor of Albert, and having given him forces, they caused him to war on
the territory of Ferrara.

This Accio was before that time a deadly enemy to Albert, and had without
doubt driven him from his estate, if the Venetians, the Florentines, and those
of Bolognia, had not ouerthrown him in the height of his good fortune, and
confined him far from Italy. There was then some likelihood that so soon as
this man should assail the Ferrarois in his Country, that he would either
greatly molest him, or enforce him to lay aside his Arms against the
Venetians: Therefore they armed certain Galleys, and gave them to Giouanni
Barba, who at the mouth of Po sailed up the River, where he did greatly
affright those of Ferrara. In the mean time The conditions of peace made with
Albert of Aeste*
diverse and sundry skirmishes were made on the River and elsewhere. And the
City of Ferrara being thus hardly pressed by water and land, Albert, to quench
this great domisticke flame, inclined to peace, the which he obtained of the
Venetians on these conditions: That no more salt should be made at Comaccia:
and that he should swear besides to continue ever a friend to the Venetians.

These things were done near to Ferrara, but on the Paduan territory they
fought Francisco Carrario, surnamed Tertius, a valorous young man, being sent
by his father with a choice troop of horse, came and assailed the Camp. The
Venetians The venetians are afrighted at the arrival of young Carrario.
Sabello ende^oureth to stay his amazed Soldiers.
at the first were so affrighted, as the enemy came even to the Generals
Tent, and trod the Venetian Ensigns which where there erected under his feet,
before any man made resistance. Sabello in this amazement with much ado
recalled his Soldiers: and by earnest entreating now one and then another he
restrained their shameful flight, sharply reprehending their fear. Then he
commanded them to The enemies retreat.
toward his Ensiignes, who already by their Captains command had begun the
retreat. The Venetians not being able to cause the enemy to stay suffered him
to depart with certain of their Ensigns which at his arrival he had taken
from them.

Some say that they fought at Mansana, and that the Venetians lost six hundred
horse; but they altogether conceal the loss of their Ensigns. This
victorious The death of Paulo Sabello.
Paduan as the Verona territory. Whilst these things were attempted, Paulo
Sabello dyed. His body being brought to Venice, was in great solemnity
accompanied by the whole Clergy, the Prince, and Senate, to the Church of the
Friars Minors. His Image is to be seen on horseback before the high Altar.
Galeas Grumello of Galeas Grumello of Mantua subrogated in the place of Sabello.
Mantua was by the Senates decree subrogated in his place. Others say that
Gonzaga brother to Prince Francisco, succeeded him; and not Grumello.

This man began his charge with as great care and diligence as could be
desired Giacomo Suriano, who lay in Vincenza, because Certain venetian troops
defeated. i
there was no doubt to be made of the Vincenzans loialtie and affection toward
the Venetians, resolved by the permission of the Prince and Senate, to go with
a company of men at arms to the Venetians Camp on the territory of Verona.
The enemy lying in ambush came forth and assailed this troop of men at arms
at Soaua, and easily defeated them, and being thus broken, they took Suriano
with diverse others, prisoners. The Veronois being wearied with so long and
tedious a siege, were already determined to yield. For they likewise did
detest the Carrarians. Giacomo Carrario commanded in the City, who (as we said
in the beginning) was Giacomo Carrario departing from verona is taken in flight*
given to the Veronois for their Lord and Prince. He of himself perceiving
all things to be doubtful, and imagining that he should be safer abroad than
in the City being out of hope to keep it, attempted secretly to fly thence.
He came first to Hostilio; and from thence crossing the Po, he was taken on the
Rivers bancks and brought to Venice. But I know not what should move him to
go to Hostilio, seeing it was at the same time under the power of Francisco
Gonzaga, unless it were so that he came thither in disguise, thinking to
deceive the enemy in that habit, till such time as he had crossed the river.
Some say that he was surprised at Asellario a village of the Veronois. But be
it that he were taken there or elsewhere, it is certain that he did not depart
from the City before such time as he knew that the inhabitants intended to
yield.

Those of Verona being reduced to the Venetians obedience, all the Castles
Verona in the venetians power.
near to the City did the like. The yielding of so mighty a City gave the
Venetians great hope of executing higher enterprises. And this victory was as
much and more pleasing to the Senate, than any other which they had obtained
for a long In what esteem the City of verona is.
among all other Cities of Lombardie, the most famous, as well for the
reputation, as the situation thereof. It is thought that the Gauls were the
first founders of it, because the notablest Cities of Lombardie were built by
them. And likewise because Trogus Pompeius refers her original and
foundation to those Gauls which came with Brennus into Italy. But whosoever
the first founders were, I do think them to have been famous men, because
they undertook so great and admirable a piece of work, and likewise that they
were wise and discreet persons, and not blind like those founders of
Calcidonia, whom in times past Apollo's Oracle thought to be so*

For besides that the territory near to the City is most fruitful in corn,
oil, The goodly situation of verona.
wine* and cattaile, and that it has goodly stone quarries, rivers, lakes, and
pondes, among which is that of Benac, the pleas^ntest of those of all Italy,
streams of water Bathes in time past at verona.
both wholesome and profitable; the which I dare affirm to have in times past
served for bathes* by reason that they are hot, and because at this day the
ruins of the walls are to be seen, which do verify the opinion which the
common people hold thereof. What shall we speak of her situation and
structure? There is nothing to be seen more fair and pleasant. Never could
any Painter how excellent soever he were, represent a place of more delectable
recreation* For the whole City Two forts at verona.
almost being seated in a plain country, looking toward the South, East, and
West, it has a little hill on the North side, the top whereof by a short and
pleasant circuit An Amphitheater in verona.
are to be seen besides, diverse goodly bridges richly builded over the river;
an Amphitheater in the midst of the City, with diverse old triumphant Arches,
with a thousand other antiquities, which declare how notable the greatness of
this City has been in former times. That which we have hitherto said is
very great, but that which follows is much more admirable.

This City has had from the beginning a certain Seminary of excellent men,
and as famous in all sciences, as any other City whatsoever. All these things
being known, to the Venetians, did make their victory more notable.

They forthwith manned it with a strong Garrison, and sent P^etro Arimondo
thither for Governor, and Rubro Marini for chief Justice. VVhilest these
things were Gonzaga besieges Padua.
done at Verona, Gonzaga having spoiled all the Paduan territory, and taken
diverse Carrarians in the mean time (perceiving their affairs to be in great
danger) did bravely defend the City walls, opposing themselves every where
against the Venetians attempts; they ceased neither day nor night from labor*
they fortified their City, placed the guardes, and encouraged the townsmen,
and did at times sallie forth upon the enemy as occasion served: Borh sides
had labor and care sufficient.

But whilst Padua was thus besieged and defended. Massolerio the Venetian
Massolerio the venetian being accused and convicted of trea son is punished.
was suspected secretly to have shot arrows into the City with letters tied
to their heads, whereupon being imprisoned he was sent to Venice, where being
convicted of the crime he was hanged from the highest place of the Palace with
a long rope. The same day his brother and two young Priests, were put alive
into the ground betwixt Acruell and unusual punishment.
yet usual, did greatly terrify all men. The common report was, That they had
determined in the night to set the City on fire in diverse places, and that
they had diverse accomplices, some of whom were found within a while after dead in
sacks on the Giouanni of Pauia is punished for having secret conference with
the enemy.
shore, not being known who they were, Giouanni of Padua likewise who had
great pay in the Venetian Army, being accused to have had secret conference
with the enemy, was sent to Venice, and there hanged betwixt the two Columns.

These executions did greatly trouble the tyrant, for besides that he perceived
all means to be cut off from him of discovering any thing in the Army, he was
certain Gonzaga, and treat with him of peace before all men. A pasport being
sent him, he came to the Camp, where these conditions (as it is reported) were
propounded to him. That Conditions of peace propounded to the Paduan
he should leave Padua to the Venetians, and that he with his children should
go and dwell an hundred miles from thence: That the Venetians would deliver
unto him Giacomo his son, and would permit him to carry away all his
treasure, apparel, and other rich moueables that he had, and that they would
over and above give

The Venetians then perceiving that the tyrant had lost that haughty and proud
spirit which he was wont to have, did press the City more furiously than
before. The venetians enter Padua in the night by Scalado. Padua circled with a
triple wall.
And at the last, having about midnight reared ladders to the wall, diverse went
up upon them: where those of the guard being heavy with sleep all were
murdered with out noise at the gate of holy Cross, whither all the troops
speedily ran, and forthwith entered the City. Padua is circled with a triple
wall, the uttermost whereof being lost by the enemy, he kept himself within the
other two. But his forces being already The Paduan s^cth to Gonzaga.
broken, and being hopeless of better fortune, he sent to entreat Gonzaga to
take him into his protection; that he would cast himself betwixt his arms,
with Gonzaga h^s answer to the Paduan.
his children and all his means; requesting that he might come safely to him
to parley and compound with him about his yielding. But Gonzaga by the counsel
of his friends sent him word that he should do better to have recourse to the
Prince and Senate, and that with tears casting himself at their feet, he
should perhaps obtain of them more than he hoped for. He then craved assurance
that he might safely go to Venice, but he was answered that the Senate would
send Commissioners to Mestra, who should hear him. Both sides being come near
to Mestra, the matter was a long time debated without any conclusion at all,
whereupon The poor entertainment which the Paduas gave to Carrario returning
without peace.
they departed thence without doing any thing, and the tyrant returned being
conducted by Gonzaga into the City: where being arrived without tidings of
peace, he was so bad^y welcomed by the inhabitants, as diverse were so bold to
tell him; That the Paduans were no more resolved to live as they had done. They
willed him then to depart thence, and (if he did mean to look well to
himself) to embrace such peace as the victorious Venetian would offer; and not
such as he desired. That the wretched inhabitants had rill then endured too
much by their Princes arrogancy; that the enemy was already within their
walls: and therefore nothing else to be expected, but that the Soldiers having
forced the inner Rampire, would come and spoil the City; which God rather
than any man's valor had til then safely preserved: And that it was madness,
rather than wilfulness, not to yield, when men could not help it.

The Tyrant being daunted with these ignominious, speeches, sent again to
Gonzaga, and with tears entreated him to take pity on the affliction of his
family, and Nouello with Francisco surnamed Padua being taken, the tyrant with
three of his children are brought to Venice. Officers sent by the Senate to
Padua.
Tertius and William, his children (for Hubertino, and Marsilio, before the
City was yielded, were fled into Tuscan) were brought to Venice. The Senate
caused them to be carried into the Island opposite to the Hall where they used
to meet, and placed diverse small boats for the guard thereof for fear least
they should escape. Zacharia Treuisano was the fiest governor that was sent to
Padua after it was taken, and Marini Caraualla was Judge: who did forthwith
fortify the City with a strong rampire, and a good Garrison: Then they did
put diverse forth of the town whom they Carrarians, bannishing them into
sundry places, and by that means did carefully provide for whatsoever they
knew necessary to keep so excellent a City under their obedience.

The Tyrant and his children being by night transported into several prisons
(to the end that the people should not see them, who for the great hatred which
they had a long time borne them would have torn them in pieces) were by the
Senates The Prisoners by the Senates commandment are strangled.
commandment strangled. The Father was buried in S. Stephens Church, and the
children in S. Georges monastery. Such an end had the Carrariaus, who not long
before did fill all places with fear and menaces: and who not being satisfied
with commanding so excellent a City, did rashly provoke those by whose means
their Francisco deserved such an end.

The report was that he kept dogs of a marvelous bigness, unto whom he gave
Francisco Carrario his great ^rueltie.
the wretched inhabitants to be deuored. There is to be seen at this day in
the great Hall where the council of the Ten do assemble, two Scorpions, with
very sharp stings, who did sting such strangers, as he called thither to talk
with him. I conceal his impudent and unnatural conditions, wherewith he was
infected, as unworthy to be mentioned.

By this so triumphant a victory the Venetians purchased Vincenza, Verona,
Colognia, Feltra, Belluna, and the last of all, Padua with her confines. The
expense of this war which lasted two years, was so great, as two millions of
gold of the public Now much money was spent in the war with the Carrarians.
Treasure were spent in it: And yet nevertheless this excessive cost was very
pleasing in regard of the proffit and renowned victory which ensued it.

At the same time as the war was ended, whilst the whole City was busied
every night in making of bonfiers, and other signs of joy for the good news
which daily arrived from al parts, the top of the Tower, which is near to S.
Marks church was burned; but it was forthwith reedified, and gilded with fine
gold. That side likewise of the Palace which looks toward the South, and had
been a long time before begun, was then ended. All things being quiet, forty
Gentlemen of Verona, Forty Gentlemen of Verona come to Venite in Ambassade.
The entertainment given to the Gentlemen of Uerona.
clothed in white, came well accompanied to Venice. And their coming being
Marks Church: whereupon the Prince with his family clothed in white, did
stand, all his Ensigns being for that day white. He was attended on by all the
Magistrates of the City, and honored likewise with the company of the
greatest part of the Senate.

The Veronois being come to the Theater, went up in order, where after they The
Ambassadors speech.
had saluted the Prince and Senate, they laid down their public Ensigns,
and the keys of their Citie-gates at their feet, entreating them to accept
thereof, and beseeching God, that the offer might be both to the Venetians and
themselves as fortunate and profitable, as that was an assured and perpetual
pledge of their fidelity, as well public as particular, toward the
Venetians; requesting them of their accustomed goodness to continue in the
defense, preservation, and maintenance of them, their Citizens, their means,
fortunes, with all other Divine and humane matters: And as for their unfeigned
love toward them, they durst freely say and

The Ambassadors being courteously entertained, received great thanks: And The
answer^ which was made them.
they were assured, that so long as they did continue such as they had
promised, the Senate would ere long let them know, that the greatest happiness
which can befall those which have not means to maintain and defend
themselves, is to be shrouded under a lawful government; and that they would
find it to be as pleasing in that they had recourse to the only Fort of
liberty, having cast off a Tyrants yoke, as does that man which has escaped
out of a terrible tempest, when he enters into a safe Harbor: They might then
depart when they pleased, and take with them In this sort the Ambassadors of
Verona were dismissed. The Paduans come in the some manner to Uenice.
after to Venice. They were entertained as the former, and the only difference
was, that in sted of white, the Paduans were clothed in purple.

The end of the eighth Book of the second Decad.
THE NINTH BOOK Venice.
The Contents of the ninth Book of the second Decad.
LADISLAVS King of Hungary restores the City of Zara to the Venetians.
Dalmatia, by means of the Sibensans. What great hurt a sudden storm happening
on the thirteenth of August did to the City, and places near about. The
Scythians make incursions on the Faires of Taken. PIPVS enters violently into
Italy with great troops of Hungarians. FREDERICK soon follows him thither.
Diverse encounters with the enemies on the Treuisan and Forlane. Certain new
Magistrates are created in the City. How the Venetians by the contention of
those of Vdina entered in Arms into the Country of Friul; which is reduced
under the Venetians obedience. Strangers come twice into Italy, under the
conduct of LEWIS Bishop of Aquileia. CARMAGNOLLA forsaking PHILIP VISCONTE
comes and serves the Venetians. Sundry opinions of the Senate touching the
war in behalf of the Florentines, against PHILIP. And last of all, war is
proclaimed against PHILIP: the Venetians being allied with the Florentines.

PEace continued three whole years, as well within the City as abroad; All
which time, according to those whom we follow, we find no memorable accident
to have happened. In the end whereof, being the year of our Salvation one
thousand four hundred and nine, Ladislaus leaving Italy, departed toward
Charles, who in the time of the Genoueses war, did for a while besiege
Treuiso; from whence being afterward called, he went into Apulia, to revenge
the death of King Andrew on Queen Ioane his wife, where he conquered the
kingdom of Naples; but returning afterward from Italy into Hungary, he was
murdered by his own subjects. He left behind him his son Ladislaus, who in
process of time, being likewise called to recover his Fathers Kingdom, came,
into Dalmatia, and recovered Zara, after he had for a while besieged Ladislaus
king of Hungary, selltth Zara to the venetians.
to return into Italy, he sold that City with her Territory, Haven, and
other appurtenances to the Venetians for the sum of one hundred thousand
crowns. Whereupon Francisco Cornari, Leonardo Mocenigo, Antonio Contareni, and
Fantino Michaeli, were sent thither with a strong Garrison to take possession
thereof.

We find in some others, that the Venetians received Zara before the Paduan
Great contention among the Sibensans.
war was ended. This negotiation was very pleasing to the whole City, as
well in regard of the haven, which is one of the most commodious in all
Dalmatia, as also, because it being reduced under their obedience did seem to
promise them the entire Dominion of Dalmatia, as it fell out soon afterward.
Some say that the Venetians did together with Zara, buy of Ladislaus all his
Title to Dalmatia. Whereupon they made general Processions in the City* and a
decree was made, That the same

Within few Months after, there arose great dissension betwixt the Sibensans;
the Nobility holding for the Venetians, and the rest of the people for the
King of Hungary. This seditious multitude did put on Arms, and having thrust
all the Gentlemen forth of the City, they took the public government into
their own hands. Those who were expelled went to the Venetians, and having
promised to yield themselves unto them, entreated them speedily to pass over
into Dalmatia, to recover Sabenica. The Venetians did forth with arm four
Galleys, with about fifty other smaller vessels. The City being besieged,
was not only well defended, but the Venetian was expulsed thence with great
loss, whereby they knew that it Lodouico Buccecharino with great supplies to
besiege it by Land.

At his arrival they built a Fort near to the City, and all the passages
were shut up, that no victuals, armor, nor relief might come unto it. And
besides, Ambassadors were sent into Hungary ( Giouanni Barba, and Tomaso
Mocenigo, both of them being Prouidatori of S. Mark, went thither.) The
affairs of the Sibensans being for a while debated, was by the consent of the
Hungarian and the Venetians, referred to Pope John to be decided.

But in this mean time Marsilio Carrario, and Brunora of Escalla, being then
fugitives in Germany, did each of them by Letters and trusty Messengers
solicit their Secret practice: of Marsilio Carrario, and Brunora of Escalla.
The conspiracy discovered.
trouble them. At the last it was known by letters intercepted by chance, that
Marsilio would be shortly at Padua, where certain of the Inhabitants, who were
lovers of novelty, had put him in hope to be kindly welcomed. One of those
who were faulty, being taken, and convicted of the fact, was cut in four
quarters: And an other of them being brought back from Ferrara to execution,
lost his head betwixt the two Columns. Diverse were reported to have a hand in
the conspiracy, but the Senate were of opinion that it was better to defer the
punishment till some other time, thinking in the mean time that they had
sufficiently provided for the Commonwealth, if by containing the Paduans in
their duty, they should for fear

About the same time, on the thirteenth of August, there happened in the City so
A marvelous Storm.
great a Tempest of Wind, Hail, and Rain, as diverse ships were cast away,
some being swallowed by the waves, and others dashed to pieces against the
Sea-banks. Diverse buildings as well public as private were overthrown, and
among others S. Saviors steeple: Trees were plucked up by the roots, and
carried far off by the violence of the wind. This was reputed for a
wonderful prodigy. And that which some affirmed, to have seen diverse
monstrous and terrible representations in the air, did increase men's fear
and amazement. Two Months after, news was The Faires of Taken robbed and
spoiled by the Scythians.
with great murder of Christians, and that among others, diverse Venetians who
were come thither with very rich merchandise, were slain by the Barbarians.
They had assured testimony that this loss happened at Taken, on the self same
day, as that horrible Tempest did afflict Venice. The steeple of S. John's
Church at Rialto was the same year finished. The order of the Celestines which
was founded in the Church of S. George of Alega, was at the same time, by the
pursuit of Lorenzo Iustiniano, and other Honorable and devout Persons, made
very famous and much frequented. This Order had at the beginning besides these
men, sundry other more rich Benefactors, among whom was Gabrieli Candelmaro,
who being afterward Pope, and called by the name of Eugenius, did much
beautify that place with buildings and reuennues.

At the same time one of those four Galleys which returned home laden with
rich merchandise from France, was castaway at the entrance of the Sicilian Sea,
not

Such was the state then of the Commonwealth abroad and at home. But this
quiet was disturbed by the invasions of the Hungarians. For Pipus the
Florentine Pipus the Florentive makes incursions on the venetians Territory.
ouer-running Italy at the same time with ten thousand Horse, made incursions
on the Venetian confines. The Venetian Annals make no mention, for what cause
the Emperor Sigismond (in whose name the Tuscan made these stirs in Italy)
did begin this War: But it was to be presumed that it was by reason of the
civil War of the Forlani, the Lords and People of that Province contending
about Pipus his arrival, Frederico Sauergnane with all his faction, being
retired to Venice, those of Vdina yielded to him. Pipus having received Vdina,
did forth with come upon the Treuisan, and took from the Venetians, Serauall,
Belluna, Feltre, and La Motte. It is certain that the sale of Zara made by
Ladislaus, and the siege of Sibensa were cause of all those troubles. Some
Authors nevertheless do affirm, that the King came into Italy at the
pursuit and entreatie of Brunora of Escalla, who did still aspire to his
Fathers Principality. But whatsoever the occasion of this War was, it is
certain that Pipus after diverse warlike exploits, being corrupted with money
(as The death of Pipus.
caused him to die, by pouring molten gold down his throat: And that soon
after he came down into Italy with forty thousand men; others make the
number less. This latter attempt of War, albeit it carried a greater show,
yet was it not so fortunate as that of Pipus, for he did hardly pass the
confines of the Forlani. Some Historians say that Sigismond did make War on
the Venetians with Pipus. But whether it were so, or (as others affirm)
apart, it is certain that the Venetians at the first report of this War,
made great preparations of Soldiers and munition, and chose Carolo Malateste
for General of their Army, who was a man of great reputation, whom for that
purpose they had called from his house. It is reported that they Great cruelty
of the King of Hungary.
came from him lame of some of their members. For he did cause the prisoners
hands to be cut off, and their eyes to be put out. After he had in this manner
prosecuted the War for a time, they sent Ambassadors to him. Francisco
Foscari, Tomaso Mocenigo, (who were afterward Princes) and Antonio Cornari,
came to his Camp and concluded a truce with him for five years.

Arms being laid a-side against Sigismond, Prince Steno soon after deceased
in the thirteenth year of his Government. His body was laid in S. Marinies
Church.

THOMASO MOCENIGO, the 64. Duke of Uenice.



THomaso Mocenigo who was absent, was subrogated in his place. He Gabrino
Fondulo, from whence being called, he came to the City, and was received of
all men with great joy.

At the beginning of his Government certain Magistrates were by the Senates
decree translated to Rialto: And to the three Tables which were there from the
beginning, the fourth Prosenitica was added, called vulgarly the Messetaria.
For that purpose a Palace was builded on La Riuade Ferro, where these four
Magistrates do at this day execute Justice. The great Douana was there at the

The City was not long at rest, a new war being raised on the confines of
the Forlani, concerning the contentions of Vdina. Lodouico Techia was at the
same time Bishop of Aquileia, who at his own pleasure governed the whole
Province, which lies betwixt the Rivers of Liuenza, and Timaua, the Adriatic
Sea and the Alps. Some Authors say that this Province belongs to the
Forlani. But the vulgar do Strife betwixt the Bishop of Aquileia and the
vdinois.
at this day call it Friul, and the Inhabitants the Country of Friul.
Therearose great strife betwixt this Bishop, and those of Vdina, by reason that
the Vdinois Sauergnane his faction, who in the last war took part with the
Venetians, and in regard thereof being in a sedition driven thence, and were
retired to the Venetians, to be called home into the City. Techia on the
contrary did impugn it, saying that he would never permit it. Whilst the
City of Vdina was in this contention, and by consequent the whole Province
almost, the Venetians seized on Sacila. The Bishop perceiving that the matter
was to be determined by arms, had recourse to the King of Hungary. For he
felt himself too weak to deal with the Venetians.

In the mean time the Ciuidalians did yield to the Venetians, who kindly
received The Ciuidalians yield to the venetians.
them, not as vassalls, but as associates. The Bishop soon after returning
from space of fifteen days, who having spoiled all places round about, being
enforced by the great frost and snow (for it was winter,) they raised their
Camp.

The Bishop being out of hope to effect any thing, did follow them into
Hungary: The Venetians recover Feltre, Belluna and other places.
The Venetians recovered Feltre, Belluna, and other places which had been lost
in that war: they entered the Patrians confines, where they wholly ruined the
City of Prata. Philippo Arcia was General of the Army, one of the best
experienced Captains of his time. He (Prata being ruined) marched toward
Vdina, where the gate on the side of Ciuitade, being opened to him by
Frederick and others of his party, the City was then like to have been
taken by that treachery: But a great noise raised on a sudden, and the alarm
given on every side all men ran to arms.

But the Vdinois perceiving, that it was in vain to expect relief from any
place, The Udinois do voluntarily yield ^ the Venetians
and that the Bishop his arrival was uncertain, they resolved likewise to
yield. Therefore they sent their Agents to Venice, to offer unto the Venetians
their Lands and means as well public as particular, and in General all
matters both divine and humane. The Agents being friendly entertained, the
Senate decreed Frederick and his associates should be restored to their City
and their goods. By which decree not only the Sauergnans but their adherents
and all those who had been banished, returned into the City and their
inheritances. The whole Country of the Patrians in Friul, followed the example
of the Vdinois. The Bishop being aduertized of the Vdinois yielding, thinking
it no time to delay, came through Germany with great troops of Hungarians,
and fell furiously on the Forlani: and at his arrival in the streights of the
Alps he took the Castle of Clasino, a most strong and well defended place,
and near thereunto that of Mutiano, a place then, as now well fortified. And
the Patrians were like to have received a great loss, if the Venetian forces
sent thither for that purpose, had not opportunely

The enemies did not only refuse to fight, but they durst not attend the
Venetians The Barr^nis fly so soon as the venetians arrived.
who came toward them; for they came into Italy with an intent rather to
rob and spoil, than make war. And by this means within few days after
this great stir, all the Country of the Patrians was at quiet, all those
places which the enemy had seized being easily recovered. Within a while
after, the Bishop returned into Italy with a greater Army, and entering the
Patrians confines, he assailed Mansane, and soon after Rosacia. But this
journey proved as unfortunate as the former whereof we now spoke. The
Venetians at the first news of the enemies coming The Ducall Palace for the
most part burnt.
loss by fire as it had oftentimes done before. The fire breaking forth on a
sudden from the Dukes Palace, did in an instant take hold on Saint Marks
Church which is very near to the same, where the flame did so terribly
increase as the lead being melted, (wherewith it was then covered as it is at
this day) there was nothing left but the open vaults. They took great pains
near to the Church to keep the fire from the neighbour-houses. The fire being
quenched, the Senate decreed, that the Senators that they would permit and
command, that the forepart of the Ducal Palace, which was much defaced, might
be reedified in more sumptuous manner as was befitting for the majesty of the
Commonwealth. The public Advocates and Procurators, did forthwith crave that
the Prince might pay the forfeiture for that he had enfringed the Senates
decree. The Prince having liberally paid the The Prince is constrained to pay
the forfeiture for infringing the Senats decree. The occasion of the war
against Philip Duke of Milan.
sum, did so constantly pursue his proposition, as the Senate revoked their
former decree, and ordained that the Palace should be new built, whereupon the
ancient structure was plucked down, and another more sumptuous was begun. But
the Prince dyed before it was finished after he had governed ten years and
almost Francisco Foscari succeeded him.

FRANCISCO FOSCARI, the 65. Duke of Uenice.



HIs promotion was so pleasing to all the people, and to the whole Venetian
Scipioni Boa, and afterward built new again by him, because the former
building was thought to be of no long continuance. The same year likewise,
war was begun against Philip Duke of Milan. The cause of which painful
and tedious war we must fetch from far, to the end that all men may know
that it was not undertaken rashly or without cause

This Philip was son to Galeas Visconte, who being left very young with John
Maria his eldest brother, did loose a great part of his Principality. For
Galeas being dead, diverse Tyrants and petty Kings, beginning to stir here
and there, each of them seized on one or many Towns of his Dukedom: and like
a body, being left in the midst of them, they tare it in pieces. But in
succession of time, as well by his own valor as that of Francisco surnamed
Carmagnolla, one of the greatest Captains of those days, he did not only
recover the greatest part of that which did belong to his deceased father, but
by a wonderful course of victory sum of money, on condition that they
should give them for assurance of the lent sum, the City of Liuorne a very
strong place on the mouth of Arno. Philip perceiving that the same war would
beget matter of new dissension, did nevertheless dissemble, deferring the
revenge till some other time.

He had determined (as he said afterward) to succor Pope Martin, whom he
understood to be basely dealt with by his neighbors: Whereupon he gave out
that he took arms for that purpose, and marching forward, he did fight with
and defeat the Florentines near to Zagonare, because (as he said) they would
have stopped his passage. But it was sufficiently known to all men that Angelo
Pergolesi, who at The Duke of Milan his victory over the Florentines.
the same time did so fortunately win the battle against the Tuscans, was
sent by Philip to raise the Florentines camp before Forli, the inhabitants
having entreated him so to do. But upon what occasion soever it was that the
Army came thither, it is certain that the wars being begun in those
quarters, it came to pass afterward that the Florentines by the carelessness
of their Captains (or rather by their own malice as some have thought) being
vanquished at diverse times, after sundry losses, thought upon nothing more
than how to preserve their liberty. And because there was some likelihood,
that they could not long without some foreign aid resist the force of Philip,
they resolved to have recourse to the Venetians, whom they had attempted at
the beginning by diverse Ambassadors to draw into that war.

At the last they sent Lorenzo Ridolpho their Ambassador to Venice, to entreat
and Philip, with this charge; That if their entreaties would not move the
Senate, that he should aduertize the Senators Tho Florentines embassage to the
Venetians.
of the danger that was like to ensue; that having overthrown the Florentines,
he would strive to do as much to the Venetians. For as touching the event of
the present war, he should give them to understand, that they would defend
their liberty against that cruel enemy, so long as their forces and means
would give them leave: but if he should perceive the Venetians to incline and
give ear to the prosperous success of Philip, to assure them that it would be
too late to talk of peace at such time as Florence being besieged, all things
should fall out contrary to them. But because it was for one man to commit the
error, they would endeavor to free

But the Senators having been already sundry times importuned by the
Florentines (for they had still for two years space continued their
solicitings for that purpose) had to that end sent diverse times to Philip:
First Andrea Contareni, and Lorenzo Bragadino were sent unto him. Then Nicolao
Maripetro, who was afterward followed Venetian Ambassadors sent to Duke Philip.
by Andrea Mocenigo, and the last of all was Francisco Serra one of the
Secretaries; all of them being commanded to entreat, and exhort him to give
over the war against the Florentines, and having laid by Arms, to refer
himself to the Venetians for all wrongs which he could pretend to have
received of them, albeit they knew well enough that if the Florentines had
offended him, they had already received sufficient punishment. Besides, that
the Venetians did highly account of his alliance, the which they were resolved
to entertain so long as they should perceive it not to be prejudicial to
their liberty: Neither had they forgotten humanity, which did constrain them
to have pity and compassion of a free people. They did then entreat him if he
desired to continue their allie, and to have them for his Philip his
dissimulation.
him, as to any of those whom it nearest concerned. Philip heard them very
courteously, and gave them to understand both by gesture and word, that he
would in favor of the Venetians grant their demands: yet nevertheless, he did
not cease under understand straightly to press the Tuscans, alleging now one
reason, and then another, and by dissembling drew the matter forth at length.
The Venetians albeit they knew whereunto Philips designs tended, nevertheless
because they would not seem to do any thing rashly, they did last of all send
Paulo Cornari to him, to give him to understand what the Senate had determined
to do, if he did not presently cease from molesting the Florentines: Francisco
Carmagnolla his coming to them Carmagnolla leaves Philip, and comes to the
venetian.
(who had forsaken Philip) had in some sort heartned them to war, if so be
that he did not lay aside his arms, seeing they were before then doubtful
openly to denounce war against him. This man having understood by vicious
young men (for so he termed them) that Philip did no more bear him the same
affection that he

Now this which follows is in effect that which Cornari spoke to Philip. That
The effect of Cornari his Oration to Philip.
among all the Princes of the earth he did not know any man who was more bound
to give thanks to Almighty God than Philip: Because he had not only recovered
his lost principality for the most part, but likewise by an admirable success
had wonderfully increased it: That he did peaceably enjoy that part of Italy,
the which in fertility of soil, in goodly and rich Cities, and in number of
skillful and ingenious men, either in time of peace to till the earth, or in
time of war to bear Arms, was not only to be compared, but wholly to be
preferred before any other Region Genoa, enemies in times past of their
greatness, at such time as in the midst of so many felicities he ought to
take his ease, he had seized on Forli in Flaminia, and had marched into
Tuscanie against the Florentines: That they were not ignorant of the pretense
he alleged, that the Florentines had contrary to the agreement relieved the
Genoueses with money, that they had seized on Liuorne, at such time as Genoa
was already in a manner taken. Nor were the Venetians likewise ignorant, what
these pretenses were, and whereunto they tended; that the common proverb was
true: That man who is cunningly dealt with, does sometimes as plainly perceive
the deceit as he that uses it. And that it oftentimes comes Philip to over
run the lands of their obedience. For by being careful of the liberty of
other men, in regard they held the same form of government, as the Florentines
did, it happened to them as to diverse others, who were as sorrowful Philip, it
was with this intent to continue frenids and allies with him so long, as he
being satisfied with his Fathers principallitie, should abstain from molesting
his neighbors, and should live in peace and quiet: But that they could not
allow, nor would by no means suffer him by a continual war still to molest
the Florentines, whose only fault has been in that they did not valiantly
defend themselves: wherefore if he did not speedily dislodge forth of Flaminia
and Tuscanie; if he did not remain within his own confines limited by the
agreement, and satisfying himself with so flourishing an estate did not
heareafter live at peace: the Venetians, as well to defend themselves as their
friends the Florentines, would both together make war upon him, and leauie
the greatest forces against him they could, as against

Cornari his speech did greatly move Philip; who dissembling his anger for that
present, answered him with a smiling countenance in few words, saying, That
he Philip his answer to Cornari
was well assured that the Venetians by their constant and faithful promise
would ever observe the agreement sworn betwixt them, and that he could not
believe, though there were none at all, that they would prefer the
Florentines friendship (whose treacheries, deceits, and thefts, the Venetians
did greatly detest both in public and particular) before his: That there was
no occasion (if the Venetians would call to memory the ancient friendship of
his Ancestors, the affection of his Father Galeas, and the respect which he
had ever borne to them) whereby he Nicholao of Aeste.

Cornari being dismissed with this answer, returned to Venice. Giouanni Areti^
who had been Secretary to deceased Galeas, and Bertrand Lamponiano did soon
after follow him. For, the report was that new Ambassadors were come to Venice
Philip fearing least the Venetians who were already of themselves sufficiently
inclined to leave him, should make a league with The Ambassadors of Philip
come to venice.
the Florentines; he would likewise have his Ambassadors to be there, to the
end that if need were, they might plead his cause in the Senate.

So soon as they were arrived: the Ambassadors were seen to walk up and The
Florentines Ambassador at Venice.
down the City in different manner. Lorenzo (as it became him) representing
with a sorrowful countenance the misery which afflicted his Country, went
here and there pensive and disconsolate, entreated the Senators whom he met
with, and visited others at home at their houses, omitting nothing that he
knew might serve for his purpose. On the contrary those of Philip, besides
their bravery

Now the Senators were of opinion first to give audience to the Tuscan, who
being brought into the Senate spoke in this manner.



The Oration of the Florentine Ambassador.
Ye may easily conjecture, most excellent Prince, and ye conscript Fathers,
albeit Iwere silent, what business I have to handle in your presence, and
whereunto this last Ambassade of the Florentines does tend. Those who have
seen my speedy coming out of Tuscanie unto this City, have understood, that
an Anbassadour of a free City, is come to demand aid of a free people for
the conservation of their liberty. This is the sum of our demands, the which
I crave for our Country, which has begotten and bred us, and raised us up
into some degree of honor above the vulgar, and if it be possible, by our
entreaties, to obtain it. If I shall be so happy, most excellent Prince, and
ye Senators, as to persuade ye to accept of the Florentines alliance, and to
join your arms with ours against this cruel Tyrant who thirsts after our
liberty and yours, my Ambassadge shall be most fortunate, and my Country
being highly contented, shall welcome me home with tears of joy, will embrace
me for such good news, and will account it self by your means to be freed
from all danger. My desire makes me to hope well, and chiefly when I consider,
that I come unto those, who besides their knowledge (which does no less
concern them than the Florentines) how to quench and root out the Tyrants
neighbor forces, as though it were a new fire, are esteemed to be so zealous
of liberty, wherein their City is borne and increased, as they will likewise
wholly maintain, and free all such places from wrong, where they perceive any
spark of liberty to shine, and will with a mutual consent hate all Tyrants,
as enemies and disturbers thereof. I could allege diverse examples, how for
love to this liberty, the Athenians accounted Philip of Macedon for an enemy,
the Romans Mithridates, Antiochus, and diverse others, who with an unbridled
desire of rule, or rather envying the liberty of other men, did rashly stir
up against themselves, the Armies of that invincible nation. But wherefore do
we seek ancient or foreign examples; when we have in abundance so many new
and domestic: There is none of us (as I think) which has not seen or heard
of their Fathers and Mothers; how vehement an enemy to this City Prince
Carrario showed himself, during the War with the Genoueses, first at
Chioggia, and then at Treuiso. What did King Lewis? what did many others who
have not ceased to disturb the peace and quiet of your state? And we likewise
have ever without intermission had an hereditarie War with the Viscontes,
ever since the Principality of Luchin. And to speak truly, it is commonly
seen, that those who have usurped other men's liberty, do hate those unto
whom they cannot do as much. I esteem your Commonwealth most happy, and
your selves O ye Venetian Fathers; in that ye have extinguished the
Carrarians race your capital enemies, before such time as this ravening Lion,
with whom we have to do, was grown great: For if he had now found them
living, he would not have been satisfied with assailing you only on the Lakes
of Bebia, (as they did) but coming both by Land and Water, he would not only
have endangered your state, but your liberty it self: whereupon I think that
it fell out well for us that day that you smothered that neighbor flame;
unless the great assurance which you have conceived by that victory, does
hinder you from thinking on the danger, which threatens you from this cruel
Tyrant. He is your enemy, believe me, he is your enemy, and lies in wait on
every side, and therefore so much the more dangerous as he is yet least known,
and there is nothing so difficult, which he presumes not to atchieue by his
good fortune, or dares not to attempt. For, having with seven thousand men
assailed our forces, who were then excellent in Arms, means, and good
fortune, and sometimes, twice or thrice greater than his, he has
nevertheless broken and defeated them, sooner than we thought that he had
descried them. He has no (...) (according to the Poets fictions) or cruel
Centaures in his Army: They be men like ours, but much more hardy and
valiant, unto whom he has given in marriage, the Daughters and Wives of
wretched Citizens, with their Houses, Lands, and Possessions. Whereunto do you
(...) think that their haughty courages will not aspire? Is it likely that
they think or desire any other matter, than after that they shall have
overthrown our forces, how they may one day assail the Venetians more mighty
than we in reputation and power, so greatly has their good success increased
their boldness. Let us then find means to overthrow their wicked Counsels,
and detestable vows, to expel their Wives and Children, with their Governors
of Cities, Fields, and Towns, from the confines of Lombardie, and to enforce
them to busy themselves about their own domestic affairs, or else to take
foreign pay. I am afraid, most excellent Prince, to speak what I think; yet
I will tell it, seeing that necessity enforces me thereunto: That unless ye
speedily join your forces with ours, Florence being subdued, will bring Philip
to that pass, that without the aid of any else he will come to disturb and
beat down the Venetians State. But (say ye) the Venetians are accustomed to
maintain their alliances as sacred and inuiolate. I beseech God, most
excellent Prince, and ye conscript Fathers, that those unto whom he has given
so good a mind to observe their promise, may likewise know the cunning and
deceits of those with whom they are to deal, and being known, to avoid them
by speedy wisdom. I think ye remember, with what subtlety and craft he
deceived you when as he expelled Pandolfo Malateste from his State, and from
that of his Mother, whom ye so much desired to maintain in the Principality
of Brescia. Ye have heard how by deceit, and contrary to the agreement, he
has suppressed the Sovereign Magistrate of Genoa, and brought that mighty
City into bondage. Ye are not ignorant likewise, how contrary to the
assurance of peace, infringing all laws and customs, he has overthrown us
by a sudden and unlooked for assault: who is it then which does not plainly see
how often he has broken all Divine and Humane laws? It is not lawful to
keep promise with a perjured person. But your silence does make me already in
a manner to believe, that ye do sufficiently know, that I do not so much
crave by this mine aduertizement the safety of our Commonwealth, as your
prosperity, good fortune, and preservation, the which this perfidious,
crafty, and well advised, great Soldier, no less audacious than ready, does
daily lay wait for; trusting to the fidelity of his Soldiers, to the treasure
which he has gathered together, and to the great yearly tribute which he
receives, deferring to make War on you, till he has wholly ruined us. But
do not contemn our alliance, although we seem to be reduced to all
extremity: For albeit we have without measure spent great wealth, we have yet
greater, though not public, yet particular, the which we are ready franckly
to employ, for the preservation of our liberty. Join then your arms, join
your forces with ours, and by wholesome Counsel and Sacred alliance, conserve
both our Liberties, Commonwealths, and Countries. And as concerning the means
how to accomplish it, we prescribe no conditions, but are ready to embrace
such as ye shall propound.

Lorenzo having ended his speech, all the Senators were greatly moved; not one
against an other; but in themselves being of sundry opinions, each of them
debating with himself the power of Philip on the one side, with the
Commonwealths danger, and on the other the Florentines example, with the great
expense of the war. Whereupon they concluded to hear the Ambassadors of
Philip, before they would give an answer. And to the end they might make an
easy reply to that which Lorenzo had uttered, certain Senators were commanded
to relate to the Gio^anni Aretin famous for humane learning, and eloquent in
the Country language, with the consent of his fellow, spoke in this manner.

The Oration of Giouanni Aretin.
I Understand, most Illustrious Prince, that the Florentines who are great
enquirers after news, are desirous over the whole City to know wherefore, and
upon what occasion, Philip Duke of Milan has sent us hither to you, and to
this most Sacred Senate: whom in some sort to satisfy, I will in few words
utter the effect of our Ambassade; and I assure my self that when they shall
understand it, it will not greatly content them. We are not then come hither,
conscript Fathers, to stir up any troubles, nor for to ouer-turne any Divine
or Humane Law. Philip leaves those cunnings to the Florentines, unto whom by
nature they belong: For he thinks on nothing more, than carefully to observe
the precepts and documents which he has received from his Ancestors, and how
to reverence by all good means and offices your friendship, confederacy, and
good will. And seeing that by the divine bounty it is come to pass that it is
not needful in such a bond of friendship, to renew any treaty of peace or
alliance betwixt you and him, the Florentines must give place, and with their
good leave (if they please) to permit Philip according to his own manner, and
that of his Ancestors, to salute you, most excellent Prince, and all these
well-beloued Senators, by his Ambassadors, together with the whole City: Let
it be lawful for us to say, that Philip lives not but for the good of the
Commonwealth: that the Duke of Milan an inward friend to the Venetians, lives
not but to preserve their dignity and greatness: who for the great love he
bears them, and in regard of the sound alliance and contract betwixt you two,
and in respect of the correspondence of all fortunate and happy events, that
he has with you, gives ye to understand, that his enemies the Florentines,
are overthrown and undone, who by evil counsel, would with a shameless
boldness have ouer-whelmed him, if he had not diligently prevented it, in a
most dangerous war. This is most wise Fathers, this is the chief end of our
Ambassade. This is the cause why Philip has commanded us to come hither.
Moreover because we have understood, that these men go about with an affected
speech, wherewith they naturally help themselves, and with tears and sighs,
say, not only in the Senate, but likewise in the streets and public places
of the City, that they are not the cause of the war, for which they are at
this day so badly dealt with; that Philip did begin it; he willingly refers
the whole matter to your judgment, being resolved to embrace such conditions
as ye shall propound: Let the Florentines if ye please, come into this place,
and excuse themselves: but let them not invent unheard of falsities, whereby
they endeavor to animate against all right and alliance, your Authority and
constancy against Philip. Ye must (say they) beware of him, if his power do
increase: For all Kings Princes, and Tyrants, do envy and are enemies to
Commonwealths, and do abhor that name. They allege Philip of Macedon,
Mithridates, and Antiochus; I would he had remembered Porsenna, who by a so
daine war did in a manner smother the Romans liberty at her first birth: But
he did of purpose forget it (as I think) because he would not have it known
that Tuscanie has in times past brought forth any, who has attempted on other
men's liberty. But if they take such delight in Histories, why do they not
rather allege. Hieron, Massinissa, the Ptolomies and Attalus, who were
trusty friend^ to the Romans. King Lewis was a capital enemy to the
Venetians, so were the Carrarians, but the Viscontes, for a hundred years
space that they have enjoyed their excellent State, were never enemies, but
always friends and allies to the Venetians. The Tuscan has not known this;
nay rather, knowing it, he has like a subtle and cunning Orator of purpose
concealed it. Let him produce but one only example of this family which does
so much affect you, he cannot do it, and therefore it is sufficient to
overthrow his untruths, fables and slanders. And not to speak of his
Ancestors, so far off were the Venetians from ever suspecting the forces of
Galeas father to this Philip (which undoubtedly were very great) as on the
contrary he did not let to join his Arms with their forces, the better to
help to increase theirs. As it fellout at such time as being your allie, he
took Verona, Vincenza, Padua, and last of all Treuiso. Ye have seen this my
Lords (to the end that no man may reprove me of false-hood) or you may have
heard it of your fathers who were there present. But the Viscontes have ever
been enemies to the Florentines, and have still from father to son even
(...) now, made war upon them. Do you not think that they had just cause so
to do? Were they not by wrongs provoked to take Arms? For to speak of the
occasion of this present war, by which they say they are greatly molested.
They complain of the taking of For li contrary to the Contract as if we had
never heard of this fable till now: Philip has given you all authority
together with Prince D'Aeste, to enquire this matter Why do they not rather
tell, upon what cause against all right they did succor the Genoueses with a
great sum of money, whilst Philip besieged them? why did they attempt to
shut up all passages to the Army of Philip, which went to succor Pope Martin?
what moved them to pass their bounds on the confines of the River Migra? why
did they seize on Liuorne? and would not give audience to the Commissioners of
Philip, till they had headlong thrown him unto the hazard of an open war?
These are the causes which have now moved Philip to undertake this war: The
(...) cause likewise had the Viscontes in times past. They can impute it to
nothing but to their own manner of life, their pride, and couetuousnesse. Let
them cease then before you to blame our Prince, a friend to peace and
quietness, and one that is stuffed with all bounty and liberality. But we
are satisfied (being provoked thereunto) that we have answered this little, for
much more which might be said, which is so true as they themselves, albeit they
are vain liars, dare not affirm the contrary. As for the rest, we have
already said and will again say, that Philip is ready and resolved to
refer the whole matter to your judgment, wisdom and equity. We are come
hither to this purpose, and not (as the Tuscan presumes) to renew the
alliance, which has not yet been violated by you nor by us ever shall.

So soon as Aretine had made an end of speaking, the Ambassadors were
Different opinions of the Senators.
put forth of the Senate: And then the Senators opinions were diverse: Some
cried out that Philip was to be prevented, and war to be denounced against
him, who drawing forth the matter in length, durst not assail them till he had
vanquished the Florentines: Others said it behooued them to beware least they
undertook such a matter inconsideratly; and that it was very easy for any
man to begin war, but Carmargnolla is called into the Senate.
very hard to end it. Upon this diversity of opinions, they decreed to call
Carmagnolla

This man after his arrival at Treuiso, was ever highly extolled, both in
public and private by Prince Foscari and all his adherents, publishing his
great renown and experience in martial matters, with his long and faithful
service to Philip a most unthankful Prince. They affirmed that without all
doubt under the conduct of such a man, (who knew Philips forces, and was well
acquainted with all his designs yea with his most inward secrets) they might
easily break and overthrow all the attemps of the Milanois. That which the
Prince and his favorites said of Carmagnolla was true; but many did suspect his
loyalty, fearing that after he should have thrown the Venetians into the
hazard of war, being won by fair promises, he might Philip.

But to clear this doubt, it happened at the same time as this matter was
debated, or not long before, that he had like to have been poisoned by John
Alitprand the Milanois. This man had in time before married the daughter of
Bernabo Visconte, but because he had favored Hector de Monze whom Philip
besieged, fearing the vanquishers fury, had retired with his wife to Treuiso.
And in regard thereof Carmagnolla did often visit him, as one whom he knew to
be greatly hated of Philip. He in mean time being reconciled to Visconte did
determine to poison his friend and guest, but being apprehended by the
accusation of his maide-seruant, and put to the torture, he confessed the
matter, and had his head stricken off. The Senators Carmagnolla against Philip
(for he was at the same time come from the firm land to Venice) they called
him into the Senate, where (being by nature chollericke) he began to inueigh
against Philip, complaining with great vehemency of his treachery and
ingratitude, saying That by his skill and diligence, he had not only
recovered his fathers state, but much more beside: That by his conduct and
dexterity, he had reduced under his dominion, Alexandria, No^arra, Monza,
Lauda, Coma, Pauia, Placentia, Bergamo, Cremona, Bressia, and last of all
Genoa, envious in times past of the Venetians greatness: And that thereby he
had extolled the name of Philip, not only beyond the confines of Italy, but
of Europe, in regard of the taking of Genoa. And that he would not have them to
think that his labors had been recompensed because that he had been greatly
honored by him and married a wife of that kindred, and taken upon him the
surname of that family: for that was no remuneration for his pains, but a
bond of his militia, so as by that means, this unthankful man had tied him
to serve him till such time as he perceived his affairs to be settled
according to his wish, as the event did afterward manifest. For besides his
suffering of certain shameless and detestable persons, whom he abused, to
slander him, and in that regard holding him in some suspect, had enforced him
retire thence, he had moreover being thus banished attempted to take away his
life. But that it fell out well (...), for that escaping the present danger in
recompense of his Country, wife and children, and all his means left to a
Tyrant, he had met with another true nurscrie of all integrity and justice,
where every man was rewarded according to his deserts, where virtue and valor
were honored, and where bad men had none access nor retreat: which being so,
he did not think on his lost wealth, but that he had purchased much greater:
That he felt not himself to be danted by any adverse fortune, but that he was
well recompensed for all his losses, were it not that his wife and children did
so abate his courage, as he had not the means to hurt that Tyrant. As for the
war which they propounded, he said that Philips power, nor his forces were
not so great as men boasted: And that the Florentines were not vanquished by
the valor and conduct of their enemies, but by the malice and rashness of
their own Captains: Nor that the other victories obtained in former time,
were gotten by Philips conduct, but by his alone. And besides, that he was but
needy, in regard he had spent all his means on those Armies which he had sent
forth by Se^ and Land against the King of Arragon, so as that Army which he
now had in Tuscanie had not of a long time received any pay. That he durst
affirm, that Philip whom they thought in show to have already surmounted all
men, was in effect n^erer to be vanquished than to vanquish: That his treasure
clean was exhausted, his subjects consumed, and his revenue in a manner wholly
engaged, and that little which remained, was by his detestable and shameless
loves, robbed, spoiled, and consumed: That he knew of a certain that his Army
had not been paid for the space of a whole year: and that the report of some
was not true, which said that his Soldiers followed him to the wars freely
and without money. He willed them then to consider what might happen, if the
Venetians should roundly assail the people of Lumbardy who were drawn dry of
their wealth by continual subsidies: If the Lombard merchants were prohibited
their traffic with them, which was only left the of all Italy: if their
husbandmen and cattle should be enforced to retire into the circuit of their
walls, their lands would become barren and vnfruit full: if after the spoil of
one years fruit famine and want of all necessaries should afflict them, they
should then perceive, that he who now was thought a Conqueror, and whose only
name was fearful to all men, being by these means vanquished, would find
enough to do to defend himself and his subjects. And that they should not
find him such an one in beating back his enemies, as he had been before, in
inuading and pursuing them. Moreover that the Florentines forces were great at
the first, but that those of the Venetians were much greater. That there was
great difference in making war in a foreign Country, and in a man's own.
That his reputation could much avail them in that enterprise, as he who had
fortunatly ended all the wars which he had begun, and vanquished all those
against whom he had fought, and had learned by so many hazards, dangers, and
labors, both to obey and command. But as concerning Philips good will
toward the Venetians (because by long onuersing with him, he knew all his
secrets) he assured them that he did defer the war, which he had long
since resolved in his mind against the Venetians, till such time as he should
wholly overthrow the Florentines. He wished them then whilst they had time
to quench this flame which was so near them: and if they thought him fit to
manage the war for the service of ^he Commonwealth, he entreated them to
use the power which they had over him. Because he was determined in regard of
Philips ingratitude, to march against him with the same zeal, affection and
heat of courage to his overthrow, as he had done when he was his friend to
purchase him the sovereign Principallitie. The Venetians should do well then
to embrace so fair an occasion, who in so doing should not alone defend their
own estate, but mightily enlarge it, and should aid the Florentines their
fellow brethren in liberty, who were then greatly afflicted. And this ought
chiefly to excite them so to do, in that they had him for their General in
this war, whom if they thought fit to serve them they might dispose of at
their pleasure. They might peradventure emploie others more excellent in valor
and reputation than himself, but none who was more affectionate to the
Venetian people, nor with more just cause and veh^mencie animated against their
enemy.

Carmagnolla by his discourse had so well moved the Senators, as all of them
in a manner inclined to war. Prince (...) thinking it unfit to stand still in
so fair a way, did with great vehemency pursue the same discourse. For the
Venetians good hap was, that the Commonwealth had then a Prince, who besides
his admirable wisdom was borne for all haughty enterprises, and an immortal
and daily enemy to Tyrants. He then spoke in this manner.

Prince Foscari his Oration.
THere are two things in the Commonwealth (most excellent Fathers) which
though in effect and name they seem to be very sweet, have of tentimes
nevertheless brought many mischiefs to very great and noble Cities; namely,
peace, and sparing of the public treasure. For being only considered a far
off there is no danger seen in them, and being viewed near at hand there is
yet none to be seen, or if there be, men will so flatter and favor them, as
they despise it, in such sort as we sooner fall into an evident danger, than
have any leisure to redress it by a sharp war, or by some expense, which is
odious to the Commonwealth. The which we have found to be most true by
diverse losses which our Ancestors have sustained, and by some likewise happened
in our time. The Florentines loss may serve for a sufficient present example,
who being able to have overthrown the power of Philip at such time as it
increased, many goodly occasions being presented unto them, they would not do
it for fear of expense. What is come thereof? They do now unprofitably spend
the Gold and Silver which in time of Peace they had so curiously gathered
together* And that which is more to be lamented, they cannot, (their liberty
preserved) obtain peace, nor give end to their expenses. I say then that it
behooves us to foresee future dangers, and being foreseen to prevent them by
counsel and mature deliberation. It is in a manner one self same government
(and no man doubts thereof) that of a Commonwealth and that of a ship at Sea.
I demand of you, if any man in calm weather (as they call it) the winds
gently blowing, holding the helm shall fall a sleep and take his rest,
without considering from far such aangers as may happen: or whilst other men
make use of the sails, mast, and saile-yardes, should omit that which were
needful to remedy the sudden fortunes of the Sea, nor exactly consider the
time when he saileth, under what climate or planet, or in what Sea, what rocks
and shelues he ought to avoid: would ye not say that such a man suffering
shipwreck by a sudden tempest did justly merit such a loss? The very
selfsame is now happened to the Florentines: And the like will still happen to
such, which do not foresee from far the imminent dangers which threaten
Commonwealths: or having foreseen them, do not speedily apply the remedy
having the means to do it. The Florentines might (not to stray from their
example) easily have overwhelmed, if they would never so little have attempted
it, the power of Philip, when it began to increase: but they would not intend
it, either through negligence, or rather co^ctousnesse. What is come thereof?
Being often vanquished in battle, and bro^ght to the very hazard of their
liberty, having lost their means they are deceived; and in sted of being
accounted wise, well-aduised, and provident people, they are esteemed dull
fools and senseless creatures. We must beat back (I say) we must beat
back mischiefs, not only those which hang over our heads, but those likewise
which do nearely press us. Besides, were I in the farthest parts of Libia
(let other men be of what mind they please) or beyond the Riphean mountains,
and should hear tell that the liberty of any Nation were trodden under foot,
although I could not succor them, yet certainly I could not choose but be a
partaker of their grief. And shall we suffer a proud Tyrant, to tear^ in
pieces, oppress, and abollish the liberty of a Noble people our Neighbor,
(...) (...) (...) up in our common Mother, Italy? We do not well consider
that which we see before our eyes, nor that which all Italy says, that The
same d^y as (...) (...) loose her liberty, will be the first that Philip will
assai^e the Venetians. The which seeing all men do think will come to pass,
I greatly wonder (...) some men, who albeit they say they have well considered
the matter, are nevertheless of opinion, rather to endure any thing, than to
relieu^ the Florentines, and bad people, a envious of our navigations. It is a
madness certainly, it is a madness, believe me, to be contented to sustain
a great loss, so as the enemy may suffer a greater. And yet, thanks be to
God, their affairs neither abroad nor at home are to be compared to ours. If
until now their forces have been so great, as we had good cause to suspect
them, they are at this present so abated, as of a long time they will not be
able to recover their former strength. Yet nevertheless, I do not say they
are so mean, but that so soon as they shall understand that the Venetians
will join with them, they will then upon hope of better fortune bring forth so
much gold and silver as shall be sufficient to entertain the one half of the
Army. And besides, Philips forces are not so great, as false report has made
us to believe. Carmagnolla has sufficiently acquainted us with what he is able
to do. Moreover, the hope which we may conceive to recover and join to our
state, Bressia, Cremona, Bergamo, and all the Territories of ancient Venice, is
no small spur to animate us to begin the war. This is it I know which ye
have along time thought on, and for which ye daily study, But he who durst
demand of the Prince of Mantua (whom he knew to be our friend and allie) the
City of Pescara, do ye think that he will not attempt to have by force, if
ye will not give it him with good will, Verona, Vincenza, and in a manner all
that we possess in the firm Land? Therefore if ye will credit me, there is
none expense, the which, God be thanked we may easily bear, nor labor, seeing
it is to purchase us an assured peace, which may be of force to hinder us from
speedy joining with the Florentines to make war on the Tyrant; I say a war
no less profitable than necessary.

The Princes vehement speech, with his authority, which herein exceeded the
Ducall dignity, did in such sort move the Senators, who already of
themselves were inclined thereunto, as the alliance with the Florentines was by
a general Alliance concluded with the Florentines.
before the Senate, the agreement betwixt their two States which was to
continue firm and inviolable between them during the whole time of the war
following* was solemnly concluded and confirmed in such manuer as h^reunder
follows. The Articles of agreement.


It was therefore concluded that the Venetians and Florentines should Arm at
their common charge, sixteen thousand horse, and eight thousand foot. They
should furnish two Nauall Armies; with the one the Venetians should sail up
the River Po to resist the forces of Philip; and the Florentines, along the
River of Genoa with the other: That no man should speak of peace neither

So soon as Lorenzo in the Florentines name had allowed of these written
conditions, he did cast himself at the Princes feet, and voluntarily with a
loud voice began to protest, That the Florentine people should be for ever
mindful of such a benefit, and besought God that the Venetians affairs might
daily prosper better and better: And that if ever it did happen, that the
Venetian people should have need, the Florentines would be ever ready
according to their means, to aid the Nicholao de Aeste, Francisco Gonzaga,
Amadeo Duke of Sauoy, King Alfonso (reconciled not long before to the
Florentines) and by those of Sienna, in respect of their neighborhood.

The Venetians sent Francisco Serrano one of their Secretaries to Philip, to
entreat him speedily to desist from making war on the Florentines, who were
newly allied to the Venetians, and upon his refusal, he should in the
Commonwealths name, according to the custom of their Ancestors, denounce
war against him. The Venetians denounce war against Philip.
But he was so far off from condescending to the tenor of this Ambassade, as
on the contrary, he did with great courage entertain their defiance,
imagining by how much the matter was more painful and dangerous, so much
greater did he hope the honor and glory would be, if he should

The end of the ninth Book of the second Decad.
THE TENTH BOOK Venice.
The Contents of the tenth Book of the second Decad.
CARMAGNOLLA Captain General to the Florentines takes Bressia. The Army of
PHILIP returning from Tuscanie besieges Bressia. The great Trench which the
Venetians made about the Castle of Bressia: The enemies being wearied with the
long siege, yield up the Castle of Bressia. Peace being concluded with PHILIP,
does not last long through his own fault. The Milanois Oration to PHILIP to
stir him up to renew the war. The Venetians having renewed their alliance
with the Florentines, do again begin the war. The banished Fregoses being
vanquished in battle by the Genoueses, were driven Genoa Coast. The Nauall
Army of PHILIP, broken by the Venetians, a little beneath Cremona: two
unfortunate incounters happening soon after to the Venetians, not far from
Cremona. The enemies falling into an Ambuscado near to Bressia, do loose many
of their Horse. The enemies so daine sallie on the Venetians Camp near to
Otholenga, does greatly trouble them. A battle near to the River of Olia,
where they fought on both sides without any loss. Last of all, PHILIP is
wholly put to rout at Macal, whereupon peace ensues.

War being thus denounced, the Senate did Carmagnolla Captain General to
the Venetians.
to loose any time, they gave to Carmagnolla their Captain General all those
troops which they had then ready. He having received them, being full of
courage, began to think in what manner he might by some brave exploit begin
the war. For his hatred to Philip on the one side, and on the other the great
opinion which the whole Senate of the place: But the business falling out
unluckily, he practiced by goodly promises the chief of that faction, whom
he certainly knew did not affect Philip, and especially Pietro, and Athilles
Auogadres, very courageous persons, and great enemies to Philip. He drew both
of them by promises and exhortations to this point, as they granted about
midnight to break down the City wall, and to The Venetians enter Bressia by
treachery.
let in the Venetians. This being executed, diverse of the contrary part, being
awaked forth of their sleep by the noise in the night, did in great fear
retire to the strongest place of the City where the Garrison (which Philip had
a few days before sent thither) did lodge: Oldrado Captain of those men at
Arms kept them back that night, as they would have run into the City which
they possessed,

Bressia has a Castle (as is already said) on the top of an hill, which does
command Description of Bressia.
the City, from whence two walls do sundry ways descend toward the
bottom; that which looks Eastward, enuironeth the City; and that which
goes athwart, cutting through certain houses and old buildings, separateth
the remnant of the hill, and is called the old Cittadell. But this old
Cittadell was so named three years before this happened, when as by Philips
commandment they made a wall joining to it, which was called the new. None
else in a manner dwelt in the Pietro Auogadres at the first Pietro Auagadres
chief of the enterprise.
report of the war entered the City with a great troop of Pesants of the
mountains, and that the Prince of Mantua followed him with two thousand horse,
and that at last Carmagnolla came thither with his troops. But in what manner
soever the City was taken, it is certain that so soon as the Venetian was
master thereof, he did suddenly fortify that side, where the wall separated
him from the enemy, fearing least they above should make some sudden sallie
upon them.

They say moreover, that at the same time as Bressia was taken, Nicolao D'Aeste
The Florentines overcome the Cremonois under the conduct of Nicholao D'Aeste.
Captain General to the Florentines in this War, entering the Territory of
Cremona, brought thence a very great booty. Philip, although at the first he
made no Alfonso had forsaken the Venetians and the other Confederates, did not
only give him hope to atchieue some great enterprise, but did wholly assure him
thereof. His first resolution then was to recover Bressia. And on a sudden he
commanded Francisco Sforza, whom he then called from Francisco Sforza is
commanded to go and relieve Bressia.
Flaminia to Milan with a few Horse to confer with him about the Tuscan
war, speedily to march to the succor of his people who were besieged within
the enclosure of Bressia. Other Authors say that Sforzas Camp lay then in
Lombardie, and not in Flaminia, where having notice of the loss of Bressia,
became with speed to meet Philip. But it is most certain that all the
Cauallerie which Philip had in Lombardie at that time, did not exceed two
thousand Horse; with which and certain

The way was still open to the besieged, so as of themselves, before they
received any supplies, they came from above and gave the Camp many hot alarmes.
It was thought at the first, that the Venetians having received some loss were
desirous to leave Bressia, and that they remained there till Sforza came
thither with his cauallerie, who was commanded by Philip to molest by all
means the rebellious Bressians, and especially to keep the Castle, if he
could not drive the Venetians thence, till such time as his forces were come
from Tuscanie into Lumbardy. But the Venetians General in the mean time,
having made a strong Rampire, environed with a great ditch, opposite to the
enemies Fort, dealt in such sort, as albeit at Sforzas Diverse skirmishes at
Bressia.
arrival many sallies were made, yet nevertheless, they did not greatly
terrify them: and they fought likewise at times near to the walls with
different events. But these skirmishes were light, and such as were usually
made upon the like occasions.

Carmagnolla considering the enemies attempts not to be so terrible as he had
in the beginning imagined: and that albeit Sforzas presence, and courageous
vigor, did make the enemy more bold and audacious, his furious sallies
nevertheless began daily more and more to cool: having left the guard of the
Rampire and trenches to Francisco Gonzaga, a brave and courageous person, he
went and assailed the gates, called the Piles: Where he omitted nothing that
was necessary for such an assault; and having approached with his engines of
battery, he would not suffer the enemy day nor night to be at rest.

But his watches and continual travail, did renew in him a weakness and
disease Carmagnolla being sick goes to the Bathes at Padua.
in the sinews, which had in former time seized on him at Treuiso by the fall
of an horse, whereupon he was enforced to go to the bathes at Padua.

It is reported that in his absence, all things were so carefully governed by
Francisco Gonzaga, as the Generals presence was no whit lamented: For albeit in
that mean Francisco Gonzaga a brave and courageous Captain.
time, the enemies made more sallies on the Venetians, than they were wont: he
was so far from being discouraged thereby, as on the contrary he did bravely
resist all their attempts, and did besides place Corps-du-guard without the
City to surprise those who were accustomed till then to carry victuals to the
besieged.

At this stay stood the affairs of Bressia, whilst Philip by diverse messengers
one after Philips forces were assembed into one body, that in sted of taking
the Castle and Rampires of Bressia, the Venetians might be enforced to leave
the City, land fall into the hazard of receiving some notable and unlooked for
overthrow. In the mean time then that they were busied speedily to prevent so
many of the enemies attempts, because they were said to be already on their
way, the Venetians having no town on the Po, nor near to the Alps, where
they might resist them, they sent to Nicolao d'Aeste who commanded great
numbers of the associates troops of horse, that breaking all the bridges and
ferries on the Modenois (where are the Appenine hills and the river of Po,)
that Victor Barbaro a Venetian Gentleman with six thousand choice soldiers as
well horse as foot, to hinder (if it might be) at Vignolles, which is the
midde way betwixt the Alps and the Po, the enemies passage. They did moreover
by letters entreat Carmagnolla, who continued still at the Bathes of Abbana to
return speedily to Bressia, for fear least Carmagnolla returns to the Army.
in his absence the Commonwealth might receive some loss. The which he did:
and being returned to the camp, he did in such sort stay the enemies
boldness, as they durst not only make any more sallies, but they did suffer
themselves to be braued and provoked even in their own Fort.

In the mean time Philips forces came and encamped on the Bolognian territory
on the banks thereof thirty days. At the last having made a bridge at
Percicete they did on May day by day-breake pass the river near to Scultenna.
The bridge was made in this manner. The enemies took twenty great Tons of
one length and bigness, binding them together very straightly, and being made
fast to trees on both sides the river, they laid upon them great hurdles of
Ozier twigs, which they covered with small shrubs and gravel, by which means
they did easily pass over their cauallerie.

Having crossed the river, the enemies by their sudden cries did so greatly
amaze the Venetians who were encamped in the neighbor Forest, as none durst
present themselves on the rivers banks. Mirandola and Concorda, two Cities
near Guido Fabrianico being sent with a squadron of horse to reenforce the
troops of Barbaro, arriving inconsiderately on the same side of the river
which the enemy had passed, and thinking that the noise came from the
Venetians camp, was cut in pieces with all his cauallerie. Some thought that
Nicolao Certain venetian troops are defeated by the Army of Philip.
d'Aeste might easily have stopped the enemies passage, but that he would not do
it, for fear least the whole burden of the war should fall upon his
territories. And thus as if he had not been able to stop the enemy, he
suffered him to pass on without any fight.

Philip fearing in the mean time least the Florentines should seize on those
places Martin, who was resident at the same time in Bolognia. Two months were
almost spent betwixt the revolt of Bressia, and the return of the Army from
Tuscanie. Whereupon it was plainly perceived, that if it had come sooner, or
if that forthwith after it was come they had fortified the Castle and the other
Rampires, (as they might easily have done) the Venetians would have been
enforced to leave the City.

Angelo Pergulan who brought back the enemies troops into Lombardie, being
come within two mile near to the Castle, did there encampe and fortify the
Carmagnolla, (whose counsels and designs only tended to take the Castle) would
not suffer them within the City to attempt any thing.

The Venetians in the mean time were not idle in so great danger, but
forthwith The Venetians send new supplies to Bressia.
made a new levy of soldiers, and sent them in have to Bressia, to assure
their forces. The Florentines likewise with the other associates sent supplies
thither with diverse Captains, among whom was Nicolao Tollentino, a man besides
his great exploits in war, most expert in the besieging of Cities. He having
viewed the Venetians Fort with that of the enemies, told them that the Castle
would not be taken, though they should besige it never so long, unless by a
Rampire and trench made round about

A double ditch was made every where of equal bigness, with a rising in the
midst of thirty foot high, and by how much the two Dikes advanced forward, A
Rampire builded against the Castle of Bressia.
by so much more did the furthest points of the rising show higher by the clods
and turfes which were heaped one upon another in form of a wall. The Rampire
followed after, being strengthened on all sides with many wooden towers very
near

This Rampire had besides, twelve gates well fortified with strong towers, to
issue forth upon the enemy when need should require. Some say that the news
of this Fort newly begun being brought to Philip, one of his courtiers said
presently, that the Duke ought to wish nothing so much, as that the Venetians
would but continue such a work, wherein they would not only consume al their
wealth, but as much as Xerxes was reported to have had, before they should end
it.

Pergulan in the mean time was not idle. For to divert the enemy from his
purpose, he entered furiously on the Mantuan Territory, putting all to fire and
sword; yet for all that he could not cause the Venetian to give over his new
work. And not being able by any means to draw him thence, he brought his
camp near to the Fort, and fortified it on every side. But he could not be
persuaded by Nicholao Picinino a great warrior, nor by Sforza, and other great
Captains of Philips Army, to give in upon the new imperfect fortifications,
telling them often times that he Philip, who had given him the honor of
General; and to be assured of his intent.

The Fort in the mean time being defended, the Venetian General encamped
between the enemies Fort, and the rising of the new-built Rampire, having in
his Army, (with the troops of the associates) fourteen thousand horse, and
ten thousand The number of the Venetians Army.
foot, and besides Carmagnolla the General diverse noble personages; namely,
Giouanni Francisco Gonzaga, Lodouico Sanseuerino, Paulo vrsini, Lodouico
Vermio, and Lorenzo Contemoli. And under Nicholao Tolentino diverse ancient
Captains and old Soldiers, who had a long time followed the war. The most
part of the footmen were placed in Garrison upon the rising, and they were
expressly commanded not to

The enemies camp consisted of twelve thousand horse and eight thousand foot,
The number of Philips Army.
beside those fourteen hundred foot which Francisco Sforza had left within
the Castle and Citadell, when, as at the arrival of Pergulan he came to his
Camp. Four great Captains did command these foot companies that were left
in the Castle and the Citadell, being denominated after the names of their
native Towns, Bressan, Plaisantin, Bergamese, and the most noted of them all
Andrew of Treuiso.

Carmagnolla, in regard of the great number of men that he had, evermore found
work for those four Captains. Some times he reared ladders against the
Walls, and then on a sudden would make approaches with his engines of war,
being assured though it did no present good, yet at least wise that show of an
assault would expose the enemies to the mercy of the Venetian Archers (of whom
there were great numbers in the Camp) until that their number should be so
diminished, as it would be afterward an easy matter to overcome them. This
determined overthrow of the enemy did not deceive him. For within a short
space, more than a thousand of

Now because there was some likelihood, that the Soldiers by taking some
little An assault given to the Castle of Bressia.
pains might with ladders easily enter on that side; the assault being
resolved on, the Magistrate of the City promised the Soldiers this reward,
That he who first should mount the Wall should have four hundred Crowns; the
second three hundred; the third two hundred; and a hundred to each of those ten
who should At last, the enemies after great loss remained masters of their
Walls, and were ready to endure as long a siege as the Venetian would, had not
famine which overcomes all things, afflicted, and enforced them to crave
truce for ten days; conditionally An agreement made with the Garrison in the
Castle.
if within that time they were relieved by Philip with sufficient aid, to
defend the Fort, otherwise (that time being expired) to leave that place to the
Venetians, and depart thence with their Arms.

This Treaty being thus concluded; the Soldiers in the Rampire were commanded
to keep good guard; and to watch more carefully than before, to the end that
no supply of men and victuals might from any place come to the besieged. In
the mean time those of Philips Camp did fret with choler, and stuck not
aloud

Pergulan made answer, That it was no reason in that manner to expose the
Soldiers to their deaths against an Armed enemy, who kept himself looked up
in his Fort; that it was much better (for that present) that the Garrison
should come forth of the Castle safe and sound, and leave the remnant to the
enemy. That it might so fall out, that having received those supplies which
they expected, they might assail Picinino there upon being bold and sudden,
said, That it Boldness of Picinino one of Philips Captains
was ill advised, to give over a place of safety, and afterward to fight for
it in plain field without any advantage. But if there were any man which
desired the good and commodity of Duke Philip, or would be held worthy of
such an enterprise, he should follow him upon the enemy; and having so
spoken, he departed on a sudden in a rage forth of the assembly, and as he went
forth Francisco Sforza promised to follow him. But whilst he ordered his
Soldiers to march against the Venetians, Sforza stayed behind to persuade
Pergulan and the rest to take Arms.

The Venetian Captain, whose Soldiers were well instructed for such an
enterprise: Picinino perceiving that no man followed, made a stand, blaming the
want of courage of his fellows, and without other fight returned to the Camp.
Those in the Castle perceiving the retreat of their Countrie-men, did abandon
the Gates of Pills and Garzette, and retired into the Citadell, where they
will fully held out for certain days after the time of truce was expired: but
at the last being vanquished by famine, they did not give over, but left that
place to the Venetians.

The Soldiers coming to assail the Castle, the Plaizantine presented
himself with fifty brave Soldiers. The Venetians in few days space, did so
batter the walls, Philip having notice, he sent word to the Plaizantine and the
rest, that (their lives being saved) they should The Castle of Bressia yielded
to the Uenetians
leave the place to the enemy. In this sort the Venetian entered the Castle
seven months after the taking of Bressia.

Carmagnolla being freed from the siege, and commanded to go against the
strong Cities and Towns there about, he received on their faith and homage the
Salodians, with all the inhabitants of the Lake of La Garda, which lies
toward the Bressans Country, before ever he took Arms against them. Soon
after at the arrival of the Popes Nuncio, they began to talk of Peace; and
Ambassadors from each side were sent to this end to Ferrara, where the
assembly was held: which was concluded Philip should friendly quit to the
Venetians, besides the Peace between Philip and the Venetians.
vale Commonica, Bressia with her confines, together with that part of
CremonaTerritorie which is contingent to the River of Olio in the Bressian,
being 40000. paces in length: and That the Duke of Sauoie should keep all that
he had taken.

The articles being thus agreed upon on either side, and sealed with the seal
of Philip and the rest, the Nuncio for the better assurance of them would
needs carry them to Milan, where finding Philip (who complained of the wrong
that was done Philip his complaints to the Popes Nuncio.
him, accusing sometime the pride of the Florentines, who had thrown him
headlong into this War, and then the Venetians covetousness, who not being
satisfied with taking Bressia from him, did likewise seize on a part of the
Cremonois,) he had much to do by fair speeches and exhortations, to cause him
to condescend to that which had been agreed upon: Which the Nuncio having at
last obtained, The Venetian Commissioners ill dealt with at Milan.
so soon as he perceived the Venetian Commissioners, (who were come thither
according to the Articles to receive the Towns) to be despightfully used in
his

Some thought then that this sudden change did proceed from the hope he had
to make an atonement with the Duke of Sauoy; and others think that the
entreaties and exhortations of those of Milan were the cause thereof, who so
soon as they had heard of the conditions of peace, came to him in the name of
the commonwealth, and spoke in this manner.

The Oration of the Milanois to Philip.
YOur subjects of Milan (most excellent Prince) come to you to obey your
commandments: and there is nothing how grievous soever to be borne (so as it
be profitable for your greatness) which does not seem light and sweet to
them. For we are all of this mind, that if ever heretoyore we have been
ready, to do you all service which a good Prince can expect of a most
obedient City, we are certainly much more ready now at this present: and we
may freely speak it with so much more affection, as we have seen you in this
wretched time most to distrust our forces and means, or else to be ignorant of
them, when for one injury received in have from the Venetians, you are so
mightily discouraged, and transported beyond your self, as you have shamefully
given over to the covetous enemy, that which the hazard of war had not yet
taken from you. For what else mean you by giving over to the Venetians all the
strong Towns of the Country of Bressia, and a great part of the Cremona
Territory, with the shore of the River Oglio, but only to present the City of
Cremona to the Usurper of Bressia? Is it not a means more to animate this
audacious enemy, who has along time aspired to the entire Dominion of
Lombardie? and to embolden him to enterprise greater matters? For if your
affairs were so desperate (which God forbid) that you were of necessity to
give place to the enemy, and to grant him all, we would then consent with you
to attribute it to fortune and to time. But seeing you have a mighty Army,
with which the enemy being often provoked durst never fight, what may we else
think has moved you to embrace so dishonest a peace, but only your fear that
you have not sufficient means to entertain so great an Army? But you have
wealth enough as well of the public as of your particular Subjects of Milan,
of whom when you please you may freely dispose. You have besides a very great
and rich reuennue, sufficient to entertain not only those troops which you
have at this present, but others greater than they, if need require. Make use
then of your subjects means which lie open to you, and do not suffer the
Venetian under color of liberty, to come and subiugate the Milanois with the
residue of Lombardie which does obey you, but rather try how we stand affected
to your State, and to that great liberty which your Dominion promises us. For
we are ready in respect of that not only to expose our goods, but our lives
likewise where need shall be.

Philip gave them a very gentle answer in few words, laying the whole blame
Philips answer to those of Milan.
of the War on the Florentines, and the Venetians, who by their ouer-weening
and treachery had forcibly drawn him into this War. But because he was of
necessity either to observe the contract or to renew the War, as they
counseled him, he told them that he was desirous to know in what sort they
could assist him: willing them to depart, and to confer with the people about
it, to the end that he might be assured on what ground he might again
undertake so great a War.

The matter was debated in a general assembly of the Citizens, who concluded
to give the Duke this answer, That if he would suffer the Milanois to gather
the The Milanois offer to Philip.
Cities reuennue, they would furnish him while the War continued in
Lombardie, with ten thousand Horse, and as many Foot.

It was thought that Philip would have granted it, had it not been for one of
his Courtiers; who knowing this Prince to be naturally fearful and
suspicious, wished him to consider what he did: For, to permit Citizens to
gather the reuennues of

Philip lent a willing ear to this aduertizement. And being resolved not to
accept Philip changing his mind: The Milanois (...) cold.
those conditions which should be propounded to him, nor yet openly to refuse
them, because he would not by a scornful answer displease his Citizens, he
sent word to those who were appointed to come to him, to report to Giouanni
Riccio whatsoever they had to say to himself. This did by little and little
cool the former affection of the Milanois, and being thus cooled, the
business remained imperfect. Philip hoping by art and subtlety to draw from
them that sum so liberally Philip renews the War with the Ven^tians.
offered, if they would not give it gratis, renewed the War; first of all
prohibiting to yield up those strong Towns lately promised by the treaty, and
soon after making a furious entry on the Mantuan Territory.

The Venetians aduertized by letters from the Popes Nuncio, that Philip wholly
tended to War, being thereby justly incensed, they renewed the war with
greater fury than before. But because whilst the treaty of peace lasted,
they had dismissed a great part of their troops, they forth with made new
leuies from all places: And when they understood that the enemy made
incursions on the Mantuan; the Senate forthwith decreed to renew the war with
all speed. First, they renewed Amadeo Duke of Sauoy who in the precedent war
did in a manner no memorable matter, under promise of doing better hereafter
entered into the league. The Marquis of Montferrat, and Orlando Paluicin, who
then possessed diverse A new league against Philip.
Towns in Lombardie, would needs be registered in that new alliance. The like
did the Bandetti of Genoa, promising to molest the enemies on the Sea*coast,
who being forsaken by King Alfonso were unable of themselves to do any thing
at Sea.

Philip, albeit he perceived so many to take Arms against him at one time, was
no whit discouraged; neither did he show himself slow in assembling his
forces, The exploits of Philip.
a Castle on the Parmesan, seated at the mouth of the Tarro: which the
Venetians had for a time possessed. Likewise presuming on the great numbers of
his Infanterie, he made incursions on the mountains of the Bressan Territory,
and at the same instant he forraged the plains with his Cauallerie, under the
conduct of Pergulan. The third and most fortunate exploit was against the
Bandetti of Genoa, under the command of Francisco Sforza. Thomaso Fregosa (who
being followed with Sforza's coming, had commanded his brother, a courageous
young man, to tarry for the enemy with part of his troops at the entry of
the Valley of the Swine.

The Florentine forces in the mean space having received no pay from Florence
of along time, began by little to drop away, and having neither victuals nor
command, they left their ensigns so bare and unfurnished of men, as Fregoza
could number but eight hundred in his Camp. The which being by spies reported
in the The (...) (...) (...) Geno^ are (...)*
City, presuming on Sforza his coming, who was said not to be far off, the
Citizens made a sudden sallie upon Fregosa's troops, which at the first they
defeated. Thomaso and Baptista his brother with certain others escaped to
Rechia; the residue were taken, and their Camp stuffed with great wealth was
taken and spoiled. And thus by Sforza his arrival, as if a more fortunate
Star had shined on the Genoueses, their affairs till then wholly ruined by
war begun again to prosper. Pergulan, Picinino with his troops drew near
the River Po: who having caused the nauall Army to come to Casal-Major, a
City of the Cremonois, he did besiege Casal-ma^or taken by Picinino.
it by Land and Water, and enforced it to yield. Then, crossing the River he
seized on the City of Brisseles on the Po, by treachery: But the Castle could
not Brisseles taken*
be won.

In this sort the enemy began the War. But the Venetians slept not in the
mean time: For they likewise sent forth a mighty nauall Army whereof
Francisco Bembo was General. Now upon the report that it was gone up the River
Po, as far as the Mantuan Territory: Eustace of Pauia, Captain of the Enemies
nauall Army Picinino was of a contrary opinion, and would have the siege to
be continued. The Captains being divided by this diversity of opinions, the
siege of the Castle of Brisseles went forward more slowly; by means whereof
those who were sent from Bressia to relieve it, did enter into it without any
impeachment.

Those of Brisseles presuming on this supply, and on the coming of the
Venetians Philips force^ driven ^orth of Brisseles.
nauall Army, did recover the Town, and expelled the enemy, who left many
warlike engines and instruments of battery behind him. Certain troops were
speedily sent from Brisseles against Eustace, who was encamped a little beneath
Casal; Bembo having there ouer-taken him, did on a sudden embattaile his
Soldiers. The Galions on both sides were near to one an other: so do they
term these Vessels, being like to those which the Greeks call Dromons. This
kind of Vessel is long, the belly thereof being nothing like to a ships
bottom, but in a manner all flat, covered sometimes with two or three floores
of plan^ks: at the top of the mast there is a place made where ten or more
Soldiers, if need be, may fight. When one of these lies at an Ankor ready
for fight, it resembles a well-rampierd Fort.

Bembo placed eight of these vessels fast joined together in the foremost
rancks, and commanded the residue of the Fleet closely to follow them. The
enemy did Bembo presently accounted those who had passed on beyond him for
lost* and brought his ships into a round compass, so as in a manner he filled
the whole current of the stream, to the end that with more courage and less
difficulty, he might assail those which had passed by. Picinino stood with
his troops on the River

Eustace then thought too late perceived himself nothing equal neither in
strength nor dexterity to the Venetians. whereupon perceiving the enemy
busied in defeating The venetians nauall Army obtaines the victory.
those whom he had environed, on a sudden he turned the Prowes of the
reresidue of his fleet, and went a pace toward Cremona: where being arrived,
and fearing that which came to pass, to wit, That the Venetians would soon
follow, he disfurnished all his ships. Those who at the first were enclosed,
perceiving the flight of their fellows, made toward the Land, and leaping on
shore, forsook their vessels. Bembo seizing on them, pursued the enemy,
whom he could not overtake. Being come near to Cremona he was enforced to
fight after a new manner.

Philip near to that place had caused three Castles to be made in the midst
of Fortes builded by Philip in the midst of the River.
the River, which did in such sort shut up the channel of the Po, as he verily
imagined that no nauall Army, how mighty soever, could come to besiege the
City, or pass on farther into Lumbardie. Two of them were opposite to the
City and builded on Piles which appeared above the water and the banckes. The
third was builded in the midst of the water of a more gross substance with
so small a space on both sides, as no ship could pass either on the right hand
or left without being greatly molested with arrow-shot. Bembo resolved to
assail that which was farthest from the City, and with ease took it: Then
coming to the other which The fortes taken by the venetians.
was nearer to it, he became likewise master thereof with like facility: but
the assault

Bembo being victorious caused these Castles to be burned, and the Piles where
on they were builded to be plucked up, fearing least the enemies should seize on
them, and make the like use of them. But the Venetian abusing his victory
landed part of his Soldiers and Mariners in that small space of ground which
lies betwixt Cremona and the Po, not having sent before to discover the place:
whereupon Christofero A troop of venetian Mariners defeated by Philips forces.
Lauellano Governor of the City, making a sudden sallie upon them, did put
Lauellanos troops coming upon these men, did in a moment kill three hundred
of them.

Bembo being angry at the Pilots for landing them without his knowledge, took
them in again, and commanded the fleet to row up against the stream, and
having taken the Fort, which was on the very point of the Rivers Po and Adda,
he went up against the stream of the River Thesina, and came to an Ankor near
to Pauia. This City was in times past called Ticina in regard of the river
Thesina which is near to it. But finding that place to be desert and
abandoned, fearing some ambushe, he returned Lauellanos Soldiers, he might be
recompensed for the same: But about the same time Nicolao Guerrieri was come to
the City with a troop of horse, which being A skirmish near to Cremona where
the venetian had the ^orst.
mingled with Lauellanos troops, would have more rudely entertained the
Venetian than before, had not Bembo who at the first perceived diverse of his
Soldiers to drop down, caused the retreat to be sounded in time.

This happened on the water. But on the Land, Summer drawing on, and the
troops which the Venetian had then levied being ready on the Mantuan,
Carmagnolla being departed from Padua, having from Lanzisa to Salles crossed
the Lake Alberico Count of Cunies, and Petrino of Dortonne, surnamed the Turk,
leaving Ottolenga (where they lay in Garrison eight miles distant from Bressia)
came and made a sudden incursion even to the very gates, and did greatly
amaze the Bressians, and carried away four hundred victuailers prisoners who
were taken in the Suburbs, when as Pietro Lauretano Governor of Bressia having
intelligence of the enemies being there, sallied forth of the City on
horseback unarmed at Saint Nazares gate, where finding many without order who
would willingly have gone forth, h^ did sharply rebuke them, and would not
suffer it, nvtil Paulo Vrsino who was within the City was armed, unto whom
having given three hundred horse next at hand he willed him to lead them by a
shorter way toward Ottolenga, and that in the midway he should ambush
himself, and presently the residue of the Cauallerie to Petrino with a hundred
and fifty horse were taken prisoners, the residue were put to route.

The very same day, Carmagnolla entered Bressia, who was much discontented that
the first exploit was executed by any but himself; And having assembled
whatsoever was needful for the wars, captains and Soldiers being sent for
from all places, the Venetians General departed from Bressia on the fifteenth
day of March with fourteen thousand horse and six thousand foot, and encamped
first The number of the Venetians Army. Carmagnolla before Monteclaro.
at Monteclaro where he tarried till his other Troops were arrived with his
warlike engines and instruments of battery. Certain days being spent rather
in expecting his own forces than in besieging the Town, which was strong in
situation and well fortified, Carmagnolla thinking it but lost time to besiege
it, raised his Camp and marched directly toward Ottolenga.

A thousand horse of Duke Philips were within it: The Venetian being in great
hope to take both them and the City, came and encamped with great noise near
to the walls: But not long before Guido Taurello, Christofero Lauellano, and
Nicolao Guerrieri were come thither with their Cauallerie: These men without
any noise kept themselves a while enclosed in the City, that they might more
commodiously make a sallie upon the enemy. The Venetians being come before the
City, most A f^rious salli^ of the besieged.
others fell a sleep, expecting nothing less than the enemies sallie. Some of
Nani Strossi his troops whom the Marquis of Ferrara according to the
conuention had sent to the Camp with four hundred horse, kept the guard: upon
these men, towares the euenning Philips horse-troupes gave a furious onset:
Strossi did bravely sustain their assaults: but being too obstinate in
defending that place, and being oppressed by the great number of the enemies
and his own Soldiers he fell down dead. But the alarm being given over all
the Camp; some being half a sleep, and others uncertain under what
Ensigns or Captains to place themselves, and diverse running inconsideratly
upon the enemy with their Arms were ignominiously defeated: and this
amazement continued until Carmagnolla being followed by a brave troop of
Soldiers marched foreward with the Ensigns. For then, the Venetians numbers
increasing at the sound of the Trumpets and Drums, the Blondus makes mention
hereof, who (as it is reported) was the same time in Bressia, and perhaps in
the Camp.

But we read in the commentaries of Mariot Montano who was present in all
these exploits, that they fought the same day with equal fortune, and that the
Venetians sustained no greater loss in that fight, than of a few who by reason
of the Carmagnolla ever after encamped after another manner. For having two
thousand Pioners in his Camp to make plain the ways for the munition Wagons
and engines, and to dig Trenches and Rampires, he divided them into bands, and
to every band appointed a Captain to command it, who should make sure the
dislodging of the Camp, and the carriage of the engines of war. And he
commanded them besides that so soon as the Camp should be set, to place all
their carriages in form of a Crescent or half Moon, which should in manner of
a Rampire enclose the Camp, to the end it might serve in sted of a strong Fort,
against the enemies sallies and incursions.

Determining still to encampe in this manner, he departed thence, and albeit he
left behind him diverse Towns and Fortes of the Bressian country which were
possessed Carmagnolla raises his camp from before Ottolenga.
by Philips soldiers, he resolved nevertheless, because he would not spend
much time in surprising them, roundly to besiege Cremona, imagining that the
taking

The River of Oglio which divides the Cremonois from the Bressian and Mantuan,
has two bridges well fortified, the one more high and near to the mountains
of the Bergamuse, and the other at the bottom of the plain called Bina. The
Venetian with great fury assailed this, as being lesser, and therefore more
easy, to the end that from thence he might have free passage from the Mantuan
territory to his camp if he should chance to pass the river. The
neighborhood of the Po did likewise move him thereunto: By which he might with
less labor and danger have all things brought to him which was needful for a
siege. Having in four

Philip having notice of the enemies great numbers, (for the Venetians Army
The venetians Army much increased.
was of eighteen thousand horse, and eight thousand footmen, six thousand of
the associates soldiers, not accounting the soldiers boys, landresses, and
other troops of followers of the camp: besides, the nauall Army conducted by
Bembo, was not far from thence, amounting to more than two thousand men) was
astonished at their great attempts, and began to fear and doubt his own
estate. Therefore leaving his former wilfulness, he called for the Citizens of
Milan (whereunto he could never before be induced) and told them that the time
was now come for to know who Philips speech to the Milanois.
in so dangerous a time to use many words to acquaint them with his meaning:
That all those who did mean to preserve their goods, should go along with him
to help to quench that fire, and that he did not wish them all in general to
go with him, but such as were fit for the wars: He caused the same to be
published by a trumpet through the whole City, and then departing from Milan,
he marched toward the enemy.

Great numbers of the Milanois, and those of Pauia followed him to the wars.
He encamped betwixt Cremona and the enemies, within three miles of the
Venetian: He had before then in his Army twelve thousand horse, and half as
many footmen, and he brought with him as well of his friends and associates as
of others, Philip comes to the Army* The number of both Armies.
had two such mighty Armies ready to fight one with another. The presence of
Philip had greatly animated his soldiers to enterprise some great exploit, so
that they craved nothing more than to fight, they wholly desired it and with
loud voice did cheerfully beg it. Then being embattelled they marched
courageously against the enemy. The Venetian was at the same time encamped at
Suma, and his camp was not fortified with trenches nor Rampires, but environed
only with wagons,

The enemy coming to that place made a stand, expecting that the Venetian in
regard of his great numbers would fight beyond the bridge. But the Venetian
attended him in order of battle, on the plain near to his camp,
determining to join if the enemy came foreward. Pergulan and Taurello
counseled him not to pass the bridge; but the bold counsel of Sforza and
diverse others was followed, A battle betwixt the venetians and Philip
who were of opinion to march directly against the enemy. These being
commanded to march before, and the fight already begun, all the rest
followed in order to the battle, a few excepted who stayed behind for the
guard of the bridge, to the end that thereby the retreat to their Camp might
be assured: They fought from noone till night, running with such fury and
vehemency one upon another, as on a sudden there arose a great dust like to a
black cloud which did in a manner blind them, by means whereof they did
inconsideratly throw themselves into danger: Eyes were to small purpose in that
darkness, they Great disorder in the battle by reason of the dust which
blinded the soldiers
only knew one another by their voices: the fight was doubtful, and the
adventures of the combatants uncertain. Every one might justly boaste in
fighting to have come even to the enemies Ensiges, or to have performed that
day some generous exploit* Some say that diverse of Philips Army thinking in
that confusion to retire to their fellows who kept the bridge, did never
perceive that they were in the enemies Camp, till they came to the wagons: at
the last* the retreit being sounded both sides retired without any advantage.

Carmagnolla was wont to say that he had taken that day more of his own
soldiers than of his enemies, and that the enemy might sundry times have
taken him if he had been known. The same likewise happened to Sforza, Picinino
and diverse other Philip being glad for that which had been done in his
presence, and The Dukes of Sauoy and Montferrat m^ke incursions on the Milanois
imagining that he had won the victory, because he had not lost the
battle, being speedily called home by sundry messengers, because the
cauallerie of the Dukes of Sauoy and Montferrat entering by Vercelles on the
Milanois made incursions even to the gates of Milan: he forth with departed,
having dismissed those forces which he brought with him, whom he willed (if
they so pleased) to go home to their houses.

The Venetian perceiving Cremona to be strongly manned (for excepting those
troops whom Philip had dismissed, the residue of the Army after the battle
was retired thither) imagining that a City so well fortified would not easily
be forced, came and encamped at Casall Major. (for so is it called) Bembo with
the nauall Army Francisco Sforza with a brave troup of soldiers pursued
Carmagnolla in his march, but perceiving his Army to be so well guarded and
circkled in on all sides, and being loath to attempt any thing rashly for fear
of ambushes, he went back again, and without any difficulty recovered Bries,
where he threw those whom he found in Garrison there into the River, because
the Venetians not long before had done as much to their soldiers.

Casall for a time was in vain besieged by the Venetian by land and water, by
reason of the strong Garrison that lay in it. Antonio Pisani a valiant Captain
was Governor there: who day and night keeping good guard on the Rampire with
four hundred brave soldiers, did by his providence frustrate all the enemies
attempts. The venetians take Casal Mayor.
fall down into the uttermost ditches. The Venetians having by sundry
assaults attempted to enter in at that place, and the Garrison of the City
being repulsed withgreat slaughter, the inhabitants stubbornness being
daunted, they were received by them unknown to Pisani.

The Venetians General being proud of this victory did determine to make a
bridge over the River of Adda, to the end to send his troops to spoil and
rauage the Milanois. But he wanted victuals, and it behooved him to provide
for that.

Philip in the mean time perceiving his Captains to be divided among
themselves, every one thinking himself equal both in valor and reputation
with the best, and by that means refusing to give place to one another either
in counsel or authority, in regard whereof there was some likelihood that his
affairs might receive some notable loss if it were not speedily remedied, he
made Carolo Malateste General of his whole Army. It is thought that in this
choice of General he had not so much respect to the valor of the man, as to
his wisdom and Nobility Carolo Malateste General of Philips Army.
in blood. Some say that he did it, because that ever since Pandolfo his
government, he had been greatly beloved of the Bressians* and that he did
hope by his means the City would revolt from the Venetians. The Venetian in
this mean time was gone from Casal. And Carolo having accepted the charge was
not idle, but leading his Army through by-waies he did opportunely frustrate
the enemies

At the last, the Venetian came and encamped before Maclodia, (called by the
The Venetians besiege Macale.
vulgar Macale) a City of the Cr^monois. Philips Captains and his whole Army
did hardly digest the enemies boldness, and did greatly blame their own
patience and their Generals, saying, that there were many Cities in the
Cremonois and Bergamese besides left by the enemy which they might with more
safety besiege, and yet nevertheless he had encamped before Macale, as if
the taking of that Town would much avail him; but that he did it in his own
and their disgrace: and therefore if he desired to purchase the reputation of
true General of an Army he should do well to take from himself and them who
under him fought for Philip that Diverse opinions in Philips Army
publicly over the whole Camp. Sforza and Picinino desired a battle:
Pergulan and Taurello contradicted it, saying that they were to deal with an
enemy, who might more easily be vanquished by temporizing than by fight: That
a battle was that which the Venetian General demanded: That they were most
assured that the same day as Philips forces (who were less in number and good
fortune to the Venetians) should fight with them, Philips affairs would
altogether receive some notable loss^. Carolo did hear them, but he fixed his
eyes on Sforza and Picinino whom he was wont publicly to call his Hectors:
He did besides willingly give ear to the residue of the Army, who craved
that they might come to

It is reported that those two who more courageously than the rest were of
opinion to fight, being requested by Carolo to deliver their opinions whether
it were necessary to assail the enemy, made this answer. That he among
many other was given unto them for their Commander, and that it was his Office
and not theirs, to command what he would have to be done. And that if of
himself he knew not what was fittest, he should do well to follow the advice
of others: For as concerning themselves they were both ready to march in what
rank he should please either in the first or last, because no man does ever
undertake great and difficult matters, so much at the peril of another man as
at his own.

Carolo at last condiscended to a battle, and commanded Taurello and Pergulan
with strong supplies to remain for the guard of the Camp, Lauellano and Sforza
to fight in the first ranks, and Picinino to follow the Ensigns with the
residue of the troops. But Pergulan and Taurello, thinking they had great
wrong to be placed out of the danger of the battle, because they had been of
opinion not to fight with the enemy, did run to the foremost ranks, and
spoke aloude, that they would with all their power repulse that mischief and
loss which by their counsel they could not divert. Carolo granted it, and by
changing the ranks, commanded Picinino to stand ready with the succors, and
he first marched against the enemy with the troops of light Horse, as he
had determined in the beginning. He commanded Taurello to follow him in the
fore-ward, and Sforza and Pergulan to come after, and so the residue in order.
The way was plain, though somewhat crooked, from Philips Army marches in
battle against the Venetians.
Pompiano, from whence the Philippians came, even to the Venetians camp,
without any hedge or ditch, because in Winter all those places are Wet and
Moi^t, and in Summer full of Thorns and Shrubs; and near thereunto is a goodly
fruitful plain on which to march, because on the forepart thereof the
mar^hes are never dry: the herbs and grass in diverse places being dry in
Summer, it made a way both dry and beaten, but the paths were very crooked,
and the Venetian had fortified some of them with deep Trenches, and others
with shallow Dikes. Taurello having viewed these places in part fortified, and
partly abandoned, turning toward Sforza and the rest, he cried out aloude, and
said, that God was Almighty, but that no man could divert the overthrow which
did that day threaten Philip and his Captains.

So soon as the Venetian General perceived the enemies to approach, he
commanded Tollentino to go with two thousand Horse to the marsh which lies
near Carolo at the very first had been environed and defeated, for that he
had inconsiderately sent his light Horse before, and a great part of his
Footmen, had not Taurello, Sforza, and some others with the Ensigns, forthwith
come to his aid, who after they had repulsed the enemies forces, made the
fight in that place equal. Then there began on either side a cruel
bickering: But the Footmen who were hidden by the way in the bushes and shrubs,
did in short space with their darts and arrows make a great slaughter of
Horse. Taurello Carolo to the fight, being assailed on every side, made a
retreat, and escaped on the other side of the marshes: In the mean time in
the rereward a great shout was made (for Tollentino was come thither.) Pergulan
retired forth of the battle, perceiving that all was lost: Sforza followed
him with his troops in a manner whole. But Picinino being enforced to fight in
Front, in Flanque, and behind, had much to do to get forth of the midst of
the press; but at the last by the valor of his Soldiers he escaped to a
place of safety: Then they began openly to fly, and great slaughter was
made every where. Carolo was taken, and with him eight thousand Horse and
Foot, as many of the one as of the other. Some say that six thousand Footmen
were taken, and three thousand Horse.

It is thought that Carmagnolla had at the same time means to have driven
Philip from his state, if he had kept the prisoners, and had forthwith after
the battle marched against the enemy, but he knew not how to make use of
this victory, or rather would not do it. Being returned to the Camp the night
following he set all the prisoners at liberty, not being entreated so to do,
which did purchase him the ill will of the Venetians: Some thought that it was
the chief cause of his death. The chief caus^ of Carmagnolla his death.
Three hundred more being brought unto him the morrow after, whom he had not
seen the night before, he gave them leave to depart likewise, saying aloude
that

Upon report of the loss of the battle, all the Towns and Forts of the
Bressan did freely yield to the Venetians, excepting that of the new Orges,
which being The Uenetian^ take the new Orges.
besieged by the Venetian was in few days taken by force: But whilst this
siege lasted, Philip made have to renew his Army, and in short time made great
leuies of armor and horse, in regard the Commanders, and the most part of the
Army were escaped. There were at the same time two Artificers in Milan who did
undertake in short space to arm as many thousands of men, as were reported to
have been taken in that battle.

Sforza and Picinino were not in the mean time idle; For joining with those
that Picinino did moreover attempt by night to recover Pontoglio, but it was in
vain. Captain Bressan a very famous Gentleman died at this enterprise, being
surprised by the Townes-men.

Although Philip perceived his affairs to be reduced to great extremity, yet
nevertheless Philip bath recourse to the Emperor Sigismond.
he did not omit all possible means to stop the Venetians, pursuing the course
of their victory. He sent to the Emperor Sigismond (unto whom he had in
former times been as great an enemy as to the Venetians) to entreat his aid,
and that he would send Brunora of Escalla with an Army into Italy against the
Venetians. He did afterward practice with Amadeo Duke of Sauoy, with whom
(having quitted Verseill unto him) he did not only make a league, but entered
into his affinity, taking his Daughter to Wife, whom he never touched after
the first night. He Philip marries the Duke of Sauois Daughter.
did moreover entreat Pope Martin to use all means to disvnite the Florentines
from the Venetians. But the more he went about by these means to raise
himself, Angelo Pergulano died within a while after, who was followed by
Fabricio Campana, and diverse other notable persons who died one after another.
At the last Visconte being afflicted with this latter loss, consented to peace.

This business was for a time debated at Ferrara in the presence of the Popes
Legate, where peace was granted on these conditions: That the Venetians should
Peace betwixt the Venetians and Philip.
have Bressia, with all the Bressian and Bergamese Territory, and that part of
the Bergamese which stretches toward the River Adice, together with all the
Castles which they then held upon the Cremonese. The Florentines had little or
nothing given to them, but only this, that it might be lawful for them to
fix their own Philip to return home to their houses, notwithstanding that
the Florentines did earnestly sue in their behalf; yet nevertheless he
promised to reckon them in the number of his friends. Carmagnolla received his
wife and children, and Palace, which he had most



The end of the tenth Book of the second Decad.
THE FIRST BOOK OF THE THIRD DECAD OF THE HISTORY Venice.
The Contents of the first Book of the third Decad.
THe cause of the second war in Lombardie. The forces of GVENESIO of Luca arc
on a sudden defeated by NICHOLAO surnamed STELLA. A treacherous attempt made
on the person of Prince FOSCARI by ANDREA CONTARENI. FRANCISCO SFORZA his
journey into Tuscanie, where he restores those of Luca to their liberty.
NICHOLAO PICININO passethinto Tuscanie against the Florentines PHILIP puts
SFORZA in hope of a future alliance. The Turks take Thessalonica on the Sea
Thermaic. A great frost round about Venice, where Carts went upon the waters.
The Florentines care and diligence to preserve Pisa. War renewed against
PHILIP. upon the Cremonese. The Venetians nauall Army is put to rout upon the
Po. The Venetians defeat the Genoueses upon the Rapalitane Sea. LAVRETAN
brings supplies to the Pope to Ciuita-veccbia. PHILIP gives ^attaile to
CARMAGNOLLA Somma, where the fight is equal. Cremona almost taken. PICININO
wastes all places upon the River of Genoa, and drives the Prince of Monferrat
an associate of the Venetians from his whole State. The Venetians have no good
success at the siege of Chios. CARMAGNOLLA being suspected a Traitor to the
Senate and convicted of the crime, has his head stricken off. The Venetians
are put to the worst in the Camonian Valley. And lastly peace is concluded with
PHILIP.

PEace was not alone in Lombardie, but (which had The cause of the renewing of
war betwixt the Venetians and Philip.
not been seen of a long time) over all Italy, at what time the rebellion of
those of Bolognia against Martin did disturb this rest: and within a while
after war was renewed betwixt the Venetians and Philip. And the better to
understand the occasion thereof, we must fetch the matter from far.

Peace being concluded with Visconte, the confines of that part of the
Cremonese which had been adjudged to the Venetians were cause of continual
controversy betwixt them, and of procuring that war which ensued. For
although Philip contrary to his promise makes war upon the Band^tti of
Genoa.
the Marquess of Aeste was at the beginning chosen Vmpier for both sides,
Philip made fierce war upon the Fiesci and Fregozas which were banished from
Genoa, whom during the treaty of peace he would not comprehend in the
Florentines Articles, but had promised to hold them in the number of his
friends. He took from them diverse Towns and Castles, first by means of the
Genoueses, and aftewards by Picinino, whom he sent against them with a mighty
Army. But these matters, which were not small, were nevertheless too weak to
renew this war all at once. Paulo Guenesio Tyrant of Luca.


Another far greater subject, which was never dreamt on, ministered a lawful
occasion to take Arms. Paul of Luca of the Guenesian Family, had for the
space of thirty years usurped as a Tyrant the Signorie and Government of Luca
his native Country, and did in the mean time so Govern the Cities important
affairs in his own name, as in the midst of so many storms of war which
did at that time thunder upon Italy, he could never be drawn to take Arms
nor to incline Guenesian name and envied his prosperity. Therefore, peace
being made with Philip, the chief of the City devised by what means they
might entangle him in some affairs of importance. They wanted not just matter
whereby to make war upon him. For Ladislaus his son being in the
Florentines pay, was gone from them without their leave: knowing very well that
they would not have suffered him to have served against Pope Martin in the
troubles of Bolognia. But the people of Florence being tired with war, would
by no means hear any talk of Arms.

The principal of the City who detested the Tyrants power, seeing they could
The chief of Florence are animated against the (...)
not be suffered to raise open war, would help themselves by a secret
means. To this end, they won privately to their side Nitholao, surnamed
Stella, Nephew to that great Captain Bracchio, who being a young man was in
the Florentines pay, that he giving over his charge, should openly say, that
he would (as his uncle had done) bear Arms for himself; and that afterward
he should attempt upon the Lucan Territories, telling him what claim he might
pretend thereto: to wit That it was known over al Tuscanie that Guenesio was
in times past tributarie to Bracchio, and that by right of succession he might
demand that tribute of the Tyrant which he had paid unto no man since his
death.

This young man being so daine and resolute, did not refuse the business.
Whereupon having openly given over his charge he did in a short space assemble
two thousand men, and remained for a while upon the Florentines Frontiers, as
though he made preparations for a far journey. By reason of which assembly
the Sienois were in greater fear than those of Luca. This expeditious Captain
discamping The incursions of Nicholao Stella upon the Lucan Territory.
about twilight, the next morning by break of day fell fiercely upon the Lucan
Territory; where finding all things to be abandoned, he carried away with him
great numbers of prisoners, and much Cattle. He continued two days encamped
upon the plain of Luca: in which time he wasted and burnt whatsoever he met
with. From thence going to besiege the Towns, he took from the Guenesian

Many upon report of this new war ran to his Army on hope of booty. The
tyrant and those of Luca being amazed at this sudden incursion, and not
knowing at first whence this tempest came, were fearful of all things. But
when they understood who was the Captain, and how that it was a practice of
the Florentines: having recommended the guatd of the City to the young
Guenesians, they first sent to Florence to complain of that injury as
proceeding from them. The Those of Luca crave aid of the Venetians, of Philip,
and of the Sienois.
Florentines being ignorant of the matter did confidently repel that slander.
But those of Luca sent to Venice to complain unto them of their Confederates,
and Philip and to the Sienois; earnestly entreating them for relief in their
affliction.

The Florentines in the mean time, perceiving that the exploits of young
Bracchi^ did daily prosper: thinking that it might shortly come to pass, that
by having a hand in that war they might annexe the City of Luca to their
State, which was oppressed with so many miseries, did by a public decree write
to Nicholao his camp, The ^lorentines do (...) that which (...) had done, and
^oe entreat him to go forward.
(who already of himself was no more able to bear the burden of so great an
Army,) That he should continue the pursuit of that war in the Florentines
name; that they were ready to furnish him with men, victuals, supplies, and
money, and generally with all necessaries for the war; that his only care
should be to go forward as he had begun and to end that war, whereby he
should purchase the peoples love, and immortal praise; saying, That the
Florentines would provide for all

Andrea (...), issued from a very noble and ancient family, being by a
disease become (in a manner) lunaticke, sued for the office of Admiral of the
Adriaticke Sea. It came to pass, that after it had been denied him in the
general assembly, he was in the company of certain young men; who lesting
with him, laid the cause of Foscari lived. This man being hereupon provoked
with rage and grief, (two mighty spurs) became so vnmeasurably and
inordinately furious, as he went and assailed the Prince, as he was coming
down the stairs to Divine Service in S. Marks Church. But the better to
effect his purpose, he made show as if he would have spoken with him in
secret; whereupon such as were near him gave place, that he might speak to
him with the more priuacie: Thus having gotten opportunity, he drew forth a
poniard that he had hidden under his gown, and had (without all doubt) slain
the old man, if one of the Ambassadors from Sienna, who was very near him,
had The Prince is outraged by a mad man.
not laid hold on his Arm, and turned aside the blow, which struck him on the
face, near to the nose. The Senators and the Princes Officers did presently
encompasse The Uenetians answer to the Ambassadors of Sienna.
it belonged not to them to meddle with the controversy betwixt those of Siena
and the Florentines their associates. And with this answer the Ambassadors
were dismissed. The Florentines in the mean time did hardly press those of
Luca, which at the last caused Guenesio, and the Sienois, to sue unto Philip
and to the Genoueses.

Philip, using the same policy as did the Florentines, persuaded Francisco
Sforza, that asking him leave, he should levy the greatest forces he could,
and march into Sforza being valiant and covetous of honor, did forthwith pass
the Alps, and speedily brought a great Army to Luca. Upon his arrival,
Stella retired to the con^ines of Pisa, because he would not be enforced to
fight at one time near to the City Walls with Sforza's forces, and with Sforza
coming to the aid of those of Luca causes the enemy to raise his Camp.
the Guenesians, being induced thereunto by his uncles example, whom he
remembered to have been defeated in the same manner at the siege of Aquileia.
He resolved therefore to draw the war out at length, until that Sforza's
Army should be enforced through want of all things to abandon the Lucan
Territory. For, they

Sforza having razed the Fortes which the enemies had builded near to the
Citie-gates, entered the Town in a triumphant manner, where, (being received
by Guenesio with a reciprocal congratulation), he made no long abode, but went
into Guenesio going about to treat with the Florentines is discovered by
Sforza.
the Torritorie of Pistoia, where in a short space he took diverse places by
force. Guenesio considering with himself what the event of that war would
be, supposing that the aid he then made use of, would not continue long with
him, and though they should remain with him for a long time, yet nevertheless
they did not seem unto him to be able wholly to free him from that war, and
that therefore it might happen that whether he would or no, he should one day
be enforced to yield: And likewise because he knew, that with far greater
advantage he might treat of peace Sforza was forth with aduertiz^d of his
negotiation by those unto whom he had discovered himself. Whereupon Sforza by
the commandment of Philip, unto whom he had written concerning that
business, did suddenly seize upon the Tyrants person and children, and sent
them to Milan; and all his rich moueables he gave to his Soldiers. Now having
by this means restored those of Luca to their liberty, he left a strong and
mighty Garrison with them for their guard. The Townes-men at his departure,
gave him many rich and costly presents. The Florentines likewise furnished him
with victuals for his journey,

The affairs of Tuscanie being thus pacified, and Sforza being grown great
both in wealth and reputation (two sure ladders to ascend to greatness) he
departed with his troops forth of Tuscanie, and came into Lombardie. After his
departure the Florentines came again and besieged Luca. Philip to free them
from that danger, making use almost of the former manner, sent Nicholao
Picinino in the name Picinino comes to the aid of the Luquois.
of the Genoueses, (into whose protection those of Luca were reported to have
cast themselves) to break the Florentines designs. He came with great forces
and rumor into Tuscanie.

The Venetians having notice of Picinino's journey against the Florentines,
although at the first they could not be persuaded to take Arms for the war of
Luca, yet nevertheless being moved by the danger which threatened their
associates, they sent to Philip, to let him know that they did greatly wonder,
how that the Genoueses, who were under the power of an other man, were able to
raise so great an Army against the Florentines, for it was apparent to all
men, that Picinino, and Lauellano, who went with him into Tuscanie, had of a
long time been pensioners to Philip, and not to the Genoueses; and therefore
that he should do well, in all points to observe the agreement, and not to
wrong the associates of the one party; or if he were determined to aid the
Luquois by means of the Genoueses, he should not take it The Venetians summons
to Philip.
the affairs of their associates not to be disturbed by Philip or by any
other: which they perceiving otherwise to fall out, did wish him to desist from
any more troubling their associates; otherwise he should be assured that if he
did continue in molesting the Florentines, that the Venetians in their defense
were already prepared for war.

Although the Ambassadors brought back from him no certain resolution upon The
Florentines defeated by Picinino.
Picinino in the mean time defeated the Florentines near to the river Arno.
This being reported at Venice, they decreed no longer to delay, but to begin
the war. Whereupon they sought to draw Francisco Sforza to their party, who
after his return from Luca had still made his abode in Mirandola. The
Florentines likewise made means to have him, unto whom he most inclined in
regard of their friend-ship toward his Father. But so soon as Philip had an
inckling thereof, the better to oblige that courageous young man to himself by
some stricter bond, he promised him his only daughter Bianca in marriage,
putting him in hope, Philip promises to give his daughter in marriage to
Sforza.
that if he had afterward no male child, to make him his successor in all
his Dominions.

We have read in the Commentaries of Montanus, That Philip for fear of losing
Sforza, because he saw Picinino his corriuall to be preferred before him, and
to have the command of his Army, did put him in hope of this affinity and
alliance by Martins death did for a time delay this war to the which both
sides were well addicted. Both the one and other thought it very necessary
before they took Arms to see who should be the next Pope. Gabrieli
Candelmario a Venetian was chosen in the place of the deceased, and assumed to
himself the name of Eugenius. Although this man did at the beginning of his
Papacy acquaint all Princes and Commonwealths by his Ambassadors, that he
would do nothing rashly, saying, That he would be vmpier of their
controversies, and in friendly manner establish peace betwixt them, Philip
nevertheless suspected him in regard of his Country. And therefore he did not
cease first secretly, and afterward by open means, to practice whatsoever he
could against him. And thus molesting him in all Colonnessi.

Whereupon the Venetians perceiving Philip, in sted of acknowledging the Pope,
openly to make war upon him, after that they had in the fourth month of
Eugenius. Papacy renewed the league with the Florentines, they proclaimed war
against him. They did moreover releive the Marquis of Mont-ferrat The Venetians
proclaim war against Philip.
with money, and the Palauicins, whom they received into this new league.
Besides, they set forth a great nauall Army, which went up against the stream
of the River Po to oppugn the enemy. Carmagnolla in the mean time lay with
his forces at the new Orges, ready to march at the first rumor of this war.
Philip sent Tolentino Francisco Sforza against him with gallant troops. He
likewise put into Cremona, upon which all men thought that the whole burden of
the war would fall, Lodouico Colonna with brave Soldiers; and opposed
Lauellan^, who was well accompanied, to the Prince of Mountferrat that had
small forces.

Whilst these things were done in Italy, certain sparks of a very
dangerous war (which the Venetians had within a while after by Sea and Land
against Mahomet Ottaman the mighty Turkish Emperor) appeared at Thessalonica
a City of Macedonia. This Town which in former times was very famous, is
seated on the Thermaic Sea, but in our time so desert, as ten thousand
Barbarians Giacomo Dandulo and Andrea Donato, who seeking to escape forth of
the midst of Thessalonica Macedonia ken by the Turket.
the tumult, Dandulo was taken by the enemies. At the same time two sorts of
moneys were coined in the City; that of most value was worth eight souls, and
the lesser, two. There was likewise a Bridge built of white stone near to the
Church of the Friars Minors. It is moreover recorded, That the waters An
extreme ^rost.
round about the City were so frozen, as men went drie-foote from the City to
Tourcelles, Malamoc, and (that which is more strange) to Chioggia. It is
reported that a bride was brought from Mestre to Venice in a wagon, the which
before that time was never seen; that wagons did pass upon those

The Florentines after the loss of the battle in Tuscanie near to the river
Arno, would again have attempted by reason of Picinino's absence, to besiege
Luca (for after the battle, he had retired himself toward Pontremolle to
force certain places belonging to the Fiesci near to the Alps) had not
Bartholomeo Fornari Captain of five Genoa-gallies, and two ships of burden,
come and encamped before Liuorne. Whereupon fearing least by reason thereof the
Pisans would revolt, they were constrained to send part of their forces in
Garrison into the City. Within a while after Picinino returned, who with a
wonderful speed had in a manner reduced all the towns belonging to the Pisans
under his power. The Florentins after that they had lost all the rest, fearing
least the victorious enemy would seize on Pisa, did make a very cruel
decree, That all the inhabitants from the age of fifteen years to threescore A
cruel decree of the (...).
should depart forth of the City, before that a candle lighted up for that
purpose should be burnt out, and by that means did unburden the City which
they

The enemy leaving the Pisan territory marched to that of Volterra, which
journey was as prosperous to him as that of Pisa. For having taken all places
of the Picinino scoureth the volterian territory, as he ^ad done that of the
Pisans.
country, Volterra likewise would have been mightily endangered, if Michaeli
Attendulo sent by Pope Eugenius to aid the Florentines had not by his
opportune coming freed it. These things were done in Tuscanie, whilst that
Philip was greatly troubled, because that Carmagnolla lay at the new Orges with
his troops in a readiness, having been there a long time; and fearing least
that he would begin as in the precedent wars by some unlooked for
reprisall, he began heedfully to look to his affairs, that the enemy might
not enterprise upon him, by some secret practice: An enterprise upon the Castle
of Lodes discovered.
Castle of Lodes had promised to give him entrance: VVhereupon having speedily
smothered that treachery, he was desirous to try if he could take the enemy
in his own trappe. He did secretly counsel the Governor of the Castle of
Socinna to promise the Venetian General, that for a certain sum of money,
he would deliver unto him the Castle, Munition and garrison. The General did
not refuse this offer, for which he promised him a great sum of money, and
had a day appointed him when he should bring his troops thither. Philip being
aduertized hereof, commanded Sforza and Tollentino to march thither very
secretly with part of their forces, to seize on all the ways, and to lay an
Ambuscado for Carmagnolla to surprise

Carmagnolla failed not at the day appointed, and having sent before him
certain Double treachery upon the Castle of Soncina.
troops to seize on the place, he made a stand near to the town with the
residue of his forces. Those which were sent before, being received into a
corner of the Castle were at the enemies mercy, when on a sudden the
Governor of the place cried out with a loud voice, calling diverse times to
Carmagnolla, saying; That he was no traitor to Philip but a beguiler of his
enemies. And thereupon Sforza and Tollentino arising forth of their ambush, and
assailing the Venetians on every side, did greatly terrify them. Carmagnolla
then perceived that he was taken in his own subtilties, Carmagnolla escapes
by flight.
and presently turning his back, fled in disorder as fast as he could. The
Tollentino.

Within a while after, the Venetians being rather detained than encamped upon
the Cremonese, did fearelesse run up and down: Lodouico Colonna (who as we
The venetians are put to rout upon the Cremonese.
have said was sent to guard the City) went and assailed them being disorderly
scattered upon the rivers banks, where he brake and defeated them with forces
far inferior to theirs in number, and took three hundred horse from them.
But I find nothing recorded by Historians, concerning this second defeat.
During these exploits in Lombardie, Tuscanie was much afflicted with war, and
especially the Florentines, who had Picinino still at their elbowes. For having
a long time Arezzo, where by intelligence he had like to have taken the City.
But being disappointed of his expectation, he began to batter Towns and
Castles of which he took many; some by force, and others by volunrarie
yielding. At this stay stood the state of the affairs of these two Provinces,
when Tollentino disdaining that Duke Philip should make more reckoning of
Francisco Sforza, and Picinino than of him, having Tollentino leaves Philips
party.
to the one promised his alliance, and to the other committed the sole command
of his Army, and thereby as it were held him in contempt, did leave Philips
party, and retired with a gallant troup of his own followers into Flaminia.
The Venetians and Florentines sought to draw him to their parties, offering him
the sole command of the Army if he would come into Lombardie. But matters
being delaied, he went from Flaminia to the Popes service, against the
Colonessi near to Rome. Philip was enforced by Tollentines departure, to call
back Picinino into Lombardie.

The Venetians in the mean time, although they well knew that they had renewed
that war with bad success, did nevertheless leauie forces, and made great
provisions of victuals and Armor, and besides their landforces, they made
ready a mighty nauall Army, to send it up the river toward Cremona, wherein
was ten thousand fighting men besides the Mariners and Pilots. Nicolao
Treuisano was The venetians nauall Army upon the Po.
made General, and in every vessel a Venetian Gentleman commanded. There
was besides great store of warlik engines of all sorts, as many almost as there
were men. Carmagnolla likewise was encamped near to the town with twelve
thousand horse, and as many foot. Philip had prepared a nauall Army upon the
Thesin, which in number of vessels, soldiers, and in all other provisions was
inferior to Giouanni Grimaldi the Genouese was General, a man among his
countrymen the most famous and expert in marine matters of any of his time, of
whose choosing Philip manned the vessels with Pilots, and the best Archers of
Genoa. Picinino likewise being returned from Tuscanie had greatly augmented the
land-Armie. But by how much his presence did further the affairs of Philip in
Lombardie, by so much more did his absence cause them to decline in Tuscanie.
For soon after his departure, Alberto Earl of Cunes, unto whom he had
committed the charge of those troops that he left in Tuscanie, falling into an
ambuscado near to the town of Colle lost above a thousand horse, whereupon

But whilst these things were done in Tuscanie, all the burden of the war
in Lombardie lay near to Cremona, where the enemies were much weaker hoth by
land and water than the Venetians. VVhereupon Picinino and Sforza perceiving,
that if to their weakness they did not join some policy, they should not be
able in both places to resist the Venetian, they did by wit and discretion
supply the want of force. And therefore they made often incursions into the
enemies trenches, as though they had contemned them, and not remembered their
nauall Army, which by how much nearer it approached coming up the stream, by
so much more fiercely Grimaldi, discoursing by what means they might give
battle upon the river Po: And resolving betwixt themselves by what policy
they might obtain the victory, the audacious Genouese having from far
descried the Venetian vessels which kept the watch, did forthwith set forward
against them, thereby to cause them to return to tell Treuisano of their
approach, and by the way he came Strat^geme of Philips Captains
before the walls of Cremona, where full of hope and courage he took Picinino
and all his men at Arms into his ships, which were equally distributed among
the vessels: Then he fell down softly with the stream toward the enemy. So
soon as they that were in the ships tops had descried him, the alarm was
sounded. The Venetian Picinino was so far off from refusing, as on the
contrary, he did fiercely set forward before the rest with a part of the
vessels. The Venetians wondering at first at the enemies boldness, so soon as
he perceived their vessels to glister with armor did suspect the truth of the
matter, how that he was to fight with the Land-Armie, and presently sent
message upon message to Carmagnolla to let him know that Picinino and Sforza
were at strokes with him together with their whole troops, and therefore he
entreated him, if he did wish the good of the Commonwealth, to come speedily to
his aid.

It is reported upon this arrival of the messengers one after another
Carmagnolla who was by nature choleric grew extreme angry, and with a loud
voice did abhor and condemn the Venetians fault, who rejecting his counsel
would not distribute that great sum of money to the land Army, saying that
he could not believe Four Venetian Galleys taken.
hand to hand with sharp swords and axes made for that purpose. At the last
these four Galleys being lost about the beginning of the night, the other
Venetian ships which had fought with the enemy, retired to the haven from
whence they came. Picinino having carried away with him the vessels that he
had taken, and caused Sforza to come into the ships with a company of men at
Arms, commanded Grimaldi again to set forward against the enemy about the
fourth watch of the night. The General of the Venetian Navy had intelligence
thereof; and because he was out of hope of the aid of the land-Armie, by so
much the more speedily and carefully he had ordered his forces in battle. So
soon then as day began to break the two Nauall Armies descried one another,
and the battle was on both sides demanded with great clamours. The Venetian
had, (like to a battle on Land) closed his ships together, as if he had meant
to have given in upon them, supposing, that by the continual casting of
Engines, he should be able to hinder the enemies approach who in numbers of
men were stronger than he: which being perceived by Philips Captains, they
presently commanded their Mariners by force of A bloody fight.
from both sides thrown iron hooks and cords to grapple together, there was
a fierce fight, whereof not any man that was there did remember to have ever
seen the like. Stones, Darts, Pots of artificial fire lighted from both sides
on the Soldiers that were on heaps together; they thrust burning torches in
one another faces, they slew one another with swords, poniardes, axes; sundry
kinds of death being presented to their view. Then the ancient manner of
Sea Fight betwixt the Venetians and Genoueses, did equally torment both
parties. They did from the ships tops throw down upon the enemies, earthen
pots full of oil and glue, which Treuisano and the rest, who perceiving
fortune to favor the enemies, and remembering that he had there with him a
great sum of money belonging to the Commonwealth, he went forth The
Venetians N^uall Army defeated.
of his Admiral Gallie into a small vessel, and with the money made have
away. He being gone, the residue of the Army, trembling with fear began to
fly. The Palauicins, and being not well entertained there went to the mouth of
Po; all the rest were taken by the enemy. It is reported that two thousand men
of both parties were slain upon the place; six thousand Venetians were taken;
among whom were thirteen Senators; and that of the whole booty that was
taken nothing was so welcome to Philip, as the vessels: the biggest whereof
he caused to be drawn up against the stream into the River Thesin, and the
tackling of the others that were disarmed to be laid up in the Castle of
Cremona.

This loss, which undoubtedly was very great, was followed by the revolt of
Palauicin, Carmagnolla gives over his charge for sorrow that he had committed
a fault.
and Carmagnolla his dismission from his charge; who knowing that he had
committed a fault would no more through his own obstinacy meddle therein; so
as Philips Nauall Army which had vanquished them upon the River. They Armed
eighteen Galleys with Soldiers, Arms, victuals, Mariners, and made Pietro
Lauretano their General, who was a man well experienced in marine matters. He
being come with his Fleet sooner A new Uenetian Nauall Army against the
Genoueses.
than was expected, forth of the higher Sea into the lower, arrived at Liuorne:
where being reenforced with five Florentine Galleys, he did honorably receive
for associates in that war Giacomo Adorini, and Antonio Fiesca, who at that
time Adorini is one of the noblest among the people, out of the which the
Genoueses did for a long time choose their Sovereign Magistrate. And the
Fiesci have ever held a very honorable rank among the Nobility. It was
supposed at the beginning, that the presence of those great persons accompanied
with a mighty Nauall Army of a free people would have provoked the Genoueses
to have recovered their liberty, to have expelled Philips Officers, and with
great affection to have embraced their fellow-Citizens. But the Genoueses upon
report of the Venetians coming had armed four and twenty Galleys, among
which was one ship of burden. Franciso Spinola was by The Genoueses Nauall
Army,
Philips appointment made their General, a man besides his ancient nobility
very famous for his valor.

The Venetian Fleet in the mean time was come upon the Rappallitan Sea ten
miles from Genoa: It lay there at an anckor, when Spinola having intelligence
thereof did in such have depart from the City, as some vessels that were of
his number could not overtake him all that day. The Genouese set forward full
of courage and assurance, occasioned by the remembrance of the late victory
obtained by his Countriemen upon the Po. Being by day-breake come to the
Promontorie of Rapalla A Naual battle betwixt the Venetians and Genoueses.
(called at this day the Cape of the mount) perceiving the enemy before him he
commanded his Soldiers to make all things fit, and to prepare for the fight.
Then without any delay, making use of a fair wind, he hoised sails, and
having given the Signal to his Soldiers he went against the Venetians
intending to sink the first Galleys he met with. Lauretano perceived Spinolas
design, and as though he had not meant to fight, did speedily put forth of the
Gulf, whom the Genoueses followed (as though he had fled) with great
clamours. But the Venetian being come Spinola perceiving, and supposing that
with small aid he might easily sink them, by strength of upon her prow, so
that in one Gallie the Genoueses fought in the poope, and the enemy in the
prow. Both of them fought with such fierceness, as the working of the sea
which was somewhat swelled, had like to have swallowed them both. The The
venetians defeat the Genouese nauall army.
Venetians in the mean time had with iron hooks drawn eight Genoa-gallies
unto them, who bravely defending themselves, so soon as they perceived their
General to be in danger, did yield to Lauretano. The others being well
beaten, escaped by flight, whom the Venetians being wearied with fight did not
pursue.

The victorious fleet came near to the Town of Reca which did voluntarily
yield to Fiesca: From thence it returned to Liuorne, where they found that
eight hundred men had been slain in the battle, and about four thousand
hurt. Lauretano, Spinola General of the enemies fleet with eight Captains of
the Galleys, and three of his Counselors taken in that encounter, first to
Florence, and then to Venice, he did put to Sea, and coming to Ciuitauecchia,
did at the entreatie of Pope Eugenius tarry there, until he had taken the
Castle which commands the Haven. That within a short space being recovered,
he departed thence, and having coasted round about Italy, he landed at Corfu.

Fiesca and Adorini, after Lauretanos departure, goeing from Pisa to Florence
Fiesca and Adorini are treacherously slain.
there to spend the time till Lauretanos return, were treacherously assaulted
by one Buffettio of Pauia, who valliantly defending themselves because they
would not fall into their enemies hands, and being sore wounded fell down dead
in the place. Philip, after the victory upon the Po, hoping for some greater
fortune came to Cremona, to congratulate with his Soldiers for that victory.
The Venetian Army was then at Summa, a place near the Po, whither Philips
Captains, determining to fight if A f^erce sight by land.
the enemies so pleased, did march in Battalion. The Venetians General did not
refuse the fight; whereupon, both sides with great fury coming to join, they
fought with such eagrenesse, as there was no Soldiers either on foot or horse
(which does not usually happen) but did that day fight. In the end, fortune
inclining no more to the one side than the other, the retreat was on both
sides sounded. The other exploits of the remainder of the year were of no
great moment, Caualcabouis (who held a very honorable rank in the Venetian
Camp) Cremona had like to have been taken.

This man about midnight had without any noise stolen with his troops An
enterprise of the venetians upon Cremona.
near to the City, where hiding themselves in the hedges and bushes which
shaddowed the Dike he lay a great while, until that the Sun being risen and
the Sentinels retired, he perceived the walls to be abandoned. For then his
Soldiers having reared their Ladders did forthwith mount the walls, placing
a strong Garrison to guard them. Carmagnolla with a brave troop was come
within three miles of the Town, and had sent certain foot companies before,
who being opportunely Carmagnolla had sent his supplies, Cremona had been
taken; but failing therein, and pretending that the enemy had laid an ambush
to entrappe him, those which had entered the Town, having lost many of their
fellows, retired to their ensigns. Some say that the Venetians held that
place which they had taken two whole days together: And others (whom I rather
believe) eight hours only. This opportunity of taking the City being

Upon the coast of Genoa, after Lauretanos departure the affairs had no great
good success. For after the defeat of the Genoueses upon the Rapallitan Sea,
Bernabo Adorini with thee hundred horse, which the Marquis of Montferrat had
given Picinino defeateth Bernabo Adorini.
him, had caused all the coast of Genoa in a manner to revolt, on the lands
side. Picinino being sent to pacify these tumults having defeated Adorini and
all his Cauallerie at Nouara, there was no kind of cruelty which he did not
execute upon the poor Inhabitants. For besides great numbers that were slain
in two battles, he did by the Hangman execute all those whom the hazard of
war had pardoned. Afterward being glutted with blood, he set to sale to them
that offered most young children, Matrons and reverent Priests. Then he marched
against the Prince of Montferrat, from whom in a short space he had taken
thirty Castles.

The General Lauretano being come to Corfu; had acquainted the Senate with The
venetian fleet before Ch^os.
Chios belonging to the Genoueses. This fleet consisted of ten ships of burden
and fourteen Galleys, with diverse other small vessels under the conduct of
Andrea Mocenigo; who arriving in the Island with the fleet, did by Sea and Land
besiege the principal City of that place, of the same name. And after that he
had battered it on all sides with engines and warlike instruments by the space
of two months, yet he could not take it, being manned with a very strong
Garrison. In the mean time there was a great rumor spread that great number of
vessels were arming at Genoa. Mocenigo (having lost many men in that siege)
perceiving that he must needs raise his Camp: and being out of hope to take
the Town ere succors arrived, did in a rage and despite spoil the residue of
the Island by cutting down the Vines and Fruit Trees. He departed thence
before any supplies came from Genoa.

The enemy having intelligence that the Venetians had dislodged; certain
Galleys Supplies come from Genoa to Chios.
and some few ships of burden sailed thither to continue there the remainder
of the winter. The Summer following Pietro Spinola went thither with a greater
fleet of fourteen ships of burden, seven Galleys, and eight thousand
fighting men.

The Venetians upon the first news of this fleet of the enemies, did likewise
augment theirs which lay at Corfu to the number of thirty three vessels, to
resist the attempts of the Genoueses. Lauretano departed thence, and with
wonderful speed came whilst the enemy coasted Sicil, to Liuorne; from whence
the Genoueses not long before departed. Spinola being come sooner to Corfu than
he was looked for did mightily affright those of the Island who had not as yet
finished their fortifications. Therefore the Senate in all have did by letters
aduertize Lauretano of the danger wherein Corfu was, if speedy aid were not
sent thither. He having notice thereof, sent six of his best Galleys thither,
to which the Senate having joined Siluester Morosino is sent to the aid of
Corfu.
four more, did make Siluestro Morosino their General, who was commanded to

Whilst these things were done at Sea, Picinino having wasted all the
Marquisat of Montferrat, returned to the Cremonese, where in short space he
recouerd Torricelles and Bordelan, whereat all men did greatly wonder, in
regard that Carmagnolla with his troops was not far from thence. The Senate
being mightily incensed thereat, did at last revive that which a long time
before it had propounded Many had suspected him from the beginning, who did
openly cry out in the Senate, that the suspicion which they had conceived of
the man was so far off from being smothered, as on the contrary it was much
increased and daily augmented, acknowledging had been tortured he should be
found convicted of treason, to have him punished with death. This determination
which was of long continuance, did manifest the Venetians faithful and secret
constancy in the managing of their public counsels and affairs. For the
Senate which is composed of sundry orders of officers, being assembled for this
purpose, the Senators came in the evening by torch light into the palace, and
departed thence the next morrow by day-breake, still consulting upon that
business. Carmagnola was at the same time in Venice, who coming in the morning
to salute the Prince as he came from the palace, asked him with a smiling
countenance, whether he should bid him good night or good morrow, in regard he
had not gone to bed that night. The Prince answered smiling, that the
Carmagnola never suspected any thing, although diverse of the council were his
familiar How secret those things are kept which are determined in the Senate.
friends, and some of them very poor, so as both the one and other might have
drawn from him what sum of money they had pleased, by discovering unto him
that which had been concluded against him.

About the same time (for they had already begun to treat of peace with
Philip) being sent for by the Senators letters, he came to Venice, where
coming Carmagnola being convicted of treason is bebeaded.
letters, which he could not deny, and by the testimony of his domesticke
servants: whereupon, on the 19. day after his imprisonment, his head was
stricken off betwixt the two Columns, and his goods were confiscate to the
public treasury. The chief points of his accusation were, his refusal to
relieve Treuisano, and the loss of The prince of Mantua General of the
Venetian army.
Cremona by his disloyal delay. Before his execution, and at the same time
that he was sent for to Venice, the prince of Mantua was sent to the army in
Lombardy, Georgio Cornari and Marco Dandulo were chosen Prouidatori.

Picinino in the mean time being puffed up with the fortunate success of his
exploits, did very earnestly pursue his victories begun in the time of
Carmagnola. And if he had not bin grievously wounded at the siege of Pontoglio,
so that the physicians held him for a dead man, or else likely to languish for
a long time, he would in a short space have recovered whatsoever the Venetians
did then possess on the Cremonese. The news of this hurt, was cause that the
Marquis of Montferrat, The Marquess of Montferrat comes for refuge to Venice
being wholly driven from his state by Picinino, was in some sort better
entertained. The Marquis, so soon as he saw his forces to be broken, passed
the Alps, and went through the Treuisan into Germany, and from thence
returning to Treuiso, he

In the mean time Philips affairs declining in Lombardie had no better
success in Tuscanie. For Tollentino being dismissed by the Pope, and soon
after entertained by the Florentines, did make fierce incursions upon the
territory of the Sienois, and with great violence did waste all the sea
coasts. Afterward joining with Attendulo whom he knew to be given him for
companion, having taken certain towns from Attendulo recouereth sundry places
for the Florentines.
the Sienois, he did in short space recover all the towns which the enemy
enjoyed Philips forces near to mount Tepulo, he put them to rout, and took
Bernardino Vbaldino prisoner, with three thousand horse. Others say that he
took but a thousand.

The same day of the fight near to mount Tepulo, Sigismond, son to Charles
King of Boheme and Hungary, who at the earnest entreatie of Philip was come
into Italy with four thousand horse, did enter Luca. He stayed for certain
days at Sigismond in the behalf of Philip comes into Italy.
Milan, where being crowned (according to the manner) with the Crown of Iron,
and resolving to go to Rome, he did at Philips persuasion come to Luca, from
thence to go to Siena, for fear least under color of hospitality he should
contract any league with the Florentines. Tollentino and Attendulo, by the
Florentines command drew near with their troops to Luca, at which time it is
reported that the Hungarians made a sallie; and that their cauallerie did so
boldly give in upon them, as some of them came to Attendulos Tent, unto whom
one amongst them of a big stature (fighting with an iron mace) gave him a great
stroke upon the head, but his

They say moreover that Sigismond, after this loss, went at last to Siena
where for Sigismond crowned Emperor at Rome.
a time the Pope and he were at great controversy; but by means of sundry
ambassades sent from either side, being made friends, he went to Rome where he
was crowned Emperor.

There is nothing found worthy of memory to have been done during that
Summer by Lauretano a-long the Coast of the lower Sea. The Sigestins only were
Abrahamo Fregosa to give the assault on the Land-side, he retired from thence
without doing any thing. Afterward he made incursions upon those of Clauara,
of whom he got no great booty. That being done, the Army returned to Venice.

The Genoueses that Summer had no better fortune, but somewhat worse. For The
two Nauall Armies of the Venetians and Genoueses return home.
sailing along the Coast of Sicill, they lost three Galleys by a tempest that
arose, and having afterward done nothing of note, about the end of Autumn
they brought back the Fleet to Genoa. In Lombardie Sanchio Venieri subrogated
at Dandulo* request in his sted, and Cornari, the Prouidators of the Army, did
exploit bravely Philip, Bordellana, Ruminenga, Fontanelles, and Socinna.

Such happy success had the Venetians affairs, when upon the return of the
Prince of Mantua home to his own house they began to talk of peace. The
Senate at the Prince of Montferrats entreatie, sent Fantino Michaeli to
Ferrara, only to know what conditions of peace the enemy would propound. The
Florentines likewise sent Palla Strossi thither. Philip had already sent
Francisco Gallina thither for that purpose. But whilst they treated of peace
at Ferrara, the Prouidators having assailed the inhabitants of the mountains,
reduced under their obedience first the Camonic valley, and then that of
Tellina. Daniel Vitturi, successor to Venieri, Cornari in the vale of Tellina,
attempted to make a bridge over the River Adda, to pass over into the enemies
Country. But this design came to nothing: the enemy valiantly opposing it.
Cornari nevertheless did still with three thousand men keep the vale Tellina
(vulgarly called Valtellina) whither Picinino, being sent for by the chief of
the Gibelline faction which favored Philip, ran with disbanded troops, but
with some loss he was rudely repulsed. The subtle enemy knowing that the
Venetia^s in regard of this fortunate success would become more bold and
courageous to attempt any thing, having first placed his Ambush, he returned
the next day, and of set purpose began to skirmish, and drew the Prouidatour
with all his troops into the place of Ambuscado, where with a sudden revolt
The Venetians are de^eated by Picinino.
Cornari, were Thadeo De Aeste, Caesar Martinenga, Italus of Friull, Baptista
Capitio, and Antonio Martinasco, who were all famous Captains.

Near to the Po likewise there were great combustions. For whilst the
sethings were done in the mountains, Philips Captains recovered Casal-maior
and Brixelles. The loss of the vale of Te^lina being reported to the Senate,
they presently resolved to appoint a new General of their Army. The Prince of
Mantua, though some were against it, was by the Senate chosen to command the
Army. He having accepted the charge, went forthwith to the Camp, and on a
sudden recovered the Camonick valley which was revolted; Then by the advice of
Contareni, Cornari his successor, he conducted all his troops (for winter was
already come) to winter in the neighbor valleys.

Peace being debated on all that winter, was at last at the springtime
concluded The Articles of peace betwixt the Venetians and Philip.
on these conditions: to wit That Philip should restore all the Towns and
strong places which he had taken upon the Bressan and Bergamese Territories
during the treaty of peace: That he should surrender to the Prince of
Montferrat his whole estate which he had taken from him during the war:
(although some say that he had already done it for Sigismonds sake:) That he
should give all assurance to Lodouico Vermio and others who had borne Arms for
the Venetians: That all prisoners of mark on both sides should be set at
liberty. That he should likewise restore to the Florentines, all those Towns
taken from them in the Pisan and Volaterran Territories, and should do his
best to cause the Sienois Thomas^ Fregosa, and Lodouico Plombino, (for this man
during the war, had likewise borne Arms against the Florentines) it was
decreed that they should restore whatsoever they had taken from the Florentines,
and that the Lord of Plombin should no more be under Philips protection: But
as for Fregosa, it should be lawful for him to follow what party he pleased.

There was a long disputation about Pontremola, yet nevertheless Philip did at
last obtain that Town, on condition to restore to the inhabitants of the
Florentines party, whatsoever he had taken from them. The Senate perceiving
Cornari dies in Prison.
that Cornari did not return, was so troubled, as they would not establish the
peace, unless Philip (according to the contract) did send home their Senator:
but the Ambassadors sent to Philip for this purpose, affirming that he was dead
a day before, they did in Philips name satisfy the Prince and Senate,



The end of the first Book of the third Decad.
THE SECOND BOOK Venice.
The Contents of the second Book of the third Decad.
FFRANCISCO SFORZA seizes on the Marca d'Ancona, and on a part of the Duchy
of Spoleta. Pope EVGENIVS is driven from Rome. The Armies of SFORZA and
BRACCHIAN are ready to join battle one with an other at Vetrale. PICININO
in a manner did renew the War on the Sabins. He does wholly defeat the
league-troupes near to Imola. MARSILIO CARRARIO is beheaded at Venice. King
ALPHONSO is defeated at Sea by the Genoueses near to Gayetta. The Genoueses
revolt from PHILIP. Luca is straightly besieged by the Florentines. The
Emperor CONSTANTINE PALEOLOGO, Ferrara to confer with the Pope concerning
matters of Religion. All the Venetian troops are in a manner put to rout near
to the River Adice. The Florentines send COSMO DE MEDICIS to Venice. The great
exploits of SFORZA and PICININO near to the Alps. SFORZA allieth himself
with PHILIP and the Florentines. PICININO takes diverse Towns from the
Venetians on the Bressan and Bergamese Territories. The description of the Lake
of La Garda. Lastly, the Venetians fight with good success in the Camonick
Valley.

BY this accord, for the space of four years there was Philip. At the
beginning underhand he molested Pope Eugenius, and afterward by open War;
which caused the Venetians who withstood it, to attempt by all means though it
were contrary to the accord, to maintain their Countriman in his Pontifical
dignity. In the mean time sundry warlike exploits were done here and there,
and in sundry places they fought with different success. Moreover, many
treasons and suspicions were discovered on either side, not only abroad Philip
in Lombardie.

He had entangled (as has been said) Eugenius at the beginning of his Papacy
The cause of the renewing of the war betwixt the venetians and Philip.
in a domesticke war, from whence toward the latter end of the war of
Lombardie great quarrels, and contentions arose as well without as within the
City of Rome: which although sometimes they seemed to be raked up, could never
for all that be wholly extinguished. But this fury running from one place to
another, did at last so far spread it self abroad, that there was no
Province, City, Town, Village, nor any place belonging to the Church of Rome,
which had not a feeling thereof. And not to fetch our History from far;
Lombardie being quieted, Francisco Sforza disdaining that Philip had made
Picinino, his corriuall, General of his Army, notwithstanding that the
Visconte had promised him his future alliance, Renatus, who laid claim to the
Realm of Naples, against King Alphonso. And passing through Flaminia, he
fiercely entered upon the Marca of Ancona, where finding all things at quiet
and no resistance, after that he had taken great booty, and wasted all the
country, he reduced under his own command partly by force, and Sforza
scizeth on the Marca of Ancona.
partly by a voluntary reddition, all the Towns, Villages, and Castles, and
other places of La Marca. This journey was very commodious to Sforzas troops
for their wintering.

Picinino, who greatly suspected Sforzas actions, did by Philips advise depart
forth of Lombardy at the spring time with a thousand choice horse to thwart
Sforzas designs, and giving out that he went to the wholesome bathes of the
Sienois, he came into Tuscanie. Then by the means of some of his friends he
dealt with Nicolao surnamed Picinino and Stella make an accord together.
Stella, that they might join their forces together, and afterward make war
both on the Pope and Sforza. Stella at the same time possessed certain towns
near to Rome; and as a near neighbor did greatly molest Eugenius, presuming
upon the Colonessi. And by this means the Churches patrimony being exposed as
a prey betwixt them, was at one time wasted and torn in pieces by two enemy
factions, the which although they began but to spring up in Italy, did
nevertheless

Sforza in the midst of these troubles left his wintering places, and first
marched into the Duchy of Spoletta, where with wonderful success he took
Tuderta, Sforza his success.
Ameria, and diverse other places by a voluntary reddition. And having crossed
the Tyber, and filled the whole country with fear and terror, he went and
encamped on the Viterbian territory. The inhabitants of Viterbo did relieve
him with victuals, and did counsel him (as it is reported) to reconcile
himself to the Pope, and to take his party against the Bracchians his enemies.
Picinino was at the same time encamped at Montefiascone. This caused Sforza to
make have, fearing least he should join his forces with Bracchian, who lay not
far from Rome. For he had rather Bracchian faction, which he had like to have
done. Eugenius in the mean time being enforced by the Bracchians who were
backed by the Colonessi forsook his Palace, Pope Eugenius leaves Rome, and
comes to Florence.
and withdrew himself all trembling to the Castle Saint Angelo, and from
thence taking boat upon the Tyber, and passing through the enemies shot, he
went to Ostia, and from thence to Florence.

The Pope being thus driven from Rome, victorious Bracchian thought on nothing
more than on means how to defeat Sforza. But Sforza having joined the troops
of Micaeli Attendulo to his own, did raise a very great and almost invincible
Army. Picinino and Stella came and encamped betwixt Viterbo and Rispampane*
Sforza likewise marched thither; whereby it happened that in a short space all
the Sforza and Attendulo join together.
forces of these two great factions were ready to fight with one another.
Sforza determined to give battle if the enemy would tarry for him, and had
already caused his foot forces to seize on the forest of Vetrale, so as there
was some likelihood that the Bracchians would have that day received a great
overthrow, if Vrbano The two ar^ies are ready to fight.
de Dertonna sent from Philip, had not arrived, who running betwixt those two
Armies did with tears in his eyes entreat now the one and then the other,
earnestly requesting them in Philips name not to commit so great an error: He
besought them to remember that they had in former time borne arms together
under The remonstrances of Urban of Dertonna to keep them from battle.
one Prince: that under Philip, they begain their strength and greatness: That
those Armies though they were not friends in name, nevertheless they were such
in effect and by alliance: That the victory of one of the parties could not
but procure Philip: He entreated them then to respect him who held them both
(as they well knew) so dear, and unto whom they ought to ascribe whatsoever
they had either of force or reputation in both their Armies.

The authority of so great a Prince, although he was absent, did mightily
prevail with both parties: and Arms being laid down, they began to talk of
agreement. At last it was concluded betwixt them that Picinino should return
into Lombardie, Accord betwixt Sforza and Picinino.
and that it should be lawful for Sforza with his troops to go whither he
pleased: those towns near to Rome excepted held by the Garrisons of Stella
But Picinino (who as it seemed was not well pleased with those conditions of
peace) marching within a while after against the Sabines, where he had renewed
the war, Sforza did likewise have thither, who having crossed the Tyber, went
to Ottricoli. Bracchians Army lay at Maillana not far from thence, where
after certain light skirmishes, and sundry posts being come from Philip,
Picinino craved that he might in safety return with his Army into Lombardie;
The which he freely obtained of Sforza, who of a long time had been evil
disposed of his person.

Picinino had already peaceably entered into Flaminia, when near to Imola he
met with a great Army composed of the forces of Eugenius, the Venetians and
The Pope, Venetians and Florentines in league together.
Florentines, who were leagued together. These men had assembled great troops
together with great Lords and Captains, to force Bolognia which at the pursuit
of the Caneduli had revolted from the Pope; And they had already recovered
certain Cities of the Bologneses, at such time as those of the Pope and the
associates quitting Picininos passage. The charge of this resolution being
committed to Tollentino, who with all the leagues troops went and encamped at
Imola, Picinino likewise came and encamped upon the same territory. Tollentino
was accompanied by Paulo Vrsino, Cato Mellito, Guido Antonio Fauentino, Thadeo
d'Aeste, and diverse other noblemen.

It happened in the mean time that Mellito did surprise two hundred horse of
Picinino deseateth the Army of the league.
the enemies, whereupon the others being spurred forward by jealousy, and by a
desire of booty, did suddenly and inconsiderately crave the battle, to the
which coming disbanded, and in disorder, they were broken and put to rout, and
Tollentino, with Aeste, Vrsino, and diverse others, who till then had gotten
much reputation, were taken by the enemy. Three thousand horse, and a thousand
foot were taken prisoners, and such a great modesty and courtesy in war
was then used, as the like had not been seen, for it is reported that four
men only were slain in that encounter, and about thirty slightly hurt. The
victorious enemy marched toward Philip who had sent for him from Tuscanie,
did openly favor the Bologneses.

Picinino after that he had for a time at the request of the Caneduli in vain
besieged Picinino besieges CastellFranco.
Castel-Franco, went into Lombardie, leaving his son Francisco with six
hundred horse upon the Bolognia territory. It was afterward thought that he
left that cauallerie with his son, because he should speedily aid Marsilio
Carrario to seize on Padua. Carrario comes forth of Germany to take Padua.
This Carrario was son to that Francisco Carrario, who thirty years before
Philip had sent for him from Hungary, and for a time had kept him secret in
Lombardie, in which space he did by fair and great promises win certain
Paduans, that they receiving him into their City, should seize on the gates
and the Castle, unprovided at that time of Garrison, promising them without all
doubt to relieve them, for he was presently ready to furnish them with
whatsoever should be needful for the preservation of the city with the
inhabitants, as soldiers, money and victuals, and that himself (which was the
chiefest) would speedily come thither with a great Army: That those of Verona
Philip soliciteth the Paduans against the venetians.
and Vincenza did secretly resolve to revolt. All which was afterward known
to be forged by him that he might with more ease induce the Paduans to do what
he would have them.

Having by these promises, and sundry others, drawn diverse debauched
companions Marsilio should enter into Padua, who was already come in disguised
habit as an Almaine merchant going to Rome: and coming upon the Vincenzan
territory accompanied with a few, that he might the next day enter into Padua,
he was discovered by some that had familiarly known him in his fathers
Carrario being discovered was executed at venice.
life time, who caused him and his companions to be apprehended, and carried to
Venice, where with two of Philips friends sent to assist him, he was put to
death, and twenty Paduans were convicted of the conspiracy.

Picinino within a while after returning into Flaminia with a brave cauallerie
Sforza (being sent for out of the Duchy of Spoleta by Pope Eugenius, with
whom Sforza by a decree of the Pope and College of Cardinals should during his
life enjoy the Marquizat of the Marches of Ancona, and should be Gonfalloniero
or Captain General of the Church of Rome, and have entertainment given him
for three thousand horse and a thousand foot.

The Province had been a long time molested, and Bracchians forces had
sufficiently run up down: and that peace was treated on, at what time the
Florentines with wonderful speed received news, that the Genoueses had
defeated king King Alphonso is taken and vanquished by the Genoueses.
Alphonso at Sea near to Gayetta, and taken him prisoner with two of his
brethren, namely king John, and the Infant Henry, and John Antonio Prince of
Tarentum, with Philip had understood before of that victory. By this peace the
affairs of Lombardie, Tuscanie, and Flaminia seemed to be wholly pacified, if
a new contention had not risen betwixt the Venetians and Philip about the
confines of the Cremonese. To end which, besides Nicolao d' Aeste who was
chosen Vmpire for both parties, Pope Eugenius did greatly labor, at what time
speedy news were The Genoueses revolt from Philip.
brought, that the Genoueses having slain Oppicino Alciat their Governor,
were revolted from Philip.

The cause of this rebellion was reported to be, because that Philip in despite
of the Alphonso and all the prisoners should be brought to Milan, who having
royally entertained them, not as enemies, but as his guestes, he gave them
leave to depart. Francisco Spinola, who in the second war of Lombardie was
taken by Lauretano upon the Rapallitan Sea, was Author of this rebellion.

It is reported that the Venetians during his imprisonment did oftentimes tell
him and other Gentlemen taken with him, when they came to visit him, how
wretched The venetians persuasions to the Genoueses.
and ill beseeming a thing it was to see Genoa, a City very famous for her
high attempts by sea and land, borne in liberty and to command, and which at
the same time possessed diverse Cities in Europe, to degenerate from the
magnanimity of her with money, ships, and whatsoever should be necessary to
repulse such an injury: That they were ready with the Florentines their
associates (as well in disgrace of Philip, as because it was just and
reasonable that those who are at liberty should defend that of other men) to
maintain and defend the wealth and safety of the Genoueses, as much as if it
were their own.

These men being animated by these remonstrances came to Genoa: But Spinola
returning from his imprisonment, did voluntarily banish himself to Gayetta,
because he knew that Philip suspected him: Some say that Philip sent him
thither to Spinola Author of the Genoueses rebellion.
guard that Town, which having been defended against Alphonsos attempts,
especially by his diligence and valor, he thought in regard thereof that he
had done a Philip, and given him sufficient proof and assurance of his
loyalty: whereupon he returned to Genoa after the battle of Gayetta, where
being coldly entertained by the Officers and Magistrates of the City, he did
incite the people to recover their liberty.

Now the rebellion of the Genoueses being known, Picinino was commanded
speedily to march against them, who having remained a while upon the Genoan
Territories, did nothing there worthy of memory. The Florentines at the
Venetians pursuit did relieve the Genoueses with victuals and Soldiers, not
caring greatly to observe the accord, which Philip had first broken, in that he
had, contrary The Florentines relieve the Genoueses.
to the treaty of peace, made a league with Alphonso, and had a hand in the
affairs of Naples. But in some Authors I find no mention made of this accord,
which lasted so short a time. The Pope had before recovered Bolognia with the
consent of the Caneduli, where the motion of peace was first begun. Francisco
Sforza being come from La Marcainto Flaminia by the Popes commandment, had
caused Philip to condescend to very reasonable conditions. For the presence of
this young man did in some sort qualify his obstinacy. Truce was every where
granted by reason of the great hope the Pope had of peace, when the sudden
commotions of the A treaty of peace, almost concluded, is wholly broken off.
Genoueses did break all, who coming to Portouennere which lies upon the
Genoueses Seacoasts, surprised the Castle, and expulsed the Arragonian
Garrison.

King Alphonso held three places upon that Seacoast which Philip had given him
not long before. Picinino being called forth of the Parmesan where he lay, upon
report of this surprizall (for Philip did openly then take Alphonso's party)
went speedily to recover that Fort. But finding it to be impregnable, both by
situation and art, turning his forces elsewhere, he seized on the Town of
Sarsane; then taking Castel-nouo, and certain other Towns upon that Coast;
and having contrary to Picinino his exploits against the Florentines.
all ancient and modern accords crossed the Macra, he w^nt to Luca, where he
enforced the Luquois to break the peace which they had sworn to the
Florentines; and entering into the Pisan Territory, he took diverse Towns
from the Florentines* Some say that the Luquois sent for Picinino, who
attempted to recover the Picinino was defeated by Ciarpelion and Pietro
Brunora* sent by Sforza. He would undoubtedly have much entangled the
Florentines affairs, if the hope to take Genoa by a commotion, had not made
him to quit Tuscanie, and to go speedily to the Genoueses Territory.

Sforza in the mean time having crossed the River A^o, did in short space
recover Sforza recouereth that which Picinino had taken.
upon the Pisan Territory* whatsoever the enemy had taken by force, and
having brought his Camp nearer to Luca, and made certain Rampires near to
the Gates, he began straightly to shut up the Inhabitants. Picinino, being
disappointed of his enterprise, marched to the Parmesan to get victuals and
supplies. But Sforza went afterward to the streights of the Appenine hills to
meet Picinino, who was coming speedily to succor the Luquois: who having
attempted in vain to force the passages, and being out of hope to effect it,
retired.

The Venetians that were in the field did earnestly solicit, that the Country
The Venetians crave aid of Sforza.
round about Luca might be forraged, the sooner to enforce the Inhabitants to
yield. Sforza with a part of his Army went into Lombardie. For they had
determined, after that they had crossed the River Adda, and furnished the
opposite shore with a strong Garrison, to make incursions upon the Milanois
Territories: from whence Philip drew great sums of money. There was some
likelihood that there by the power of that proud enemy would be so danted, as
laying down arms (which

The Florentines being therewith discontented, conceived some envy against the
Venetians, as though they could not endure to have Luca a very famous City in
Tuscanie, to fall into the hands of their associates. But the Venetians were so
far from being blamed therefore, as on the contrary, waiting no longer for
Sforza's coming, they sent in that journey Francisco Gonzaga as General of
their troops. Pope Eugenius was then (as has been said) at Bolognia, being
come from Florence to make himself master of the City by means of some
excellent fortification. Whereupon with great expenses he caused trenches, and
a rampire, in form of a A Citadell made at Bolognia.
Citadell, to be made at the Gate of La Galera. This fortification and the
murder of Bentiuoglio (who being newly received into the City was slain by
the stroke of a Polax by Baltazar Offidane, Governor of the City, for that he
perceived the people to make too much of him) did in such sort estrange the
Bologneses from the Pope, as the rebellion which soon after ensued, happened
upon none other occasion. But whilst Eugenius made his aboade at Bolognia,
there arrived at Venice John Peleologo The Grecian Emperor, and the chief of
the Greek Empire come to Venice to confer with the Pope concerning Religion.
Emperor of Greece, Joseph Patriarch of Constantinople, and Demetrius Prince
of Morea, accompanied with the Agents of the Churches of Alexandria, Antioch,
and Jerusalem, with the Ambassadors of Trapezond, and the Metropolitan
Prelates of Iberia, and Misia, who from thence being come to Ferrara where the
Pope was,

The Venetians about the same time being out of hope of Sforza's coming into
Lombardie, had commanded (as has been said) the Prince of Mantua, General
The Prince of Mantua General of the Uenetian Army.
of their Army, to make a bridge upon the River Adda. Those that did then
bear Arms for the Venetians were Mellato Tibertino, Brandolino, Pietro
Nauarrini, Guido Antonio, Asturi Fauentio, Sigismondo Malateste, and
Bartholomeo Coioni, Guido Rangoni, Guerriero Martiano, Antonio Martinenga, with
diverse other great personages. Mellato who had first counseled the building of
a bridge, being commanded to lead the first battaillon over the water, departed
about midnight with his Cauallerie, which were ready for that purpose, and
crossed the River at a Foord; and having at his leisure seized on the shore,
the Footmen on the other side without any noise did pass the River that night
in boats prepared to that end.

Now the Venetians being busied on all sides in making the bridge, that they
their small boats became vselesse through the swiftness of the current.
Hereupon diverse tried by swimming to return to their fellows. For it was
likely, that so soon as it was day, and that the Inhabitants should descry
them, they should in regard of the small number of those that were past over,
be forthwith all cut in pieces. But the first of those that in such manner with
their Horses attempted the River were drowned, where with the rest were so
affrighted, as they durst not adventure. When the Sun was up, the Inhabitants
of the next Mountains descrying the enemies on both sides the River, at first
stood amazed at the strangeness of the matter, and aboade together in one
place: but eftsoons perceiving the small number of those that had passed the
River on their side, and what fear they were in, they instantly Lodouico
Sanseuerino, who wintered in the neighbor Villages, under whose conduct in
troops they ran to the River. Mellato for a time bravely sustained Th^se
which had crossed the river are assailed.
their charge, whilst his Footmen escaped to the body of the Army, of whom
many were drowned by violence of the stream; but the most of them by swimming
having gotten the other shore, the Horsemen soon after got over likewise:
Mellato his valor.
Mellato himself being the hindermost in the Rere was the last man that took
the River (therein imitating that Noble Roman Cocles) and so by swimming came
safe to the Army.

The business having thus unfortunately succeeded, the Venetian General
marched into the Country of Gyradade: where having surprised Lugniana, he
would The Venetia^ take Lugniana.
if Picinino upon the report of what had passed had not speedily come thither
with his forces. Departing therefore from Lugniana he came to the River Po
where he spent a whole day in passing over his troops; then three days after
he went and showed himself to the enemy. The Venetians being aduertized a
while before of the enemies passage, did possess a boggie place, through which
only he could come at them, and there stayed for a time. But afterward being
enforced to change place either through fear, or for want of victuals, they
retired into a place of safety; at what time Picinino perceiving them freely
to quit that place, having speedily led his troops through the streights of the
mountains, and ouertaking Picinino defeateth the Venetians at Pontoglio.
them near to the Fort of Pontoglio, he fiercely assailed them, and in a
manner utterly ouer-thr^w them; having cut off five wagons of their baggage
from them.

Now this enterprise falling out contrary to the Venetians project, who
determining to assail the enemy was himself beaten by him, it caused them
more earnestly than before to entreat the Florentines to send Sforza unto them
who was then on the further side of the Po: But neither he nor the Florentines
resolving to do so, they alleged sundry excuses: At the last, entreating
that he might at least wise come to Regio to enforce the enemy to retire for
fear of loosing Parma, it came to pass as they wished. For Picinino, having
ruined Calepia upon the Bergamese, Sforza at the venetians entreaty comes to
Regio.


Sforza being importuned by the Venetians letters came to Regio. But he was
scarce gone forth of Tuscanie, when Picinino being advertised of his departure,
came likewise with speed to Parma. Sforza being come to that place, began
greatly to distrust Pope Eugenius, notwithstanding that he had been reconciled
to him, and made Prince of La Marca. For tyranny leads this mischief along
with it, to make a man distrust his best friends. Whereupon, fearing least in
his absence they should practice ought against his brethren whom he had left
to command in the Province* he sent Italus of Friull thither with certain
troops of horse. He had Italus his departure he had with him at Regio but
the one half of his Army. During his abode at Regio the Venetians on the one
side entreating him to cross the Po, and Sforza on the other craving according
to the conuention to have his troops complete, time ran on without any
memorable exploit. Picinino in the mean time being mindful of the Luquois,
assembled great numbers of laboring men and peasants, and departed from Parma
toward Luca to raise the siege. Sundry exploites betwixt Sforza and Picinino.
Sforza's troops likewise went speedily through the Country of Modena to the
Alps. Sundry atchiuements were there performed on both sides, and diverse
skirmishes of small importance: howbeit as often as Picinino (woe was strongest)
came to fight Sforza did not only make head, but courageously repulsed him.

During these passages in the Alps, or within a while after Francisco Gonzaga
having voluntarily given over his charge retired to Mantua. It is reported that
he departed Francisco Gonzaga gives over his place of General.
scarce well pleased from the Venetians. The cause of his discontent proceeded
Gonzaga being gone, Frederico Contareni the Prouidator did for a time take the
charge of the Army. Afterward, Paulo Troni was sent thither from the City,
who by the Senates advise accusing the negligence of some and the treachery of
others, gave occasion unto diverse that stood already badly affected to them to
crave leave to depart, among whom were Antonio and Asturo Fauentij, and Borsia
D'Aeste son to Nicholao. These with many more being departed, such as had
served under them, Sforza his dem^d in Senate.


Sforza in the mean time demanded of the Florentines and Venetians payment of
that which was due unto him. And sending to Venice for that purpose, his Agent
being brought into the Senate, told them that he was expressly come to put the
Prince and Senate in mind of Sforzaes good services done unto them, and to
receive such sums as were due unto him. It is reported that prince Foscari by
the Senates appointment, answered, That the Venetians were ever accustomed
bountifully to satisfy and pay those who in any sort had loyally served the
weal public, The Prince and Senates answer to Sforzaes Agent.
according to their promise; but as for Sforza, he had been so far from
employing himself for them, as having been earnestly entreated to aid them,
he Sforza his due, or else to discharge him both of his place and promise, that
he might more freely provide for his affairs; it is reported, that thereunto
all men generally answered, That the Senate was well pleased, that he should
take his leave and be gone.

Sforza being nettled with this answer, resolved to reconcile himself to
Philip, Sforzas demand to the Florentines.
whereunto till then he could never be induced, for that he would not abandon
the Pope and his confederates. Whereupon being inflamed with choler and
disdain, he went to the Florentines to demand that which they and the
Venetians did owe him, or if they should refuse it, presently to discharge him
as the Venetians had The Florentines answer to Sforza
him to have patience for a while, and to execute his charge whilst money
might be raised on the people, whose means were much exhausted; and that they
might send to Venice to the Prince and Senate. For they knew well enough, that
Sforza being gone, they should altogether be out of hope of taking Luca, and
were besides doubtful lest some other new war should assail them from
elsewhere.

According to this promise they sent Cosmo de Medicis to Venice, a man, besides
his great wealth, very wise, and beloved of the people. He had in former times
dwelt at Venice, at such time as through envy he was driven from Florence*
where during his abode he had behaved himself with such modesty and courtesy
toward Cosmo de Medicis is sent to Venice.
Whereupon, being afterward restored to his country (for the hearty affection
which he conceived to that City, where he had bin so kindly entertained) his
countrymen called him, the Venetian.

Being come to Venice, and brought into the Senate, it is reported, that with
great feruencie he spoke unto them in this manner: That his love and affection
toward the Venetians being remembered by his Countrymen, it fell out, that,
not as a Tuscan, and borne in Florence, but as a Venetian, he was sent to the
Venetians, to acquaint them with the Florentines great want of money, and that
they were no longer able to make any leuies upon the people for the
entertainment of the Army: That his fellow-Citizens were not cause of the
renewing of the war against those of Luca, but Picinino only, who without
any cause given by the Florentines, had furiously entered upon the Pisan
territory, and had enforced the Luquois to practice novelties against them,
having by force drawn them to the war: But that by the divine goodness it
was come to pass, that being enforced to take arms, they had brought their
enemies the Luquois to that point, that despairing of peace from any place
else, than (according to the report) from the Venetians, they were ready
whether they would or no to fall into the Florentines hands. He did
afterward add; That Sforza being commanded to pass the Appenine hills,
came to Regio, so that during his absence the Luquois had some small
relaxation: That the Florentines had never hindered Sforza, who was so often
entreated by them to cross the Po: But that he, distrusting the Pope, feared
by going too far, lest some attempt would be made upon La Marca, and that
afterward when he would he should not be able to free it from war, resolving
by all means to defend it: That the Florentines had intelligence from very
good place, that of a long time since he had not been paid his pension, he
determined to reconcile himself to Philip; And that without all doubt, if they
did continue to deprive him of his due, he would speedily do so: if they
should lose him, it was certain that they should not only be out of all hope
to take Luca, but their affairs likewise would be greatly endangered. And
therefore he did entreat and adjure them by the sacred League sworn betwixt
them, and by the particular love which he bare to the Venetian name, more
safely to advise both for themselves and their associates in so great danger,
and to pay Sforza, (though he had not deserved it) that which he said was due
unto him: But if they should still refuse to satisfy him, and that for want
thereof, he should go to the enemies side, he did let them know, that the
Florentines resolved to follow him whither soever he went, not as their
Captain, (seeing they could no otherwise do) but as their Lord and Governor.

This being said, Prince Foscari by the Senates advise answered: That the
Florentines did well in holding him for a Venetian, ever since that being
driven forth of his Country, he retired himself to Venice: as also for that
since the same time, the goodwill and affection of the Venetians, as well of
public as particular persons, had ever been such toward him, as the Senate
and people would willingly do him all courtesy, and would as soon commit any
charge of importance unto him as to any one of the chiefest Senators: By
means whereof, the Venetians had for his sake granted diverse things to the
Florentines, which otherwise they would have refused. But concerning his
complaint, that the Luquois expecting to have peace by the Venetians means,
had refused to yield themselves, he knew not how to answer it, because it was
the first time that ever he heard that fable: That the Florentines should find
that the Luquois had invented that report, who did secretly write so to their
Countrymen, diverse of the wealthiest among them being retired to Venice. And
that he should not imagine that the same proceeded from any Senator: if it were
otherwise, they should do well to show some presumptions or letters sent to
the enemy; for they would take order, that those who should be convicted of
such a crime, should serve for an example to others, not to enterprise in time
to come any such matter against the friends and allies of the weal public;
yet he would not deny but that the Ambassadors of the Luquois were in full
Senate willed to depart, and if they could not enter the City by reason of the
siege, they should certify their fellow-citizens by letters, that if they
would quit Philips party, the Venetians, who desired the wealth and
advancement of the Luquois, would in such sort deal for them, as the
Florentines their allies should leave both their siege and the war; whereunto
the Luquois had never since made any answer: They did likewise freely
confess, that they had given them such an hope, but he denied that ever they
had promised them any aid or succor. As concerning Sforzaes demands, he
could not accuse the Venetians of avarice or ingratitude, for not paying that
which they had promised. For, he was to believe that their Ancestors had
appointed stipends and rewards for soldiers to this end, that their
pay-masters who paid them, might when need should be make use of their
service. But as for Sforza, whom the Florentines so much affected, he never
fought for the Venetians, but rather when they stood in need of him, he had
boldly denied them all favor and aid. That he might at his pleasure depart,
and that they whom he had ever so curiously assisted should take care to pay
him his due: And whereas they threatened them to break the league, and to follow
Sforza, he said that it was an easy matter for the Florentines to break their
faith when they pleased, but that he did hope, that ere long they might repent
them of so disloyal and discourteous a resolution, and withal be punished
both by God and men (who had hitherunto preserved them) according to their
deserts, for breaking their league and alliance.

Cosmo with this answer taking his leave of the Senate within a while after
went Cosmo goes to the Pope.
to Ferrara to Pope Eugenius, and entreated him to send in his own name to the
Venetians, to try whether they would quit their former resolution. The
Florentines after Cosmo's departure sent Iuliano de Vantiati to Venice, who
being entertained with less respect than Cosmo, and being a very wise man,
did soon acquaint his fellow-Citizens with the small account which the
Venetians made of any thing that concerned the Florentines.

Picinino in the mean time (as has been said) being come to the Alps, and
Picinino cannot pass the Alps.
perceiving that in regard the passages were held by the Sforzians, he could
not pass, Asturo Fauentio with two companies of men at Arms to forage and
wast the Florentines country) he followed him at the heels with the body of
the Army, and by the way took the tower of Aureola. In that place he received
certain news of the treaty newly made betwixt Philip and Sforza, and of the
contents thereof, which were (as some say) That the Florentines not mentioned in
the accord (because without the Venetians consent they durst not do it) should
make truce for ten years with the Luquois, and in the mean time keep
whatsoever The articles of agreement betwixt Philip and Sforza.
near to Luca: That Sforza should be Judge of the controversies which should
arise during that truce, and the revenger of the wrongs done by either of the
parties: Hereupon alliance was contracted betwixt Philip and Sforza on these
conditions, That neither Picinino nor any else bearing Arms for Philip should
molest the Florentines, in regard Sforza was then as before, in their pay: And
that Philip should give him his daughter Bianca to wife, whom he should send
with her train and dowry upon the Parmesan to the Castle Firmiano, a place
appointed for the wedding.

The Venetians were displeased with this agreement: but Picinino much more; The
Venetians and Picinino are disple^sed with this accord
who after that he had mightily complained of Philips ingratitude toward him,
and Flaminia with his Army, he did at last assail Ostasio Polentano Prince of
Rauenna, who for a long time had been under the Venetians protection, and
never gave over to pursue and torment him, till he had enforced him by his own
Citizens to follow Philips party. Rauenna by this means being no more at the
Venetians devotion, he attempted a greater matter. For he did at the same time
take Imola and Bolognia from the Pope.

At this stay stood the affairs of Tuscanie and Flaminia, whilst that Mellato
(unto whom after the Prince of Mantua his departure, the Venetians had given
^ellato conducteth the Venetian Army.
charge of their Army, and yet not honoring him with the title of General)
after he had recovered the valleys and Castles which Picinino had taken upon
the Bergamese the precedent winter, entered furiously into the Cremonese, where
he Picinino being moved at these news, sent for Italus of Friull forth of
Vmbria, and his son Francisco; and commanded his son to guard the Cities
and strong Towns which he had lately taken in Flaminia, and the other to
follow him into Lombardie with his Cauallerie. Being gone forth of Flaminia, he
went and encamped with his Army near to the Po, at that place where it
nearly presses the City of Cremona: Then having forthwith crossed the river,
he went and besieged Casal-maior. The Venetian having notice of the enemies
coming, and having committed the guard of other towns to the Inhabitants, put
a strong Garrison into Casall-Maior, and Soncina, two strong towns on the
Cremonese: They did besides enjoin Mellato to guard the shore of the river
Oglio with all his forces. He came and encamped at Bina twelve miles from
CasalMaior, where after that he had fortified his Camp, he did aid the
besieged, and by many Sentinelles and Corps-du-gard defended the other shore
of the

There was in the mean time a rumor spread, that Gonzaga, who lay still at
Gonzaga makes alliance with Philip.
Mantua, had secretly made a league with Philip. This being reported to the
Senate, it was thought most expedient to appea^e him if it were possible by
their Ambassadors. And to this purpose diverse of the chiefest Senators were
sent unto him, who had of a long time been very familiarly acquainted with
him. They being come to Mantua, the better to win this Princes heart; began
highly to praise him, and to extol his perpetual loyalty toward the
Venetians, and their reciprocal affection toward him: And although that in
their passing by the Army Discourse betwixe Gonzaga and the venetians.
they had found a great part of the number of the Cauallerie to be wanting,
The Mantuan^ excuse.
the Ambassadors entreating him that since himself did determine to live at
peace, he would at leastwise permit Lodouico Gonzaga his son to be enrolled
in their pay: he did not altogether refuse it, nor yet wholly granted it. At
the last they came Philps party, till news were first brought him (which God
forbid) that Venice were either taken or ruined by him. The conclusion of their
whole discourse was, That as a lover of peace he detested war: And that the
Venetians ought not to marvel if he did reenforce his own troops; for he
did it, fearing least if he should leave his frontires naked of Gar^ison,
whilst the war was so near him, he should not be able when he would, to
keep and defend them from being vvronged. The Ambassadors were heerevvith
dismissed.

Picinino in the mean time had for nineteen days together battered
Casal-major* Picinino (...) peth before Casal-Maior.
His Army consisted of twenty thousand fighting men, and that of the
Venetians of half as many: But that long siege had put the Senate in hope,
that Picinino's terrible attempts would be brought to nothing, before he could
attain to that which he had conceived in his mind, in regard he had so long,
contrary to all men's expectation, continued before one place only, and done
no great good there: whereupon they hoped that his vehement heat would at last
be cooled: And that Soncina in the Cremonese, and diverse other places elsewhere,
were as strong by situation and in munition as that which he then besieged;
every of which might not alone amuse

But the fall of a Tower did in such sort daunt those of Casal, as they began
openly Those of Casall desire parley.
to talk of yielding. The enemy at the first would not accept their
submission, using delays of purpose, till such time as he had made agreement
with the Gotolengians and Gambarians concerning the treachery, which they had
secretly practiced; who were determined to revolt. Whereunto being solicited by
Picinino's Agents they did with him undertake an horrible villainy; which was
to enclose Mellato, with his troops, as he passed through the Bressan
Territory; to the end that the Venetians troops being at one time assailed on
the one side by the peasants, and on the other by the Soldiers, might be
wholly defeated. This treacherous plot being A complot to assail the Venetian
Army on all sides.
thus concluded, those of Casal were received on composition. Picinino had
thought at his first arrival upon the banks of Oglio to have broken the
Venetians as they were marching; and therefore he would not compound with the
Casalins, till he

Casall being thus yielded, he drew about midnight toward the River Oglio, and
Casall yields to Picinino.
having sent certain light horse before to sound the foord; he learned by them
that the Venetians kept the opposite shore* yet nevertheless he held on his
way, and encamped by daie-breake upon the banks of the River Oglio, four
miles beneath Bina: And forthwith, so soon as his Army drew near to the
place, he prepared all things necessary for an assault.

Mellato suspecting that it was but a policy of the enemy, and that his
designs Mellato in the mean time was ready to send Cristofero and Giouanni
Tollentino with their companies of men at Arms in Garrison to Verona. The
Mantuan was not of this opinion: The Prouidatori that were present at this
consultation, and reposing more trust in the Mantuan than he deserved, were
likewise of his opinion. He on the contrary, either by Treachery plotted
against the Uenetians.
chance, or else because he had some suspicion, not of the whole matter, but
of some part of the plot, did still persist in his own opinion.

The enemy removed his camp from place to place, whereupon the Venetian was
greatly troubled to see him so often day and night to shift places; who after
he had spent certain days in such like feigned shows, all things being in
readiness, about midnight he sent the third part of his forces, without any
rumor at all to pass over the Bridge, which was forth of the enemies view, to
join with Gonzaga's troops: And he in the mean time still showed himself on
the opposite shore the better to color his enterprise, himself resolving
within a while after to pass over at the bridges of Macharia and Canet.

The Venetian Army had like to have been overthrown, being enclosed by the
enemies ambuscado, and by the treachery of the inhabitants. But that good God
unto whom (as we have often said) all Republics are pleasing, and especially
those whose beginning (like that of the Venetians) has been Religiously
established, would not suffer it to be so. It happened very fitly for this
purpose that a certain man whose name was Bareta Gotholengian sent by his
compartners to the enemy to The treachery is discovered to Mellato.
this end, was taken by the Venetian forragers, and brought to Mellato; who,
after that he had promised to free him from all punishment, did discover unto
him the danger wherein the Venetian Army was. Mellato hearing it, made no
longer delay, Mellato does speedily dislodge.
but suddenly discamping, did with all his troops without any danger take the
Picinino had already about the fourth watch of the night sent his forces over
at Macharia, where the troops, sent to the Mantuans Camp, did go and receive
them: In the mean time word was brought them that the Venetian having speedily
dislodged was twelve miles onwards on his way; That the inhabitants of the
Country, did not dare to m^ddle with them in regard they saw no man pursue
them.

The Mantuans revolt being understood at Venice, they presently decreed to Arm
a mighty nauall Army against him of threescore and five Galleys and five
Gallions, with a great number of other small vessels. Pietro Lauretano
General of this Army A Uenetian n^uall Army against the Mantuan.
entering by the mouth of the Po, into the Mantuans Country, was expressly
commanded to wast and spoil whatsoever he met with* Mellato in the mean time
was come to Bagnols, where he had fortified his Camp with trenches and
rampires. He determined to send part of his forces to Bressia, which was not
far off, whereunto the inhabitants of the City opposing, and craving to have
the guard of the Gates Francisco Barbaro commanded in the Town, a man very
discreet, and well acquainted with affairs of importance. He by good advise
hindered them from so doing, and showed them the danger whereto the Cities
State would be brought; if those of one party alone committed to the guard of
the City, the rest should be accounted enemies, and traitors, seeing they
reposed no more trust in them: For then they would practice novelties, and
would in hate to the contrary party, openly hazard all things possible for
them. The authority of the man did The Martinenga's and Auogadres in Bressia
are reconciled together.
much prevail with them, and according to his advise, the Venetian Magistrates
which were within the City, guarded the Gates: Then he did reconcile the
Martinenga's Auogadres together, the heads and chief of the two factions by a
new alliance; wherein by means of Leonardo Martinenga, and to the great profit
of the Commonwealth, he made Paris de Lodron who held certain Castles in the
Mountains of Bressia, and Pietro Auogadre who were mortal enemies, good
friends.

Picinino resolved to shut up the Lake of Benac, and the river Mincia from
Mellato's Picinino his design to (...) the Venetian Army.
Army, to the end it might receive no Venetian succor: and being in this
manner starued (for it was certain that it could get victuals no where, but
from the Town) he assured himself of the entier ruin of the Venetian forces:
Whereupon in this resolution he divided his troops into two parts. Gonzaga,
and Lodouico Vermio, did fiercely fall upon the Verona-territorie, and having
seized on Valeza and the bridge Giouanni Malauolte who conducted three hundred
horse from Bressia to Verona, falling by misaduenture near to the bridge into
the enemies hands, was wholly despoiled of his Cauallerie. He did besides
reduce under his command all the inhabitants of the Lake of Benac: and the
Mantuan Prince took Pescara, seated at the head of the River Mincia, and
Lonata upon the Mountains of Bressia, which had been his.

The Lake of Benac, by some termed La Garda, (to speak somewhat of it) is the
The description of the lake of ^enac.
pleasantest Lake of all Italy, and is more long than broad. It extends in
length Adams apples. That side thereof which looks toward Verona on the right
hand, has besides Pescara, Langissa, Bardolin, and la Garda, whereof the Lake
takes the name, the towers of Malsesina which some call Malaselse. And
opposite to that upon the Lake is the Town of Sermion, the Country of Catullus
the sweet and eloquent Poet, with that great huge stone, a mark of antiquity,
which appears above water. After Sermion comes Riuoltella, called by some
Riualtella, Manerbia, Feliciana, Portuesia, and lastly Sales, the chief of the
Province. It has besides on the North-side, very high and steep Mountains
as far as Riua. This place with Penetra which appears not far from thence
upon a Rock, did in times past belong to the Territory of Trent. The Borough
of Nac is to be seen above the Fort of Penetra, whereby we may conjecture that
the Lake was in old time called Penac, which we by changing of a Letter call
Benac. The Ancients called it Penac because it was so

Now all the places from the Lake on the hither side and beyond the River
Mincia being taken, the Mantuan marched with his forces to Vidizolles, where
Picinino lay encamped. Blondus says that he departed from that Camp when he
went the first time to scour the Verona-Territorie: But let it be how it will,
it is certain that Philips forces during the incursions upon the Veronois,
were encamped at that village seated upon the River Clesia, in the midway
betwixt Bressia and the Lake of Benac: Against whom Mellato, being desirous to
oppose his forces, went with his troops to Gauarda. Barbaro sent him from
Bressia a brave troup of young footmen; and from the Mountains great
multitudes of Soldiers came unto him, so as in a Five and twenty thousand men
in the Venetians Camp.


Mellato with his forces seized on all places along the Mountains, from St.
Euphemius even to La Garda. The River Clesia separated two goodly Armies ready
to fight, by reason that it was too deep in that place, nor in any sort
foordable. Mellato resolved to fight: But understanding afterward that
Picinino's Army was mightily increased by Gonzaga's arriual, he abstained from
battle; As also because he distrusted certain Captains, who had a long time
followed Gonzaga's camp; but the event did afterward manifest whether he had
cause to distrust them. For diverse of them having an inckling thereof, and
perceiving that he took from them the means to do hurt, did withdraw them
selves from his camp and went to that of the Prince Mellato then fearing least
some sudden revolt might draw the Venetians affairs into some danger, and
being desirous to take all occasion from those who practiced novelties, having
lodged the greatest part of his forces in Bressia, he sent the residue into
Garrison to the Cities, and Towns near adioining, which were under the
Venetians obedience. And by this means Picinino had time and leisure to remove
his camp from place to place: whose only aim tending to keep the Cities
victuals from Mellato's troops, he went with his Army and besieged Sales:
But those within it having bravely defended themselves, he approached with his
Army near to Feliciana and Manerbia.

Thereupon, the Forlani, and those of Monteclaro embraced Philips party.
Within Those of Sales and other town near adioining yield to Philip.
a while after having received those of Sales, and all the other inhabitants
upon the Lake in Philips name, he marched to Bagnolls; from whence on a sudden
coasting about with his Army, he first took Pontoglio, then Palacicla, and
diverse other Towns without any difficulty. All this was done in the
Champaine. But in the Camonick valley, they fought at the same time with better
success. For Antonio Bechari with two thousand horse did by the consent of the
inhabitants make himself Master of the whole valley. Barbaro sent Giouanni la
Conte, Bartholmeo Coioni, and Leonardo Martinenga against him with great troops
of Mountaniers, who did greatly affect Martinenga, who entering on a sudden
into the vale, and having made Great spoil in the Camonick valley.
a great slaughter of the enemies, did put all those of that rebellious

The end of the second Book of the third Decad.
THE THIRD BOOK OF THE THIRD DECAD Venice.
The Contents of the third Book of the third Decad.
A False rumor being spread in Venice concerning the battle won at
Coloignes MELLATO attempteth in vain to go from Bressia to Verona. NICHOLAO
D'AESTE makes sundry attempts against the Venetians. The Venetians surrender
the Polesin to AESTE. MELLATO with great travel over the tops of the
Mountains arriueth at Verona. A great nauall Army comes by the Po, upon the
Mantuan Territory. Bressia is straightly besieged. The Senate determines to
renew the alliance with SFORZA. MELLATO being made General of the Army,
resolves to relieve Bressia with victuals. PARIS LODRON vanquisheth the
enemies near to the River Sarca. The Venetians resolve to prepare a nauall
Army for the Lake of Benac. Galleys are carried by maine strength over high
Mountains into that Lake. SFORZA allieth himself with the Venetians and
Florentines. PICININO and the Prince of Mantua having crossed the River Adice
take diverse Towns on the Verona and Vincenzan Territories from the Venetians.
The Venetians fight against the enemies by Land along the Lake of Benac with
good success.

WHilst al these warlike actions were done in the Those of Chiau^ yield to
Philip.
Camonicke valley, those of Chiaua yielded themselves to Philip. This new
Rebellion was accompanied with a greater loss. For Guerriero Martiano, and
Michaeli Gritti (whom Mellato had sent with three hundred foot, and a hundred
and fifty horse to lie in Garrison in that place) were defeated. Picinino went
afterward Picinino besieges Rhoades,
and encamped before Rhoades: whereat the Venetians being moved, marched
thither with a company of Mercinarie Soldiers, all young men, chosen among
the inhabitants of the Mountains of Valtropia and Seroliana* to raise the
siege. These troops setting forward at the beginning of the night, stayed
near to Passirana and Paderna. Picinino being aduertized of their approach one
another, Picinino did embattaile his Soldiers. Mellato did not refuse the
fight; but sent some of his troops disbanded to scour the plains, and the
skirmish being begun, he did by little and little send troops of horse among
his footmen against the enemy, and without any disorder, retired his wearied
and hurt men, putting those that were able and fresh in their places; both
sides dealing so cunningly, as The two Armies ^kirmish.
when Picinino's troops came forth of the Ambuscado, Mellato's not being moved
remained firm.

Now the fight having continued from day-breake till it was almost night, with
greater loss on the enemies side than on the Venetians, both sides retired;
Picinino to Coloignes, and the Venetian to Bressia. And although Fortune at
that time no Mellato had broken and put the enemy to rout. This rumor was not
only spread in the City of Bressia, but being brought to Venice, the whole
City received such content, as the people being ouerioyed, came running from
all parts to the Marketplace to rejoice with one another; by means whereof
the Republike had like to have fallen into a great and wonderful danger.

There were in the City great numbers of Histrian and Dalmatian Mariners, and
Rowers, who were sent for thither expressly to furnish the Nauall Army which
The vnlook^ for danger whereinto the Commonwealth was like to have fallen.
the Magistrates, nor chief Senators that were come thither to appease the
tumult, they began to break open greater shops, and to fall into an open
rebellion. But at the arrival of Pietro Lauretano this sedition was soon
quieted. It is reported that these Mechanic people at his very name stood
still and offered to do whatsoever it

Lauretano by good deserts had in such sort gotten the love and good will of
all men, as not only those mean people of the City, but those of greatest
place and authority did reverence and respect him. The which he had easily
obtained by Lauretano respected and beloved of every one.
his courteous meekness and hearty love toward the Republic, which does as
much cherish and embrace their virtues, as it does abhor and detest pride and
ambition. As also for that the Commonwealth had for the space of twenty years
employed him in every war of importance. And that time also when the
affairs Philip, the Senate did choose him, notwithstanding his great age, for
to command the great Nauall Army which it had prepared against the Mantuan.

It consisted of greater number of vessels than had been at any time before
seen The number of the vessels in the Venetians Nauall Army.
in any fleet upon a River. For there were more than an hundred and threescore
vessels of all sorts, among whom were five Gallions higher and greater than
were usually made, and about threescore and ten Galleys; the residue being
small vessels like to little Brigantines. But whilst these things were making
ready in the City, Picinino four days after the encounter coming back
from Coloignes to Rhoades Rhoades and diverse other towns, yield to Picinino.
with all his troops, enforced the inhabitants to yield. The like did those of
Bomedes, Paternia and Passeria. The next day after, the Monticulans, Iulians,
Omians, and Brienses yielded unto him upon his word; and at the last, having by
force seized on Isea, he did on the mountains take Valtropia.

And within a while after he possessed all the plains on the Bressan
Territories, with a great part of the mountains: the new Orges excepted, which
he determined to assail upon the first occasion. M^llato, Barbaro, and the
other officers of Bressia suspecting Picinino his design.
that Picinino's designs did only tend to shut up the passages from the
Venetian troops, to the end that all relief being kept from them, he might
famish them in Bressia; did secretly resolve that Mellato, leaving certain
troops for the guarde of the City, should go his way with the residue of the
Army to Verona, or whither fortune should lead him.

Now Blondus says, That about the third watch of the night he came forth of
Mellato comes forth of Bressia.
Bressia with five thousand men both horse and foot. We do not find in
Montanus Pasius of Arimini sets down but three thousand: And because both of
them were present at this war, I do the rather follow them: But of what
number soever this Army was it marched speedily to the banks of the River
Mincia: where after it had attempted beneath the Bridge of Valeza to pass at a
foord, and could not by reason of the depth of Mellato is constrained to
return to Bressia.
the waters, and for that the enemies were encamped on the opposite shore,
having lost some horse, it returned to Bressia with as great speed as it came
thence. Picinino marched toward Bressia with an intent to surprise the
Venetian, but he was prevented by his enemies speed, whereupon he blamed his
own negligence for loosing so fair an occasion; and without more delaie he
marched against the new Orges, Mellato in the mean time attempted to pass by
another way, which although it was as dangerous as the former had nevertheless
better success.

Whilst these things were done near to Bressia, Nicholao D'Aeste did make
great The Duke of ^errara complains to the Pope.
complaints to Pope Eugenius who remained still at Ferrara, how the Venetians
did hate him; saying, That he knew of a certain that they had of late
prepared a Nauall Army: And because he was assured that they did suspect him
to have been the cause that the Prince of Mantua had forsaken their alliance,
he had cause to doubt that the same great preparation was rather made against
him than any other. The Pope sought to comfort him, and to feed him with better
hope, assuring him

But notwithstanding all this, Aeste levied a brave Cauallerie, and sent for
Guido Nicholao d'Aeste forti^ieth his own Estate.
Fauentio with fifteen hundred horse, and three hundred foot, and called home
his son Borsia, who was in Sforza's Camp with six hundred horse; saying that
he raised those forces only to defend his own, and not to offend any man, He
did afterward cause a great quantity of ground to be cut which lies betwixt
the Po and Padua drawing a broad and deep trench from the River to the
marshes; commanding the Ferrarois to take Arms, and that a speedy levy of
Soldiers should

The Pope began to exhort Nicholao D'Aeste who was with him, and the
Venetians Nichol^o (...) f^eed from fear and suspicion.
by his Ambassadors, to lay down Arms, and to embrace some honorable
accord, but with this condition, That the Venetians should surrender to
Nicholao D'Aeste Rouigo, with seven Castles of the Pollessin Island, which
seven and thirty years before had been engaged to them. Aeste being overcome
by the Venetians bounty, did forthwith change his determination, and relieved
the Venetian Army with victuals and all other necessaries, which already was
going up the Po; the like did the Ferrarois following their Princes example.

In the mean time those of Orges in the Bressan Country did valiantly resist
Philips forces. But thar which neither strength nor any attempt could execute,
was done through the treachery of Pietro of Luca. He being sent by Mellato
with The new Orger, are yielded unto Picinino by treachery.
three hundred horse for the guarde of the Town, within a short space after it
was besieged, did deliver both the Town and her inhabitans into the hands of
Picinino. But whilst the enemy was busied at this siege Mellato did attempt
to pass toward Verona: Barbaro and the other Officers of the City being
desirous to have it so, to the end that the City being discharged of such a
multitude might be less afflicted with the dearth of victuals; as also
because they thought it most profitable for the Commonwealth to have some
troops near to Verona that might make head against the enemy if he should
chance to march thither.

Mellato hereupon took that way which seemed most commodious. And because that
of the champain country had proved successesse, he resolved to iourny through
the high Mountains and Forests that were in a manner in-accessible. Giacomo
Antonio Marcello a very valiant person, and Giouanni Villano Captain of a
company Thadeo d'Aeste with six hundred horse, and a thousand foot, should
tarry behind for the guard of the City, the residew were commanded, every
man to be ready with their Arms and baggage to depart about Mellato departs
from Bressia and marches toward the mountain^s.
the second watch of the night. The troops being come forth of the City at
midnight marched through the vale of Sabia to the mountains. Diverse Bressans,
some being persuaded, but most of them provoked by their own proper motion,
did follow the Venetian Ensigns, among whom were Pietro Auogadre, Leonardo
Martinenga, with Antonio his brother.

Those of the valley of Sabia being amazed to see these troops, took arms,
being Those of the valley of Sabia seek to stop their passage.
assured of the hatred which the Bishop of Trent their Lord did bear toward
the Venetians; but not daring to assail them openly, they brake down the
strait passages through which the Venetians were to pass, and if they met with
any straglers, they did either villainously murder them, or else throw them
down headlong into those deep valleys. The Venetian Captain dissembled all
these wrongs, and entreated the soldiers to make haste, and not to abandon
their ensigns. And having with great labor and travel passed the first days
iourny, about the second watch of the night on the top of the mountain of the
last valley, he made a stand, and commanded the weary soldiers to eat and
take their rest: Then by daybreake the companies being dislodged, Paris Lodron,
who was before reconciled to Mellato, who having followed him with all his
forces over those difficult mountains of Italy, without any fear of the
Mountaniers did late in the evening encampe in an assured place.

Al men thought it fit in that place to rest the tired soldiers and horses who
were wearied with a continual march of two whole days and nights. But Mellato
would by no means suffer it, saying, that it behooved him to make haste before
that the Bishop of Trent were advertised of their passage through his
territories; yet nevertheless for all his haste, the enemy had notice thereof,
who having the same night sent Polonians and Maclouians to cause the
Mountaniers to take arms, the army

There was in the midst of the mountains a ragged uneasy way; on the one
side whereof rocks and great ruins of stone-quarries did ouer-hang, and on
the other appeared very deep valleys, full of torrents, and of so great a
distance to look upon, as whatsoever was thrown down into the botome, of what
bigness soever it were, would yet appear less by the one half. The cruel
Inhabitants of those mountains meeting with certain straglers from the troops
threw them headlong into those deep bottoms. The enemy had seized on those
streights, and the Venetians The enemies intent.
had already perceived his intent, which was, to roll down huge stones upon
the Army, which would have greatly endangered them.

Grief and despair had in a manner seized on all the troops; not so much in
regard of the difficulty of the ways, as for fear of their lives. Which the
General perceiving, he commanded Cauacalbon, Rangon, and Guido, three valiant
young men, The enemies are d^iuen (...) the mountains tops.
to go secretly with three hundred footmen, armed with swords and short pikes,
to assail the enemies in the crooked passages of the mountains. These men
having bravely executed his commandment, and driven the enemies from the
mountain tops, the army passed on in safety.

These iij. hundred men, leaving their heavy armor in that place from whence
they had driven the enemies, did the remainder of that night march before the
army to discover the ways and forest. Then being come in the morning to
Thegna, the Inhabitants of the place at the first did not stir, but
afterward falling upon the rereward, they took from the Venetians a great
part of their baggage, and

The next day, the troops which were to pass over, staying upon the River
banks, descried the armed enemies on the other shore, who were brought
thither by Lodouico Vermio whom Picinino had speedily sent by the Lake. Some
say that Vermio and Francisco, son to Vinciguerra, went to beat back the
Venetians in the forest of Penetra. Whether it were there, or near to the
River (for those places are not far asunder) that the enemy showed himself,
it is certain that the Venetians Leonardo Martinenga The Venetians great
distress.
to Vinciguer Lord of Arques, whose near kinseman he was, to use means if it
were possible by fair promises to draw him to their party, but if he should
refuse the Venetians friendship, yet to entreat him to oblige the Venetians so
far to him, as not to enterprise aught against them, and to withdraw his
forces forth of the forest of Penetra. Whereunto he was so far off from
giving consent, as on the contrary he did forthwith, against the law of
Nations, take Martinenga prisoner, and binding Great (...)
him hand and foot, sent him to Mantua where he died.

Martinenga's misfortune did much more amaze Mellato and the rest, and there
Pilosus a Centurion, who being come into the forest of Penetra with a thousand
men, or (according to some) with four hundred to open the passage for his
fellows, opportunely arrived. The (...) of a Centurion.
It is reported, That this man deceived the enemy by a new stratageme. For the
enemy possessing the forest, through which they were of necessity to pass,
and the narrow passages, (where ten resolute men would with ease have kept
back thousands) being guarded day and night, he being not able to drive the
enemy

There was a wood near to the top of the mountain where the enemies lay,
wherein he placed in the night time twenty tall soldiers, and commanded them
carefully to mark whether the number of those that kept on the top did wax
less, and if they should quit the place, speedily to seize on it: And
himself, as though he had despaired of being able to pass, caused diverse
Torches, and other Lights to be fastened to Lances ends, and with them fained to
go further off. This did not only make them believe that the Venetians were
gone away, but did confirm them in that opinion, in regard it did not avail
them to tarry there. Whereupon men were preserved by the labor and industry
of one alone man.

By this means the troops past along in safety. Blondus affirms that the
Venetians lost above eight hundred Horse in that journey. M^ntanus, and Pasius
of Arimini do not mention so great loss. During these exploits in the
Mountains, Lauretano being come up the River Po against the stream, resolved
to tarry for the troops that were appointed for the Navy, at the separation
of the River, a little beneath the walls of Ficarolles. For, of eight thousand
men, appointed for the Vessels, he had taken in but three thousand. But
whilst the Venetians delaied time, The Mantuan fortifi^th the Po.
and matters went slowly forward at Venice, the Prince of Mantua at Hostillia
stopped the passage of the Po with a strong Rampire, and caused great piles to
be driven

All this was done upon the Po. Philip after the taking of the new Orges, was
very sorry when he heard that Mellato with his troops had escaped through the
mountains. And although Harvest was ended, and that it was time to send his
troops Philip exhorts his Captains to besiege Bressia.
to Winter, yet never the less he sent for Picinino, and the other Captains
of his Army, entreating them to go and besiege Bressia, telling them by word
of mouth how desirous he was to have that City besieged, and that the greatest
pleasure they could do him, was to have that Town taken by the valorous
conduct of his Captains, the which besides the great wealth would purchase him
a very notable victory. He willed them then to go their way, saying, that he
hoped that the same City, unprovided of a Garrison, molested with famine and
pestilence, would in a short space either by force or fair means be reduced
under his obedience. After he had thus entreated and exhorted Picinino, and his
other Captains, he dismissed them. Picinino within a while after, and without
delay, went and besieged Bressia Philips Army (...) Bressia
with twenty thousand men, and brought great numbers of pieces of battery
near to the walls, among which there were fifteen brought from Milan, of such
bigness, as the least of them did carry a bullet of three hundred pound
weight. The battery was great and furious against the tower of Mombellane, and
other places of the City, whereof ensued such ruin of the walls, as the
Inhabitants being daunted at the very first, began openly to talk of
yielding.

In this siege the Officers of the City were for a time more careful and
diligent, The order which the besieged kept in the City.
than were the enemies attempts fearful or dangerous. And therefore it was
concluded among them that Christofero Donato, the Cities Magistrate, should
remain in his own house, and courteously entertain as well those that should
come to visit Barbaro in like manner who was Governor, The besieged are
greatly assured.
and General of the Garrison, being a valiant and brave Gentleman, should
still be near to the walls and gates of the City; should place the
corps-de-guard; and by his speech give hope to the Soldiers and Townsmen. The
which he did so cunningly by feigned letters and messengers, and did so comfort
them all, as there was none among them, notwithstanding death and wounds, but
had rather to obey the Venetians than to fall into the enemies hands. In this
resolution they fought thrice with the enemy with good success, sometimes
from the walls, and otherwhiles by sallies. And as much as the Bombards (for so
we will term these engines Notable service (...) Women.
selves than the Men, among whom divided into Hundreds, and Tens, Braida
Auogadre, as Valiant as Noble, did a notable service to the Commonwealth.

But two insupportable mischiefs daily increasing, plague and famine, the
Magistrates Famine and pestilence assl^ct the besieged.
permitted those who were less fit for the Cities defense to go whither they
would. Hereupon diverse left the City, and especially those of the Gybelline
faction. The Town was so desolate, as of seven thousand which were numbered at
the beginning of the siege for the Cities defense, there remained but three
thousand with the Magistrates and the Garrison. This small number did increase
the enemies boldness, so as they began more than before nearely to press
the besieged, by new mounts and mines, and by all other warlike engines. And on
the other part the besieged did in all places very valiantly resist the
enemies, not eschewing any pain or danger.

An assault being given to the Tower Mombellane, and the wall being beaten The
valiant defense of the besieged.
down flat to the ground, they did not only make head against the enemy who
was almost entered into the City, but valiantly repulsed him from the ruins of
the wall with great slaughter and loss; and not only once, but diverse and
sundry times. In the end, the Inhabitants loialtie was so great, together with
the valor and industry of Barbaro and the rest, as the City being well
defended, Picinino grinding his teeth Picinino is enforced to raise his Camp
from before Bressia.
and weeping in a manner for spite and rage, discamped in the midst of
Winter, having lost in this siege above two thousand men, among whom were many
Noble persons; and the besieged, accounting Townes-men and Soldiers, lost not
half so many.

The siege being raised, the Soldiers were sent to Winter. During the siege of
Bressia, Mellato accounted whatsoever he had till then done to be nothing, if
he did not open a way to relieve the besieged with men and victuals. And
himself with his troops pursuing his journey did in the Valley of Lagarina
(as Pasius of Arimini writes) take Burgo and Coruario by force: Then coming
to Penetra, he received Penetra yielded to the Venetians
it at the hands of Francisco, Son to Vinciguer. It is reported that in this
journey Pilosus, who by his valor had in former time saved the Venetian
troops, was grievously hurt, and that the next day after he died of his
wound. His disaster being Pilosus death.
known at Venice, the Senate did speedily send the skillful est Physicians and
Chirurgians

The Senate in acknowledgement of these exploits and others of great
consequence, performed by Mellato, did in his absence declare him General of
their Army, and did daily send him supplies of money, and victuals, and did
by letters exhort Mellato is made General of the Venetian Army
him to relieve Bressia with victuals, if it were possible. For the danger of
that City, which by Barbaro's letters they understood to be furiously
assailed by the enemy, did very much trouble them.

Pietro Auogadre was present; who coming to Verona with the Venetian Philips
obedience. Yet he greatly feared Auogadre his r^monstrance to the Senate.
that unless they were speedily reliued with men and victuals, they could not
long withstand so mighty an enemy: That they should do well to make have, and
if they had any remembrance of their own State and reputation, and of the
safety of their subjects, to provide for the conservation of that City, whose
singular loialtie they

Prince Foscari his frequent exhortations likewise did herein much prevail
with the Senate: Wherein whilst all men were busied, news was brought that
Bressia was freed from the siege. This did not only raise their daunted
courages, but gave then hope of better fortune, the which was strengthened with
another more recent, namely, that for the better fortifying of their alliance,
they might draw Sforza and the Florentines to their party.

It is reported that Nicolaod' Aeste was the first that motioned it to the
Senate, who being reconciled to the Venetians, came to Venice to visit the
Prince and Senators, Nicolaod Aeste his motion made to the Senate.
where coming into the Senate clothed in white, after sundry speeches of his
great and loyal affection toward them, he began to talk of means how to
Philips forces, but to make war upon him: which was by their Ambassadors, and
fair promises to draw Francisco Sforza to their side, who was reported to have
left Philips party in a discontented humor, for that he had lately refused to
accomplish the marriage betwixt him and his daughter: That he doubted not but
this courageous Lord, so renowned for his high attempts, would snatch the
present victory forth of the enemies hands, as well in regard of his ancient
emulation and hatred to Ricinino, as for his discontent newly conceived against
Philip.

Aeste his speech did greatly move the Senators who gave him infinite thanks
for The Senates answer to Nicolao d' Aeste.
Senate his sincere affection toward them, and likewise for that he had
familiarly discoursed with them concerning the profit and service of the
Commonwealth. But the Senate told him that they would more maturely determine
on that which had been propunded. Some say that the Venetians did at that time
present him with Rouigo and the whole Polesin; but I think that it was rather
an approbation of what was already done, concerning the restitution of the
Pollesin.

The Senate being hereby put in some hope, had intelligence by letters from
Giacomo Antonio Marcello, which were read in the Senate, That Mellato after the
taking of Penetra and Torbolles, took great care by what means he might
relieve the Giouanni Pisani to La Marca to Sforza, The Senate send to Sforza
and the Florentines.
Francisco Barbadico to Florence. They called Pietro Auogadre into the Senate
where they acquainted him with that which Mellato had done for the victualling
of Bressia, whereupon they entreated him that he would speedily go to the
Army, to the end that both of them together might consult on that which should
be necessary for the journey. And that he should write to Paris Lodron to
entreat him still to hold firm his alliance and amity with the Venetians: and
to the Bressans, that they should want no supplies nor victuals, only they
should do their best to hold out

These things were treated of at Venice. Mellato determining to relieve the
(...) after that he had gotten together a great quantity of whea^e at Penetra,
resolved to pass over the mountains, seeing he could go by no other way*
Therefore he did Mellato makes provision ^a relieve Bressia.
by express messengers request Paris Lodron to come and meet with the sorage^s
as far as he could. Then he commanded four Captains, that after they had
distributed the wheat among the soldiers, they should first go to Paris
Lodron, and afterward to Bressia. The enemies in the mean time had placed a
strong Garrison in Arques and in Tengues, and had sent Ittalus of Friull (for
they had notice which way they meant to pass) to lie in ambush with six
hundred horse and foot, to surprise Mellato's soldiers had already passed
through the forest of Tengues, and supposing that they were out of all danger,
they were come down into a deep bottom, when the enemy showing himself on
a sudden* and The enemies assail the forragers.
unlooked for, did greatly affright them.

There was by chance near to that place a little hill, whither the Venetian
soldiers all trembling marched with their burdens, but being environed in
that place What Philip did in the vale of Sabia.
on every side, and molested with sundry assaults (for many were slain
there) the third day after both they and the corn fell into their enemies
hands. Mellato was at the same time at Torbolles, where it was commonly
reported that his designs only tended to relieve the afflicted Bressans.
Philip on the other side, the better to take all hope of relief from them, did
in the month of January, march with six thousand men, together with the
Prince of Mantua into the vale of Sabia, where he remained till three forts
which he there caused to be built, were made defensible and manned with strong
Garrisons, the one at Nosa, the other at Cagri, and the third at Solecetta,

Some say that Picinino builded these Forts near to the City at that time,
when he raised his camp from before Bressia, namely the one at S. Euphemias
Church, the other at the hill-top, and the third at the fountains Monpianes.
Ittalus his enterprise against the Venetians being executed, he was desirous to
march against Paris Lodron: But his purpose being discovered, Barbaro the
Governor of Bressia, who was very circumspect, did speedily send six hundred
footmen to the relief of Paris, The venetians send succors to Paris Lodron.
the Venetians friend, under the conduct of Gyrardo Dandula. He being come
near to the Fort at Nosa, assailed a troop of Philips horse, which he easily
defeated. Guelpt faction of Valtropia being joined with him, he went to Paris
with a thousand men. Ittalus on the other side having raised two thousand
peasants as well of the Mantuan ar of the Gibelline faction of the Bressans
territories marched with them against the enemy, together with the footmen
which he had brought with him at the first, crossing the river Sarca at the
bridge which is upon the confines of Romagnia. He had already begun to ascend
the next mountains, when Paris being conducted through covert valleys, went on
a sudden, and assailed those footmen whom he had left to guard the bridge,
where in a moment he made a great slaughter of them. Many were slain there,
among whom were Ittalus his son, Pietro Capocia, with Polonus Colonel of the
Bishop of Trents troops. Ittalus Paris perceiving him coming down like a
tempest driven from the mountains, did bravely receive him, and at last
wearied him The ^igh betwixt Paris Lodron and Ittalus. Ittalus being vanquished
retireth into the mountains.
with fighting. There was a cruel battle for the space of three hours, but
in the end Ittalus retired the next way into the mountains. Paris being
victorious, made himself master of the latter squadron: and the enemy had
been wholly overthrown, had not the night with her darkness been favorable
to him. The next morrow by day-breake Paris marched freely against the enemy,
and was already come to the mountains, at such time as the enemy (being
provoked by shame) returned likewise to the fight. This encounter continued
with greater fury than the The bickering being renewed, Ittalus is wholly
overthrown.
flight, but at last they turned their back, Paris being victorious pursued
them thus disordered. A thousand of the enemies were taken, and as many slain.
Ittalus after this overthrow, with much difficulty through by-waies, and
steep mountains retired himself to Riua d'Trente, whither likewise within a
while after came three hundred horse, and a thousand foot which had escaped by
diverse passages.

Pi^inino having intelligence of the route of his forces assembled those troops
which wintered near to Bressia, and speedily marched through the vale of
Sabia, and over the tops of the mountains to Lodron which he straightly
besieged, so as after the fifteenth Paris) but finding it strong both by art
and nature, and that there was a strong garrison in it, by reason that it was
winter he raised his camp on the first day of February, and sent his troops
to winter along the lake of Benac.

This in brief was all that was done in the Alps: whilst Lauretano having a
long time in vain expected forces from the City, went (because he would not
have it said that he had done nothing) and besieged the City of Sermon.
Gonzaga had Lauretano besieges Sermon.
before (as has been said) carefully fortified that place, which could not be
taken by so small a company. The Senators were suspected to have refused to send
supplies to Lauretano, rather through envy than for want of means, which
happened, for that they gave ear to sundry detractors, who were desirous
rather to see Lauretano's fame to decrease, than to be augmented by any notable
exploit. But he falling sick by the distemperature of the air, and waxing
daily more and more weak, was brought to Venice. Stephano Contareni was sent
in his steed.

Lauretano, after he had a while been sick, died, and was buried (according
as The death of Pietro Lauretano, and his strange burial.
he had appointed it by his last will and testament) in S. Helens Church, his
feet being bare, a stone under his head, and without any funeral pomp.

Mellato, after he had taken Penetra, did not cease by letters to aduertize the
Senate, that a way lay open to chase the enemies from the lake of Benac,
whereby they might afterward with ease relieve Bressia. This business was
very difficult, and every man demanded how it would be done, and how a nauall
Army might be sent into that lake, seeing there was no forest near, nor any
river whereby to bring the vessels. This consultation had for certain days
troubled the Senate, when a certain A wonderful proposition of a Candiot.
Candiot called Sorbolla, who (as I suppose) had viewed the places, went to the

The vessels were drawn up against the stream of the river Adice to Verona,
from After what manner the vessels were brought to the lake of Benac.
thence with great labor and travail unto the borough of Mora, by Oxen tied
to Pasius makes mention but of one Galley) it was drawn by strength of Men
and Oxen through a plain of six miles in length to S. Andrews lake, the
other lesser vessels were carried in carts. Blondus says that they drew two
great Galleys, and three other smaller ones, and with them five and twenty
small vessels: Some others who were present at that action, say that there were
two great Galleys, one of which was scarce finished when they carried it from
Venice.

Over this lake where the vessels were first brought, a rock ietted forth much
like to a wall, which to make smooth and even great numbers of peasants were
employed, who having thrown part of that stony substance into the lake, made
the place so

It is reported that they had no less trouble in bringing them down, than
they had to get them up: For all men feared least that the same huge weight
being carried over those precepices and steepie Rocks should fall and break it
self in pieces. The third month after their departure from Venice, they came
down to Torbolles, where the Galleys being viewed they found that one of them
had need of trimming before they could launch it into the water. The residue
of the Army was embattailed at the mouth of the River Sarca, which was
environed with three ranks of piles in form of a semicircle for the better
safety thereof. The Venetians besides built a Fort at the going forth of the
River, to keep the enemies who were reported to have a Gallie and certain
Ganzarioles at Riuoltella, from coming to them. It was thought that the Senate
did undertake this enterprise rather to feed the Bressans with hope than for
any opinion it had that those vessels The S^nate takes care to preserve
Verona and Vincenza.
would do any service, in regard that there were in all places upon the lake
such great numbers of enemies as it was not only impossible to enter Bressia in
despite of them, but they were much encumbered with care, how they might the
Summer following keep Verona and Vincenza from them.

The Venetians affairs were (without all doubt) in great danger, when they
being thus dejected, fortune turned toward them and smiled. Philip had the
most part of the winter deluded Sforza with promise to give him his daughter
Bianca to wife. But excusing himself sometimes by reason of his daughters
indisposition of Philip delaieth and deludeth Sforza.
body, and afterward by the sharpness of the winter, he did of set purpose
delaie the matter. But Sforza soon perceived his double dealing, and finding by
his delays Troillo a trusty friend of his own to Milan; to sound the meaning
of Philip and his daughter; from whence he bringing him back What moved* Sforza
to make a league with the Uenetians.
nothing but words, in rage and choler he gave ear to the Venetians more than
he had done. Within a while after there arose a new suspicion. For it is
reported that at such time as Picinino exhorted his Soldiers to assault
Bress^a; a certain friend of his asked him, why he did expose himself and
Soldiers to such a manifest danger; seeing he knew very well that the same
City and all the rest should never be his, but were destined to Sforza as
Philips future heir. His reply was. It is all one; let your Pioinino flouteth
Sforza.
self and the rest only do your best to take Bressia; for that being done,
we will be at La Marca before this delicate bridegroom shall have any
suspicion thereof, and then, I will play the bride, and ye young fellows shall
be the dancers. This being reported to Sforza, he did not only hearken to the
Venetians, but did forthwith dispatch messengers to Florence, whither (as we
have said, according to Pasius) Francisco Barbadico was sent.

Blondus says that Giacomo Donato was sent into Tuscanie. The Florentines,
although they were well assured, that Philip, so soon as the Venetians should
be overthrown, would presently come and assail them, and notwithstanding that
they were desirous by all means to withstand the Tyrants attempts, yet
nevertheless, because they would hardly believe that Sforza would forsake his
Father-in-law, they were A league concluded betwixt the Venetians, Florentines,
and Sforza.
not easily drawn to enter into the ancient league with the Venetians. But
being Eugenius who was then at Florence, they did on the eight day of February
conclude a league for five years with Sforza and the Venetians.

In this accord it was expressly mentioned that Sforza should be the allie of
both those Commonweals, and General of al their forces, and that they should
give him pay for three thousand horse and two thousand foot: That the Venetians
and Florentines should levy such forces as he should think fit for the
mannaging of that Nicholao D'Aeste is received into the league.
war. Nicholao D'Aeste was received into this alliance, with whom they
concluded that he should entertain at the costs and charges of those two
people Guido Fauentino with fifteen hundred horse and three hundred foot, and
his son Borsia

I find in Montanus commentaries that two hundred and twenty thousand Duccats
were appointed for Sforza's pay, whereof the Florentines were to give
fourscore and ten thousand, and the Venetians the rest: And besides, that
whatsoever they should take from Philip should be given to Sforza, (Cremona
excepted) which should return to the Venetians, and if they should take none
other City but Cremona, that then it should be allotted to the General. For
the rest it was expressly concluded that Sforza should presently pass into
Lombardie, to free the Venetians from the war there. Pasius says that the
league was renewed in Tuscanie during the siege of Bressia; But if it were
concluded on the eighth of February (as Blondus says) I cannot see how that
could be done, seeing it is certain that the siege before Bressia was raised
before January, although it was afterward much molested by the Garrisons
round about it, and the ways stopped by the enemies, so as victuals nor relief
could come to them. But whether it were then (as he says) or Philip was
mightily daunted when he understood of his sonne-in-lawes revolt.

But Picinino not thinking it fit to temporize, or to tarry till the Venetians
forces should be augmented by Sforza's coming, began to treat with the
Prince of Mantua concerning the passage of the Adice. There was some likelihood
that it would avail Philips affairs, if the war might be transported into
the Paduan or Vincenzan Territories. Now this seemed easy to be done, if
entering into either of the Countries, they might on a sudden surprise some
town or other. This was reported to be the Mantuans plot who thought it fit to
send the war far from his own Gates, and to draw those vessels which were
upon the Po near to Sermona, The Mantuans plot to send the war far from his
own Country
(for by the Senates commandment Contareni had brought back the nauall Army
to Chioggia) by the River Tartar into the marshes and lakes of the enemies, and
then from thence to transport them by land, (if it could not be done by water)
into the River Adice. Mellato by his spies having intelligence hereof, did
sundry times aduertize the Prince and Senate, aduising them forthwith to send
a nauall Army into the Adice.

In the mean time they were not quiet near to the lake of La Garda. Pietro
Zeno General of the Nauall Army which lay at Torbolles coming forth by
little and little from the Haven, did in such sort open the way to his
Countriemen on that part of the lake which is betwixt Torbolles and the mouth
of Ponal, as through Bressia is somewhat relieved.
small quantity of corn to be carried upon men's shoulders, first over the
high mountains, and from thence to Bressia.

But whilst these things past in Lombardie news came from the Ambassadors
that were in Tuscanie and La Marca that the league was renewed. It is reported
that the letters and the accord being read and seen in the Senate, it was
differently received, according to every man's humor. Diverse murmured, and
often told News of the league is brought to Venice,
those that approved it, that they should beware that some deceit did not lurk
in that new league: That they were not pleased with that which the Florentines
had Philip (if they might obtain it) although it were to their disadvantage,
than to thrust the Republike into danger. These complaints had moved the
Senate, and diverse seemed to be of opinion that the league newly made with
Sforza and the Florentines was of no force, had not the Princes grave speech
confirmed the Senators who were in some sort estranged.

The Princes speech concerning the league.
FIrst he rebuked the Senators for their inconstancy, who so inconsiderately
had repented them of the accord so much desired: He told them that they needed
not to fear and suspect the Florentines, who had freely embraced war to
pleasure the Venetians, but that they ought rather to account them mindful and
not ungrateful for the benefits which they had in former times received, as
men that did remember ^ow by the Venetians aid they had in time past beaten
their (...) from their Gates: That this then was an acknowledgement of that
which was past, and no deceit: That they should beware least they rashly lost
so goodly an occasion offered for the preservation of their state which came
rather by divine miracle than by any humane device or counsel. That he very
plainly perceived, that by that means only specified in the accord, and not
by any other, the State of the Republic might be preserved and maintained in
so wretched and dangerous a season: He willed them then to rest satisfied, and
if they were desirous of the public good to embrace that alliance, which did
not only bring them speedy relief but likewise opened them away to obtain a
gallant victory.

The Princes speech was of such force, as having forthwith changed their
minds, they did generally approve whatsoever their Commissioners had
negotiated: Sforza. They The Venetians do ratify the league.
did afterward raise forces over all Italy. Cristofero and Giouanni
Tollentino were sent for: These men came by sea to Chioggia; for by land they
could not come by reason of the rebellion of Rauenna.

Whilst the Venetians made these preparations, Picinino with his troops was
come to the river Adice, where attempting to cross it he was affronted with
Andrea Donato on the opposite shore; who being newly returned to Florence, was
sent to command in Padua, with Ieronimo Contareni in his company. Gonzaga in
the The Mantuan^ policy for the passage of his Galleys.
after all the mudde was taken out which lay betwixt the River and the Fennes
to make a great deep dike, and through that to make a passage into the River
Adice. This river, the cawseis being broken down, did empty a great part of
it self into those Fennes at the Borough of Castagnaria, forty stadij beneath
Legnaga, and at the place called Malapietra. But the Venetians had before stopped
up those Passages with strong Rampires, and placed great numbers of small light
vessels to defend Marino Contareni, and Lodouico de Molino.

Now the enemies first attempts were at Castagnaria, where using means to
break down those obstacles, Molino and Contareni did valiantly withstand
them. The enemy having begun the skirmish, and perceiving that he prevailed
nothing, and that the shore on the other side was kept by those whom Donato
had brought thither in have, having about sunne-set made a fruitless brauado
he departed thence about midnight, and sailed to Malopietra; where being
arrived, and the banks beaten down, he did without any difficulty put eight
Galleys into the River Adice, and landed a thousand men upon the shore, the
most part of whom were Archers. Donato contemning so small a number of enemies,
as though he were assured A Nauall battle betwixt the Venetia^s and the
Mantuan.
resolved to tarry a little beneath the bridge of Balde, where whilst he
embartailed his forces, Tibertino Brandolino did fiercely march against the
enemies which were past. The Captains likewise of the Nauall Army having
followed the enemy, began a cruel fight in the midst of the River, where
Contareni fighting valiantly was slain, being stricken through the body with
a dart, and Brandolino was sore wounded in the right leg. But at last the
enemies being out of hope to pass that way, they retired to Sanguaneta, and
afterward sailed toward the River Busset, where with six thousand Peasants
they did undertake to cut a trench into the Adice, the which being filled by
night by the Venetian Soldiers who came thither in small boats, made them to
change their determination, and to undertake a matter almost like to the
former: which was to cleanse and empty the ancient channel of Panegia. And to
the end the Venetians should not hinder this work, as they had lately done the
other, they went and encamped at Angleria, an house

This trench being drawn from Panegia to the River Adice, the enemy began
The Mantuan Galleys pass into the river Adice.
to bring his Galleys into the River. But whilst his fleet lay at Malopietra,
the Venetians did extraordinarily elect (without casting lots) Dario Maripietro
to command their Nauall Army. Mellato, who lay at Penetra, being sent for,
hasted thither with eight thousand Horse, and six thousand foot: howbeit some
Authors mention not half so many. Maripietro was come to Legnaga with five and
thirty Galleys taken from that Nauall Army, which (as we have said) by the
Senates command had been brought back forth of the River Po to Chioggia.
Picinino had planted forty pieces Molino's nauall Army, and to keep it from
hindering the arrival of the Vessels, which they were drawing from Panegia and
the old Channel into the River. This being considered by Mellato, after that
he had embattailed his troops upon the other shore, he aduertized Maripietro
and Molino forthwith to sail up the River* and that the enemy, if the nauall
Army did not withstand it, would pass on in despite of him. Molino believed
it, and with his own vessels and five Galleys of Dario's which followed him,
he passed on beyond the enemies Army, and the mouth of Panegia. Some say that
one of his Galleys The Venetians Nauall Army does retire.
being pierced by the enemies Ordnance was taken: which being perceived by
Dario, he was so amazed as he could by no means be persuaded to follow Molino.
Picinino Dario and Molino not knowing what to resolve on, nor yet daring, being
so divided, to assail the enemy, each of them sought by all means how to
avoid the frequent shot of the Ordnance: by means whereof the enemy at his
own leisure put his Vessels into the Adice: whereat they that stood upon the
opposite shore being affrighted, began to fly disorderly not abiding the
enemy.

Diverse hold that Mellato was Author of that base flight, but the greater part
lay the fault on Donato. Two things there are which induce me to believe that
it was rather the Venetians fault; first, the authority of Pasius of Armini,
who says that Donato had sent word to Mellato to forsake the River banks, and
to retire with his troops into a place of more safety: and the second is,
because I find that he was within a while after cited at the request of the
Advocates Fiscall for that matter. Those which affirm that Mellato by Donato's
commandment did quit the shore, Sundry opinions concerning the Venetians
retreat.
stick not likewise to say that Christofero Tollentino was sent to Verona with
a company of men at arms; Tiberto Brandolino to Montagnane with his
Cauallerie; Giouanni, brother to Christofero to Vincenza; and that Mellato with
the residue of his army went and encamped at the Baths of Abana.

The enemy having entered the Adice, and coming to besiege Legnaga, he first
Picinino besieges Legnaga.
of all seized upon the bridges, where Carolo Gonzaga a courageous young man did
valiantly there in Garrison, whom the Venetians had found to be confident and
loiall. Frederico Contareni, and Pietro Quirini, were there likewise with other
Gentlemen. Some there are that in sted of Pietro Quirini set down Andrea
Mocenigo, who were all sent thither for the guard of that place. But, as it
often happens, when fortune once begins to decline, she cannot be stayed,
neither by counsel nor any reason what soever: even so it came to pass that
by the sudden yielding of the Townes-men, these men, together with the
Chioggians, fell into the enemies power. Legnaga is take,


Legnaga being taken, Picinino and Gonzaga began to scour the Vincenzan and
Paduan Territories. They found a while some resistance at Balde; but that once
taken, with wonderful good success they became masters of Longina, Brendole,
Picinino being proud of this success brought his Camp near to Verona,
whither Gonzaga likewise came with all his forces.

At this stay stood the Venetians affairs along the River Adice, when as they
fought with better success upon the lake of La Garda. Italus of Friull lay at
Sales with a great cauallerie, and diverse foot companies, being followed by
many of the Gybelline faction of the Bressan Country. With these forces he
sought by all means Pietro Auogadre A fierce fight near to the lak^ of Benac.
with a great troop of Guelphes was there ready to withstand their attempts.
They fought cruelly at Maderna; for this Town likewise did at the same time
belong to the Venetians. Zeno, who commanded the Venetian Nauall Army, did
approach so near to the place of battle, as his Soldiers being landed had
their share in it. The fight lasted from three a cloc^e in the morning till
late in the evening. At which time Italus by little and little retiring his
forces from the battle, and conducting them through a very narrow way hanging
over the lake, Zeno with his vessels pursued them with arrow-shot and did
greatly infest them by reason of the commodiousnesse of the place. In the mean
time Auogadre did straightly press The Venetiant victory near to the lake.
four hundred prisoners were taken; among whom were fifty Gentlemen. Italus
by favor of the night escaped to Sales.



The end of the third Book of the third Decad.
THE FOVRTH BOOK Venice.
The Contents of the fourth Book of the third Decad.
SFORZA through the Countries of Flaminia and Ferrara leads great troops
first to Chioggia, and then to the Paduan Territory. MELLATO joins with
SFORZA. The Venetian passing over the mountains causes the enemy to raise
his Camp from before Verona. PICININO with all his forces retireth beyond the
River Adice. The Venetians Nauall Army is put to rout upon the l^ke of La
Garda. PICININO is defeated by night in the vale of Lodron. SFOR^ (...) in
battaite vanquisheth the enemies at Thienna. PICININO and the Mantuan surprise
Verona, but not the Castle. SFORZA recouere^h Verona thirty days after it was
lost. Bressia in the midst of winter is victualled by the way of the
mountains. MELLATO fails sick. PICININO sends forces into Tuscanie
against the Florentines.

SForza was in the mean time come from La Marca with diverse brave men in his
company, among whom were Alessandro, Giouanni, and Leon his brethren, Roberto
Sanseuerino, Dominico Malateste, Lodouico Duke of Hadria, to whose daughter he
was betrothed, Franciso Ortonio, with many other notable Guido Fauentino to be
wanting, who was gone to the contrary side: which when he understood, for a
time he remained doubtful with what place he should first begin. For he
perceived it to be Philips practice by that new enemy to stop his passage into
Lombardie. But being sudden in his resolutions, supposing that there was
nothing which could more avail their intended journey (seeing they were of
necessity by Arms to win themselves Forlimpopoli is taken by Sforza.
thence marching toward Rauenr^, speedy news was brought him that the enemies
had crossed the Adice, and taken in a manner from the Venetians whatsoever they
possessed on both sides the River, (Verona and Vincenza excepted) and that
those of Verona were straightly besieged; that the Paduans and Vincenzans,
having expulsed their Garrisons had mutined; and that unless he made have, it
was to be feared that all would fall into the enemies hands.

But it is reported, that concerning the commotions in those two Cities, it was
The cause of the commotion of Padua an^ Vincenza.
made by the Soldiers, who by overmuch liberty did spoil and rob the
wretched Townes-men, as though they had been enemies taken in war. As for
the Paduans, if by reason of these outrages they took Arms, they were
presently appeased at the Governors coming. But those of Vincenza being
troubled upon the like occasion, having driven away the Garrison, said, That
they were loyal to the Venetians;

Mellato upon the first report thereof went thither, greatly commending the
Vincenzans, and exhorted them still to persevere in their ancient love and
loialtie, and gave them leave, according to their own desire, to guard their
City them selves. These news being greater in appearance than in effect,
caused Sforza to change his mind, so that leaving the way of Rauenna, he
returned speedily to the bridge of Roncanes. Then having enforced Guido, and
Francisco, sons to Picinino, to retire From whence. the Hadriatick Sea takes
the name.
belonging to the Tuscans, and for a long time very rich: But thus much I
thought good to speak by the way, because I would have no man think, that
the Adriatic Sea did take name of that Hadria which is in La Marca.

Now this mighty Army came sooner than it was looked for to the Venetians
aid upon the Paduans Territory, notwithstanding that it was to pass four
great Rivers. First they made a bridge at Goria over one of the Arms of Po, on
two and

It is reported that Sforza's troops held it for a prodigy, because that on a
sudden the Po did in such sort swell as it had almost ouer-flowed the banks,
and with the inundation had like to have drowned the Camp which lay not far
from the River, and also for that great numbers of serpents had gotten into the
Soldiers cabines. Sforza being from thence come to the Haven of Chioggia found
three hundred small vessels, ready to transport the troops to the firm Land,
with the horse and foot companies, who were with a fair wind and there abroad,
which were come to meet him; some to offer him their service; others with a
desire to see him; some were likewise sent in the Commonwealths name to
congratulate his happy passage, and to present him with rich gifts. The The
number of Sforz is troops.
Army being landed upon the Paduan Territory, they numbered six thousand two
hundred forty four horse, and sixteen hundred footmen. Those which make the
number less, set down but four thousand horse, and two thousand foot.

So soon as Sforza saw his Army on the firm Land, he desired nothing more
than to join his forces with those of Mellato, and with the rest wheresoever
they were that did belong to the Venetians, that he might presently march to
fight with the enemy: Mellato likewise having intelligence of Sforza's
arrival, did not delay to The number of the whole Army in general.
forces together upon the Colonois Territory, where a general muster being
made, they found the Army to consist of fourteen thousand horse, and eight
thousand foot.

But during all these warlike preparations, the Bressians were no less
tormented with plague and famine, than with the continual assaults of the
enemies. For two The great distress of the Bressans.
thousand men whom Italus had left not far off from the City, did in such
sort disturb them by their ordinary incursions, as they within the City had
no more rest, than when they were besieged by Picinino and Gonzaga. The
Inhabitants being oppressed Barbaro by a wonderful providence foreseen all
these difficulties. For it is recorded, That there was nothing whatsoever could
be imagined, whereby to give hope to the Citizens, and to contain them in
their duties, which readily he did not execute, so as it is scarce credible,
in what manner and how great sums of money he raised from sundry places to
pay the Garrison. For from Venice none could come to them: all the ways and
passages being intercepted. As also it was very admirable what means he used
together with the aid of Pietro Auogadre, for the bringing in of so great a
quantity of nuts, roots, chestnuts, and other sorts of fruits as he drew from
the inhabitants of the Mountains therewith to slack the hunger of the
Citizens: Barbaro his politic w^sedome.
feigning one thing, and dissembling an other; and with what patience he could
temporize with that froward multitude in a time of so great scarcity. He
refused not to converse and talk with all men, and namely with those whose
houses he knew to be infected with the Pestilence: for that contagious
sickness was so dispersed over that wretched City, as there was no day, but
it buried more than threescore persons: his Gates were open at all hours, and
he did ever eat in public; and yet during that miserable time, there was never
seen any bread of Wheat upon his table, but either of Rye or Barley. Some say
that he did at times bring forragers into the City in sted of victuallers,
with sacks full of Straw and other substance, to put the inhabitants in The
Bressans term Barbaro the Father of their Country.
committed to his keeping, but had governed matters in such sort, as the
Bressans termed him the Father of their Country.

At the last, at Pietro Auogadre his return, and upon assurance of aid from
the mountains, having on a sudden assailed the Fortes, the one at Santa Cro^
and the other Italus was encamped at Castagnedola the better to free himself
from the infected air) determined to besiege Sales, supposing that it would
come to pass, that they besieging it by Land, and the Venetians nauall Army
by water, the Salodians would be enforced to yielde, either by composition, or
force. For this purpose Thadeo d'Aeste with three hundred horse of the
remainder of those which had bin left with him for the guard of Bressia; Pietro
A^ogadre with three hundred Mountaniers, and Theosaluio with six hundred
soldiers met at Gauarda. Italus having intelligence of the enemies design,
marched to Feliciana, Fight betwixt the Bressans and Italus.
whither those of Bressia went fiercely to assail him. But he having speedily
displayed his ensigns, came forth, and began the fight under the
towne-walls, which continuing from day-breake til noone with equal valor on
either side, both parties being tired, they began a soft retreit; but as the
Venetians retired, the enemy came upon them with such fury, as he disordered
them and put them to The Bressans are put to rout.
rout. Thadeo having lost many of his soldiers, did without any stay gallop
into Piedmont, from whence returning soon after to Gauarda, he went with
those forces which Barbaro had assembled forth of the Bergamese for fear of
greater loss, to besiege and take the Fort which the enemies had built at
Saint Euphemias.

On these terms stood the affairs of the Bressans, when as Sforza being
joined with Mellato (as has bin said) marched against the enemies which
besieged Verona, The enemies raise their camp from before Verona.
who with their ordnance furiously battered it. But they being assured of his
coming, presently sent away their Artillery and baggage into the Mantuan
Country, raised their camp, and went to Soaue, which is a Town lying on the
Sforza could pass forward to relieve Verona, Bressia, and Bergamo.

Sforza in the mean time besieged Longina, and took it the same day, the
spoil Longina is taken by Sforza.
whereof he gave to his soldiers (as Pasius says.) Blondus writes that it
endured diverse assaults, and that it was bravely defended, in which assault
Pietro Brunora and Troillo, two of Sforza's special friends were slain; the
one with a dart, and the other with an harquebuze-shot; whereupon being
inflamed with choler, he caused all his forces to assail it, intending not
only to sack the Town, but wholly to

This town being recovered, Sforza in a square batallion marched against the
The enemies answer to Sforza who offered them battle.
enemies, and in their view ordered his squadrons, offering them battle. But
they having answered that they would not fight before the new Moon, he
perceived their fear, and marched away to recover the towns upon the
Vincenzan territory, diverse of which he took in a short space, having
promised them all favor and impunitie. Some say, that then, and not before,
the enemy encamped at Soaue, resolving after the loss of all other places, to
keep that, as most commodious, Sforza, on what side soever he would turn to
march to Verona. And because that trench drawn from the Marshes could not be
forced without great slaughter, Sforza and the rest resolved to go to Verona
by the way of the mountains. He came to Ronques called S. John's before
Picinino had any notice of his resolution.

Tollentino and those that lay in garrison in Verona, sallying forth on a
sudden (which they were expressly commanded to do) having fired certain Forts
which Philips forces had built near to the City, did place garrisons of their
own soldiers in two of them, which they had then forced. Sforza in the mean
time being encamped at Ronques, ski^mished with Picinino near to the forts
which he had Sforza's troops were shaken, but Troillo and Nicholao Pisani,
being forthwith sent with a great squadron of horse against the enemies, the
fight became equal, and Picinino in the night Sforza goes forward toward
Uerona.
being retired with his troops to Soaue, Sforza without any greater
resistance ascended the mountains toward Verona. The Venetians being come to
the top, Picinino for a time followed the troops, that he might with strong
garrisons defend the Towns and Castles which he had taken in the
neighbour-hilles, abstaining by all means from fight. For Sforza had left him
no place fit for an ambuscado, and was far superior to him in number of
soldiers.

Blondus who only makes mention of the mercenarie soldiers, says that there
The number of the enemies cap, and that of the Venetians.
were fourteen thousand men in the enemies camp, and sixeteene thousand in
that of the Venetians, howbeit in the one Army as well as the other there were
great numbers of Bisognios or fresh water soldiers. Sforza being come to
Verona, would not lodge in the City, but encamped certain furlongs from it,
near to Mars, which is near the Citie-walles, and that upon the report that
he did mean to pass over Adice, Picinino (who remained near to Porcilia)
did suddenly cross the River, and retired to Vigasio upon the Mantuan
confines with all his troops. And then thereupon Sforza returning from whence
he came, besieged Soaue; and having taken it, in a short space he recovered all
the towns on the other side of the River Adice, Legnaga excepted.

Whilst these things happened near to Verona, the union of the Greek church
The union of the Greek church with the Latin.
with that of Rome insued soon after. This business after a long and serious
disputation, being debated in the Assembly at Ferrara, was by the assistance
of the holy

All the Towns which the enemy possessed on the hither side of the River
being recovered (as has bin said) the Venetian army drew near to the lake of
Benac and besieged Bardolin, in regard that all Sforza's designs with those of
his associates tended only by some means to open the lake, it being the only
way whereby Bressia could be relieved, the which was reduced to all extreamitie
by famine and pestilence. For beside the great loss it had sustained during
the siege, the contagious The great extremity of the city of Bressia.
sickness had taken away five thousand men: Famine moreover did now Zeni durst
not come near Bardolin which his Countrymen besieged. Whereupon Sforza
perceiving that he did no great good there (in regard the inhabitants were
relieved by the Lake) raised his camp.

Now because his coming hither had been to no great purpose, Caualcabon,
Gu^rrieri, Martiano, and Giouanni el Conte, Roman Gentlemen, were sent with a
thousand Barbaro in the mean time having determined to burn part of the
enemies nauall Army that lay at Sales, sent Thadeo d'Aeste, Andrea Valerio,
and Andrea Leon thither: Zeni Admiral of the Venetians fleet was likewise
commanded to be there, and to assail the enemy.

Picinino and Gonzaga having intelligence as well of this design of the
enemy, as of the arrival of the victualles, did secretly depart from Vigasio
with two hundred horse, and by Pescara came to Feliciana, where they joined
with Lodouico Sanseuerino Italus of Friull: who being commanded to follow them,
they fell upon the Venetian cauallerie which still remained in Piedmont, brake
them, and despoiled The Venetians are put to rout at Feliciana.
them of all their baggage, and taking some prisoners, put the residew to
flight who escaped to the City. From thence marching against the rest who were
coming to the Lake, they divided themselves into three bands. Sanseuerino
embarking himself in the vessels, was commanded to fight upon the water;
Italus with the footmen to go up to the mountains of Maderna; and Gonzaga
together with Picinino to conduct the cauallerie by the way which lies betwixt
the Lake and the mountains. In this manner the enemies nauall Army did assail
that of the Venetians. Thadeo upon this rumor made haste with his troops,
that he might come to the timely rescue of his Contrymen; but the enemies
with great cries fell upon The Venetians nauall army is defeated upon the lake
of la Garda.
the Venetians in front and in flank. Thadeo being encompassed on every side,
used all means to preserve his soldiers; yet nevertheless, the nauall Army
and those that fought on land, were in a moment defeated by the enemy: The
Venetians Zeni their General fell into the enemies hands. Thadeo likewise was
taken prisoner, with Valerio and Leon the Prouidators.

This overthrow was accompanied with an other. For the next day after this
unfortunate battle, the enemy took the Castle of Maderna. It is reported
that The enemies take the Castle of Maderna.
Sforza had a long time before foreseen this defeat, and had often advertised
the Senate to send supplies to the Lake, and that if they did not, it was to
be feared that their nauall Army there would be defeated by the enemy. But
he did speedily assure Torbolles and Penetra by a strong garrison, for fear
lest the enemy A new venetian Army for the lake.
make them, which they had in readiness, and there, as in an haven near to the
water, to make eight galleys, as many gallions, and four brigantines. All the
workmen of the Venetians ships were sent thither speedily to make an end of the
work.

Stefano Contareni was chosen General of that Army, and in every gallie a
Senator was appointed to command. They did besides send certain months pay
Sforza with his troops retired to Gibeta. The enemy was encamped at Vigasio,
where his Army was no less afflicted with sickness; for besides Agews, the
plague was crept into it. The The Senates care for the Bressans.
Senate taking great care to free the Bressans from danger, wrote to Sforza,
and earnestly entreated him if it were possible, before he sent his Army to
winter, to relieve that loyal City with men and victuals. And for the
safety and assurance of that which he should leave behind him, the Senate
resolved to turn back the River of Adice into the old channel, so soon as
it should be cleansed, some four

Contareni in the mean time (for they could not bring masts for the ships so
far) being come to the Camp, went to the mountains of Trent, with skillful
workmen to view those Forests, and to see if there were any trees in it of
that height fit to make masts. All men were of opinion, that he might there
furnish himself, not only with masts, but all other matters necessary for
many vessels*

Picinino who had intelligence of those great preparations, that he might in
some sort frustrate the enemies designs, did about the shutting in of the
evening depart from the City of Riua (whither he was secretly come) marching
along the lake, through a secret and almost unknown way, he attempted to set
fire on a Galley Picinino attempteth to bur^e the venetians nauall Army.
which was newly made. Troyllo by chance had the guard of that place, who not
only withstood the enemy, but coming valiantly to the fight, made good his
party. Picinino being in the midst of the throng beaten from ^is horse, and
being remounted, did hardly escape, having lost three hundred men, Sforza
having notice thereof, fearing lest the enemy with greater forces would return
to end what he had begun, commanded Mellato to go with his troops to guard
those places, Mellato fortifieth the passages near to Torbolles.
who being come thither, caused his soldiers to make a wall of stones without
any mortar, ex^ending from the lake to the hills of Riua, of two hundred paces
long,

Now whilst they were preparing the nauall Army, and that the turning aside
of the river Adice was by a new advise interrupted, Sforza resolved to send
victualles to Bressia by the mountains. Wherefore having at Torbolles and
Penetra made great provision of corn, and hoping either by entreaties or money
to win the Lords of th^se mountains, or if that failed to open himself a
passage by force of Philips forces who had discovered the enemies designs being
come to Riua, did on a sudden seize on the vale of Lodron: and Picinino and
Sanseuerino having left eight hundred foot, and three hundred horse in the
forest of Thyenna to guard those passages, they went back again with the
residue of their troops.

In the mean time Martiano and G^ouanni el Conte, being sent by Sforza had
ambusht A new design of Sforza to relieve Bressia.
and there lay in great silence expecting the enemies arrival. Now so soon as
Picinino and the rest drew near them, the Venetians gave a charge, whereupon
there began a cruel fight. Martiano's troops did not only continue the fight
all day long but a great part of the night* for when daylight failed, they
fired the neighbor houses, and by that light fought so long till Picinino
being weatie and tired began Picinino is put to rout.
by little and little to retire. Bu^ in the retreit the Venetians charged him
with such fury, as they did forthwith put him to rout, having lost all his
cauallerie, and the greatest part of his Infanterie, and himself getting up to
the top of the mountain Ponall, which looks upon the lake of La Garda, and
by the help of an Almaine Sanseuerino in great fear escaped through the
mountains with twenty horse to Maderna: Fourscore of the chief prison^ were
by Barbaro his commandment brought to Bressia.

Picinino nothing danted with this overthrow, taking Sanseuerino along with
him, presently marched to seize upon the pace of Thyenna. Sforza was already
upon the mountains, resolving to pass forward, although it were through the
midst the enemies. Thyenna is seated upon an high hill, there being on either
side of it dangerous precipices, in one of which on the right side of the town
stands Carolo Gonzaga had emba^ailed his cauallerie forth of the City gates:
The Venetians General stayed at the foot of the hill, where the enemies footmen
were encamped, where he perceived that the passages being on every side kept
by the enemy, he could not pass without fight. Thus standing amazed, not
being resolved by what means to pass through the enemies, he did from far
descrie a fresh band of men at Arms coming from Riua to Thyenna. And
supposing that the enemy had sent for the residue of his troops which lay at
Vigasio, he did on a sudden cause Troillo with all the cauallerie to march
against Gonzaga, and then turning himself toward his Infanterie (of whom he
had ever a brave band near unto him for his guard,) he showed them the top
of the mountain which was covered with armed men, and did earnestly exhort and
entreat them, That if they did desire to be accounted such as he had ever
esteemed them, if they would ever acknowledge those many benefits which they
Sforza exhorts his souldi^ ers.
soldiers, to execute some generous action in his presence, that they should
by that days valor purchase immortal glory and renoune, and march
courageously against the enemies, who being defeated and overthrown, they
should not only preserve a City most loyal to the Venetians, but open
themselves a way to obtain a gallant victory.

In this manner did he speak unto them, and then marched up toward the hill
at the head of the Army with a pike in his hand. And although the soldiers
did with Sforzas great valor.
great difficulty march up that craggie and steepie mountain, yet
nevertheless being animated by their Generals speech and presence, they
mounted to the top thereof. Sforza showing them his friend Troillo valiantly
fighting near to the City, he did entreat them to make have, and to take from
the cauallerie the honor of that victory. Afterward running to an high place
from whence he might be seen and heard of his soldiers, he began with a
cheerful voice to call out aloud, sometimes to Troillo, then to Nicolao
Pisani and the rest, willing them to break the enemies Army with a close
battaillion, telling them that himself with a troup of footmen had beaten the
enemies from the top of the mountain.

Then tnrning toward his Infanterie, and running to encourage them, he
perceived The part of a, true General of an Army.
his soldiers a far off to throw the enemies into those fearful
precipices, and with a cheerful voice shaking his pike, he said unto them,
On, on, my valiant f^llowes,

The Victory in that place was somewhat difficult by reason of the arrival of
certain companies of men at arms, but when they understood that the Garrison
had been thrown headlong down the mountain, the enemies began to give
back. In this bickering Caesar Martinenga fighting valiantly in the midst of
the battle was taken prisoner: Whereupon the enemies forsaking the place, did
openly betake themselves to flight. Sforza's victorious soldiers pursued them
up and down, slew great numbers of them, and took make prisoners. Besides
Caesar, Carolo Gonzaga was taken with two hundred horse, and three hundred
foot. Sforza The enemies ar^ vanquished a^ Thyenna.
at the beginnnig thought that Picinino had been taken, but not finding him
after search made among the prisoners, he promised five thousand crowns to any
man that would undertake to fetch him back. All this notwithstanding he
escaped to the City, where he hid himself for one whole day, fearing if the
enemy should Picinino escapes in disguised habit.
know that he were in Thyenna, he would presently have besieged the City, and
taken all means of escape from him. Therefore about midnight disguising
himself in ragged habit like to a poor lame soldier, he was carried upon
men's shoulders forth of the City, and through by-waies at length came to Riua,
whither a great part of the cauallerie had escaped.

The next day after the battle, Sforza besieged the City, and during the
siege, Malateste prince of Cesenna is taken prisoner.
certain light skirmishes were made, where Malateste Prince of Cesenna a
courageous young man, coming forth to fight with the enemy was taken
prisoner. Pasius of Arimini says, That the Venetian General after the
victory at Thyenna, marched in order of battle to Riua, and that Malateste
was taken in a salley there. Alardo of Verona in his Oration made in praise of
Sforza says, That Picinino the next day after that he escaped from the
battle, came with his Army and presented battle to the Venetians. Wherein
his valor appears more notable, by how much his forces seemed wholly to be
overthrown. For thereby all men knew; that Sforza and the rest had to do with
an enemy, who whether he were victor or vanquished, The disposition of
Picinino.
could not be at quiet. Yet nevertheless howsoever it happened, it is most
certain that Sforza sent victuals to Bressia, and would daily have sent more,
had not the loss of Verona which happened at the same time, called the
Venetian forces elsewhere. Philips Captains had laid a plot to surprise the
Castle of Verona which stands on Blondus says) one of the dead paies there:
That small Guard was kept there in the night. Pasius says, That a Mantuan gave
them this intelligence, who being taken prisoner the Summer before, had for a
time dwelt with Giacomo Bolognese, the Governor of the Castle, whilst his
ransom was providing, and that during his An enterprise upon verona.
imprisonment, he went freely about the walls, and had at his leisure viewed
the munitions and all parts of the Castle.

They had (as has been said) a long time before determined to undertake this
enterprise: but they had deferred it till the enemy should send his troops to
winter, that they might the more safely fortify themselves in Verona, and
before Sforza from going to Bressia, they resolved to put this enterprise in
speedy execution there, the better to draw him from that journey. To this end
having secretly assembled their forces, leaving Riua, they came to Pescara,
before those whom they had sent for thither arrived, and commanding them to
follow after, they speedily marched to Vigasio, and took along with them all
the soldiers that lay there in garrison.

Departing from thence on the eighteenth day of November at the beginning of
the night, they came in great secrecy near to Verona. Afterward about
midnight Alarm in verona.
cries and nocturnall rumors the whole City ran to Arms, and coming forth
on every side, they put themselves in order in the marketplace. The enemies
were already heard to come forward, and Picininos and Gonzaga about the fourth
watch of the night had sent their troops into the City. But perceiving The
enemies are in Verona.
from fight, because that all their troops were not yet arrived. Some say that
the bridge Raffiolane being broken down by the force of the assailants, the
fight in that place ceased.

But whether it did cease or no, they began to affright the inhabitants, by
breaking down the houses behind the Castle: In the mean time many that did
affect the Venetians being come to the Marketplace counseled the fearful
Magistrates which knew not what to do, that in regard they had no Garrison to
defend them, every man should that night retire to some place of safety, and
take order for the Guard of the strong places: For they being well defended,
there was no doubt Bartholomeo Peregrino, a man of great authority amongst
them and a friend to the Venetians, did accompany those that went their way as
far as the same Bridge, for fear lest some sinister mishap might hinder
their escape. But so soon as it was day, the enemy without any resistance
entered the City at the Gate Raffiolane. Pasius says that he entered it before
break of day.

A terrible fear had seized upon the inhabitants being ignorant what would The
doubt of those of Verona
become of their City. For it was doubtful whether the victorious enemy
would preserve it, or give it as a prey to his Soldiers. Lodouico Ver^o was
one of the foremost amongst the enemies, who after that Carmagnolla his
father-in-law had been condemned did still follow the contrary party, and had
voluntarily banished himself. He coming to his own house, where he
understood Mellato's richest goods and Francisco Picinino, son to the
General, was the first that began to spoil, who had the guard of the gate
Rassiolane. But whether it were he or the other, it is certain that the City
would that day have sustained a notable mischief, had not Maguis, one of the
excellentest Lawyers of his time, and a man of great authority among his
Countriemen, Maguis entrea ^eth the Prince of Mantua not to spoil Verona
gone to the Prince of Mantua, and entreated him not to suffer that City which
had ever deserved well of him, and was fallen into that danger to be ruined
without the fault or desert of the inhabitants; That he ought to be satisfied

These words no less profitable, than true, did greatly move the Prince; who
presently commanded the soldiers to desist from spoiling, and that all the
Ensigns should be drawn up in order of battle to the Palace, where within
a while after The Mantuan is proclaimed Prince of Verona.
he was proclaimed Prince of Verona. For in the league betwixt him and Philip,
against the Venetians, it was expressly mentioned, that if Verona and Vincenza
should chance to be taken in that w^rre* that then they should be given to
the Prince of Mantua. After this proclamation, he, determining to recover the
strongest places in the City, did speedily make himself master of the Gates,
Bridges, Carolo was lately brought as a Prisoner and he determined either to
breakedowne the bridge which is near to it upon the River, or else to make a
great trench before it with a Fort, to take all hope of succors from those
within it. He did likewise send Giouanni Gonzaga his brother to The Mantuan^
preparation for the defense of Uerona.
the Castles upon the Mountain to deprive them likewise of all relief. He
did moreover attempt to seize on the streights of Clusina to keep Sforza from
coming to the relie^e of the City. He sent word to Giacomo Maranico Governor
of the (...) of Policella, that he had the night before seized on Verona, that
with the Sforza. For the night of the very same day that the City was taken,
news was brought thereof to Sforza's Camp.

The General who first heard of it was much amazed at the newness of the
matter, being scarce able to believe it, had not certain Letters written to
him from particular friends confirmed the truth thereof, and entreated him
speedily to come to Sforza marches to the reskew of Verona.
sending for Mellato from Torbolles, he marched thitherwards with his Army,
staying in no place, but a little upon the banks of the Adi^, which ha^ing
passed he went about Sunset with a small troop to the streights of the
Mountains. The River Adice in that place, where a Castle is to be seen upon a
craggie Mountain, does wax very narrow toward the end of the valley
Lagarina, and glideth through the streights of the broken Mountain, having on
every side fearful rocks in form of a wall advancing still forward as high
as a man can shoot an arrow more than two The description of the (...) Adice.
thousand paces in length, and betwixt the River and the rocks there lies a
narrow way wherein two Armed Soldiers can hardly pass in front: but near to
the Castle, both sides of the Mountains do shut themselves up together, so as
the River betwixt the two rocks makes a great Gulphe: on that side likewise
where the Castle stands, there is a path cut through the rock a croshow-shot
in length, where one man at once whether he be on foot or horseback can but
pass. I dare affirm that

Now Sforza being come thither (as has been said) in the evening, had
intelligence from those that lay in Garrison in the Castle, that Francisco son
to Picinino had attempted to take that place, bu^ perceiving his labor to
prove vain he had retired his troops. But the Venetian General fearing some
Ambuscado, did by day-breake send Nicholao Pisani before with armed horse to
discover those suspicious ways, and chiefly the streights. He presently
returned galloping, telling him that great Sforza being greatly moved with his
report, spoke to Mellato, Marcello, and the rest, telling them, That they were
that day either to die in those streights, or to pass forward to the enemies
cost. That Sforza his speech to his Captains.
he was certain that the enemy before them had enclosed the going forth into
the valley, and that he was moreover in doubt that they had done the like
behind them. It behooved them therefore to go forward, and in the company of
Sforza and his good fortune to run fiercely upon the enemy: That they should
be well assured, that there was nothing so difficult, nor any power so great,
whichthe valor of brave men accompanied by fortune, could not vanquish and
overcome. And there upon he marched forward in battle, resolving to fight
with the enemy; at what time certain word was brought him that Giacomo
Mor^nico was beneath in the valley with a thousand Soldiers to keep the
enemies from seizing on the passages; and that he might boldly march on without
any fear of Ambush.

This news made Sforza joyful, who caused the ensigns and Soldiers speedily
to march. Being come into the plain the ensigns made a stand at Volarnea,
till such time as the whole Army was embattailed, that they might from thence
march in a square battalion to the City. In some Authors there is no mention
of this fear, nor of Sforza's speech to his Captains. At night the Venetian
Army encamped at Saint Ambrose Borough some eight miles from Verona. There
they understood of whatsoever had been done in the City for three days space*
what attempts The brave message of the Goue^nor of the old Palace, to the
Prince of Mant^a.
him word, that unless he did give over that manner of besieging, he would
b^de and lay his son Carolo on that part of the wall which he first battered
that he might be beaten in pieces with the Canon, whereupon the Prince being
daunted with (...) threatenings, did presently withdraw the battery.

Now the fourth day after they were come from the Mountains, they came to the
Fort of ^eliciana. Some say, that the enemies for a ti^e fought at the Rampires
and trenches which they had made, to keep back the Venetians; and that being
driven thence by the valor of Sforza's troops, they did easily give place And
that Sforza puts supplies into the Fort of (...)
then Sforza did with ease put a company of foo^-men into the Fort; sending
h^s brother Alexandro, Mellato, and the other brave Captains, with all the
cauallerie to the Bishops Gate, where certain Vero^ois standing by chance,
were entreated to go and open the Ga^e for their friends, and if they could
not do it by fair means to break it open by force. So soon as the enemies
knew that it was taken, and that The (...)
Sforza's Soldiers were in the City, they forthwith fled over the River; and
the amazement of the horsemen near to the new bridge was so great, as the
wooden bridge which stands betwixt that of stone, and the Tower, being broken
with the great weight of Runawaies, five Knights, or nine according to some
Authors, fell The enemies (...) from Verona.
into the water; and by the weight of their armor together with their horses,
were all drowned; only one man by the goodness of his horse escaped to the
shore.

Sforza understanding that his Soldiers were in the City, and that the enemy
fled, caused his footmen to march forth of the Castle. They did for a time
fight The Venetians (...) the (...).
he^pe of the inhabitants, Sforza's troops made themselves way into the
midst of the City. Thus writes Blondus: But Pasius says, That the troops
came from the Castles in two bands and marched against the enemies, so as
beyond Saint Z^nos Church which stands at the Hills foot, the Cauallerie went
on the left hand, and the body of the Infantrie, was sent from beyond the Fort
of Feliciana, and that of Saint Peter, which is somewhat lower directly to the
City, and that about sunne-set there was a cruel fight with the enemy on
both sides the new bridge: after which, the enemy fled; and that in fear
running by heaps over the bridge, it brake under them. The same Author
affirms that Giouanni Gonzaga was sore wounded in that Blondus says, That he
was slain before the Fort of Feliciana with an harquebuze-shot before Sforza's
arrival. But both of them agree, that the wooden bridge was burnt by night*
and that the same being broken, Picinino and Gonzaga, who had stood all night
in battle before the Palace, having notice of the violent incursions of
Sforza's forces into the City, did speedily retire into the Citadell. Some
others say, That it was in the evening. But, whether they quitted the place
then or about midnight, all of them agree together, that before day they
speedily left Verona, and went to Vigazio. The enemies flight being di^ulged,
Troillo and Ciarpelion being commanded to follow them, gave in upon the tail
of the Runawaies, and slew many of them. A great Gonzaga, were murdered by
those whom they had robbed. All the towns men that had kept themselves shut up in
their houses for fear of either party, expecting the doubtful issue of the
bickering, perceiving the chance of the dice to be suddenly turned, the enemy
in fear and amaze, did from their windows rail upon them, and furnished the
Venetians that night with victuals, light and counsel; and so soon as it was
day they came into the Marketplace to congratulat Sforza and Marcello for
their The Veron^is (...) (...) clear themselves.
victory, and with tears in their eyes called them Fathers of their Country,
recommending to them all their public and particular means, and entreated them
to believe, that the enemy had not taken the City through the Citizens fault,
who were

The apparent loyalty of the Veronois was much esteemed, and after many
embraces and salt tears shed they were willed to take courage, and that none
should sustain either general or particular loss, but such as were guilty:
For if they could find any one (which they did not think to do) that had
been Author of that Sforza, M^cello, and the rest did comfort the sorrowful
inhabitants, and did put them in hope of better fortune. It is reported that
Ci^rpelion had almost spoiled Mag^is by force Maguis brought before (...),
(...) (...).
dragging him, like a Traitor, before Sforza: And that he did so constantly
iustifi^ his own cause with that of the Citizens, as he did not only clear
himself from all objections, but gave them to understand, that the City had
been taken neither by his fault nor by any of the Citizens: whereupon by the
consent of all men he was declared guiltless, and as one that had well merited
of the Venetian State, was greatly commended.

Sforza from the vale Clusiana had aduertized the Senate of the di^aster of
Verona, and how that he was going thither with an intent to reduce it quickly
under their obedience, or else to hazard the lives of himself, his brethren,
and the residue of the Army. He wished them therefore to be patient for a
while, and in the mean time to pray unto God for the happy success of that
journey, for they should shortly The great joy in Uenice upon the recovery of
Verona.
tears, and great multitudes of people from all parts of the Town ran to
the Palace: the Senators and common people rejoicing together: General
processions were made for three days together: with prayers and thanksgiuings
unto God in all Churches. The posts were recompensed according to their speed,
some more

The Commissioners of those of Verona who came thither within a while after,
The commissioners of Verona, come to Venice.
had audience. These men with tears in their eyes did relate the wretched
estate of their City, protesting their own innocence, and that the cause of
their coming was to assure them of their loyalty in general. The Senate did
courteously entertain them, and congratulate the present victory; assuring
them that their fidelity had been a long time known to the Prince and
Senate, in regard whereof they had ever been desirous of the con seruation of
that loyal City, and that they did therefore greatly rejoice, that the matter
was ended without any further loss or The Senates answer to the Commissioners.
danger to them. Sforza's valor was highly commended, with Mellato's prowess,
Marcello's speed, for that they had opportunely recovered that which was almost
lost, and vanquished the enemy so soon as they saw him: Wherefore they
thought it not only well beseeming, but did allow of it, that the Magistrates
of their City should present Sforza with ten thousand crowns for having so
bravely borne himself in that action; and Mellato with two thousand.

The Commissioners, being dismissed and rewarded, returned to Verona. Sforza in
the mean time (because winter was well forward) resolved to tarry at Verona.
But his care for Bressia did greatly afflict him and the rest: which caused him
to leave his winterning-place before the first of January, and return to the
siege of Aranes and Thienna. The Camp abode certain days in the plain of
Arques; Mellato by the sharpnes of the weather lost all feeling, and was so
benumbed, as he lay like a dead man, who was presently by the River Adice
carried to Verona. Sforza being then enforced by the vehement cold, and by the
enemies resistance, to return to his wintering place, did send by Ciarpelion
and Troyllo, accompanied with three hundred men, certain victuals to Bressia
by the way of the mountains.

It was reported, that the Bressians were reduced to such extremity and want,
as they sustained themselves with filthy and unwholesome diet. And moreover,
That at such time as the enemies took Verona, accounting all for lost and
desperate, they The great extremity of the Bressans.
were at the point to have yielded: which they had done, had not Barbaro
opportunly Picinino and Gonzaga, had by Philips commandment sent new forces,
who with great heed were to keep the Bressians more closely mewed up, and
carefully to provide that no victuals might from any place be brought unto them.

Now S^orzas troops being come to Franzacorte, or (as others say) to Guzac,
Bressia (...) (...) with ^alls.
they fell to blows with Philips forces, who being daunted with Sforza's
arrival; before day fled, and lost three hundred Horse. But the better to
disburden the City (freed now from the siege, and in some sort from famine) of
so great a multitude, those which had brought the victuals, returned by the
same Mountains and went to Winter with Sforza. The Nauall Army in the mean
time went forward at ^orbolles, where they had slowly wrought, because that
after the taking of Verona, the Carpenters and other workmen being scattered
here and there for ^eare, the work had for a time been discontinued. Likewise
Mellato, who had the charge of the Haven, and the workmen, by extremity of
cold which he had taken, died the

It was reported that Gionanni Cornetano, of the Family of Vitelli, who
commanded the Popes troops, and who for the secret practizes he then made was
much suspected of the Pope, had about the beginning of the springtime made a
secret league with Philip and Picinino: who had concluded together, That at one
time Cornetano A league betwixt Philip and Corn^tano the Top^s General.
with his troops should invade La Marca, and Picinino should cross the Po,
and come into Tuscanie; the one wholly to ruin the Florentines state, and the
other to overthrow Sforza's Principality. The report hereof was hardly
believed; when Picinino upon the eighth day of February, was then already
come forth of Garrison, and with his troops had crossed the Po. Sforza being
troubled with these news, went himself to Venice to confer with the Prince
and Senate about the state of that War. He was afraid least Cornetano would
speedily invade La Marca, which was wholly unfurnished of aid and Garrisons.
The Venetians at his entreatie sent to the Pope, who dealt so with him; That
whatsoever had been granted unto Sforza as Prince of La Marca, should in
peaceable and safe manner remain untouched. They did likewise entreat the
Florentines speedily to arm, and not only to drive the common enemy from
their confines, but to stop him if it were possible from making incursions upon
Sforza's state. Picinino in the mean time made diverse Picinino makes war in
Flaminia.
and sundry attempts on Flaminia which were valiantly withstood by Sigismund
Prince of Arimini, and Malateste his brother (who being taken at Thyenna, was
exchanged for Carolo Gonzaga) who receiving a thousand Venetian footmen, and as
many from the Florentines, together with Sforza's Cauallerie made have to the
aid of La Marca.

The enemy having left Guido Fauentino to continue the siege of Magellana,
came to pass the Appenine hills. In the mean time the two brethren
Malatestes went The Malatestes take the enemies party.
to the enemies side. Picinino took certain Towns in the Appenine Mounts,
which he forthwith pillaged. Philip supposed by means of that voyage, that
Sforza would altogether quit Lombardie and run to the rescue of his own
State, and to that Giouanni Cornetano was imprisoned G^ouanni Cornetano (...)
committed to prison in S. Angelos Castle.
by Antonio Ride of Padua, Captain of the Castle of S. Angelo. These news
made him think that Picinino in despair would return into Lombardie. But
this could not restrain him: For sending for the Malates^es, Guido, and Asturo
Fauentini, he came more furiously than before from the top of the Appenines
into Tuscanie, having (not without great labor) caused the Snow to be taken
forth of the ways through which he passed. The Florentines during these
troubles were not idle: For they levied forces from all parts. Pope Eugenius,
who was an Associate in that war, commanded Bishop Lodouico, That as Legate
Apostolical, he should Cornetan's, into Tuscanie.

The Florentines gave entertainment to Paulo Vrsino, and Michaeli Attendulo
with a great Cauallerie, and many foot companies: they did likewise procure to
have Troyllo (whom Sforza, with a company of men at arms, had sent to La
Marca) to be sent to join with them, that with all these forces together, they
might be able not only to withstand the enemy, but bravely to assail him.

During the Florentines preparations, Picinino although he had been bravely
repulsed and with great loss from Primolcoria by Nicholao Pisani, who then was
at Florence, and had been sent with a band of young Soldiers to guard the
streights Picinino passes the Appenines and encompeth before Politiana.
of the mountains, yet he having soon after overcome the difficulty of the
mounts went and encamped at Politiana. The news that he had passed the
Appenines did greatly terrify the Florentines, and most of all in regard of
his great speed, so as at first they knew not what to resolve on. Watch by
night was placed over the City, The fear of the Florentines.
with strong guard at the Gates; But the arrival of Borsia and Troyllo,
revived the appalled

The enemy lying encamped before Politiana, greatly afflicted these two
renowned Commonweals, and drove Sforza for a time into many doubts; which was
the cause that at the Springtime he came not into the field so soon as men
did expect him. The Florentines likewise on the one side were very importunate
with him, to have him come to them. And the Venetians on the other side did
detain him and earnestly entreated him to tarry still; fearing if he should
change his former course of war, that he would afterward be enforced to
begin again (as it were) and to recover a new victory forth of the enemies
hands, which he had already in a manner with so great travail taken from them;
with all alleging, That the Florentines

With these sundry cogitations was Sforza greatly perplexed; whilst all men
began to condemn his long staying. But in the mean time Picinino, after the
taking Politiana is taken by Picinino.
of Politiana, marched against the Casentines, ruinating all places that he
met with in his passage. This mischief also was accompanied with an other,
almost as great as it. For Borsia d'Aeste (on whose arrival in regard of the
great Cauallerie he brought with him, as on the sole refuge of the war, the
Florentines had grounded Philips party. All which accidents notwithstanding
Picinino's affairs in Tuscanie became ever after less fortunate and
successful: For being come to the Pace of Arezzo, as if he had meant to make
incursions on the Sienois, or on the Territories of the Church, he dwelt so
long upon his resolutions, as he did wholly foreslow the course of his happy
fortune. Picinino his good fortune begins to d^line.
For in the mean time the Popes forces entered the Town, and shortly after
Vrsino, Troyllo, and the rest came thither likewise with the whole body of the
Army: whereupon having intelligence of the levy of so great Forces, with all
speed he retired to

The end of the fourth Book of the third Decad.
THE FIFTH BOOK Venice.
The Contents of the fifth Book of the third Decad.
SFORZA determines on the passage of the River Mincia. CONTARENI General of
the Venetians Nauall Army, defeateth the enemy upon the Lake of Benac, and
recouereth the Towns near to the Lake. The Venetian Army having crossed the
Mincia, recouereth all the Towns on the Bressan Territory. SFORZA vanquisheth
the enemy in battle, betwixt Soncina and the new Orges; and bringing his
forces to the banks of the River Adda, puts those of the Co^ntrie of
Gyradade in great fear. LEON, SFORZA'S brother, is slain with an Harq^ebuze*
shot before Carauazza. PICININO in a set battle Anglare (...) Tuscanie.
Winter approaching SFORZA comes to Venice. Great Triumphs are made at Venice
in favor of GIACOMO FOSCARI the Princes Son, which continued three days.
PICININO returning from Lombar die in the midst of Winter takes d^ers Towns
on the Bressan Territory. The Venetians Army and the of PHILIP comes at one
time to Martinenga. Peace is made with PHILIP according to SFORZA'S will and
pleasure. He marries BIANCA, PHILIPS Daughter* in Cremona* and after the
publishing of the Peace he comes with his Wife to Venice, where he is most
magnificently entertained.

THe Springtime was far spent, and Summer was at Sforza having intelligence
of the success of the affairs of Tuscanie (for he was out of fear of any
danger toward his own state, or that of his Associates) with a mighty Army
matched against the Sfo^za with a (...) (...) march^h against the enemy.
enemy. It is reported* that the Soldiers never before had so large pay as at
that time, whereby they were all exceedingly well furnished with Armor,
Horses, and all other furniture for the Wars. And (...) the speedy relief^
of Bress^a with men and victuals, he reso^ued to pass through the midst of
the enemies; Contareni had lately done upon the Lake of La (...).

This man (as has been said) being declared General of the Nauall Army,
which the Senate had with wonderful speed made ready at ^orbolles, had already
lanched certain Galleys into the lake, together with other vessels: but the
number of Galleys is not agreed upon by our Authors. Pasius of Arimini
mentions but four; Lagisiano of Verona, six; and Montanus half as many,
nor can we certainly find in what part of the Lake they fought. Some say, That
the enemies departed from Riua, and that they fought near to Torbolles.
Others, That it was betwixt the mouth of the River Ponalis and Riua: And others
again, That Philips Army departing from Pescara, and being tossed with the
waves and a contrary wind, met with the Venetian Army in the midst of the
Lake: But they agree generally, That the enemy at the same time, had many more
vessels than the Venetians, which were commanded by Blasio Assereta a
Genouese, a man very Italus of Friull had manned their vessels with
soldiers. Pietro Brunorio was with Contareni, with whom were certain bands of
choice footmen.

Now whilst Italus remained at Riua, he brought his army many times arranged
in battle before Torbolles, to fight with the Venetians, if he had found them
so disposed. But Contareni did by all means shun the fight, distrusting the
small number of his vessels: Howbeit growing afterward more bold (as Pasius
says) in regard of four new-come Galleys and diverse other small vessels of
sundry sorts which were well armed, and perceiving moreover that the enemies
had the wind Contareni being loath to leave his Gallie as a prey to the enemy,
speedily came forth of his Haven, and with full sails viered toward him: All
which his haste notwithstanding Italus had well near taken his Gallie. Some
there are that say, that the enemy did take it, before it could be rescued but
A battle upon the lake betwixt the Venetians and Philips forces.
withal, that at the ariuall of the Venetian with the residue of his galleys
and twelve other vessels, there began forthwith a cruel fight betwixt
them, which for a long time was very doubtful; and likewise that they fought
hand to hand, in regard

This was a bloody battle to the beholders: great numbers of slain bodies on
every side dropping into the water. But that which made it more hideous and
frightfull were the ^easlesse and terrible reports of the cannon, together with
the lamentable cries that were heard: all which (as it were at once)
reuerberating the concauities of the neighbour-mountaines, gave a double Echo
of those (...) of thunder. The air, earth, and waters being troubled by the
wind, and ^orcible motion of the vessels, did all togeth^r make a terrible
noise. Many and different were the dangers of death; of all which one only is
most remarkable: There was a rope tied athwart two Galleys, upon which fifty
men had taken hold that were fallen The venetians are (...) upon the la^.
After a long fight, the Venetians had go^ten the upper hand of the enemies, by
the valor and prowess of Contareni and the rest, when (...) perceiving fortune
to frown, entered into a little boat, and betook himself to (...): Assereta
and his fellows being amazed at their Generals absence, sought means
likewise of escape. Then the Venetian on every side did straightly press and
enuiron them, and followed the victory, till such time as he had made
himself master of all the enemies vessels, two only excepted which escaped
(...) with great joy drew them The valor of Contareni.
regard it was extremely battered with violent strokes in that fight received.

The news of the victory being brought to Bressia did greatly comfort the
afflicted City, and gave every one hope of better fortune. For it was likely,
that the Lake lying free and open to the Venetians, nothing could hinder them
from receiving aid and victuals in abundance. Therefore they resolved to
send Ambassadors to Venice, to congratulate the Senate for that victory.
Pietro Auogadre was This victory did greatly rejoice the Bressans. The
Bressans send Ambassadors to Venice.
the chief Commissioner who carried thither a golden ensign, wherein was
written, Brixiamagnipot^ns, Caeteris vrbibus fidei praebuit exemplum. Bressia
the magnificent has given an example of loyalty to other Cities, the which in
the Commonwealths name, as a presage of the future victory was hung up in
Saint Marks church, where it is still at this day to be seen.

Contareni and Brunorio in the mean time stood not breathing in so fair a
way, Riua is taken by the Venetians.
land and water, which though it was valiantly for a while defended, yet at
last they forced it, and being taken, it was sacked as an enemy. They dealt
roughly with the Inhabitants, because that they, more than the enemies, had
abhorred the Venetian name; young children were violently dragged forth of
their parents arms, virgins Great cruelty.
were defloured, and wives with their husbands were grievously tormented. The
Venetian presently after this recovered La Garda, which as some say was La
Garda, Bardolin and Lansiza are taken.
ruined; and as others, that it had no hurt. Next, for the recovery of La
Garda they took Bardolin, Lansiza, and diverse other towns upon the Lake;
whereof those which they took by force, were given in spoil to their
soldiers; those that voluntarily yielded, they did freely pardon.

During this fortunate success of Contareni upon the Lake, Sforza had brought
his Camp near to Manerba, where having intelligence (as Pasius says) that
Borsia d'Aeste was gone to the enemies side; that many thousands were on the
Bressan territory; and that Gonzaga their capital enemy was with great
forces come to Marmirolla to assail them in front and in flank, he remained
for a time doubtful whether he should pass the River Mincia, or not. For,
having passed it, he was to open his way to Bressia by dint of sword; but his
greatest care was, from whence to have victuals to supply his Army; for
there were twenty thousand men in his Camp: wherein, because he would do
nothing without counsel, he was desirous Sforza's advise to the Prouidator and
Captain^ of the Army.
to confer with the Prouidator and the other Captains. Being in consultation
about

Pascali Maripietro was at the same time Prouidator in the Army, who answered,
The Prouidators answer to Sforza
It becomes not me, O Sforza, nor any here, who under thy command do
follow the Venetian ensigns to prescribe a Law unto thee concerning martial
affairs: but it belongs unto thee who art our General; and by long experience
art most expert in martial discipline, to advise that which is necessary to
be done, and afterward to commandit. For it is our duties which fight under
thy conduct to follow thy counsel and commandment. At The effect of
Auogadres speech to Sforza.
this speech he made no show of any sudden resolution; but Pietro Auogadre
being come to the Army did incite him by a vehement Oration. The sum whereof
was, That acquainting him with the state of the affairs of Bressia, he told
him, that unless it were speedily relieved with victuals, men, an^ armor* it
would come to pass (which he should be very sorry for) that that most loyal
City, through want of timely succor, would be forced in despair to yield to
the enemy: and therefore he earnestly entreated him having obtained so fair a
way, not to abandon so well-deseruing a City, surpassing all others in
constant affection and loyalty to the Venetian Republike, saying, That he
needed not fe^re the want of victuals, seeing that corn was already ripe on
the ground; which being reaped, he for his own part promised to furnish out of
his own lands, a sufficient quantity to feed the Army for ten days.

Sforza being moved by these speeches caused the bridge to be instantly made,
whereupon the Army crossed the Mincia near to Monzabane, which town being
being assailed, was forthwith taken and sacked by the soldiers. From thence he
Monzabane is taken.
went to Riuoltella, where the inhabitants perceiving themselves to be
straightly besieged by land and water, did presently yield. Contareni drew
near to Sales, and Riuoltella yields.
Sforza being come to the river Celsia, encamped within ten miles of Bressia.
Thither did Barbaro and the chief of the City come to salute him. From thence
Br^norio, and Scariot Fauentino, being sent with two bands of men at Arms to
assault the town of Sales, by help of Contaren's nauall Army, they took it
by force; where the Venetian dealt cruelly with the townsmen. Those of Caluisa,
Gauarda, Sales taken.
Calcina and Bagnols, did by their deputies yield themselves to Sforza whilst
he renained at the river Celsia.

In this fortunate progression the General changed his determination, and in
steed of going to Bressia, he resolved to march against the enemy. Barbaro
(whom Sforza highly esteemed) exhorted him thereunto, telling him that it was
much betbetter to pursue the victory almost won, than to go to Bressia,
which was by The Generals sudden resolution.
news of his arrival already sufficiently assured. Being come to Bagnols, to
make incursions on the enemies (who were said to be encamped at Manerbia) those
of Otholenga and diverse other towns sent their Commissioners to him, suing for
peace, and giving him to understand that the enemies being terrified at the
report of his approach were retired from thence. The next day a thousand of the
gallantest young men of Bressia came to the Camp to salute the General, unto
whom, (for their Philip) they offered freely to follow him, and to bear Arms
at their own cost. Sforza did courteously entertain them, and willed them to
follow the ensigns.

Upon the report that was bruted that Lodouico Sanseuerino, Ittalus of Friull,
and Vermio, Philips Captains, had fortified themselves betwixt Soncinna and
the new Orgies, the General departing by night, went speedily against them,
and having fiercely assailed them being fortified with trenches, and two
bridges upon the river Oglio, sent part of his cauallerie in front, and his
infantery in Flank, to provoke them with Arrow-shot and warlike engines. Then
having under color of flight, drawn them on the otherside of the river, he
returned courageously to charge the^. He rode Ciarpelion coming with a band of
old soldiers over the wodden bridge which lies on the Oglio, and having
filled the trenches and broken down the Rampires, the victory eftsoons
inclined to the Venetians, the which being perceived by the enemies, who were
able to make no longer resistance, in great disorder they betook themselves to
flight. Pasias faith that a thousand Sforza vanquis^eth the enemies.
of them were either slain or wounded, and twousand horse, and as many foot
taken. Others lessen half the number. The chief of the Army with those which
escaped from the fight, fled to Crema. Some Authors affirm, That the
victorious Soncina taken.
Others again maintain that the inhabitants did voluntarily yield after the
battle. Borsia d' Aeste lay at the borough of Ienepalt with fifteen hundred
horse, which is two miles from the place where the battle was fought,
determining in the shutting in of the evening to join with Philips Army.
Sforza's soldiers pursuing the enemy, gave in on a sudden, and vnloked-for
upon him, who supposing that the whole Army was there, fled, having lost his
baggage and the third part of (...) de Aste is put to r^nt.
his cauallerie. It is reported by some others, that he came to the latter end
of the battle, and that he fought there together with his cauallerie, but
that the victory

Philips affairs by these defeats being reduced to extremity, those of the
new Orgies returned under the Venetians obedien^: And not that they alone, but
all the Towns, Castles, Forts, and Villages of the Bressan and Bergamese
territories, together with the inhabitants of the (...) valley. The price of
victuals did afterward greatly fall at Bressia. Corn and all other fruits
were sold for a lower rate by the tenth part than before they were. Bergamo
likewise had a share in this good fortune. The Ambassadors of these two Cities
came to Sforza's camp first to congratulate him for his victory, then to give
him thanks, for that by his valor, and that victory, they had been freed
from so long and redious a siege, which had continued almost three years, at
such time as they were (...) to have made no more Ambassadors come to Sforza
(...) Bressia and Bergamo.
resistance. Therefore they acknowledged and did prom^e ever after to confess,
That there was none next to the Venetians, unto whom they were so much bound

Now Sforza after his victory having crossed the Oglio (for corn was ripe,
and therefore there was no fear of any want of victuals in the Army) he
recovered Sforza rec^ereth Casal Mayor.
Casal Mayor, and diverse other towns in that country* Cara^zza except which
Breguan, Triuil, and R^molca (...) the country of Gyradadeart recovered by
Sforza.
both by day and night bring all manner of v^ctuals thither, he ^aised his
camp, and went first to recover Bregnam, then Triuill and Reinol^* towns in
the Gyradade. In regard of these approaches those of the Duchy of Milane
(...) greatly affrighted: The poor country men bringing their cattle and
goods into the good towns.

Philip having from all parts assembed forces, builded certain Forts upon the
river Adda, placing strong Garrisons in them. After the battle of Og^, he
did continually send messengers to Picinino to call him from Tuscanie where he
remained.

The Venetians not being ignorant how many places of importance, which were
still possessed by the enemy he lef^ behind him, and receiving certain
intelligence that Philip had called home Picinino into Lombardie, fearing an
alteration of fortune, that if by chance he should be enforced to retire, he
should no^ easily do it upon an urgent necessity: Notwithstanding that
oftentimes he made show as if he were desirous to cross the river Adda,
nevertheless he abstained. Afterward returning to besiege Carauazza, Leon his
brother being shot into the body with an Harquebaze died within a while after,
whereat being enflamed with choler, with Sforza takes Carauazza.
greater courage than before he oppugned the besieged, using all meanaces and
other Leon, Sforza's brother, died of his hurts after Carauazza was taken.

Picinino in the mean time having notice of the overthrow of Oglio, and being
pressed by Philips importunate letters to return with speed in to Lombardie,
supposing Picini^s project.
that after his departure from Tuscanie, his associates together with the
towns which had yielded to him, would be afterward defeated, and taken by the
enemy, resolved to give a battle, to the end that, if he wanne it, the
forces of the Florentines and the Pope being broken, his associates with the
rest might more easily be won to per^ist in their affection.

Now all hope of taking Perugia being lost, the which he had promised to
himself S. Sep^lcher, and from thence marched in battle to Anglare where
Bishop Lodouico Paulo Vrsino, and others were encamped. This town stands at
the foot of the Appenine hills in a very high place, and beneath it is a
bottom. In this place, because the ascent is not sleepie, the Florentines
troops with those of the Pope were encamped, although some of them lay in the
bottom as far as the river, over which is a little bridge.

At Picinino's arrival the first encounter was near to the bridge. It is
reported that some had assured him that he should that day defeat the enemy,
as being unprovided and not expecting his coming, especially upon that day
which was the nine and twentieth of June, a day religiously observed, in regard
of the Feast of the holy Apostles. Thus b^ing confident and full of hope, he
left the borough, having brought with him some thousand of the townsmen to
make them spectators of his assured victory. But finding the enemy at his
coming ready ranged in battle, The battle of Anglare betwixt Picinino and
the l^ague.
an other fashion. Near to the bridge (as has been said) and the river side
was the first encounter, where Picinino's son giving a furious charge, the
Tuseane was beaten back, and the bridge won, but at the foot of the rising
he made a stand. Nicholao Pisani a brave Captain was surprised near to the
river, and Attendulo fighting valiantly was almost taken by the enemies. Now in
that little space of the bottom which lies betwixt the river and the
mountain, they fought without any advantage* Picinino did all he could to beat
the enemies from their place, but all his attemptes were vain. Whereupon,
perceiving that the enemies Army stood fast, he commanded As^uro Fauentino,
and the other valiant Captains, As^uro and many more of note being taken in
that place, the enemies The defense and flight of the Venetians.
on a sudden in very great fear did repasse the bridge, and dislodged.

Picinino afterward supposed, That by reenforcing the troops, he might easily
march thence in battle, but it fell out otherwise. For being ready to
depart, the Florentines horse with those of the Pope did not eease to pursue
him, even as he mounted on horseback, and with their whole forces did so
charge him, as they gave him no time to reenforce his Army, but disordering
his troops: As^ura, who was (as has been said) taken in the middle of the
fight, eight The great number of prisoners.
and twenty Captains, and eighteen hundred horse, with all the Inhabitants
of the borough, were carried away prisoners.

Picinino thus vanquished, escaped to the borough, where understanding, whom
he had lost, he cried out aloud; That Philips s^ate was overthrown, unless
Picinino dispa ireth after the loss of the batt^le.
the enemy sent back the flower of all Italy which ^ee had then taken.
Lagisian^ writes; That with very grief he would twice have slain himself,
and had undoubtedly done it, if his son Francisco had not stayed with him day
and night to

Whilst these things were done in Tuscanie, Sforza, after he had taken
Carauazza, Sfo^zas great conquest.
and left Auogadre of Bressia at the siege of the Castle, deparred thence, and
at that time (as some say) recovered Casall*Maior and diverse towns upon the
Cremonese. The Castle of Cauazza being yielded, he took Azola and Caneda from
Gonzaga. They lay a while before the Castle of Macharia, those within it
refusing to yield till such time as they perceived part of their walls to be
beaten down with the Cannon. Those of Lona having seen Sforzas ensigns, did
forthwith put themselves under his protection, the like did those of
Monteclaro, Cauriana, and Riuoltelles. At the last, the camp drew near

This City (as has been elsewhere said) is seated at the mouth of the River
Mincia. It has a goodly Castle near to the River with a bridge, and diverse
Turrets. Sforza being encamped before it, Nicholao D'Aeste came thither unlooked
for.

He, resolving to motion a peace, came to the Camp to talk with Sforza and
Miripietro Nicol^o d'Aeste comes to Sforza's Camp to (...) of peace.
the Prouidatour. And after a long discourse of the inconstancy of fortune
(which he said, the Venetians and Sforza were to remember) made a motion of
procuring a peace with Philip, and promised, if Sforza thought it fit, to be
the Author and Agent thereof. He added besides, (which he knew would be very
pleasing to Sforza) that he would do his best to caufe Philip to give him his
daughter Bianca to wife, which till then he had refufed, and that he should
send her to the Camp (if he pleased) with a rich and sumptuous train. Sforza
made answer, that he craved nothing but peace and quiet, and that he likewise
knew, that the Venetians did desire it; provided that Philip were so content;
As for Bianca, he would Aeste departing with this answer went to Milan to
Philip. Pescara in the mean time, the fourth day of the siege, was taken by
The Venetians take Pes^ara.
force, by the valor of Contareni and his Mariners (for the Nauall Army came
thither at Sforza's arrival) and was sacked. Then they planted a great piece of
battery (wherewith the walls of Macharia of a marvelous greatness had been
beaten down) to overthrow the Citadell, which ouerlooked the City. Some write
that the report of this piece was so great and forcible as diverse houses of the
inhabitants fell down at the only noise thereof, and that the ships which lay
at ankor upon the lake, above five hundred paces off, did strike one against
another as often as the piece was shot off.

Now this Tower being battered with that Engine, was at the tenth shot beaten
down to the ground, whereat those of the Citadell being daunted did forthwith
yield. Sforza crossed the Mincia, and in a short space made himself master of
Villa-Franca and Vigasio, then of Vallessin and the bridge over the River, with
diverse other small towns gotten from the Mantuan.

During those exploits along the Mincia, Aeste having remained a while with
Philip, N^colao d'Aest^ brings the Lady Bianca to Mantua.
brought Bianca dow ne to the Po to Mantua. This caused the Venetians to
suspect Sforza, for that he was so soon reconciled to his father-in-law; and
they were afraid least the Commonwealth would receive some detriment by that
reconciliation. But Sforza being entreated to go to Marmarioles a village of
the Mantuans Bianca lay there to confer of peace and Marriage, he answered
that he Sforza's answer to those that entreated him to go thither where
Bia^ca lay.
would not go without the Senates leave to an enemies Country, the which he
thought they would not suffer him to do. This answer caused the Venetians no
more to doubt of his loyalty. Hereupon the Lady was by the River Po brought
from Mantua to Ferrara; and Aeste three days after followed her thither.

Picinino after the overthrow received at Anglare, departed from the Borough
whither he had retired after the battle, and went into Flaminia; and being
safe in the company of his associates, he did by great iourneis arrive at
Milan. Lodouico, General of the Popes Army, did within a while after go into
that Province, where (the Brethren Sigismund and Malateste being called back
to the Popes service, although Malateste did afterward return to Philips
party) he recovered in a short space certain Towns by a voluntary
reddition. The Forlani would have done the like, had not the garrison with
Picinino left in their city kept them in awe. Then joining with the troops of
Giacomo, Antonio Marcello, who was sent from Lombardie into Flaminia with five
companies of men at Arms, he thought it very necessary to besiege Rauenna.

Ostasio in regard of his ancient friendship with the Venetians, did upon
Marcellos Raucnna under the Venetians.
word, receive the Venetians into the City, committing the government thereof
to him, whereupon he with his wife and children re-withdrew himself to
Venice: Some say that the people yielded in despite of Ostasio, which seems
unto me Lodouico took it in ill part; and in indignation thereof did within a
while after give Bagna and Cauallo, which he had taken by force to Nicholao
D'Aeste* And because the Autumn of that year had been very unseasonable by
reason of the continual rain, they were enforced by the bad disposition of
the air to send the troops to Garrison sooner than they used to do. Thereupon
the Popes forces left Flaminia, went into Tuscanie, and from thence to Rome.

Sforza likewise, Winter drawing on, having recovered all saving Legnaga, which
for a time he besieged in vain in regard of the strong Garrison within it
(although it is most certain that it was more defended by the continual rain
and tempests than by Arms) sent his Army to winter, all saving one band of
men at Arms which he led with him to Verona for his Guard. He distributed
the residue of the Army along the river Adda as far as the Treuisans
Territory in towns

Never was any General of an Army entertained with greater joy both of the
The great entertainment given to Sforza at Venice.
people and Senate, than Sforza was. For they did not only commend him but had
him in great admiration, they gazed attentively upon him in regard of his great
valor, and thought that they saw somewhat in him that was venerable and more
than humane. All the States of the City went to meet him and brought him to
the Palace where he was magnificently entertained. Francisco Barbaro, who by
Francisco Barbaro highly esteemed in Venice.
the Senates appointment after Sforza's arrival was come to Venice with Pietro
Auogadre and an hundred Bressan Gentlemen, was likewise highly praised and
esteemed. The Bressans are recompensed for their loyalty.
they were declared worthy of all franchise and exemption. And to the end that
the common people might likewise taste of his grace and bounty, the yearly
tribute of the Mills amounting to twenty thousand Duccats was for ever quitted
to the people.

Pietro Lodron son to Paris, for that he and his Father had deserved well of
the Giacomo Foscari the Princes son, who at that time was married in great
magnificence. But of all the shows, one especially, being very rare and
delightful, has deserved above the rest to be commended to posterity: which
was, That from Saint Samuels Church unto Saint Barnabies shore, a bridge was
made for that time over the water, for the Great triumphs at Uenice at the
wedding of the Princes son.
pompous train of Knights to pass over to go to the Palace of Leon Contareni
Father to the Bride* who coming forth of her Fathers house entered into the
Bucentaure which was richly tapessed, wherein she was accompanied with all the
Ladies

In these shows was the City busied, whilst* Picinino (who as has been said
though neither victorious nor vanquished, could not live at quiet) having
renewed his Army in Lombardie, came in the midest of winter, when no man
thought he would have come into the field, and made a fierce march upon the
Bressan Territory, filling the whole Country with fear, so as before
Sforza's departure from Venice, he enforced Picinino his unlooked for (...) into
the Country of Bressia.
all the champaigne Country of Bressia, and whatsoever the Venetians held upon
the river Adda, and on the Bergamese confines (the new Orges excepted) to
yield; Sforza's troops being speedily drawn from their Garrisons retired into
the strongest Towns. This loss was accompanied with the revolt of Ciarpelion,
who with three hundred horse went to Picinino's side: The Duke of Hadria within
a while after did the like. For he forsook Sforza, and carried a great
Cauallerie away with him.

During these stirs there happened a marvelous revolt of Towns; but within
a while after there followed a greater, upon the false rumors that Picinino
spread abroad concerning Sforza, How that being at Venice he had been
committed to prison, and afterward secretly murdered by the Senates
commandment. The enemy by these forged matters made all things more easy for
himself, until that Sforza to wipe out these false imputations, came speedily
to Bressia. And because the extreme cold weather would not permit him to
execute any enterprise, after that he had by his presence confirmed those
that had continued loyal, and put them in good hope, he returned to Verona,
where having intelligence of that Sforza recruers the bridge of Valeza.
it; and being taken in a short space, he manned it with a strong garrison.
Some write, that at his departure from Bressia, Monteclaro, Soncina,
Martinenga, and Casal-major revolted; and that he was not greatly troubled for
that loss, having rather to loose them in that manner than by force, knowing
for certain that those Towns would prove his, who the next summe^ should be
strongest in the field. Philips troops spent the remainder of the winter in
those places.

The Springtime being come, they began on both sides to make great
preparations for war, and to provide armor, victuals, and generally,
whatsoever The Venetians place Attenda^ in Mellato's (...).
end but by the death of one of those two great Captains, or by his entire
overthrow. Michael Attendulo being sent for by the Venetians, was in the mean
time come forth of Tuscany into Lombardy with two thousand men to command the
troops in Mellato's place, who drew toward his end.

Sforza (whose great authority and command did not only extend over the
Venetian forces, but over all those of the associates) in regard it was time to
leave the Garrisons, had assembled all his Army, when as the enemy, who was
wont by his Spies to have intelligence of the least of his proceedings, was in
the field a little After what manner Picinino encamped.
his back the River Oglio with a bridge guarded by a strong Garrison. I find in
some Authors Mella for Serioles, and Legnaga for Algesia. But whether he
encamped there or not, (for undoubtedly it was in a place naturally strong) he
thought himself able by long delays to frustrate all Sforza's designs.

But it fell out otherwise than he expected. For so soon as the Venetians
General with a gallant Army came in view of the enemies, and that he had
considered the situation of the places he forthwith resolved to join battle,
and to enforce That it was greater in show than substance, and withal assuring
them, Sforza his speech to his souldi^s.
that with ease they might defeat Philips soldiers, and their fearful
General in those narrow straights, wherein they had enclosed themselves; and
that they being vanquished, they should purchase same and a great booty: He
told them that he would use a longer speech, if those with whom they were to
deal were not already sufficiently known unto them: being even the same men
whom so often they had overthrown, beaten, taken, and basely disgraced. He
willed them then to march forward, and at the first signal of the battle to
beat down the enemy, who by his own confession was more than half
vanquished; For he did not send them to the fight, but to the victory, as
being much stronger than they in number, valor, courage, and good fortune.

This being said, he called for the crossebow-men, and having given the
signal to the sight, the battle began to be very cruel on the shore, where
Caualcabon a valiant man, and diverse other men of note were slain; many
likewise were hurt, among whom was Troillo. And certainly there would have bin
great slaughter on both sides, had not night given end to the battle which
began very late. Some say that it lasted from morning to noone. Pasius
writes, That Philip willed Picinino not to fight, and that by reason thereof,
the night after the battle he crossed The fight betwixt Picinino and Sforza
is broken off ^y the approach o^ night
the Oglio about midnight; and leaving a strong Garrison at the bridge, he
went and encamped on the Cremonese. But that which Montanus sets down seems
most credible, to wit, That they fought more than once with sundry events, and
that the enemy did not pass over the River, before that Bartolomeo Coyone, a
valiant man, had taken Pontologia five miles from thence, or as others say
Antonio Martinenga: and until he had notice that the Venetian troops were come
upon the Sforza came into the enemies Country, he went and besieged Martinenga.

Giacomo Gaiuano was in the Town with a gallant troop of horse. There were
Sforza besieges Martinenga.
likewise great numbers of footmen, so that the mercenarie soldiers were far
more in number than the Townsmen. There was in the Venetian Army more than an
hundred and thirty troops of horse, and great numbers of foot-forces. The
Venetians General upon the assurance of his forces, did encompasse the whole
Town: and having fortified his Camp with trenches and rampires, he resolved
to keep the enemy besieged until he should constrain him by force or fair
means Picinino retired a mile off into a place full of wood and water, watching
all occasions, that if the enemy should commit any error, he might cut off
the Victuallers, or those which kept the guard, determining not to fight with
his whole forces. Philip is reduced to great (...).


At this stay were Philips affairs, who although he were reduced to that
want, as after Picinino's return he was enforced for the renewing of his Army
to borrow money of certain of his Courtiers, to take up Arms on credit in
shops, and horse and victuals forth of the towns under his subjection, yet
nevertheless, because he perceived that the whole burden of the war would
light upon him, and being of a great and invincible courage, and always busied
in war, he used all

The ordnance in the mean time still playing, had made a very great breach,
The number of the Venetian army before Martinenga.
which might have been easily approached, if Sforza had given an assault: But
he would not do it, fearing (as some thought) that Picinino would have
assailed his Camp, while he should be busied at the assault. At the same time
it was by some Sforza's loialtie, had no mistrust thereof. Sigismond of
Ari^ini, unto whom Malateste gave his daughter Polixena in marriage, came at
the same time to Sforza's Camp.

Ostasio Polentano, who lay at Treuiso, being taken as he was going to the
enemy with Ieronimo his son, were confined into Candie, where both of them
not long

Philip being either incited by the reports that were dispersed of the
treacherous accord made betwixt the two Generals; or else being wearied with
the great expenses of the war: or rather, as some affirm, being urged with
the insolent demands Philips resolution.
of Picinino and the rest that were in pay under him, turning suddenly from
Arms to peace, resolved to commit his daughter Bianca and all his means to
the trust and discretion of Sforza. He secretly therefore sent one called
Vrbano Rosan of Pauia, or as others write, Eusebio Caiman to Sforza's Camp:
Howbeit those that have most faithfully written this History, say, That
Antonio Guidebon of Derthonna was first sent to sound him how he stood inclined
to peace, and presently after him, Eusebio Caiman, who finished the business.

It is reported that Sforza alone treated with this man from the second watch
of the night, till broad daylight concerning the conditions of peace: and that
in the morning both of them coming forth of his cabinet, they publicly showed
themselves with smiling countenances. Many were already come to the Generals
tent (as the manner is) to bid him good morrow, among whom was Maripietro the
Prouidator: Peace is conclud^d by Sforza and Philips commissioner.
Sforza turning toward him and the rest smiling said, Gentlemen I proclaim
peace to you, we must talk no more of war nor Arms, we must only think on
peace and quiet.

This advertisement being new and unlooked for, seemed very strange to the
Venetian and the rest, who asked of one an other what was meant thereby, and
why Sforza was so soon turned from Arms to peace, and of Philips capital
enemy become his friend. These news were forthwith spread over the whole
Camp: And the General presently commanded the Soldiers no more to execute
any hostile actions. The like did Philips Commissioner cause to be done in
Picinino's Army. It is reported for a wonder, that the very selfsame day,
there was such a mutual congratulat on among the Soldiers, and such frequent
coming to and fro, from one Army to the other, upon the only speech of peace,
as both Camps seemed to be but one, and that the next day the Captains did
publicly embrace and entertain one an other.

Sforza in the mean time had sent Angelo Simonetto to Venice to acquaint the

Picinino did not long conceal his grief; but having drawn the Garrison
forth of Martinenga, he marched to the Territory of Lodes, where he greatly
complained on Fortune and Philip; for that they had betrayed a poor, lame, and
old man.

O Fortune (quoth he) and thou Philip most ungrateful, could ye without my
knowledge Picinino his complaints upon ^he report of pence.
treat of a business of so great consequence? and is this the recompense of
my services for the space of so many years in heat and cold, fair weather
and foul, done to an unthankful Prince? O how vain are all my toiles and
forepassed dangers? To what purpose has my loialty been, to what end my
industry? why has my labor and speed so often restored Philips affairs
wholly ruined? I have served and defended him in his sovereign authority,
that now proves mine enemy; for certainly he holds me for such an one;
nor do I think but that he hates me more than an enemy. He has given his
daughter to Sforza, he has committed all his means unto him; But of wretched
Picinino, of whose love, affection, and industry, he has had so great trial,
he has no remembrance, esteeming him not only unworthy of greater honor,
but reputeth meanly of him, not vouchsafing to acquaint him with the motion of
the peace. O how more than true is that saying, That there is nothing more
vain and uncertain than the favor of a great Prince, and that there is no
more assurance in depending upon such an one, than in the words and actions of
a madman.

Such were Picinino's complaints: when Sforza, after that he had recovered
Martinenga, and other Towns on the Cremonese, and committed the troops to
Maripietro the Prouidator, went to Venice, where coming into the Senate he
spoke in this manner to the Senators.

Sforza his Oration in the Senate.
We have O Prince and Senators by the favor of Almighty God and your good
fortune, till now, so daunted Philips great forces, and in such sort lessened
his greatness by many overthrows one after an other, as he has been of
late enforced to send to your Camp, and humbly to sue for peace whereof he
has made me Judge and Author. Your Army is safe and in good estate, we have
recovered the Towns which he took from you, which are under the command of
your Prouidator. Besides, I bring you peace if you think it worthy of you,
and such, as being received may profit the Commonwealth. Receive it if ye so
please, with as good a will as it is offered. But if ye think it more
expedient still to continue the war (seeing it lies in you to embrace which
of the two ye shall best like of) command what you will have to be done. As
for my self, I will endeavor, if fortune answer^ my desire, to finish this war
to your contentment, with as great loialtie and constancy as I have undertaken
it, and by Gods help to continue it to the end.

Sforza's arrival was very pleasing, much more his sweet and gracious speech;
but peace most of all. For they could not have wished for one more just and
aduantagious: Therefore they highly thanked him, for that by the selfsame
valor and loyalty as The Senates answer to Sforza.
he had begun that long and tedious war, he had brought it to the desired
end. And concerning peace they answered him, That the Venetians were pleased
with it, and would hold that for firm which he had made with the enemy: He
had leave then when he pleased to depart, and to dispose, (they praying God
that it might be to the profit and honor of the Republike and his own) of the
public business, as he should think fit. For they were assured that he
could do nothing, but that which would be profitable and honorable for the
Commonwealth.

In this manner he went forth of the Senate, reioicing as much for that peace
as for a victory, and so returned to the Camp. From whence sending the Army
to Garrisons, he stayed at Capriana, to give audience to Ambassadors who he
knew would come thither to him from all parts of Italy. There came to him at
the same Lodouico Nuncio to Pope Eugenius; who taking his leave of him to
return to Rome, Blondus of Furli the Historian remained with Sforza. Nerius
C^pare and Angelo Acciarole were sent from the Florentines; Francisco Barbadico
and Paulo Troni from the Venetians, to the end that if need were, some might
be there to defend the Venetians cause. Nicholao Arcimboldi, and Franchino
Castellone were sent by Philip from Milan: diverse others came thither, as
Ambassadors from other Princes and Commonwealths.

Philip according to his promise at the beginning, having called back his
daughter from Ferrara, did send her with a gallant Nuptial train to Crem ona.
Commissioners likewise were appointed from him and in his name to give the
City and Castle Sforza for her dowry; The which to receive together with the
Lady, he came thither, attended on by three thousand horse. And entering the
Castle glistring in Arms with a numer of his choice friends, coming near to
the Lady he spoke unto her in this manner.

Sforza's speech to his future Bride.
I Have along time labored (my dearest Spouse) to attain to this so much
desired marriage. The good will which I have ever borne to thee since I first
made suite to have thee to my Wife, has never suffered me to take rest, but
night and day thou have been imprinted in my mind: And it did greatly
despite me to see those that envied our good fortune, to have so much credit
with thy Father Philip, as that by their means he denied me his Daughter. I
resolved either to die valiantly, or else to win thee: if not by fair
means, at leastwise by force of Arms. I will not deny but that I took arms,
and did enterprise a dangerous war, but it was to let thee see how that there
is nothing how difficult soever but I would attempt for thy sake. I never hated
Philip, because he was thy father, and by thee my father-in law: nor did I
ever so much desire to hurt him, as I was willing to keep him from offending
me. The which may easi^y be discerned by the effects that ensued. He was
desirous to have me lay down Arms, I presently did so; He made me Judge and
Vmpire of the peace, I have procured him a perpetual peace with the Venetians.
Whereunto has all this tended, but to let thee know that I never had any
intent either to hurt thee or thine? And do not think, because thou see me
armed, that thou art sent to an enemy, and not to a loving husband. For it
beseems the daughter of a great Prince, to be in this manner first saluted by
a souldior and great Captain her husband. There remains nothing to do, but
that with mutual affection we love one another, and that by thy means thy
father may hereafter think well of us: And for mine own part, I will love
and honor him as our common father, with the like affection as thy self.

This he spoke (according to Pasius of Arimini) and the better to oblige the
Lady to himself he presented her with many rich gifts. Others say that he
was betrothed unto her in Saint Sigismonds Church without the City; and they
make no mention of Sforza's speech to his wife. The Nuptials being solemnized
he spent certain days in dispatching the Ambassadors. For on the one side
the Popes Picinino held, and Rauenna which was possessed by the Venetians. On
the other side the Venetians were not well pleased, because that Legnaga, and
those Towns which they had formerly possessed in the Gyraldade, were taken from
them. Philips cause was well debated there as was that of Prince Sforza is
busy in hearing and satisfyng the Ambassador.
Gonzaga by those whom they had sent thither. The one craved Lonada Pescara and
diverse other Towns; and the other Bressia and Bergamo, two most excellent
Cities, In the end after sundry contentions, Sforza pronounced his sentence in
this manner, That Philip should pretend no claim to the Bressan nor Bergamese
Sforzas sentence concerning the strife betwixt the Ambassours.
Territories, but that those two Cities with their dependances should remain
to the Venetians: Cremona and all the Cremonese should be the dowry of Bianca
his Philip, with all the Cities in the Gyradade: That they should have (...)
(...) (...) (...) Gonzaga should have again whatsoever belonged to the Mantuan
(...), (...) ^is condition nevertheless* That after h^ had drawn (...)
Garrison (...) (...), he should deliu^r both it and the Haven to the Venetians:
That the (...) ^ould enjoy Riua, Torbolles, and (...), which they had won by
right o^ Arms, together with Rauenna. That Pope Eugenius within two years
should have ^olognia restored from Picinino* That (...) Fauentino having
restored to the Florentines those Towns which ^e had taken from them and which
he (...) held, should be freed from his impri^ent* The (...) Genoueses should
(...) their liberty and should Phili^* And besides ^oncerning ^eace (whereof
he had an especial care) his ^ill was, that every one should religiously
observe it.

This sentence of Sfo^ (...) with (...) of the rest approved, was by the Popes
Nuncio rejected, who went about to cause others to dislike of it, because, as
he thought, they had done no great matter for the good of the Roman Church.
Whereupon, in a rage he went to Florence, and from thence to Rome. Peace was
in this sort concluded on the (...) and tw^eth day of September, the year one
thousand and twenty from the Cities foundation, and in the fourth year of the
last war with Philip. In Venice, enerall processions were made for three
days space, and thanksgiving to Almighty God for that the Commonwealth was
not only

Sforza the third year after his coming into Lombardie, went to Venice with
Sforza with his wife comes to Venice.
his wife: the Prince and the whole Senate went forth to meet him. The Princes
wife being attended on by all the Ladies of the City received the new married
wife in the Bucentauro, and were lodged in the Palace of the Bernardi, which
for that purpose was sumptuously furnished. The public streets, and all the
shoppes from Rialto to Saint Marks were stuffed with all sorts of rich
merchandise, which gave great admiration to strangers. All the treasure which
is kept in a part of the Church, was laid abroad to be seen and viewed of all
men: Then great presents were given to both of them: And at last, when they
took their leave to go to La Marca, the Prince and

The end of the fifth Book of the third Decad.
THE SIXTH BOOK OF THE THIRD DECAD Venice.
The Contents of the sixth Book of the third Decad.
War is renewed by EVGENIVS and PHILIP. SFORZA'S troops La Marca, were at
the last driven thence. War at the same time was made in sundry places
against the Turks. The Honorable entertainment given in Venice to the Wife
of LIONELLO D'AESTE. The Bologneses recover their liberty. FRANCISCO PICININO
in his Fathers absence is wholly bereft of his forces in the Mount Volmea. The
great revolt of SFORZA'S Captains was the cause of his defeat in La Marca.
NICHOLAO PICININO, the great Captain, dies at Milan. MICHAELI ATTENDVLO
having taken arms near to Cremona, defeateth PHILIPS troops upon the
Gyradade. The Senate having intelligence of the new alliance made betwixt
PHILIP and SFORZA, takes from him all the benefits which the Commonwealth had
Venetian Army approaches twice near to Milan. The Venetians do greatly
molest the enemies near to the Lake of Coma. The death of PHILIP Duke of
Milan. The Venetians reduce Lodes and Plaisancia under their obedience. SFORZA
coming into Lombardie takes Plaisancia by force and sacks it. He burns the
Venetians Nauall Army near to Casal-Major, and defeateth the Venetians at
Carauazza. The Venetians make a league with SFORZA against the Milaneses. Those
of Milan with in a while after, having made a league with the Venetians, do
attempt to defend their liberty against SFORZA.

LOmbardie after Sforza's departure was for a time Philip renewed the War
against them upon the Cremonese, the which after his death was dispersed over
all Lombardie: but we will hereafter set down what was the cause thereof, and
likewise what end it had. And now seeing that the order of the affairs do

Now Lombardie being at quiet, Andrea Dandulo was sent Ambassador to the king
of Babylon, upon a rumor that was spread, how that the Venetians had carried
Andrea Dandulo is sent Ambassador to the Sultan of Babylon.
away diverse of his subjects forth of the country, and transported them into
the West, having slain them, and sold the rest, to the end that the Sultan
might know that it was not done by the consent of the Commonwealth, seeing that
the Author thereof for want of appearance at an appointed day had been
condemned as guilty, although that a while after coming by the Senates leave
to iusti^ie himself, having proved that he had been enforced ^o to do, it is
reported that by a general consent he was acquitted.

About the same time Mellato that excellent Captain, who had so well deserved
Mellatos death.
of the Republike, died. The Senate in memory of his good services caused his
statue on horse* back to be erected near to S. Antonies Church in P^dua. The
same year three new Procurators of S. Mark were created. Lodouico Lauretano
was chosen at the first assembly, Paulo Troni at the second, (...) Fancisco
Barbarico, surnamed the Three new Procurators of S. Mark created.
rich at the last, so that then, they who were wont to be but six, were
increased to nine. There were besides at the same time three ships of burden
armed, and one galley, which were sent to Sea to free it from Pirates. For it
was reported that the Sotolani very famous Rouers, did scour those Seas: And
within a while after, four Galleys departed from the City under the command
of Ant onio Diede for the guard The City of Antiuari subject to the Venetians
of the Gulf. This man by means of some others of the contrary part that
favored

The same year which was the thousand and two and twentieth from the
foundation of the City, on the sixth day of November, the Sea did in such sort
ouerflow A great deluge at Venice.
all the streets in the City, as an incredible quantity of Merchandise was
therewith spoiled. It is thought that the merchants lost by that inundation
m^re in value than a million of Gold. The Hungarians at the same time fought
against the Turks with prosperous success, who within a while after received
a greater overthrow in the lower Misia, at this day called Valachia.

The Pirates in the mean time were so strong at Sea as the Merchants upon all
Alfonso, and receiving no other answer, but he was ^orie for it; that the
merchants were not wronged by any of his subjects; and that he could hardly
believe it: Diede being moved with indignation, went to besiege the town of
Bistonia, Bistice assailed by the Uenetians.
the only harbor at that time of those thieves (I suppose that the same Sea
town which stands upon the confines of the Florentines, which at this day is
called Bistice, was in time past so named) and at his arrival summoned the
Inhabitants to deliver into his hands the Pirates that were there, and in so
doing, he promised them to depart Diede ran to Arms, and coming to assault
the town, he would greatly have endangered the enemy, had not a terrible
tempest suddenly arose, which scattering his vessels here and there, threw the
Venetians into the enemies hands, whereupon the General of the fleet with his
whole companies were taken, who afterward by Alphonsos commandment were set
at liberty, and had their ships and goods restored to them: and of his
bounty, the king added his promise to make good to the Venetians whatsoever
they had lost in that encounter, which could not be recovered.

Andrea Quirini drew forth the vessels which had been taken from the Haven of
to Venice, they would by no means fall into the Venetians hands, but forsaking
their Liburnian vessels, they went on shore in the next Haven they came to,
where they continued till such time as they understood that the nauall Army
was returned to Venice. For then they began more fiercely than before to spoil
and take whatsoever they met with. But their unbridled liberty lasted not
long. For Philippo Canalus was speedily sent against them with three ships of
burden, and one Galley. Some write that about the same time certain Galleys
were armed at Venice against the Turks; but they that write this, do not set
down the number of the Galleys, nor under whom they were sent forth.

Of those ships which returned from Syria ^oden with merchandise, that of
Contareni Antonio Abramo his ship, they did again suffer shipwreck, and were
cast all away near to Modon. This carried with it two losses, namely of men,
which was the greatest, in regard they were many, and also in rich merchandise,
which was thought to be worth fifty thousand crowns.

Two Galleys were likewise furnished in the name of Lionello d' Aeste, the
sails The king of Arragons daughter comes to Venice.
of one of them were of purple silk, which brought from Ortona, a town of the
Peligniani, to Venice, the king of Arragons daughter betrothed to this young
Prince* Victor Capello, and Francisco Lauretano commanded those two Galleys.
The Bride (...) d'Aeste comes to venice.
presents. For which, within a while after Lionello came in person to Venice to
salute the Prince and Senate, and to thank them for the honorable reception
of his

At the Springtime eight Galleys were on a sudden armed at Venice against the
Turks, at the expense of Pope Eugenius. The Pope referred the execution of
that business, to Cardinal John his Nephew, of the family of the
Candelmares. Lodouico Lauretano, Pietro Zenti, Marini de Molino, Paulo
Lauretano, Lorenzo Moro, Nicolao Contareni, and Antonio Candelmare were
Captains of the Galleys. Besides these, the Duke of Burgondie caused four
others to be armed there at the same time, which were commanded by four
Venetian Gentlemen, namely Diverse Galleys armed at Venice against the Turks.
of the family of the Venieri, Contareni, Lauretani, and Georgij. This French
and Papal fleet being ready to set ^aile against the Turks was commanded
by Lodouico Lauretano their General, who departing from Venice with the
Cardinal Candelmare, and with all men's prayers, that their journey might be
prosperous, put out to Sea. The Christian fleet opportunely arrived at the
straight. Amurath Ottoman Emperor of the Turks having left his son at
Salonica, departed at the same time, by the aid of the Genoueses (as it is
said) forth of Europe into Asia, whither he was speedily recalled by sundry
messengers. The rumor was, That king Caraman marched against him with a
mighty Army: But haing composed the affairs of Asia, returning into Europe,
he found the straight to The Christian^ possess the straight.
be shut up and guarded by the Christian fleet. This had put all men in hope,
that this cruel enemy being divided from his forces, might by his absence
Ladisla^ King of Poland, having caused his Army to cross the Danubie in three
several places, did fiercely march against the Turks in Europe.

But it is now time to return to the affairs of Italy, from which we have
somewhat digressed, the better and more plainly to dispatch that which
remains behind. Eugenius (as has been said) took it in evil part, That
by Sforza's sentence, he might not enjoy Bolognia till two years were expired.
But Philip was more displeased to see that all his sonne-in-lawes attempts were
bent against Alfonso whom at the Spring he meant to assail with his greatest
forces. The Pope and Philp^ d^scontent
Although Sforza's hatred seemed to be hereditarie from his father (for
Sforza's father serving valiantly in the Realm of Naples in the quarrel of
Queen Ioane, had bravely withstood all Alphonso's attempts) it was
neuertheles^e augmented by a new displeasure, which was, that Alphonso had
seized upon all the towns The cause of Sforzas hatred taking Alphonso.
which by succession belonged unto him in Samia and Apulia; upon which occasion
Renatus by means of Nicolao Mace, who for that purpose came to him to entreat
his aid.

Alphonso being troubled with the report of this league, entreated Philip if it
were possible in some sort to mitigate the fury of his sonne-in-law. Philip,
being moved by the entreaties of the King his inward friend, and displeased
likewise with Sforza for that he had rather recommended Cremona to the
Venetians than to him, as also because that since the marriage with his
daughter, he was in a manner estranged from his party, did importune Eugenius
to take Arms against him: withal aduising him to take Picinino into his
service, seeing he could The Pope, king Alphonso, and Philip make league
against Sforza.
Alphonso was received into it as a third man.

Sforza was fully resolved to relieve king Renatus whom Alphonso by sea and
land had besieged in Naples, and undoubtedly would have performed it to the
uttermost if before his coming to La Marca, Pope Eugenius had not entangled
him in a civil war. Whereupon, changing his determination, because he might
not himself Sforza sends his brother to the aid of Renatus.
be so far from home, he sent his brother Giouanni to the aid of Renatus.
But his journey proved unfortunate. For joining with the Cappilistes, and
coming by chance to fight with Alphonso, he lost at Carpenona both his camp
and cauallerie. Picinino in hatred to Sforza, but adopted him into the family
of Arragon: who having received of the Pope and King money for his pay, went
with great rumor through the territory of Perugia into the Duchy of
Spoleta, where at his arrival he took Tuderta from Sforza. Then marching
through the territory of Sisa to La Marca, he did straightly besiege
Bellafort. Diverse that were present at that journey say, that war was begun
in La Marca before Sforza departed forth of Lombardie: and that from thence
proceeded Sforzas great hatred to Ciarpelion who came to meet him, which was
thought to be the cause of his death: For being of a bold courage and free
speech, he taunted Sforza, telling him, That whilst he spent the time in
kissing Bianca, he basely suffered the enemy to take the country of La Marca
from him.

War being thus kindled, Sforza came to La Marca, and within a while after
Picinino departs from La Marca.
coming in sight of the enemies, he enforced Picinino that was retired to
Amandola, a very little town, to sue for peace, which was granted him on
condition, That he should depart forth of the country of La Marca* and all
other territories belonging to Sforza.

The Province being in this sort quieted, Sforza marched against Alphonso; And
it fortuned in his way that through the stubbornness of the Transionates he
commanded their City, which stands on the frontires of the Province to be
sacked and spoiled.

Picinino having thereupon taken an occasion, and being provoked thereunto by
the Popes Agents, as though he had outraged one of the Popes towns, did
presently War renewed in La Marca.
seize upon Tollentino, Galde, Nucernio, Asisio, having driven Alexander,
S^orza's brother, from thence. Sforza being called back upon these sudden
news was enforced to winter in La Marca.

Renat^s in the mean time having lost all hope, returned home into France.
Whereupon Alfonso, within a while after entering the royal Castle, which till
then had been in the enemies hands, was by Pope Eugenius declared King, on
condition that he should presently march into La Marca to overthrow the power
of Sforza^.

At this stay stood the affairs of La Marca, and there was likelihood that
there would be great war about the possession of that Province, when
Francisco, son to Picinino, whom his father had left at Bolognia at the
beginning of the war of Haniball Bentiuoglio, who had bin a long time
suspected in regard Hani^al Be^tiuole prisoner.
of the great power and authority of those of his party, and sent him prisoner
to the Castle of Variana. But he escaping thence by means of Galeas Marascot
and Virginio Maluesia, went to Bolognia, where having incited the people to
regaine their liberty, he defeated by surprise Francisco Picinino, and most of
his Garrison. Francisco The Bologneses having recovered their liberty crave the
alliance of the Venetians and ^lorentines.
was afterward exchanged for Gasparo and Achilles Bentiuoles. But the
Bologneses, the better to assure and maintain their recovered liberty, sent
to the Venetians and Florentines to crave aid of them, and to be received into
their alliance, unto whom both their demands were presently granted.

Being confident upon the alliance and forces of these two great States, they
did Lodouico Vermio from their confines, in a short time they recovered all
their Towns and Castles. And the better to increase their Republike, they
thought fit to repeal Baptista Canedo^a with all those of his faction, who had
been banished from the City since the time that Eugenius had recovered
Bolognia, whose niece Hanibal Bentiuoglio should marry, thereby to extinguish
all their ancient enmity: But neither the new alliance, nor any other bond of
affinity could root out the hatred which time had planted. For H^nibal being
treacherously surprised by Bertucio Canedola and other his accomplices was most
inhumanely murdered. The Bologneses being moved with this monstrous impiety
forthwith ran to Arms, and on a sudden slew the chief of the Canedoli
with diverse others, amongst whom Baptista was the first that tasted of Hanibal
Bentiuole is tr^acherously slain by his enemies.
their fury: whose body after they had dragged it ignominiously about the
City, was at last in the market place burnt to ashes. Their liberty
notwithstanding by the supportance of their associates, stood inuiolate. But
these two Commonweals were not only careful for Bolognia, but likewise for
the danger they saw Sforza engaged in. And now the Venetians began to repent
them that they had so soon dismissed Christofero Tollentino, with diverse other
excellent persons; and that Bartholomeo Coioni was gone to Philips party. In
the mean time Philip had sent William of Monferrat, and Carolo Gonzaga to make
war on those of Bolognia. The Venetians being troubled with sundry
cogitations, dispatched thither Tiberto Brandolino, Thadeo d'Aeste and Guido
Rangone. The Florentines had sent thither not long before, Asturo Fauentino and
Simonetto. These men having easily broken the enemy, did in a short space
expel them out of the Bologneses territories. Whereupon all places near
Bolognia being in this sort pacified, the associates troops departed by
several ways.

The Venetian Captains were by sundry messages called back into Lombardie by
reason of the war renewed upon the Cremonese. The Tuscans were commanded to go
to La Marca to Sforza's aid: For upon the arrival of King Alfonso and
Lodouico the Popes Legate, both of them were come to La Marca with great
forces, where Sforza was brought to great extremity by means of sundry
overthrows Troilio with a thousand horse went to the Kings side, having first
delivered unto him the Town of Esia where he lay in Garrison: and Pietro
Brunora had already done the like with eight hundred footmen. This valiant
captain being amazed with those losses and many others, although of himself
he was of courage invincible, after the loss of Stella, and whatsoever almost
he possessed in La Marca was retired to Santa Maria de la Fortuna. It is
thought, That at this time he sued to Philip, and made a secret league with
him; wherein it was agreed, That Philip should invade the frontires of the
Cremonese: Against whom there was some likeliehood that the Venetians would
oppose themselves, and presently take arms to defend that which belonged to
Sforza: who coming afterward Philip in Lombardie, should strait press the
Venetians.

In this manner, as they had plotted it, not long after war was renewed in
Lombardie, but with far better fortune to the Venetians than the enemies
expected. But before we proceed to that which was done in Lombardie, we will
briefly set down, what was the end of the war in La Marca. The Venetians
upon report of Sforza's losses had sent Thadeo d'Aeste, Guido Rangone and
Tiberto Brandolino to his aid; and the Florentines had sent Simonetto: who
being all joined together, had four thousand men in their Camp at Marignane.
But Picinino lay upon the hill Laura to keep them from joining with Sforza;
which although for a time he endured, Picinio entirely defeated by Sforza.
yet at last he assembled all his troops and marched against the enemy, who
being in battle vanquished, left his camp to be possessed by the Victor. This
happened in the space almost of three years: But in the fourth year of the
war of Picinino and Alfonso having renewed the war about Spring time,
Picinino was vanquished by Ciarpelion upon the mount Millo: and Alphonso not
being satisfied with raising a land-Armie at Eugenius instance, did besides,
arm eight galleys to molest Sforza by sea.

The Venetians (as some say) upon report of Alphonso's nauall Army, did
likewise arm certain vessels of theirs, which were appointed for the guard
of Rauenna. In this sort was Sforza straightly pressed by sea and land, when
Philip sent Francisco Landriano to call home Picinino, under color to confer
with him concerning the affairs of the war. Francisco his son, in the mean
time being left with the troops in La Marca, and vanquished in the mount
Volmia by Sforza, having Firmiano the Popes Legate in the Army, with diverse
other great Lords. Many at that time thought that it was Philips pleasure to
have it so, to the end that Picinino's Army being defeated, Sforza his
sonne-in-law might be freed from that war: whereby we may perceive that the
common reports then current, were most true, That Sforza was before then
reconciled to his father-in-law, and that he had secretly made a league with
him, to the utter subversion and ruin of the Venetian estate.

But Picinino upon the news of this rout, was not able to conceal his grief,
but lamented and exclaimed, taxing Philip oftentimes, That he had left him
nothing but his life, and that he should do well to deprive him of that; and
in this manner falling sick Picininos death.
with extreme sorrow, the greatest and best advised Captain of his time, did
in a short space decease at Milan. Sforza at Philips entreaty set Francisco at
liberty, and soon after peace insued with the Pope, although Sforza possessed
diverse Towns of La Marca, and Pope Eugenius some others. Carpeli^ns death


At the same time Alexander Sforza's brother did cause Ciarpelion to be
hanged, who was a man very famous for his skill in martial discipline, only
because he had an intent to go to Philips party.

About five years after the Pope renewed the war, and sent the Patriarch of
La Marca is reduced under the Popes obedience.
Aquileia to La Marca, who in a short space reduced all the Province (Firmia
excepted)

Sforza being retired to Pisaura with his wife, did there spend the remainder
of the Winter. At the spring time being solicited by some of his friends, he
came through the Duchy of Spoleta, an having crossed the Tiber, the better to
disturb the quiet of the City of Rome, he encamped upon the Viterbian
Territory: From whence in have departing, and returning into Flaminia by the
Lake of Trasimene, he stayed at Metaura* In the mean time, his brother
Alaxander with the Tower of Alexander, Sforza his brother reuolteth from him.
Pisaura revolted from him. Being on every side environed with enemies he came
within a mile of Vrbin, and after that, no great exploits were done on either
side, until his arrival in Lombardie.

Philip on the other side in the Country of La Marca caused Italus of Friull,
and Italus of Friul and Giacomo Guiuano are put to death.
Giacomo Guiuano to be beheaded, upon suspicion that they had intelligence with
the Florentines. Soon after having notice of Ciarpelions death, as if that had
given him Sforza, he commanded Francisco son to Picinino, whom he had sent
for into Lombardie, to scour and wast the Cremonese Territory. Whereupon
Francisco making a furious road into the Country, after sundry spoils and
depredations, he besieged the City of Cremona: which gave occasion to the
Venetians to have recourse unto Arms. But because they would not seem to do
any The Venetians in Sforza's behalf, denounce war to Philip. Disgrace
offered to an Ambassador.
thing rashly, they sent Lodouico Foscari to Philip; who, according to the
custom of their Ancestors, should denounce war unless he would desist from
inuading that which did belong to Sforza. Answer was made him, that Philip had
no time nor leisure to hear any Ambassade, and that Milan was no safe place
for him: That he should do well presently to get him forth of the City,
unless he meant to be outraged. Michaeli Attendulo General of their Army, to
march speedily against the enemy, who by this time had seized on the greatest
part of the Cremonese. He making have, according as he was commanded, with six
thousand horse, and as many foot, having crossed the Oglio, went and encamped
upon the Cremonese at Casall-major; but on a sudden dislodging thence, he
marched against the enemy, who with his Army was in the Country of Gyradade
very near to Casal. There, ioining battle, after a cruel fight which
continued from daie-breake til noone, the Venetians drove the enemies from
their Camp, and in their disorder, took four thousand horse from them. This
victory was not obtained without loss: For diverse of their brauest men were
The Venetians vanquish Philips forces.
Picinino would have made one of the number if, when he first saw the
alteration of fortune, he had not gotten into a little boat, and escaped forth
of the battle. Others say that he went over the Po, at a Bridge.

After this famous victory, the Venetian General did in a short space recover
whatsoever the enemy had taken on the Cremonese; and being strengthened with
the troops of Lodouico Gonzaga he went and encamped on the Gyradade. In this
place likewise did the Venetians affairs so prosper, as Attendulo in a short
space left An other victory of the Venetians.
Philip nothing on the hither side of Adda but Crema and Lodes. From thence his
Lodouico of Seuerine had sent to break the bridge, by which the Venetians had
joined the River to the Marshes. Pietro Auogadre, Giacomo Antonio Marcello, and
Antonio Martinenga, because they had fought valiantly that day, and borne
themselves more bravely against the enemies than any else, were honored with
the order of Knighthood.

Whilst the Venetians were entangled in this war of Lombardie, Sforza, as
though he had been reduced to the last extremity, did at the persuasion of
Pope Eugenius and King Alphonso, who envied the Venetians greatness in that
Country Philip. The Venetians had been before advertised of his meaning, and
upon the first intelligence of it, they thought it fit to The Venetians revoke
all that which had been given to Sforza.
commit Angelo Simonetto to prison, who was then in Venice, and to take away
Sforza's pension, and the Palace which the Prince and Senate had given him: To
revoke likewise all gifts given to Sforzas friends, which were so many and so
rich, as that it is scarce cre^ble which we find in the Venetian Histories; how
that in the last war of Lombardie the Venetians spent five Millions of gold.
And afterward they drew from Simonetto the true ground of Sforza's revolt. The
Senate upon this new rebellion did forthwith levy 400. Archers for the guard
of Rauenna together with certain vessels: Commandment was likewise sent to
those forces which the Florentines had sent to Bolognia; to suffer none
whosoever to come forth of Lombardie. Philips Ambassadors come to Venice to
treat of peace.
Philip after al these overthrows sent his Ambassadors to Venice to treat of
peace; who were not only entertained as friends and loving guests, but were
moreover suffered to tarry a month in the City: But the business being for a
time debated on, had not

Attendulo after the battle of Adda having fortified the bridge which iojned
the River to the marshes, and placed a strong Garrison upon it, did with great
rumor make incursions into the State of Milan, and in the midst of winter
did with his cauallerie run to the very gates of Milan, from whence, having
set fire on diverse houses of the suburbs, be carried away many prisoners, and
great store of Cattaile.

Whilst these things were done in Lombardie, one of those galleys which in
trade of merchandise had been at the Tana, and was commanded by Zeni Morosino,
was cast away by a storm on the Pontick-sea; but the goods within it and all the
Mariners being cast upon the shore were taken by the Turks; the other galleys
arrived safely at Venice.

Such success had the Venetians affairs, when news was brought of Pope
Eugenius Pope Eugenius death.
death, in whose place, Thomaso Sarsania was chosen, who was afterward called
Nicholas; in whom we have set before our eyes, the only example of humane
happiness. For in one year he was made a Bishop, created Cardinal, and
elected Pope. The Venetians presently decreed to send Ambassadors to him.
Four of the chief of the nobility were chosen, Lodouico Lauretano, (who
after sundry brave exploits against the Turks had brought home the fleet to
Venice) Lodouico Venieri, Pascalis Maripietro, and Christophero Moro, who was
Advocate to the Commonwealth, and Ambassadors sent to the new Pope.
the other two were Procurators of Saint Mark. But Moro not being able to
travail through extremity of sickness, Zacharia Treuisano was sent thither
in his sted.

Giacomo Foscari the princes son, being cited by the council of Ten, was in his
absence condemned, for not appearing at the day prefixed; But afterward his
innocence (as I think) being known he was by the Senates decree sent from
Thryeste where he remained to Treuiso, with express charge, not only not to go
forth of the City, but not to walk upon the Mestrine without the leave of the
Potestate: but afterward, either for his Fathers sake, who was at that time
matchless for his wisdom and piety toward his Country, or as I suppose,
rather for his innocence, he was repealed from Treuiso home to Venice. But as
Fortune when she once begins to frown upon a man, does ever after pursue
him, even so it happened, that soon after his return to the City he was accused
of a murder, and that by his procurement Hermolao Donato had The Princes son
is confined into Candie.
purpose to fetch him, for that the Senate knew by his letters that he
practiced treachery, and being upon the torture demanded if he had written
those letters which were directed to the enemies, he confessed that he had
written them, and that he had used means to have them fall into the magistrates
hands, that thereby he might be called home into his country, which though it
might not be as he desired, would nevertheless be as it might. At the last
when they found he was guiltless, he was again confined into Candie: where he
died. Andrea Donato likewise being at the same time Andrea Donato being accused
to have been corrupted is condemned in a pecuniarie fine.
Sforza, was sent for from his government of Candie, and being enforced by the
Senates decree to answer before the Lords of the Council of Ten, he was
put to torture, and by them condemned in 1400. Ducats, and being deprived of
all publik government, to endure ayeares imprisonment.

In the mean time, Carolo Montone son to that great Captain Brachio having
intelligence Carolo Montone takes the Venetians party.
that Philip and Sforza were reconciled, did in hatred to the contrary faction
come to the Venetians side. The Venetian Army had already taken from Sforza
Casalmajor and other strong towns near thereunto: Afterward Attendulo going
again upon Attendulo his incursions upon the Milanois.
the territories of Milan, commanded Tiberto Brandolino with a brave troup of
horse to scour as far as the City Gates, where in the enemies view erecting
the Venetian ensigns, he invited the Milanois to recover their liberty; But
perceiving the enemy not to stir, he turned his forces elsewhere, and went on
wasting the Country as far as Pauia; from whence having carried away a great
booty he again drew near with his Army to Milan and invited many of the
Townes-men to recover their liberty.

In this place, as they abode near to the river Adda, four valiant men were
knighted hard at the City gates; namely Tiberto Brandolino, Theote Saluia of
Bergamo Lodouico (...), and Gilberto C^rregiano. At length, the Venetian
hearing no tumult in the City, after he had spoiled all that quarter where he
had planted his ensigns he went to besiege Brebia in Briansa, which he
presently took. From thence he The (...) take Brebia.
scoured and wasted all the Province of the Briantines. It is reported that
they did there use great cruelty upon the inhabitants not only killing men,
but young children of two years old, rauishing maids, and abusing married
wives. The Soldiers did not commit this cruelty, but the Voluntaries of the
contrary party, who to glut their hatred toward the poor vanquished, did
like brute beasts fall to

Besides, Mount Barri being forced by Attendulo was sacked and spoiled. Leco
afterward Mount Barri^ taken.
which is seated on the mouth of the Lake of Coma being for a time besieged
could not be taken. Moreover diverse small towns near to the Lake, whose
inhabitants were supposed would not long continue loiall were given over to be
spoiled. In this manner all places from the river Adda as far as Coma on both
sides the Lake being reduced under the Venetians obedience, the Soldiers being
laden with booty were brought back on the hither side of the river.

Whilst these things were done abroad, the City of Venice was greatly
afflicted The plague in Venice.
al those that were infected with the sickness were carried two miles off from
the City to a place commonly called the Lazaretto. Six boats were by the
Signorie appointed for that purpose to the end there might be one in every of
the six quarters of the City, into which the town is divided. And because
this place was found to be very commodious, not only to lessen the sickness,
but likewise for the relief of the poor (for the sick were there better and
more commodiously looked to) it has

Philips affairs were (as has been said) much disiointed, when Sforza
departing from Flaminia with 4000. horse and 2000. foot whither he was come
from La Marca to assemble forces, went through the Territory of Ferrara to
that of Parma. At his departure the Pope recovered al places of La Marca,
Ancona excepted. For the Anconitans being besieged by Land and Sea ( Alphonso's
nauall Army did vex them by Sea, and that of the Pope by Land) fearing if they
should too rashly give credit to the Soldiers, who solicited them to yield,
their town would be sacked, did erect the The Anconitans yield to the
Venetians.
Lorenzo Mini was sent thither with seven Galleys for the guard of the City:
Some Historians write thus; But many make no mention at all of the tumult of
the Anconitans. Two ships of war at the same time departed from Venice against
the Pirates, who troubled all the Seacoasts the one was set forth by Giacomo
Morosino, and the other by Andrea Leone.

At Sforza his arriual in Lombardie, the cauallerie which the Senate had
appointed to withstand him, marching through the Paduan territory coming by
an other way was sent on the hither side of the Po to Attendulo's Camp. The
preparations for war were great on both sides, at what time Philip the greatest
warrior that ever was in the family of Viscontes, being first troubled with a
fever, and then with Philips death.
a flux, dyed. By his death all those of his party and his subjects being
amazed were Lodes yields to the Venetians Plaisancia does the like.
voluntarily yield to the Venetians. Four days after those of Plaisantia
opened their City gates to the Venetians. Giacomo Marcello, placed strong
Garrisons in both these Towns: Then causing his troops to cross the River
Oglio, he did in a short space recover Colombana and in a manner all the
Country of Lodes.

The Milaneses in the mean time did with great courage undertake to pursue in
their own name the war begun by Philip, and chose Sforza for Captain
General of their troops against the Venetians, on these conditions, that if
he could take Bressia from the Venetians, it should be his own, and if he
should become master An accord betwixt those of Milan and Sforza.
of Verona likewise, that then Verona should be his, and Bressia should return
Philips death, Sforza wrote to all the Captains of the Army, entreating them
to persevere in their loyalty, that he would shortly be with them, if those of
Milan would send for him, and that then, their forces being joined together he
did hope with ease to overthrow those of the Venetians. He then being made
General by those of Milan, came to Cremona. From thence, having crossed the
River Adda at Picigatone, he joined with Francisco and Giacomo Picinino, and
with the other Captains of deceased Philip, and presently Sforza comes to the
field.
departing thence, he did in a short space recover Colombana.

The Venetian Army, because it was less than that of the enemies, retired
toward Lodes. Those of Pauia being provoked by their own particular passion,
did Sforza's son by his wife Bianca, Earl and Lord of their City, in
memory of his Grandfather. The Milaneses in a short space sent three
Ambassades to the Venetians one after an other, to demand of them that which
had belonged to Philip. The Ambassadors were still answered after one manner,
that notwithstand all those Towns till then taken from Pqilip, were well
purchased by right of arms, yet nevertheless, that the world might see that
the Venetians did love peace Ambassadors sent from Milan to Venice: with the
Venetians answer.
better than war, they were ready to surrender that which they demanded, so
that the Milaneses would truly pay them the great quantity of gold which they
had disbursed in that war: But they offering nothing, were dismissed with
nothing.

The Senate perceiving the great war they were to sustain against Sforza and
A nauall Army determined against the Milaneses.
the farthest places of Lombardie, and to that end four Galleys were armed,
and two and thirty Galliots under the command of Andrea Quirini and Georgio
Lauretano.

During these preparations at Venice, Sforza having assembled all the forces of
Lombardie went on a sudden and besieged Plaisancia, and having beaten down a
great part of the Walls betwixt the gates of Saint Lazarus and Saint Raymond,
and the Pobeing so risen at the latter end of Harvest, as the vessels might
easily come to the Walls, he did by an assault by Land and Water take the
City, which was given to the Soldiers to spoil. Gerardo Dandulo and Thadeo
D'Aeste that lay in Garrison

But whilst Plaizancia was besieged, Attendulo having crossed the Adda at
Colombana, went to waste the territory of Pauia, from whence he carried away a
great booty. From thence, the better to divert Sforza from his enterprise, he
still marched up and down the territory of Milan wasting and spoiling it,
where, as we Attenduloe^ incursions upon the Milanese.
find in some Authors, he seized on Melssa: He had determined if Plaizancia
had not been taken, to have besieged Cremona. Marcello being at the same time
called from the Army returned to Venice: After his departure, Lodouico
Lauretano and Matheo Victorini, came as Prouidators into the Province. And
because winter drew near, and the Army not being able to lie in camp by
reason of the cold weather, they went to winter in the villages and
farme-houses near adjoining, where the Commonwealth had like to have been
endaungered by a mutiny amongst the

Peace was again motioned, by the commissioners of the Venetians and Milaneses,
A motion of peace.
who for that purpose met at Bergamo: Those of Milan demanded Lodes, the
Venetians on the contrary refused to surrender it, unless they might be
satisfied for the expenses of the war: And although the Florentines and the
Popes Ambassadors did exhort both sides to embrace peace; yet nevertheless
they would not be drawn to any agreement. At the Spring, although the Senate
had wholly bent their designs upon the war of Lombardie, yet nevertheless,
because there was a report that two ships of burden returning from traffic
forth of the Ponticke sea had been taken by Pirates, there was a decree made
to arm three ships A nauall army against pirates.
Lorenzo Lauretano was appointed to command the Galleys, and Lodouico Bembo
the other ships.

Sforza in the mean time was not idle, but coming from his wintering places
he took certain towns from the Venetians.

The nauall Army which was set forth against the Pirates (as has been said)
defeated Vitalis Sarde whom it encountered at sea, who not long before had
surprised three ships of burden who were going to the Vintage of Candie: he
being taken, Vitalis Sarde the pirate hanged.
was hanged. Within a while after, it surprised two other ships of Pirates
near to Naples, where all those that were in them were likewise hanged.
Alphonso being moved with the matter, commanded all the Venetian Merchants
that were in his Alphonso imprisoneth all the venetians in his kingdom.
to the King, to know whether he would have peace or war, and why, without
proclaiming war against them, he had contrary to the law of Nations outraged
their Merchants and Factors. Alphonso after he had complained of the Venetians,
for that in the view of the chief City of his kingdom, they had suncke
ships which had Alphonsoes answer to the Venetian Ambassadors.
offended no man, and shamefully put their Captains and Mariners to death, who
peradventure had not deserved it, told them, that notwithstanding that injury
was very great, he would not at that time re-sent it, nor by any means
prefer war before peace, but that he desired to have the Venetians deal
with him in such sort, as he might have occasion to be at peace with them:
Therefore they

Bartolomeo Coyone whom Philip for a time had kept prisoner (who after his
death had found means to escape, and went to the territory of Pauia, where he
understood that Philips cauallerie wintered under the command of Nicholao
Guerriero of whom he was kindly entertained, and within a while after honored
by the Milaneses with the command of 15. hundred horse) marched and fortunately
fought with (whilst Sforza besieged Plaizancia) Renaldo of Dreux, who after
Philips death Charles into Italy with a mighty French Army.

By an accord made betwixt them against the Venetians, the French had received
the town of Ast of Visconte, but after his death, they not only seizd upon Ast,
but upon a great part of the County of Alexandria. Coyone being accompanied
with Asturo Fauentino, went and assailed them before Bosca which they held
besieged, and in open field defeated them and drove them from their camp:
Diverse of the French (...) takes the Venetians party
were slain in that fight* and many were taken prisoners. Coyone being
renowned for this victory, did within a while after go to the Venetians side
with fifteeno hundred horse.

The Spring time was almost spent, when as Sforza coming from garrison,
besieged Mozzaniga, and speedily enforced the inhabitants to yield: from thence
going Sforza takes diverse towns.
whole Country, Carauazza excepted. He did besides take Cassan from the
Venetians. Attendulo likewise was encamped with his Army at Calce beyond the
Oglio. And both the Armies remained for a time in those two places without any
exploit worthy of memory. At the last Sforza going from thence, went by land
and water against the Venetians nauall army which wasted all the Cremonese.
All Quirino's designs aimed at the breaking of the bridge, which Sforza during
the siege of Plaizancia had caused to be made upon the Po near to Cremona.
There was a sharp fight, and the Venetian did not cease to assail it, till
he understood that the enemies approached.

Sforza had six and twenty Galeots, which were not well furnished with men nor
armor. At his arrival the Venetians were repulsed as far as Casal-maior. The
Venetian vessels being there environed by the enemies both by land and water
were The Venetians nauall army is broken.
that skillful General had planted upon the River banks, as being all bruzed
and battered Quirini like a desperate man, having about midnight caused all
their tackling and furniture to be carried to the next town, burned the
vessels, for fear lest they should fall into the enemies hands. Quirini being
come to Venice, was by the Senate delivered over to the Procurators fiscall, by
reason that they suspected that he had not done his duty in saving the nauall
Army. The Procurators condemned him to perpetual imprisonment* Some thought
that Quirini might at the first have retired with the fleet into a place of
safety, and that he would have done so, had not Attendulo promised him, that
so soon as he should begin the fight,

The enemy being gone from them (for he needed no longer to stand in fear for
Cremona) went and encamped before Carauazza, which was manned with a Venetian
Sforza besieges Carauazza.
garrison. Attendulo who had followed Sforza when he went against the Venetian
nauall army, almost to the very place where the execution was made, so soon
as after the rout he understood, that Sforza being come into the Gyradade had
besieged Carauazza, he likewise approached with his troops near unto that
place, to make it famous by the Venetians overthrow. Never before in any other
The number of both the armies.
men assembled in one place. For the Venetian army besides Attendulo, who was
their General, had in it Lodouico Gonzaga, Bartolomeo Coyone, who not long
before was come to the Venetians party, Gentil Leonesio, Carolo Montone,
Tiberto Brandolin, Giouan la Conte a Roman Gentleman, Guido Rangone, Alberto
Bodiense, Caesar Martinenga, Nicolao Guerrieri, and with them twelve thousand
horse, and great numbers of footmen. In Sforza's Camp were Alissandro Borsia
and Conrade his brother, Roberto Sanseuerine, Francisco and Giacomo Picinini,
Gulielmo of Montferrat, Carolo Gonzaga, Lodouico Vermio, Giouan Tollentino,
Cristofero Tourello, and Bartolomeo Quartiero, and with them sixteen thousand
horse. They often fought in that place

Frederico Contareni, and Hermolao Donato were at the same time come to the
camp with commandment to enjoin the Venetian Captains, to relieve Carauazza.
Frederico at the same time being bitten with a dog, died. Hermolao and Gerardo
Dandulo, who before was Prouidator in the Army continuing the same request,
Attendulo and diverse other Captains, although they were assured that unless
the inhabitants were relieved they could not long hold out* were not for all
that of opinion in Council to give battle: but others insisting on the
contrary, they did at last conclude, that it was better to hazard the last
fortune of war, than by a lingering Diversity of opinions in the venetians
camp.
encamping to suffer the inhabitants being tired with the siege to yield: This
determination held good for certain days. For they could not resolve,
principally by what way the Venetians might pass through the enemies. Tiberto
Brandolin offered to give the first charge, by the new way, because that the
same side by reason Sforza. For he, being disguised like a mean soldier had
been over all the enemies camp, and had at leisure well viewed it.

Tiberto, Guido Rangone, and Alberto Bodiense were commanded to go upon a
holiday when no man would think on their coming, to give in behind upon the
enemies camp. Sforza was gone to hear divine Service in our Ladies Church of
Carauazza which is not far from the town, whither certain horsemen one
another The venetians on a sudden and unlooked for, do assail Sforza's camp.
coming to him told him that the enemies were in the trenches, who coming
with great fury to assail the camp, had already forced the Rampires, where
undoubtedly all would be lost without speedy remedy: Some say, that returning
from Service as he was sitting down to meat, this word was brought him, and
others

The Venetian troops in the mean time made good the way which lay betwixt the
two Armies: Carolo Gonzaga, Alexandro, and Sforza's other Captains being at
the Venetians first approach beaten back into the Rampires, could hardly
sustain the enemies charge: Some say that Carolo Gonzaga being wounded, did
not only leave the fight but the camp, and that being affrighted, he went to
Milan, where he assured them that the Venetians had defeated Sforza: Such at
the beginning was the Sforza's presence, who with the body of the Army ran to
that place where the fight began, the fight was not only made equal, but
they did beat the enemies forth of the Rampires: Then giving a fiercer charge,
the Venetians who had fought in the forefront being tired by the enemies who
were stronger than they both in force and courage, Alberto, and Guido Sforza
defeateth the venetians.
Rangone, who were much troubled to renew the battle, and to keep the
soldiers in their ranks, being environed with a troop of enemies were beaten
down dead: and then the Captains being slain, the soldiers began openly to
fly: wherein besides the difficulties of the places, the enemies pursuits did
much hinder them. For those of Mozainga so soon as they saw the Venetians had
the worst, stopped the runna

On the other side, the two brethren Picinini which were at Triuia on the one
side of the Army, did give in with two thousand horse in another place upon
the Venetians camp. Coyoni who was left to guard it, did for a time make it
good, but perceiving his friends to fly, and the lower end of the camp to be
taken from the enemies, did on foot escape into the neighbor forest:
Attendulo and the rest, so soon as they knew the foremost rank broken (whether
they did it upon malice, or else because they knew that all was past remedy)
betook themselves to flight. Eight thousand men both horse and foot were
taken together with the Dandulo the Prouidator being advised by Attendulo to
save himself Dandulos brave answer.
by flight, answered, That he had rather die near the public ensigns, than
escaping by a shameful flight purchase a perpetual disgrace. The Victorious
enemies were masters of the Venetians camp which was stored with marvelous
abundance of all things, wherein were two thousand wagons. Attendulo retired
to Bressia, whither the enemy pursuing his victory within a while after
brought his camp.

The Venetians notwithstanding this great loss were not discouraged, but
having speedily appointed two new Prouidators, Lodouico Lauretano, and Pascalis
Mariptetro, A new Army of the venetians. Sforza besigeth Bressia.
they did levy the greatest forces they could. Phe Prouidators being sent to
ressia with thirty thousand crowns could not enter into the City, which was
Sforza being come thither with his Army, had by the commandment of the
Milaneses divided it to Lodouico Verinio, Carolo Gonzaga, and other noble
persons. The Prouidators were day and night at Verona busied in making new
leuies. They did in a very short space by means of great pay assemble many
troops of horse and foot: Diverse great Lords likewise did by their express
letters and messengers promise to enter into their pay, and to be quickly with
them if the Senate thought it fit, with great numbers of horse.

Victorious Sforza in the mean time rcouered Casal-Maior, Riuoltelles, and
diverse Many towns yield to Sforza after the battle.
other towns from the Venetians. Carauazza the next day after the overthrow
yielded. But whilst he lay before Bressia, Picinino went with the residue of
the Malan troops, and encamped before Lodes.

On these terms stood the affairs of Lombardie, when those of Milan had,
notwithout cause, some suspicion of Sforza, as fearing that he did secretly
aspire to the The Milaneses. suspect Sforza.
same principality like Philip. They then being desirous to preserve their
liberty, did by little and little, retire their forces, and did daily diminish
his credit, and reputation. But Sforza perceiving that ere long he should be
esteemed no more a friend to those of Milan than to the Venetians, he resolved
to renew his ancient league and alliance with them, for he knew well enough
that the only power of that Commonwealth might serve him for a ladder to mount
up to the principality. Sforzas resolution


Now among all the prisoners of note that were taken at the battle of
Carauazza, and carried to the castle of Cremona, was Clemento Thealdino one of
the Secretaries of the Signorie, with Hermolao Donato. Angelo Simonetta had
been acquainted Sforzas secret practices with the venetians.
with him a long time, whereupon he brought him secretly to Sforza, who sent
him Giacomo Antonio Marcello, or Pascalis Maripietro.

The Senate although it had after the overthrow at Carauazza, by virtue of
their ancient alliance obtained great supplies of the Florentines, and had at
that time mightily increased their Army, yet for all that, supposing the
success of war to be uncertain, they did willingly he a^ken to peace. And
because Marcello was at that time Governor of Verona, they sent Maripietro to
the Fornaces, a place near to Pescara. The Venetian and Simonetta had many
secret conferences in that place, where they agreed upon these conditions of
peace: That Sforza and the Venetians Accord betwixt the venetians and Sforza.
crowns. Moreover, it was expressly mentioned, that the Venetians should
possess whatsoever Philip had held on the hither side the river Adda, and
should purchase Milan and the residue of the Duchy for him.

The accord being in this sort made, and all the prisoners set at liberty,
Sforza crossed the river Adda, and marched against those of Milan. The
Venetians having dismissed Sforza mar^heth against the Milaneses.
Attendulo from his place, sent him to the Treuisan territory. Those of Lodes,
because they would not fall into Sforza's hands, having sent away the Venetian
Garrison, Sforza in a short space recovered whatsoever the Milaneses held
betwixt the Adda and the Thesin (Lodes and Coma excepted.) Then from thence he
went and encamped within five miles of Milan.

The same year about the end of Harvest, there was a bloody fight betwixt the
Turks and the Hungarians upon the confines of Adrinople wherein fourscore A
battle betwixt the Turks and Christians at ^drianople.
thousand Turks were slain, and of Christians half as many. The Venetian
Galleys surprised a Foist of the Pirates, all the Rouers were hanged, and they
that were less faulty were made Gallie-slaues: within a while after they met
with a Merchants ship belonging to the Gotholans which was laden with oil,
the which they took in hatred of their Countrie-men who were all Pirates.

Tortona in the mean time, Nouara, Alexandria, and at the last, Parma, yielded
Diverse towns of the state of Milan yield to Sforza.
to Sforza: These news being brought to Venice, did greatly rejoice the whole
City* and this joy was by so much greater, as they supposed these conquests to
have been made in part by the valor and conduct of Marcello: The Senate
according Lorenzo Lauretano, and Pascalis Maripietro: and Sforza had afterward
sent him with Alessadro his brother to recover diverse Towns beyond the Po;
most of which being recovered and assured by strong Garrisons; this valiant
Captain called for the Venetian Sforza besieges Milan.
forces, and went to besiege Milan. In the mean time news was brought that
Lewis Duke of Sauoy, who had leagued himself with the Milaneses against
Sforza, had (...) great trouples into Italy, under the command of John
Compensio to wast and spoil the confines of Nouara; who at their first
arrival attempted to surprise Nouara* But their enterprise sailing, they went
from thence and encamped upon the Territory near adioining.

Coyoni whom the Venetians had sent with Marcello to Sforza, was commanded to
march against them, who were reported to be six thousand men. He ioining
Coyoni his victory.
fight with Compensio upon the banks of Thesin, did put them to rout, and took
Compensio prisoner with four hundred of his horse. This victory did highly
renown Coyoni and did greatly further him afterward in mounting to those
honors which he obtained.

At the same time Lrrenzo Pisaure was sent with a Gallie to the King of
Babylon: The cause of his Ambassade was, for that the Venetian Merchants had
been badly dealt with by the Barbarians in the Faires of Syria. Angelo Pisaure
did likewise put to Sea with two Galleys against the Pirates.

The Milaneses in the mean time affecting liberty which they had a little
tasted, did on a sudden murder diverse of the chief in the City who were
said to take Sforza's party, then going forth of the Gates in heaps, they
ran toward the enemy: Sforza did at that time batter the Fort of
Mellignana, who understanding of the enemies The people of Milan come forth
disbanded against Sforza. The Milaneses fear of Sforza's Army.
coming forth who were reported to be three score thousand men, he did in
such sort order his battallions, as those of Milan hearing of the excellent
order of his Army, durst not approach Marcello who was with him, perceiving the
great skill and dexterity of that brave Captain in a matter so sudden, did
write to Venice, that not only the Venetians, but all Italy would have had
cause to have feared that invincible Captain if he had taken Milan. The
enemies being retired he continued

A certain Greek named Stamatus, borne in Candie, being by chance at Venice
at that time when they did show (according to their manner to great Lords that
were strangers) unto Borsia D'Aeste the public treasure which is kept in a
part of S. Marks Church, it happened after this manner; That this Greek being
unknown, The famous theft which a Greek did enterprise.
and thrusting himself among his household servants, did enter into the
Vestrie. Marks Church, which in the beginning we have termed the golden
Church, in regard of the excellent guilding thereof both within and without, is
down to the pauement seeled as it were with great tables of marble. In that
part of the Church where the Innocents Altar stands, this cunning thief
removed a marble table, Then falling to work in the night time (because the
wall could not be suddenly opened) he did before day light put the stone in
the usual place, and stopped all the chinkes and crannies with lime, so that
nothing might be discerned, and long before day carried all the rubbish which
he had made to a place far from thence; And having wrought in this manner
sundry nights at last he got into the treasury, from whence by little and
little he began to carry all those rich and exquisite jewels, which are
admired of al those which behold them. For besides great numbers of inestimable
stones richly inchaced, there were twelve The inestimable value of the tresure
of Venice.
of pure gold is nothing in comparison of the fashion and worke-manship
wherewith they are adorned, and precious stones of sundry colors wherewith
they glister: nor of Vnic^rnes horn of an invaluable worth; nor of the Princes
attire for his head, nor of diverse other matchless pieces of work, which this
famous thief had at leisure taken from thence. But (according to the proverb)
Adultery and theft Zachary Gria a Candiot like himself, but of a noble
family, and a man, as this one example can witness, of an exceeding good
conscience* Stemmatus after that he had sworn him upon the Altar, told him
what he had done, from thence carrying him to his poor cottage, he showed him
his great and famous theft; But this honest virtuous man, being stricken dumb
with beholding it, could not of a long time make him any answer; The
sacrilegious villain was once minded to have murdered him, and would have
heaped sin upon sin, if he had not prevented him, by telling he was fallen
into an ecstasy with sudden joy to behold Gria in the mean time having
received a most rich stone of him in gift, which for the worth thereof was
well known, (for it was the same which the Prince at this day wears on the
fore part of his ducal Crown) took his leave of him, saying that he would go
and dispatch some: business, who presently went to the Palace, and being
admitted to the Princes presence, he did discover the whole matter to him,
saying, That it behooved him to make have, for fear least he whom he had with
much to do deceived with fair words, should change his mind, and hide
himself with his booty in some secret place: and to manifest the truth of
what he spoke, he drew the precious stone forth of his bosom, which being
known, men were presently sent to apprehend The these is hanged betwixt the
columns. The accuser is recompensed.
His accuser, besides a present recompense, had by the Senates decree a
perpetual pension allotted him forth of the public treasury.

The Picinines in the mean time forsook the Milaneses, and came to Sforza's
side with three thousand horse, and two thousand foot: but because it was
certainly reported, that the Picinines being drawn by Sforza's fair promises
had left the Milaneses, the Venetians took it not well, by reason that it was
expressly mentioned in the accord made betwixt them, that it should not be
lawful either for the Sforza to receive any into their pay that had borne
Arms for the Milaneses. This did in some sort lessen the Venetians affection
toward Sforza; for The Venetians suspect Sforza.
his potencie did begin, more than was needful, to be suspected of the
Venetians: but the Picinines being soon after suspected to practice against
Sforza's life, whereof Marcello had often wished him to beware, they on a
sudden returned with their troops to Milan: Some nevertheless do say, that
the Picinines came from Milan to Sforza, with an intent to spend the winter
abroad, and then to return to Milan at the beginning of Summer, as they did.

Sforza in the mean time did greatly vex and molest the Milaneses, when as
Alphonso, to free them in some sort from this war, did by an Edict expel all
Venetians Alphonso expels the Venetians out of his dominions.
forth of his dominions: This warrelike threatening, did presently cause the
Venetians to make ready a great nauall Army: They armed five Galleys and ten
ships of burden against the King, whereof Lodouico Lauretano was made
General: This warrelike preparation of theirs by Sea made Alphonso to attempt,
both The Venetians nauall army against Alphonso.
by Lionello d'Aeste, and by Ambassadors to obtain peace, who being come to
Ferrara, the Senate sent them word that they should not come to Venice, where
men's courages being once moved, it was but in vain to seek to appease them.

Victore Capello in the mean time who lay at Sea for the guarde of the Gulf,
did give chase to a Gallie of the Gothelans as far as Ortona, which long
before had taken a Venetian Gallie; so soon as he saw the enemies landed, and
that by aid of The Gotholans are vanq^shed at Ortona.
the townsmen, they prepared to offend him, he turned the prowes of his
Galleys and commanded his soldiers to leap on land, which they perfourming,
there was a fierce fight upon the shore: The enemies being there put to rout
and enforced to enter the City, their Gallie was drawn from thence and burnt;
together Alphonso.

The Venetians being tied to the war by sea, did by their Ambassadors sent
to Sforza try if they could rid themselves of that by land. Vrso Iustiniano
and Pascalis Maripietro went to him in the name of the Common wealth with
commission A motion of peace betwixt Sforza and the Milaneses.
and commandment to treat of peace, which the Milaneses propounded very
aduantageous for them: The motion thereof had been already made when as
Crenia having been many months besieged by Malateste (for the Florentines
according Andrea Dandulo, and by Sforza's aid likewise, who would not Crenia
yields to the Venetia^s.
have accepted of their yielding: Gentili Leonesio was commanded to go and
receive them with a strong Garrison.

Peace at the same time being almost concluded with the Milaneses, was referred
to Sforza upon these conditions, That seven cities which had obeyed Philip,
should The articles propounded to Sforza.
be his, but that he should leave Lodes and Pauia to the Milaneses. If (...)
did accept of these conditions, he should be a friend and allie of both the
Commonwealths: And Lombardie being by this means at peace, the Venetians
should entertain Sforza one thousand, and no more: And if he would not have
peace with the Milaneses, he should be declared an enemy to them both, and
that the Venetians should make war upon him with eight thousand horse, and
the Milaneses with six thousand.

Maripietro having propounded these Articles of peace to Sforza, he did
neither allow nor reject them; but it is reported, that gnashing his teeth, he
did lament and complain of the Venetians loyalty, and that he made answer,
that he was not only content to quit Lodes which the Venetians had decreed
should be surrendered Sforzaes answer to the proposition of peace.
to the Milaneses, but all those towns which by an accord made betwixt them
were to be his own, if he did but think that they would have it so, in
regard his Alessandro, Angelo Simonetta, and Andrea Biraga were by him sent
thither, who having a while debated the matter, did soon return without any
resolution, first to Ferrara, and from thence to Sforza. Some write that these
men did approve the peace with the usual solemnities, but Sforza would not
ratify that which Alessandro and the rest had done, as though he had given
them no such commission.

So soon as the truce was expired which had been granted for certain days,
Accord betwixt^ the Venetians and Milaneses*
that they might in that mean space treat on the conditions of peace, the
Venetians and Milaneses made an accord: For which agreement, if the Venetians
had not some reason, they might seem to have degenerated from their ancient
custom, by contracting a new league, and abandoning Sforza. But without all
doubt they did it upon great occasion, because Sforza not long before had
forsaken them, and he merits no pardon that sins by an other man's example:
Besides, the love to Philip, than by that which they had formerly made with
Sforza: Notwithstanding, they did not ^ease to do all good offices for this
Prince their friend: For whatsoever (in a manner) had belonged to Philip (Milan
excepted which they desired to set at liberty, together with Lodes which
before then was tributarie to it) did by their means become his own.

Supposing therefore that he would be satisfied with these conditions, they
were desirous to treat with him of peace. Nothing therein was done underhand
or fraudulently, but openly and plainly, and in the self same manner as they
had dealt with him from the beginning. Now as the Venetians had taken Arms
against Philip in the Florentines behalf: even so by a solemn defiance, (as
beseemed Sforza makes war on both the Commonwealths.
a free and potent Republique) war was denounced as well to this man, a^ to
them. But this invincible Captain by a fortunate advice made choice rather to
follow the victory which he had in his own possession, than the Senate, and
accepted war against both those Commonwealths, which by his own valor and

The end of the sixth Book of the third Decad.
THE SEVENTH BOOK Venice.
The Contents of the seventh Book of the third Decad.
THE Venetians nauall Army burns diverse ships in the Haven of Siracusa.
GIOVANNI PICININO, and SIGISMVND MALATESTE, victual Milan. Those of Milan
having slain the Venetians Ambassador proclaim SFORZA their Prince. The
Honorable entertainment in Venice given to the Emperor FREDERICK and LEONORA
his wife. King ALPHONSO makes great war upon the Florentines. The Venetians
SFORZAS forces near to Otholenga* They fight afterward with different
success in sundry places. King RENATVS in the behalf of SFORZA and the
Florentines comes into Italy against the Venetians: STEPHANO PORCIO is
beheaded at Rome. The taking of Constantinople by the Turks, gives terror to
all Christians. Two nauall Armies prepared against the Turk. Peace with SFORZA
and the Florentines is published. The City of Venice and all places near
adjoining are greatly astonished by a terrible tempest. And lastly are
mentioned sundry exploits of the Turks, in Greece and Asia.

DVring these new Treaties, Lauretano with a mighty to the ships, that they
might with more ease if need should be, desend them from assaults. Lauretano at
his first arrival attempted after he had beaten down their fortifications, to
enter by force into the Haven, and near to those ships there began a A cruel
fight at the mouth of the haven of Siracusa.
cruel fight. But the Venetian having lost many of his men, perceiving that he
labored in vain, went back to Sea. Then he invented another means to offend
the enemy, he filled a ship of burden with dry vine branches and brimston,
and manned it with thirty valiant men, whom by fair promises he had drawn to
that business, who with the wind and tide sailed toward the Haven. This ship
by the force of the wind striking upon the Chain and Rampire, did despite of
all the enemies attempts, and to their amazement pass forward to the ships
that lay in the Haven: those

In the mean time the vehement flame which came forth of the Venetian ship,
took hold upon the rest, which could by no means be quenched, so as diverse
others which at that time lay in the Haven besides those two great Argozies
were burnt in the Cities view.

The Venetian departing thence, sailed to Corfu, from whence he dispatched
Zacharia Donato with one Galley to Venice, to acquaint the Prince and Senate
with what he had done in that voyage, and how that by a wonderful success he
had burnt Lauretano in his absence, there was no talk but of him: The Senate
was of opinion to call home part of the fleet to Venice, and that the rest
should continue at Sea to assure the navigations.

In the mean time the Ambassadors of the Pope, Florentines, Milaneses, Sforza,
Ambassadors assembled at venice. The venetians resolve on war against Sforza,
and choose Malateste for their General.
and Duke of Sauoy, remained for certain days at Venice, where first of all
the contention betwixt Sforza and the Milaneses was amply debated. But when
they Sigismond Malateste for General of their Army, and commanded the
Florentines to trade no longer with their City, because they would not make
war on Sforza.

Sforza likewise had opportunely provided for war with the Venetians. For
during Sforza his preparations.
the treaty of peace he had fortified his towns. He had manned Lodes and
Picigithone with strong Garrisons, and made a league with Lewis Duke of Sauoy.
And to take all hope from the enemies of any relief by the Venetians, he made
an attempt to surprise Brebies, wherein failing, he encamped not far from
thence, where he builded Forts, and leaving a strong Garrison in them, (because
Winter drew Sgismond within a while after came and assailed the Forts near to
Brebies, two whereof he took, and presently burnt them, and would have taken
the rest had not Sforza in time arrived, at whose coming Malateste retired
beyond the river Adda. Coyoni likewise coming through the valley of Sassina to
the lake of Coma, did for the easier getting of victuals attempt to join
himself with the troops of Giacomo Picinino: Francisco being newly dead. But
the Cauallery which was sent him from Milan, by the treachery of certain
persons fell into the enemies hands. Sigismond afterward arrived, who joining
with Coyoni in Bianza, in a short space became master of mount Barri, and then
by stealth victuals were sent to Milan: but in regard of the A great dearth in
Milan.
contrary it so mightily increased, as a bushel of wheat was sold there for
twenty crowns. The Venetians in the mean time did by all means seek to
draw Sforza to a battle, who was encamped or rather lodged at Vimercata,
Me^ze, and Caratta. But he still avoided it, knowing like a wise and discreet
Captain, that by Sforzas wise and discreet resolution.
the continuance of the siege, the Milaneses would by famine be suddenly
reduced to such extremity, as they would be enforced whether they would or no,
to yield. The Venetians Army after the taking of the mount of Brianza went to
^rezzia* Winter was already much spent, and yet neither the one or other were
idle, but still as occasion was offered by one of the sides sometimes toward
the Rampires of Brebies, and then near to the bridges which were made over the
river Adda, there did daily in a short space happen sundry light encounters,
and yet all their forces never joined.

Sforza's constancy was admirable in the continuation of that siege, who
although The venetians Ambassador is mu^thered in Milan.
he understood, that besides the Venetians and Milaneses, king Alphonso did
openly arm against him, nevertheless constantly continued his siege, till
such time as the Milaneses being by famine reduced to all extremity, having on
a sudden taken Arms, and murdered Lenoardo Venieri in the Palace, who from
the beginning Sforza is proclaimed Duke of Milan.
had been sent thither by the Venetians as their Ambassador, yielded
themselves and saluted Sforza for their Prince, whom they sent for into the
City.

Sforza having obtained what he desired, commanded the Venetians to be set at
liberty, who had been imprisoned after Veniero's death: This valiant Captain
was desirous to oblige the Venetians to him by all good offices: for they being
reconciled, he knew well enough that he needed not fear any warlike menaces
from any Alphonso, Peace betwixt the venetians and king Alphonso.
which if it took effect, he was in some fear of great war not only
against the Venetians, but in a manner against all Italy. The business being
begun at Ferrara whither Pascalis Maripietro had been sent to that purpose,
had at last such success as they desired: for peace ensued about the fifth of
June: the treaty having continued certain months.

This year was the year of Jubilee, and from all parts of Europe multitudes
of people came to Rome. It happened that a Germane Lady in the company of
certain knights going in pilgrimage through the Mantuan and Verona
territories, was seized on to be ravished, and her friends slain: But she
abhorring such wickedness An excellent example of chastity in a Germain Lady.
would neither by entreaties nor force be drawn to consent to the unbridled
appetite of the rauisher. Whereupon she chose rather to suffer her chaste body;
after it had been miserably tormented, to be put to the edge of the sword,
than to defile it by a voluntary sin. Sigismond of Arimini, whom the
Venetians had newly cassed, was at the same time encamped there about, who
because he was young and valiant, was suspected to have seized on this strange
Lady, being enflamed with her rare beauty. But he, in regard the Senate was
highly moved at the matttr, to clear himself from that imputation, sent some
of his Captains as guilty of the crime, bound hand and foot to Venice, who
being found to be guiltless, were sent back again without any hurt.

Peace being concluded at Ferrara, was to the great content of every one
published over all the City by sound of trumpet. Lauretano who had been
commanded The Emperor Frederick with his wise comes into Italy.
to send seven Galleys for supplies, at such time as they were uncertain of
peace, having left some of his Galleys for the guard of the Gulf, brought home
the rest of the fleet to Venice. This year was not only famous for devotion,
but for the arriual of the Emperor Frederick and Leonora his wife into
Italy, who were crowned with the imperial Diadem by Pope Nicholas in S.
Peter's Church.

The same year the Venetian Prince was by the same Pope honored with The Pope
hon^reth the veneti^ prince with the golden sword the girdle, and ornament for
his head. A motion of peace with Sforza.
the golden sword, with the girdle, and ornament for his head. Nicolao Canalis,
who at that time was Ambassador for the Signorie with his Holiness, brought
these presents Sforza by Ambassadors. Pascalis Maripietro was to that end sent
to Crema, whither Ambassadors were come from Milan to treat of that business.
The Senate likewise sent Ambassadors to congratulate Borsia d' Aeste for his
promotion to his new principality, who after the death of Leonello had been
with a general consent proclaimed Prince. At the same time likewise Hermolao
Donato, a Venetian Gentleman, was The death of Hermolao Donato.
murdered. The Senate by a decree, made sharp search for the murderers, and
promised a perpetual pension (besides a present recompense) to him that should
bewray them. The Duke of Austria, the Emperors brother, in his journey from
Rome toward Germany came to Venice: The Prince and Senate went ^o meet The
Duke of Austria comes to Venice.
him, and being received into the Bucentauro, he was conducted to the Palace
of Aeste which was sumptuously prepared for his lodging: and having at leisure
viewed the City, he went home into Germany. In the accord which they made
with king Alphonso; the Sienois, the Duke of Sauoy, the Maquesse of Montferrat,
and the Lords of Corregia were included: their Commissioners sent for that
purpose, did at one time meet at Venice.

Ambassadors came from the king of that part of Illiria, which at this day is
called Bossina, who from their master did present the Prince with four gallant
horses, The king of Bossina sends presents to the venetian prince.
hawks, and flagons of silver; they said that they came, to bring the
presents, and in their masters name to congratulate in the presence of the
Prince and Senate, the marriage of his daughters; one of whom had married
Stephen the Vayuod, and the other, Caloianes Viceroy of Hungary. And that
therefore the King their Lord did wish perpetual happiness to the Prince,
Senate, and people of Venice his friends, for

Whilst these things were done at Venice, Gentilis Leonesio, and Tiberto
Brandolino, Coyone is on a sudden and unlooked for assailed by the Senates
command.
(some Authors mention Picinino in steed of Brandolino) did by the Senates
commandment take fifteen hundred horse from Coyoni which he had with him on
the territory of Verona, against whom, (having practiced some novelty) they
came on a sudden as they had been commanded: But himself escaping, went to
Mantua to Prince Lodouico. At the same time king Alphonso, the Venetians and
their Sforza whom they had assisted with money. Carolo Gonzaga upon the first
report of this war came to the Venetians to implore their aid and succor
against his brother Lodouico, who he said had wrongfully bereft him of those
lands which he had till then possessed Carolo Gonzaga imploreth the venetians
aid.
by his fathers testament. The Venetians did lovingly receive him, and did put
him in hope, whether that they had peace or war soon to repossesse him in
his estate: and the Commonwealth gave him in the mean time a thousand crowns
a month for the entertainmenr of himself and family.

Lodouico Bishop of Aquileia came to Venice, and within a while after Pietro
Barbe Cardinal (who when he came to be Pope, would needs be called Paulo:)
great Frederick had more princely reception, who with Leonora his wife came to
Venice about the Spring time of the year following. For such great numbers of
boats never went forth to meet any Prince The great entertainment given to the
Emperor Frederick, and Leonora his wife at Venice.
whatsoever. It is reported that besides the Bucentauro richly hung with cloth
of gold wherein the Prince and chief Senators were, four great vessels were
set forth, whose poopes were all gilded, in which were the whole nobility of
Venice: These followed the Bucentauro as their Admiral: The Galleys went after
them. The Ganzares and patischermes which are lesser vessels, to the number of
sixscore, were as gallantly decked as those of the Clarissimi, in which were
the common Frederick being come to S. Clements Church, where the Prince met
him, came forth of the Duke of Ferraraes Barge, and went into the Bucentauro
where the good old Prince Foscare welcomed, and seated him in a throne of
Gold, and then sat down next to him: He was with great joy and general
applause conducted through the midst of the City to the Palace of Aeste;
which the Commonwealth had richly furnished for his lodging.

The Empress Leonora within a while after came to Venice; and to the end that
her entry into the City might be more magnificent, she tarried three days
at S. Nicholas on the shore; then upon an holiday she was received into the
Bucentauro, by the Princes wife, and two hundred of the fairest Ladies
glistering with gold* purple, and precious stones: The same order of boats as
had served for the Emperors Eustace his Church unto the palace of the Vitturi
where she landed: The chief Senators went to visit her, and to do her
seruiee in the Morning and Evening: The day was spent in feasting those great
Guests: The Council Chamber was richly hung which was filled with the fairest
and noblest Ladies of the City: The Senate presented the Empress so soon as
she entered her Chamber with a Crown of Gold set with three precious stones
which were esteemed to be worth two thousand six hundred crowns, and with a
coat for a little child as a presage of her future progeny, with a
Cradle-cloth of purple, powdered with pearls. Both of them danced together;
The day was spent in all delights and pleasures; And the whole City Frederick
being gone, the Senate the better to provide for the expenses of the war,
made a Decree, that all Officers, The Senates Decrce to get money to furnish
the expenses for the wars.
as well in the City, as abroad, Judges, Registers, and others of meaner
qualities under great Officers, who in any kind had pension of the
Commonwealth, should pay a certain tribute to the Signiorie: And that the
Gentlemen, after that they had executed their yearly charge (for every one at
the years end received his pay) should serve the Republique gratis for six
months longer: At this day

At the Spring time war was renewed with Sforza when Leonesio the Venetians
General, having for a time scoured the Country round about Lodes, Otholenga,
Manerbia, and Pontoglio, and taken certain small Towns by a voluntary
yielding, crossed the River Adda, at the bridge of Ripata, and went as far as
Milan, upon the assurance of some Bandetti, who said, That if the Venetian
troops The Venetian troops come to the gates of Milan.
would approach the City, that the people within it would presently rise in
their behalf: But notwithstanding the Venetians arrival, and that certain of
their light horse rode into the suburbs, there was nevertheless no commotion
in the city. The Uenetians besiege Soncina*
The Venetian within a while after besieged Soncina, and battered it with his
ordnance.

The enemy thinking to raise the siege did cross the Oglio at Canedulla, and
Sforza with 20000. men comes into the Bressan territory. The Venetians march
against the enemies.
with twenty thousand men marched into the Country of Bressia, where having
taken Gambare by assault he besieged Ponteuico. The Venetians having made a
reasonable breach at Soncina, enforced the Inhabitants to yield; and from
thence, having made themselves Masters of Romanenga, they marched toward the
enemy, who in the mean time had taken Ponteuico upon the River Oglio, and
were gone to Gella, thereby to be the better able to press those of Bressia:
Leonesio being encamped in a very commodious place near to the enemy, did
seize upon the The number of both Armies.
fifteen thousand horse, and six thousand foot; and Sforza had three
thousand foot, and eighteen thousand horse. Some Historians say, that they
fought fiercely at that time for three hours space and more, near to the
Town of Porsane, and that the loss was equal on both sides, but, that by
reason of the unfitness of the place they lost more horse than men, and that
both sides would have fought till they had gotten the victory, had not dark
night separated them, Fortune inclining to neither party.

This was done near to the River Adda, when as William of Montferrat with
four thousand horse made fierce incursions upon the territory of Alexandria,
and William of Mont ferrat is van quished by Sacromor Visconte.
Country: Sacromor Visconte, and Antonio Burgese whom Sforza had sent against
him to withstand his attempts, coming suddenly to strokes with him upon the
confines of Alexandria, did defeat and enforce him to retire to Castelnouo.
But whilst these things were done in Lombardie, twelve Venetian Galleys under
the command of Marco Zeno, having scowred the high and lower Seas, came to
Liuorne. And King Alphonso's royal army under the conduct of Ferdinand,
having attempted to cause Cortona to rebel, went to the Territory of Rezza,
where assailing Foilano, they took it the fortieth day of the siege after
sundry toils and interchangeable losses.

It is reported that Asturo Fauentino whilst Ferdinand lay before Foilano, was
twice put to rout by the Kings army; so that at both times he lost a thousand
horse, and certain foot troops. From thence the Arragonian Ensigns being
Sigismund of Arimini General of the Tuscan troops did greatly vex them.

The Florentines fearing the Arragonians and Venetians forces by sea and land,
did by Sforza's advise send Angelo Acciola knight of the Order, to the French
king, The Flarentines send to the fie^ch King.
who having represented to his Maistie the Florentines ancient affection
toward himself and his predecessors, the King granted that he would
command the Duke of Sauoy to cease from making war on Sforza, and would
persuade King Renatus (promising him to that intent men and money) to use
means to recover his kingdom of Sicill. This did the Florentines crave, that
they might divert the Alphonso's attempts from Italy.

Sforza likewise had sent to the same King to entreat him to procure Renatus
to come speedily into Italy. But Lombardie was still in tumult. Bartolomeo
Coyone, who (as has been said) was by the Senates command dispoiled of his
forces, being followed with a thousand horse, took many prisoners and great
store of cattle Coyone makes incursions on the Bressanterritorie
from forth the Bressan territory.

Within a while after Giacomo Picinino and Tiberto Brandolino with four
cornets of horse, defeated six Ensigns of Sforza's troops. The enemy being
aduertized by chance, that the Venetians departing from the new Orgies were
gone to make incursions upon his territories, did speedily from his Camp at
Quinssana send Bartholmeo Quartiero and Giacomo Salernitano with six Companies
of horse to surprise them. But the Venetians having intelligence of the enemies
coming, and being charged with greater hope than discretion near to Iauenotta
a town on the Cremonese, they did courageously abide them, and without any
difficulty did absolutely defeat them.

It is reported that more than an hundred and sixty of Sforzaes men at Arms
were taken that day, and that within a while after they took a great booty
forth of the enemies Country. For Leonesio having made a bridge over the
river Adda at Caretta, and fortified both the ends thereof with strong
Rampires, sent part of his cauallery to scour the Milaneses territories near
to Pauia: whereupon Sforza Alessandro his brother to march thither with part of
the troops: Leonesio having intelligence of the enemies design, caused Carolo
Montone to march with like number of horse, to be there before him. Now
Alessandro staying in a place not far from the Venetians Fort, and not having
any thought that his enemies were so near him, Carolo on a sudden gave a
fierce charge upon him: with which vnexpecte^accident he was so affrighted, as
without any other fight he forthwith brake him and became Master of the Camp
and the whole bagage. But some few of them by good fortune escaped to Lodes
Sforzas troops are defeated.
with their Captain, who otherwise had all been taken prisoners by the
Venetians.

Sforza being troubled with this loss departed from his Camp at Gades, and
marched to Quinzzana. Mattheo Campana being favored by the Venetians good
fortune, made a furious rode with his cauallerie into the state of Milan. At
his return, being laden with spoil, he met with Thadeo D'Aeste who then
served the enemies, with diverse others: both sides coming presently to the
encounter, after a confused Sforzas purpose was, after that he had crossed the
river Mella; and therefore* the Venetians General went speedily and encamped
at Sforza takes Caluisians.
Bagnolls* Sforza within a while after took Caluisiana, having made his
journey thither to none other end, but to make it a wintering place for his
troops in the enemies Country. Leonesio went to Gades. This is that which was
done in Lombardie during the summer season. The Venetian Captains having
intelligence by their espialls about the middle of harvest, that great store of
victuals was going to the enemies Camp, with a thousand horse to conuoy it;
Giacomo Picinino, Carolo Gonzaga and Tiberto Brandolino, did with part of the
Army encounter the enemies The death of Hector Brandolino.
betwixt Othelenga and Issea, two towns on the Bressan Territory; who issuing
forth as from an ambuscado, did at the first charge break and defeat Sforza's
his cauallerie, and took diverse wagons laden with victuals, armor and other
warlike necessaries. But as they were carrying away this rich booty to their
Camp, Sforza being vexed with this loss, with expedition made after them, and
assailed them on their way: whereupon the Venetian suddenly turning from his
booty to fight, did courageously sustain the fury of the enemies. Now fight
being fiercely begun, Hector Brandolino brother to Tiberto, a valiant
Gentleman, fighting in the foremost ranks was slain, by his death amazing
those that were near him; And although Leonesio come to their reskue with the
rest of the Army. By his arrival the battle was not only reenforced, but
made equal, where the fight on either side was a while very doubtful. In the
end Sforza being enforced by the enemies great multitudes, quitted the booty
and retired with his whole forces to the marshes near to Otholenga. And thus
the A fierce fight with victory on neither side.
Venetians being Masters of the booty, went home to their Camp.

Winter already was at hand, when as the enemy having sent his bagage before
him, soon after repaired to his wintering places. But it is reported that
Sforza bebefore his departure, at such time as he remained at Caluisiana,
presented battle to Sforza being again invited to fight could not be drawn
to it. We find in some Authors that Sforza had ordered his Army ready to
fight, but that whilst he expected the Venetian, there fell a great shower of
rain which enforced him to retire before the Venetians arrival. This seems
to be truer than that which some Annalists write: How that he durst not fight,
but did flatly refuse the battle. If this were true, I do greatly wonder
that so valiant a Captain who had so often fought with displaied Ensigns, and
obtained so many victories, (and who, if any Caesar the Dictator either in
magnanimity, prosperity, Sforza (...) red to Casar.
or good fortune, is the only worthy reputed Captain in most men's judgment)
having purchased so goodly a Principality with such gallant forces and brave
Soldiers, without any great loss, and being provoked to fight, should refuse
the battle. It may be that fearing the alteration of fortune, he was become
more deliberate: as he to whom we have compared him was likewise in his later
years: who after so many gallant victories is reported not to have fought so
vehemently as he was wont. Perhaps his new purchased State was the cause
thereof, the which, being on every side encompassed with enemies, he might have
endangered, if he should have put it to the hazard of abattaile: But
whatsoever it were that kept him from it, it is Sforza resusing to fight reth
ret^ (...) to his winter garrisons.
reported that without fight he went to his winter-garrisons. After his
departure, Coyoni, or (according to some Authors) Alessandro, Sforza's
brother, having given an assault to the Fort which the Venetians had built at
Sarretta, took it by treachery. He was afterward commanded to march against
the Marquis of Montferrat, where being despoiled of part of his troops, and
bagage, he returned like a Run-awaie to the Camp. The Venetians on the other
side were not idle, but being come from their winter-garrisons, they entered
furiously upon the Mantuan Territory, where having taken Streueres, they
brought away great booty. Carolo Gonzaga in like manner drove all those of
the Gybelline Faction forth of the valley of Sassina in the Bergamese, and left
it free to the Venetians. During these exploits in Lombardie, King Alphonso did
still pursue the Alphonso pursues the Florentines.
Florentines, intending wholly to ruin them, and to those ends made great
warlike preparations against the spring time: For it was reported that his
intent was to take Renatus to pass into Italy against Alphonso, assuring him
that by the help of the Florentines and Sforza, who promised him men and
money, he should shortly recover his kingdom.

About this time news came from Greece How the Turks grew strong near to
Constantinople, and that Mahomet Ottoman their king, a Potent, rich, and
ambitious Prince, and then in the prime of his years, had builded a Fort at
the Outlet of the Georges Arm, and that thereby it was evident to all men The
Turks intend to invade Constantinople.
that his designs tended to the entire subversion of the Greek Empire. Pope
Nicholas being troubled these warlike menaces, as well abroad as in Iatlie,
whilst he first made means to settle a peace in Italy, was by a domesticke
conspiracy like to have been undone himself. Stephano Porcieri or Portius,
was the Principal conspirator, Diverse of that family so term themselves and
derive their original from Marcus Portuis Cato that noble Roman; but the arms
of their house do argue the contrary.

This man being richer in nobility of birth than wealth and substance, and
withal very eloquent, was already somewhat suspected by the Pope in regard of
his insolent Stephano Porcio his conspiracy against the Pope.
carriage; and therefore to restrain him from practizing any sedition in Rome
he sent him first into Germany under color of some negotiation, from whence
returniug home, he was inioined to dwell at Bolognia, on condition
nevertheless, daily to show himself to the Bishop of Nice who commanded
there as Viz-legate: But he being desirous of innovation did practice
underhand by trusty messengers, or rather by letters written in caracters,
(for it is not certainly known how it was) certain debauched Romans, to
execute a damned act; which was, That upon a ptefixed day all the conspiratours
should meet at Rome, where having at once assailed the Pope and Cardinals in
the Church during the time of Divine service, they should kill them all, and
then inuit the Roman people to embrace their liberty. Hereupon Stephano
Porcio without his knowledge had left Bolognia, and that he could not learn
whither he was gone, but that he chiefly feared that he was gone to Rome, to
disturb the peace of that City. Porciero being wearied with his long travail
and watching, betook himself to rest, which gave the messengers leisure
opportunely to deliver their letters, which the Pope received the night before
the day of execution, who being amazed at the matter, did suddenly resolve to
put him to death: The charge thereof was committed to Giacomo Lauaniola of
Verona, who at that time was a Senator of Rome, and to diverse others. These
with a troop of armed men being come where Stephano was, he heard a noise, and
being amazed, escaped to his sisters house, having left Baptista Sarra in his,
with the armed men whom Baptista being a valiant man, so soon as he perceived
himself environed with fire and arms, made way by force through the Popes
soldiers. But the Author of the conspiracy being Stephano Porcio is put to
death.
taken at his sisters house, was put to death. This matter in some sort
diuerted the Popes affection from peace.

About the Springtime of this year, the Florentines as well with their own
troops as with those of Sforza, recovered Foglian which they had lost the
year The Florentines recover Foglian
before, when Alphonso as yet had not raised any tumults in Tuscanie. Sforza in
the Wintertime came to Cremona to aid Lodouico Gonzaga whom his brother
Carolo did nearly press: But he thought it necessary rather to relieve the
Manerbians Leonesio in that place performed the part of a vigilant Captain, he
was shot into the body with an arrow, Leonesio his death.
whereof shortly after he died. Some say that he was slain before that time,
and that the Generals place was given to Picinino, before Sforza came forth of
his Winter Garrisons.

This disaster was within a while after accompanied with another. For Carolo
Sundry combats and in counters betwixt the Uenetians and Sforzans.
Gonzaga having made a rash attempt upon his brothers troops betwixt Gades and
Villafranca was broken and put to rout, with the loss of seven hundred horse.
Picinino Sforzas arrival, he discamped and retitired to Ponteuico. The enemy
gave an assault to Gades, and took it. Then there was a cruel fight near to
that place by means of Picininos arrival, where Lodouico Gonzaga whom Sforza
had sent for thither, had like to have been defeated by the enemy (for the
Venetian charged first upon him) had not Sforza opportunely come to his reskue.
The Venetians departing thence went and encamped at Porciana betwixt two
marshes. Sforza in the mean time commanded Roberto Sanseuerino, and Tiberto,
to go and wast the Bressian country. Picinino went and assailed them being
Sforza thereupon speedily marched against him, but the bickering being quickly
ended, the Venetian with his Army retired safely to his camp.

Both Armies did often skirmish with one another as occasion was offered; and
Summer was half spent, when king Renatus having driven the enemies from the
King Renatus comes to Sforzas company.
confines of Alexandria, came to Sforza with four thousand horse. At his
arrival he sent an Herald at Arms to denounce war to the Venetians. The
enemies forces being thus increased (for they had in their Army, together with
the French succors, six score companies of men at Arms) they departed from
Gades, and having crossed the river Mella, they went and encamped at Bassan
betwixt Manerbia Antonio Marcello, and Pascalis Maripietro were come as
Prouidators to the camp) marched to Manerbia, and from thence went and encamped
at Porciana. The enemy so soon as the Venetian had dislodged, Manerbia and
Ponteuico yield to Sforza*
did by a voluntary yielding enter into Manerbia. Then Sforza and Renatus gave
an assault to Ponteuico, which they took by force, having besieged it a while,
and overthrew the walls down to the ground. It is reported that the French in
that place did deal very cruelly with the wretched inhabitants, which did in
such sort amaze all the towns round about, as whatsoever the Venetians held in
the plains of Cremona and Bressia, (Soncina and Romanenga excepted) did in a
short space yield themselves to the enemy. Picinino by this revolt being
enforced to give place, did suddenly march toward Bressia, and encamped in a
very strong place, betwixt the City, the mounraines, and a lake, which
comes forth of the river Clesia, from whence he might easily defend the
inhabitants of the mountains, and all the Bressan country which lies toward
the lake of La Garda.

Such success had the Venetians affairs in Lombardie. But the Senate was not
so much troubled for the danger of this war, as with the news from Greece,
How that Mahomet the Turkish Emperor had besieged Constantinople. Whereupon,
for fear of loosing so commodious a place for Christians (for, that being lost
there was no more hope of traffic upon the Ponticke Sea) the Senate made a
decreeto send forth ten Galleys to the aid of the City under the command of
Giacomo Lauretano: They did beside command two great Argozies of two thousand
tons a piece to be made ready. Lauretano within a while after departed from
Venice with five Galleys, for by the Senates command he was to take other five
out of Dalmatia and Candie. Alphonso promised to send ten Galleys, and the
Pope as many, which Othoman in the mean time had besieged the City by Sea and
Land with three Constantinople besieged.
hundred thousand fighting men, and three hundred seventy five ships of war,
among which were seventeen Galleys of three Oars on a bank, and others of
two, with many other smaller vessels. This they report which were present at
the siege. The Venetian Annals set down less by the third part, as well of
soldiers, as of vessels.

Constantine Paleologus did at that time command the Greek Empire, who to
withstand the enemies, had caused an iron chain of a wonderful greatness to
be drawn athwart the Haven from Constantinople to Pera. The Venetian Galleys
returning Aid enters into Constantinople by Sea.
aid of that Christian City. Certain ships of Candie were likewise there,
and an Argozie of Genoa of a wonderful bigness, whereof Georgio Doria was
Captain. Then three other Genoa ships of like bigness which came from Chios
arrived there being laden with men and victuals. As they entered the Haven in
the Cities view, the Turks vessels went and assailed them, whereupon there
began a bloody fight on both sides, which lasted long without any advantage to
either party. In the end, the Galleys and other vessels that lay at Anchor not
far from thence coming to their reskue, the Turks quitted the place, and
retired to the pillars of Pera. The last that arrived there, was Giouanni
Iustiniano of Genoa surnamed the Long,

The Emperor having embraced him, and entertained him with fair promises, he
committed unto him the guard of the Roman gate. Nicolao Molino, and Giouanni
Lauretano kept the gate Chersina: Baptista Gritti with diverse other Venetians,
who by chance were at those troubles of Constantinople, guarded the Palace of
Paleologus: And by reason that the enemies nauall Army had been beaten forth
of the Gulf, all was safe on the Sea side: The Turks greatest fury was
toward the land. They had brought diverse great pieces of Ordnance in sundry
places near to the walls, and especially at the gate Sutrina.

There and elsewhere the continual shot of Ordnance had beaten down a great
waters of the castle near to the walls, and commanded an assault to be given
to the City on that side with threescore and ten thousand men. He himself
came to guard those vessels whilst they were drawn forth of the water for
fear least the Army should on a sudden come and set fire on them. He had
beside planted certain pieces of ordnance ouer-against the mouth of the Gulf,
opposite to the city, not so much to batter the walls, as to keep the
Christian Galleys from approaching. Some say that those of Pera might have
hindered the Turks in their enterprise of carrying their Galleys into the
Gulf, but that they were unwilling to do it for fear of drawing that warlike
tempest upon themselves.

The Galleys being thus drawn into the Gulf, there was nothing more certain,
Mahomet sent the same night as many soldiers to overthrow our nauall Army, as
he had done at the former time.

The Captains of the Christians vessels being full of hope and courage, set
forward against the enemy, thinking that their coming had not been known;
but the Turks being prepared for fight, waited for them, and did not only
courageously receive them, but having on a sudden discharged a piece of
ordnance upon a Candiot gallie, which was commanded by Zacharia Gria, they
went to inuiron all the rest. The Christians being amazed to see them in that
readiness, turned their backs. One Gallie which was commanded by Giacomo
Cocco coming in considerately

A great quantity of the wall in the mean time on the other side of the
City near to the gate Sutrina was beaten down. This breach was forth with
repaired with new fortifications according to the usual manner. The Turk
attempted to enter the City by a mine, which took no effect; for by a
counter-mine it was made unprofitable. A Tower at the Roman gate which the
canons had much shaken, fell down, and had made a great breach, and near
thereunto the enemy had raised a rampire and gabions against the Christians
ordnance. There was a great Mahomet, upon hope to enter the city there, to
give a furious assault. The Turks, the more to amaze the besieged, did before
day enter the rampires with fearful and terrible clamours. The Emperor
riding up and down the city, encouraged his soldiers to fight valiantly for
their Country, wives, children, and lives, telling them, That the time was
come, The Emperors exhortation to his soldiers.
that unless they did bravely bear themselves, that famous City would not
only he lost, but the fame and renown of ancient Greece would be clean
extinguished. He told them moreover that they had to do with an enemy, from
whom they were to expect no grace nor favor: It therefore behooued them,
either to live with their Country, or to die with her ruin.

This did he speak to the soldiers as he walked the round upon the walls;
but coming to the Roman Gate, he found Iustiniano the Genouese grievously
wounded, who began to talk of yielding, from which the Emperor could by no
means divert him. It is reported that the Emperor perceiving those that

fought in Justinians company, to think on nothing but flight, did stand in
his place with those few forces that he brought with him, and that he did
bravely attempt The Emperor in despair.
to beat the enemies from the walls; but perceiving that his soldiers were
too weak to resist such multitudes, he was well-neere ready to have slain
himself. But considering that it did not become a Christian to use such
desperate means, he did entreat his own soldiers to kill him, and upon
their refusal so to do, he resolved to die more nobly. For he threw from him
his Imperial ornaments, fearing if he should be known, that they would take
him alive, and with his sword in hand ran in among the thickest of the Turks
that were entering, where this Prince, worthy of eternal memory, fighting
valiantly with the enemies was flaine by The death of the Emperor of
Constantinople.
them. His body falling down, together with that great Empire, was confusedly
mingled among his other subjects: and being afterward known among the dead
bodies, his head by Mahomets command was stricken off, and borne in triumph
through the Camp and City. Some say that he was smothered at the Roman Gate
among the throng which fled, and that he was afterward known by his
Coate-armour. The enemies nauall army was not idle in the mean time: for the
Venetian Galleys, and the rest of the Christian nauall army, with diverse
others who came running to the ships at the enemies first assault, being out
of hope to defend the city, presently went their way, but the Turks took
diverse of them near the sea-shoare. The city was wholly sacked, Virgins were
defloured, young The Turkish cruelty.
boys forced, and wines tormented with detestable filthiness, according to
the manner of that cruel Nation. Men that escaped death were made slaves.
Diverse Venetians were on that day slain and taken, among whom were seven and
forty Gentlemen.

In this manner was Constantinople the chief city of Grecia taken by Mahomet
the Turkish Emperor, and thus was that most ancient Grecian Empire
overthrown, the year 1121. after the establishment thereof. The news of this
loss gave great terror to all Christendom. Pope Nicholas sent to Venice to
have five Pope Nicholas recompense to as many as should tak arms against the
Turks
Galleys armed at his charge against the Turks, and propounded to as many as
should take arms under the Ensigns of the Roman church against those
Infidells

The Venetians sent Bartolomeo Marcello to Mahomet, to crave restitution of
their countrymen with their goods. An other Messenger went ouerland before
Marcello, who promised to return to Venice from Constantinople within five and
thirty days. The Senate was very desirous to understand what was become of
those Venetians which were in Constantinople when it was taken, whether they
were still alive or dead, and if they were living, in what state they were,
either at liberty or captives. The above mentioned Galleys, with certain
ships of burden, had Giacomo Lauretano, who upon news of the taking of
Constantinople retired into the Isle of Nigrepont.

The Senate thought upon this new war, whilst all Lombardie was filled with
Sforzaes exploits in Lombardie.
arms and soldiers: for Sforza having recovered all towns upon the plain
approached with his army near to Rhoades, that he might become Master of the
mountain: where during his abode, the towns of Romans, Martinenga, the
Camonick valley, and Brisanza yielded to him; the like did all the Inhabitants
of the Gyradade. Rhoades also being afterward taken, he went to besiege the
new Orgies, He takes Rhoads the O gies, Soncina, and Romanenga.
in which mean space, those of Soncina yielded to him. At the last, the Orgies
being recovered, Romanenga, who alone did obey the Venetians, did voluntarily

Toward the latter end of Harvest when Winter drew near Sforza was desirous in
the behalf of Lodonico Gonzaga to take Asola, but he was enforced to give over
his enterprise, and to put it off till some other time, as well by reason of a
mighty tempest which then happened, as in regard of the continual rain that
followed it. Renatus being in a rage (as it is supposed) against the
Florentines and Sforza, went hisway in the midst of Winter, and returned
through the country of Ast and Thurin into France.

But to return to the affairs of Greece. The Venetians being desirous to
understand of the welfare of those, who with the city of Constantinople had
been taken by the Turks, had intelligence within a while after by some that
came to Venice, that the Venetians that were taken in Constantinople were
prisoners, and that the enemy had used no cruelty on those whom Fortune had
saved: within a while Lauretano's letters did assure the Senate of the
prisoners redemption, and that the Turks for seven thousand crowns would set
them at liberty. The very same day of these news, the Popes Nuncio came to
Venice, who was received by great The Popes Nuncio comes to Venice to treat
of peace.
troops of people. He spoke to the Senate concerning peace which he said he
had motioned at Florence, and said, that at his departure thence, he would go
to Sforza to treat likewise with him: And that the Pope did determine to quiet
Italy, the better afterward to prevent the great danger which threatened all
Christendom from the Turks, and to that end, he was desirous to be Judge and
Vmpire of that peace, and that he which should impugn it, should be held as
excommunicate, and for an enemy, not only to Italy, but to all Christendom.
This advertisement Sforza.

Lauretano who had intelligence (as has been said) of the taking of
Constantinople, was gone to Nigrepont, from whence he writ to the Senators,
certifying them Lauretano his exploits in the Iste of Nigrepont.
That he was resolved to tarry there for the guard of the Island; that he had
sunk four of the enemies great Galleys, and thirteen other small ones; that
their Rowers and Mariners swimming to Land had been all slain by the Country
people; and that he had hanged those whom he took in the Galleys. No sooner
were Lauretans letters read in the Senate, but the Popes Galleys which were
ready to set sail were commanded to go and join with their Nauall Army;
with which Lauretano

Within a while after, Christophero Moro and Vrso Iustiniano were sent to Rome
to Christophero Moro and Viso Iustiniano are sent Ambassadors to Rome.
treat of peace with the other Ambassadors of Italy in the Popes presence.
The Venetian cauallerie before the Ambassadors departure had surprised certain
victuals from the enemy, together with those which conuoied it, but after
that the treaty of peace was mentioned the Venetians made no more incursions
into Lombardie: Yet, because they would not seem quite to abandon the
Province, they sent Bartilmeo Coyoni underhand to come and serve them.

But whilst this was done, the Popes five Galleys which at the beginning went
against the Turks, about the Springtime returned to Veniee without
Lauretano's leave. Giouanni Dandulo, Antonio Quirini, Andrea, and Nicholao
Contareni who were Captains of them, were by the Senates decree committed to
prison: Andrea Contareni The Captains of the Galleys are punished because they
left the fleet without leave.
and Giouanni Dandulo being found guiltless were acquitted, and the rest
condemned in a pecuniarie fine and to endure imprisonment for half a year, and
were declared

Within a while after, peace was concluded with Sforza and the Florentines,
which, The conditions of peace concluded by means of an Hermit.
contrary to the Popes opinion was effected by means of Simon Camertes the
Hermit, who after sundry iournies concluded it on these conditions: That Sforza
should restore to the Venetians whatsoever he had taken from them in the last
war (the Towns of the Gyradade excepted) That the Marquis of Mantua should
reinuest his brother Carolo in his State: That the Florentines should receive
from Alphonso whatsoever he had taken from them, (Chastillon excepted and the
Sienna Territory belonging to the Florentines): And for the greater
confirmation of that peace, the Pope interposed his authority, and it was
expressly mentioned, that if henceforward any strife did arise betwixt them,
that the Pope should have ample authority Alphonso would still continue war
against them; which we must suppose to have been granted him, because
otherwise he would hardly have been drawn to have consented to the peace
which ensued.

The City of Venice being tired with so long a war had never a more welcome
day than that, when peace was published over the City with sound of trumpet:
They did first appoint prayers to be made in Churches, and general
processions, in The great reioicing at Venice in regard of the peace.
whole Clergy following them with the Prince and Senate, and all the orders of
the City. The night following many torches were lighted, and other signs of
joy were showed over all the City. This was in the year of our Salvation
1454, and the eighth after the war was renewed in Lombardie against Philip
concerning Cremona, and the fifth against Sforza in the behalf of their
associates the Milaneses. Italy was afterward a long time quiet, and
especially Lombardie, which was very peaceable till such time as it felt the
terrible tempest of the Ferrarese war.

Zacharia Treuisano and Nicholao Canalis were sent Ambassadors into Germany to
the Emperor Frederick who had written to most parts of Europe, That
Commissioners Ambassadors sent into Germany to the Emperor.
might be sent to him, with whom to consult in open assembly concerning the
war with the Turk. Bartilmeo Marcello did in the mean time return from
Constantinople, who in the Republikes name had made peace with Mahomet and
freely obtained of him whatsoever he craved. Mahomets Ambassadors followed
Marcello to Venice to cause that peace to be ratified. But the Senate fearing
to do any thing inconsiderately, did delay the business a long time, till the
league among Christians was contracted, and then, (for they rather wished the
wealth and commodity of Italy The Venetians great discretion in doing nothing
without good advice.
and all Christendom than any good to the Turk) they would have war and no
peace with him. Yet, in the mean space, because they would not seem to
contemn the friendship of so mighty a Prince, they returned the same Marcello
together Mahomet should receive them, then to conclude peace in the name of the
Commonwealth, and that he should remain there as their Magistrate.

But here an occasion may seem to be offered to condemn and tax the
Venetians. It was very well known that the Venetians had forsaken the
Christians alliance (will some detractor say) in regard they had inioined their
Ambassador, that if the Turk should entertain the offered conditions, then to
make peace with him, the which being once sworn to, it would not have been
lawful for them (their public faith saved) to alter. But we must imagine that
they did foresee this; for we find no certainetie thereof, because that the
enterprise against the Turks had been as they have always done, who would not
rashly thrust themselves into so dangerous a war, wherein being entangled by
Sea and Land, the other Princes of Europe might in derision have looked a far
off upon their loss and overthrow, as it happened within a few years after,
when the Venetians being enforced to make war on the Turk, they were not
only forsaken of all other Christians, but were betrayed in the very confines
of Italy. But we will speak of this in his place.

Let us now return to that which happened after the peace in Lombardie, which
seems to be worthy the noting because that arms being scarce laid down, a
new war had like to have entangled the Venetians at their doors. The Senate
demanded Borsia D'Aeste. To this end they sent messengers to him to Ferrara to
denounce war according to their custom, unless he did surrender those Towns
which they demanded. But he being a lover of peace, and one that made great
account of the Venetians friendship, did by his Ambassador write to the
Prince and Senate, that he desired peace with them and no war, and that he
would refer The honest answer of the Ferrarois.
himself to their discretion: Upon this honest answer they did presently lay
down their Arms which they had already put on, and attempted nothing against
him.

Then the Venetians having changed the war by Land to that by Sea, did Arm
Nauipator the Venetian, who having received some disgrace of his
fellow-Citizens, was become a Pirate. The Senate accounted it an heinous matter
that any Venetian should in those days scour and rob the Seas, seeing that
their Ancestors from the first foundation of their City had rigorously pursued
such thieves. About the same time Victore Capello was sent to the Princes of
Morea, who foreseeing the great danger which threatened them from the Turks had
sent to the Prince and Senate of Venice, to treat with them about the
delivering up of their Island into the Venetians hands, provided that they
would give them in recompense as much revenue in Italy as would suffice for
their honorable entertainment according to their present fortune, though not
so much as they were The Genoueses come into Morea for the same purpose as the
Venetians did.
wont to have.

At Capels arrival, the Genoueses had approached the Island in hope to become
Masters thereof, their Nauall Army consisting of ten Galleys and eighteen
other ships of war. Lauretano likewise was come thither with his Galleys;
Each of them did but wait for a fit occasion. The same year there were such
Terrible tempests over all Italy and especially upon the Venetians Coasts, as
wonderful hurt was done thereby. It is reported that one storm brake as many
glass windows in Venice, as were thought to be worth seven thousand Ducats.
The Venetians being at peace ever sinte the taking of Constantinople, there was
no Prince nor Commonwealth in all Italy that had war, but only Pope
Calixtus and the Genoueses: Calixtus all the time of his Papacy did not cease
both by Letters and messages to stir up all Europe to take Arms against
those Infidells, and to those ends, himself Armed thirteen Galleys, whereof
Lodouico Patriarch of Aquileia was made General. This man for three years
space, did scour all the Sea Coasts of Asia, doing great harm, and took
diverse Islands from Mahomet.

This cruel Tyrant in the mean time prevailed so far in Europe by an
admirable course of victory as he subdued all Thrace, the Tribals, and
Macedonia: and The Turks good success both in Asia and Europe.
in Asia likewise he utterly subverted the Empire of Trebisond, howbeit rather
by Gathelosis of Genoa (against whom he began the war about a child) the Isle
of Lesbos which yielded on conditions: He did afterward vsurp upon Bossina,
killing the king thereof: And in a manner, reduced under his Empire whatsoever
the Christian Princes had till then enioied, from Constantinople as far as
Albania and Dalmatia, betwixt Hungary and the Danubie, and the Ionian and
Aegean Seas. But whilst the Infidel made all these conquests, the Venetians
attempted nothing, although their aid sundry times had been earnestly
implored. Morea only (which at last they took from the Princes Thomas and
Demetrius) did certain years after Arm against the Turk. We will in the
books following set down the original and success of that war. But
whilst Othoman executed these exploits the which we thought good briefly to
touch, in regard they do in some

The end of the seventh Book of the third Decad.
THE EIGHTH BOOK Venice.
The Contents of the eighth Book of the third Decad.


THE Prince accompanies the funerals of his Predecessor, which was never
seen before, since the custom of associating a Colleague was abolished. The
cause of the war against OTTOMAN. The Description of Morea. The Venetians
having taken Argiers, fortify the Straight. The Venetian Army has no good
success at the siege of Corinth. The Venetians in Italy besiege Thryeste. The
Turks drive the Venetians from the Straight. They fight twice with good
success against the Turks before Naples. The sieges before Thryeste and
Arimini are raised at one time. The Venetians being vanquished at Talamata in
Morea, receive a notable overthrow. VRSO IVSTINIANO does twice assail those of
Mitylene in Lesbos with great loss of his soldiers. SIGISMVND of Arimini
takes Sparta by assault. VENIERI his Gallie having in the nightime passed
beyond the Dardaneans, returns safely to his Countrymen. Pope PIUS being come
to Ancona, dies within a while after that the Prince and Venetians nauall
Army came thither. Supplies of money are given to the King of Hungary in the
name of all Christendom. VICTOR CAPELLO after that he had fortunately
executed diverse gallant enterprises upon the enemies, at last receiving an
overthrow at Patras, dies with grief. BARTHOLOMEO of Bergamo, surnamed
COYONI, coming into Flaminia had like to have endaungered the Venetians with a
new war. NICHOLAO CANALIS General of the Venetians nauall Army ruineth
Oenos. MAHOMET having a long time besieged Nigrepont, takes it in fine, to the
great hurt of the Venetians.

THE Venetians State for the space of ten years had peace both by Sea and
Land. But this security was mixed with fear and care. For the Venetians in
this mean time might well be likened to that man, who seeing his neighbors
house on fire although his own be free from it, can not for all that but
fear, lest the same flame being dispersed should take hold of his, and
runs forthwith (according to the proverb) to the River. Even so the
Venetians, though they Tyrant. Yet in all that time they kept themselves from
taking Arms, till some just occasion should enforce them. But hereof we will
speak hereafter. Now we must set down that which happened at Venice during
that peace. The Venetians limits were mightily extended during Foscari his
principality. Which came to pass, as well by reason of the public felicity
and good fortune of the State, as by the long time of his government, which
was managed with singular The happiness and cont^t of the city of Venice
during Foscari his principality.
skill and discretion: And not the State alone, but the cities self was
illustrated with rare and costly buildings. For in his days, the Porch of the
Palace was on the outside beautified with white Marble. Saint Gregory's
church, which was begun to be repaired from the foundations, was finished in
costly manner. After all this the

PASCALIS MARIPIETRO, the



PAscalis Maripietro (the other yet living) was subrogated in his sted. But
Foscari suruiued not long after the creation of the new duke. The honorable
Ensigns that had been taken from him in his life time, were One Prince
waits upon an others funerals.
in the Church of the Friars Minors; and by this means it came to pass, that
one Prince accompanied another funerals, which had never happened till then,
since that the custom of associating a Colleague was abolished. His Nephews
built him a Tomb of white Marble, richly gilded, near to the high Altar.

In the time of Maripietro that great Earthquake happened, which about the fifth
day of December, did shake all Italy, especially the Realm of Naples. This
Prince was adorned with diverse eminent virtues: He had a sound and excellent
The new Princes virtues.
judgment, without faining or dissimulation. He was a lover of peace, a friend
to Religion, and a severe punisher of vice: He did execute offenders according
to Foscari, as by tradition, which had been well observed in all times and
places, was by him delivered entire to his successor.

To this felicity and other fortunate events which happened in his time, the
Art of Printing may be added, which in those days was invented in Italy. The
invention The invention of the Art of Printing is attributed to a Germane.
thereof is attributed to a Germane. But this divine art being by succession of
times dispersed over all Italy, the chief workmen in that mystery did
openly contend for the garland of singularity: In which art we find Nicolao
Iansonio of Venice to have exceeded all the rest. Maripietro having governed
four years and a half, departed this life, and his body lies honorably
buried in the Church of the Twyns.

CHRISTOPHERO MORO, the Duke of Uenice.



CHristophero Moro succeeded him. The second year of his government, Ottoman:
We must briefly set down the cause thereof. The tyrant having done much hurt
to the Christians of Grecia and other Provinces of Europe, determined to take
The description of Morea.
Morea. This Province is almost like an Island, and is (as they term it) one
of the three rocks of Europe, joining to the straight of Corinth. For the
Ionian Sea on the one side, and the Aegean on the other, do in a manner make
an entire Island of it. It is in form like to a leaf of a Plane tree, by
reason of the Seas which enuiron it, toward the North the Ionian, the
Sicillian toward the West, the Greek on the South, the Aegean on the East,
and that of Mirtona toward the Solstitiall. It is in circuit (according to
Isidore) three hundred and threescore

Ottoman having mightily enlarged the confines of his Empire was desirous to
take this Province as a member of the Greek Empire from the brethren Thomas and
Demetrius. The occasion of the Ottomans war against the Uenetians.
In regard of the situation thereof they might have defended it a long time, if
they had been assured to have been relieved by the Christians in time, or if
the Demetrius went to the Turks side, which was the first and chiefest cause
of the ruin of that state. He gave his daughter in marriage to Ottoman, and
gave him entrance into one of the goodliest Provinces of Grecia. Thomas made
some resistance near to the straight, but in vain. And having lost all,
flying from the rage of that cruel enemy, he went to Rome whither he brought
with him S. Andrews head: in regard whereof, Pope Pius being accompanied with
all the Clergy went Saint Andrews head is brought to Rome.
to meet him as far as the Miluian bridge, and appointed a marble Chapel to
be built in that place where he had first saluted the Apostles head, and
another larger than that in S. Peter's Church where the head was afterward laid
up with great solemnity.

The Dominion of the Greeks being extinct in Morea, the Venetians still kept
those towns there which they had a long time enjoyed. But the violent and
perfidious inclination of the enemy would not long let them rest. For after
that he had taken Victor Capello was then Admiral of the Sea, who being
entreated by the chief of the Isle of Lesbos, (at that time when Ottoman took
it from the Cateloses of Genoa) to come and defend the Island, would not do it:
as also when the Theodorans sent to him who dwelt in a part of the Island, that
he would aid them, and receive them upon their homage, when the Isle of
Mitilene was taken, he refused it, notwithstanding that he had a mighty nauall
Army, fearing least by any inconsiderate attempt, he might precipitate the
Repulicke into a manifest danger of war, although he might justly have taken
Arms, seeing Ottoman had contrary to the ancient accord, which Amurath his
father, and afterward with himself, crossed the straight of Gallipolis with
his Army. This is the report of such as were there present. For there is no
Venetian An^all, nor any other Historian whatsoever which makes mention thereof:
Cepio exepted, who in an eloquent style has written the notable actions of
Pietro Mocenigo. Nevertheless it is certain that so soon The war against
the Turks is begun in Morea.
as the war was proclaimed against Mahomet, it began in Morea where the wrong
had been first offered. And whilst they expected greater forces from Italy,
certain foot companies under the command of Pietro Palmiero together with two
hundred light horse, which the Greeks call Stradiots, entering fiercely into
the enemies country, did by a sudden incursion surprise a small town betwixt
Arcadia and

Within a while after, Bertoldo d'Aeste, Betin of Calcina, Cicco Brandolino,
Giouanni Attellano, Roberto Thyente, Giouanni Massano, Leon Illirico, and
diverse other great persons with gallant forces arrived at Modon: From thence
the whole Army went speedily to Naples, where making no long stay, Aeste, who
was General of the The Venetian Army before Argers.
Army, went to besiege Argers. This town among all others of Greece was very
famous, as well for the original thereof, as for the residence and Court of
kings. It was easily taken, and as soon given to the soldiers who spoiled it.
The Turks in the city who were no great number were retired into the Castle.
Two days after the Martin of Dalmatia, who held an honorable rank in the
Venetian Army. Those of the Castle yielded within a while after. The Priest
who had delivered the town to the Turks being taken in that place, was put to
death. Bertoldo The traitor punished according to his deserts.
having left three hundred Candiot Archers in the Castle, brought back the
troops to Naples.

Within a while after, the Venetian General departed from Naples with
fifteen thousand men. He went first and encamped at Basilia, the which being
taken at his first arrival, he marched the morrow after to the straight
through the territory of Lodouico Lauretano was there with a mighty nauall
Army. They had before placed a Garrison on the the other side of the straight,
opposite to that place: Six Galleys rode at Anchor not far off. Now (because
that the Sea and Land troops were come thither for that purpose) they
presently with great courage began an admirable piece of work, which in 15
days was finished. They fortified with a wall and double tre^ch the whole The
Venetians make a wall at the straight.
length of the straight, which from the Aegean Sea to the Ionian contains
4000. paces, though the circuit of the walls makes it appear greater. It is
reported, that in the same place they did set 30000. men on work, but the
great number of men did not so much prevail for the speedy ending of the
work, as the aptness of the matter wherewith it was made, which was ready at
hand. The stones of old buildings were scattered here and there which had bin
in times before cut foure-square for the same purpose. With that the wall was
easily builded, with Rampires and trenches on both sides: This Straight was by
the Greeks in Xerxes time enclosed with walls It is certain Demetrius first,
then Caesar the Dictator, next him Calligula, and lastly Domitius Nero, whose
enterprises nevertheless were in vain.

Four thousand Turks that were encamped near to the walls of Corinth, did
The Turks attempt to hinder the Venetians enterprise.
within three days after their coming thither, attempt to divert the
Venetians from their enterprise; but being repulsed and enforced to retire to
their Camp, the night following before that the straight was enclosed with
walls, they dislodged without any rumor at all, and went their way through the
places which were yet left open, leaving no Garrison in the whole Island. The
Venetians being freed from their encombrances, did at the same time as they
were busied in the work execute Benedetto Coyoni was sent to Misistrate. Some
Cosmographers say, That the same Town is that which was in old times called
Sparta. All the places round about it were taken at the first: the Castle
excepted, with the enemy held, at the assault whereof, Coyoni the chief of
the enterprise was The death of Benedetto Coyoni.
slain.

John, surnamed the Great, with a troop of Soldiers having assalted the City
of Londaria, did presently take it, but not the Castle. The Fortification of
the straight being finished, and manned with a strong Garrison, Bertoldo went
with the rest of the troops to besiege Corinth. This City is seated in a
place as difficult as commodious; The description of Corinth.
whereupon, Philip King of Macedon was wont to call it one of the keys
Bertoldo encamped toward the West, Giouanni Attellano on the East side, and
Lazaro Pontoliano toward the North, near to the Walls, with certain foot
companies. They gave two assaults to the City; but the first was in some sort
most fortunate, because that Attellano took a very strong place from the
enemy, which did afterward keep them more straightly shut up. But whilst
they prepared for the second assault, and that Bertoldo was Bertoldo D'Aeste is
slain at the siege of Corinth.
which hurt within a while after, he died. The Generals misfortune did not
divert the Soldiers from the determined assault, but they gave in furiously
upon the enemies Rampires, and though all the defenses wherewith the Soldiers
covered themselves the more safely to approach the Walls, were broken,
nevertheless with great valor they made good the place which they had once
taken. But the night following those of the City making a sudden salley, as
many as remained near to the Walls were thrown down headlong from the
Castle rocks, where they all died. And because great numbers of Turks were
reported to be near at hand, they raised The Venetians raise their camp from
before Corinth.
the ^iege and retired into the straight.

Bertino of Calcina, who after Bertoldo his death was made General of the
Army and the other Captains, having in that place assured intelligence of the
enemies number, who were said to be fourscore thousand horse, distrusting
their own small number) for besides the Sea troops which kept the vessels,
they were far inferior in number to the enemy) having left the straight
without a Garrison, they speedily retired to Naples; whither they were scarce
come, but word was brought them that the enemies were arrived. For after that
they had recovered and burnt Argers, and made a great massacre of the poor
Country people, they did the next morning by daie-breake without any rumor
show themselves before the Walls of Naples. But before their approach those
within the Castle had discovered them from The Turks before Naples.
far. Their arrival being diuulged over the City, certain mercenarie
Soldiers would needs make a rash salley upon them, who being environed with
thir^ie horse, most of them were in a moment slain before the City gates, the
rest escaped into

The Venetians would not loose so fair an occasion, but diverse troops did
with The Turks loss besore Naples.
great cries enuiron the Rising, and gave great terror to the enemies: Others
ran fiercely upon the troops of horse which stood close together before the
Cities Rampires, and slew great numbers of them. Diverse that were there present
report, That five thousand Turks were slain at that time; others lessen the
number. They skirmished likewise upon the Dike of the City, and along the
rampires from whence The Turks leave Naples.
these two losses so soon as he perceived that he lost but his labor to lie
any longer before Naples, did on a sudden make incursions upon the Territory
of Modon, where at his first arrival he took Molines, and certain other
small Towns by force. This storm spread it self likewise upon the Territory
of Coron, where the Greeks were wonderfully molested. The Turks being
desirous to depart from Morea, they did for three days space besiege the Town
of Zonchia. Giouanni Crasso of Coma lay in Garrison there and did bravely
defend it: whereupon the enemies dislodged, and went to their wintering places.
After their departure the Venetian Captains would needs have their revenge,
and went with three thousand

This happened in Morea during the summer and harvest season. The Venetians
likewise in the mean time had some troubles in Italy, about a contention
betwixt the Thryestines and those of Cap-Histria, by reason of tributes and
highways; the strife on both sides grew so hot, as although the Senate were
busied in a greater war, they were nevertheless constrained to send forces
thither. But for the easier understanding of the matter, we must fetch it a
little farther off. The Alman The cause of the war betwixt the Thryestines and
those of Cap-histria.
merchants were wont to come directly to Cap-Histria and other towns of the
Province to trade, not coming near to Thryeste by five miles. The Thryestines
perceiving that them selves had no profit at all by this commerce were greatly
vexed. Whereupon they sent an Ambassador to the Emperor Frederick whose
subjects they were, to crave that it might be lawful for them to enforce all
German merchants which came into Histria to pass by Thryeste, supposing
thereby that their city would become the chief Mart of all Histria. And
because the Emperor had not flatly granted nor denied their request, they
sought by fair and courteous means to divert the Merchants from their usual
way and trade, but if gentle means would not serve, they resolved to use
force, and to proceed by constraint. Those of CapeHistria commanded that
certain armed vessels should lie at anchor near to the moare of Thryeste, and
should have a special care not to suffer any victuals to enter into the city
by Sea. The Thryestines seeming to make small account thereof, and constantly
dissembling their grief, it was resolved, the better to bring them to reason,
to put garrisons for the same purpose in the fittest places by land. Gauardo
Iustinopolitano was sent thither with some horse, who having borrowed a
certain Gauardo Iustinopolitano is sent against the Thryestines.
place of Count Gorician* and straightly shut in their confines, should advise
the Merchants to keep their ancient way: And if the Thryestines should attempt
by force (as they had done) to hinder their iournies then by Arms to repulse
them.

By chance, one of those soldiers that were appointed to convey the merchants,
was slain by a sudden incursion of the Thryestines, and the rest put to rout;
Gauardo not digesting this injury, went with a brave troop of Histrians, and
wasted the Thryestines territories on the other side of the Sea. The Senate, in
regard this tended to an open war, commanded those of Cap-Histria to send
three of their Townsmen to Venice that might instruct them more amply in the
matter. The Senate by these men's report perceiving that the strife could not
be ended but by An Army sent against Thryeste.
arms, war was on a sudden concluded against the Thryestines: And according
to this Decree, Antonio Martiano, Bernardino son to Carolo Montone, a young
man, Girardo Martinenga, Antonello Cornetano and diverse other Noble men were
Thryeste is besieged.
places. The first was at S. Francis Gate on a little rising. The second
toward that part of the city, which is opposite to the high way of Pucina:
And the third not far from thence on a high place upon the way of Chersina.
The Inhabitants were first assailed with the ordnance which did beat down the
tops of the houses; whereupon they craved truce for three days to consult
about the yielding up of the town. Vitalis Land Prouidator in the Army did
freely grant it, for he had Francis Gate, the which during that space he hoped
to do without impediment, because there was some likeliehood that he could not
otherwise do it without fight. But so soon as the enemies perceived the
ordnance to be removed, doubting the matter, they did presently break the
truce, and shot at the pesants that wrought in the work.

News in the mean time was brought to the Camp, that a company of German
horse was coming to the relief of the town. The Prouidator sent Gauardo
Iustinopolitano before with a brave troop of light horse, to surprise them by
ambuscado*

On these terms stood the affairs before Thryeste, when Giacomo Antonio
Marcello Antonio Marcello Prouidator before Thryeste.
came as Prouidator to the Army. This man before then had been Governor of
Vdina. He at his arrival having altered the form of war, the enemies
Cauallerie without any let entered the City, and giving in on a sudden upon
the camp toward the high way of Chersina, took two hundred horse from the
Venetians, and did not only afterward defend the city, but as long as the
siege lasted, did The Almaines make sallies upon the venetians.
greatly molest the Venetians by their continual sallies and incursions. And
because that by frequent shot of the ordnance, part of the wall had been
beaten down, and that the soldiers in an other place craved to be sent to
their wintering Garrisons, they resolved to give a general assault to the
city. But the business had no The assault given to Thryeste has no good
success.
great good success. For an hours space they fought valiantly on both sides,
some

The siege continued all Autumn, and would have lasted till the enemy had
been subdewed by famine or force: But Pope Pius, who besides his ancient
friendship and alliance with Frederick, was much unwilling to have the
Thryestines receive any harm, in regard he had been their Bishop, had from
the beginning of the siege solicited the Venetians to abstain from pursuing
them, and ever after had not ceased to entreat and exhort them, to draw their
troops upon certain conditions from their Gates. It was concluded betwixt the
Pope and the Venetians, That the Pope should cease from making war on
Sigisneund Malateste whom he besieged in Arimini after that he had vanquished
him in fight by Frederico of Vrbin, and had taken from him the greatest part of
his State; and the Venetians did Thryeste and Arimini are freed from the siege.
raise their Camp from before Thryeste: and so by this accord those of
Arimini,

Sigismund having obtained the Popes pardon, for that in the wars of
Lombardie he had molested and wasted the Country of Flaminia, on promise ever
afterward to be obedient to him, and to the Venetians, went the Summer
following into Morea against the Turks.

Lauretans nauall Army at such time as the land troops abandoned the
straight, and after it went forth of the Sarronic Gulf, and had environed all
the Islands, received of Cominius the Pirate the Isle of Lemnos in Morea. He
with two Galleys The Isle of Lemnos delivered to the Venetians.
had taken it from Mahomet, who had made it his own, by reason of the Empire

The nauall Army wintered in the confines of Modon, Zonchia, Naples, and
Coron. Vrso Iustiniano did at the Spring time succeed Lauretano in the place
of General. He departed from Venice about the beginning of January, but in
regard of the extreme cold he arrived in the Province three months after with
three galleys. At Zonchia he received one and twenty Galleys that lay in the
Haven; with those, Vrso Iustiniano is General of the venetian nauall Army.
and them which he brought with him, he sailed toward Modon, where half way
he met Lauretano with three great Galleys, who after sundry reciprocal
embracements did according to the Senates command surrender the charge of the
Galleys

Vrso stayed at Modon till the whole Army were come thither together, then
departing thence with two and thirty Galleys, he sailed toward Coron, and
within a while after, passing by Naples, he came in a short space to Nigrepont,
and from thence, having coasted all the Islands of the Aegean Sea, he had
heedfully observed what state they were in But whilst Vrso made these reuiewes,
Nicolao Ragio, and John surnamed the fat, Captains of the bands of men at
Arms, with those troops that they had with them, took certain small towns
from the enemy upon the Gulf of Patras. Francisco Sidicino, Cicco Brandolino,
with diverse other Venetian Captains were encamped with three thousand men at
Mantinea, and the enemies Brandolino and Giouanni Attellano, who the day before
was come from Modon to Mantinca with Andrea Dandulo the Prouidator, Giouanni
Massano, and diverse other noble men, who had command in the Venetians Army.
The Republique had no better success near to the Islands. For Vrso having
viewed them, went to Lemnos, and from thence returned to Nigrepont, where
within a while after having received supplies from thence, and having forty
Galleys in his company, he sailed fiercely against the Isle of Lesbos. From
Nigrepont he came directly to Lemnos, and having by the way taken a ship of the
enemies Vrso Iustinian^ saileth against the Isle of Lesbos
he did put ten Turkish Merchants to death that were in it, and hung up the
rest.

Then about midnight departing from Lemnos, he went with great rumor about the
third hour in the morning, and encompassed Mytelene, the chief City of the
whole Island. It has two havens on the North side, and one toward the South:
The Army entered into this as being further off. Those of the country betook
themselves to flight, and the whole Island was in alarm. Then three hundred
Turks that were brought to the Galleys, were by Vrsos command, impaled,
thrown into the Sea, and some of them hanged. Within a while after, he did by
The Venetians do give two assalis to Mytilene
day-breake give an assault to the City by Sea and Land, having first sent a
ship of Genoa* which to that end he had stayed by the way, and a Dalmatian
Galley, to take the tower upon the haven: And himself in the mean time landed
his troops on the other side of the City. The two vessels being sent against
the tower, did presently retire by reason of the Ordnance shot. The troops
being landed, went bravely to the assault, throwing themselves inconsiderately
to manifest danger, whereupon the fight lasted with wonderful fury for six
hours space to the loss and ruin of the Venetians, who being vanquished by
the multitude of shot, and grievously wounded, after a great overthrow were
enforced to retire. It is reported that three thousand of them were slain that
day.

This loss did not abate the Venetians courage, for within a while after,
returning again to assault the enemy with greater fury, they were after
sundry unprofitable attempts beaten from the wall with like loss as at the
first. In the mean time news was brought, that the enemies nauall Army did
approach, the which besides, other smaller vessels consisted of five and forty
Galleys. It was likewise reported that two thousand horse, landed on the other
side of the Island, would presently arrive. Vrso being daunted with these news,
after that he had lost five thousand men, and the rest for the most part hurt,
quitted Mitylene, and came to Nigrepont, where with remorse of conscience for
such bad success, Vrso Iustiniano dies with grief
senses. From Nigrepont being brought to Morea, and from thence to Modon, he
was landed by his own servants, where on a sudden being oppressed with
grief, he died within half an hours space. Such was the end of Vrso
Iustiano, a man valiant and noble among his countrymen.

Giacomo Lauretano was after his death sent to command the Army. He departing
from Venice, was followed by Sigismond Malateste accompanied by a thousand
Italians. A long time before, Pope Pius had made a league with the Venetians,
the king of Hungary, and Philip Duke of Burgondie against the Turks. But
Malateste so soon as he came into the Province where he heard of the death of
Giouanni Attellano, and Brandolino, and saw the small forces there, made a
loud protestation, that he would never have embarked himself for that war,
if he had but known in what state the affairs of that Country had been:
yet, because men should not say that his coming thither was in vain, he
marched with all the troops he could leauie to take Sparta (a City in old
time most famous among the chiefest Cities of Greece) the which in a short
space he forced. It being taken which Malateste besieg eth Sparta.
at this day is in a manner inhabitable, he began to batter the Castle with his
Ordnance. That siege continued many months, and it could not be taken by
reason of the strong Garrison within it.

About the latter end of Autumn, fifteen thousand Turks arrived there,
Sigismond distrusting his own small number (for he had but two thousand men in
his camp) durst not assail them with his whole forces at once, but skirmished
oftentimes with them: And so long as the enemy remained there, he did by
cunning and force so amaze him, as the Turks having put some supplies into the
Castle, dislodged without any loss to the Christians: And perceiving his
encamping there to be but to small purpose, after that he had burnt the City,
he brought back his troops to Naples. During the siege of Sparta, Lauretano
besieged Rhodes, and did great harm to the inhabitants, The Venetians assault
Rhodes.
he spoiled and burnt their farms and countrey-houses. He did afflict them in
this manner, because that the Rhodians not long before had by force taken forth
of the Venetians ships which lay in the haven certain Syrian merchants with
their goods, and would in no sort give satisfaction to the Venetians that
carried it: This being done, he returned to Nigrepont. From whence he craved
all the Islands on the Aegean Sea, without any other memorable exploit for that
year.

But at the beginning of the next, he did put to Sea and came very near to
the The Dardanes are two sorts at the mouth of the straight.
straight, meaning by force of Oars to pass through betwixt the Dardans, that
he might afterward scour the coast of Galipollis. The Dardanes are two
Castles just opposite to one another at the mouthof the straight, in which was
great store of Ordnance to sink all enemies ships that should pass that way.
Mahomet so soon as he had made himself master of the Costantinopolitane
Empire, caused one of these to be reedified which was in a manner ruinate, and
builded the other from the foundat ons, that he might with a continual
Garrison keep those of Europe from entering into the straight.

The sleete being come thither (as has been said) Venieri his Gallie which
according Venieri craved leave to be the first to attempt that passage, and
that the enemy would not spend all his shot upon this one Galley, but
determined to bestow his bullets upon the rest of the fleet that would attempt
to pass, whereupon, the next that followed it, being struck through with the
Ordnance, and many of her men slain, and in great danger, returned: the like
did the rest of the fleet, except the first Galley that went through. Venieri,
who although he was Prouidator of the Gulf, did nevertheless follow the
public ensigns under the command Lauretano being a man of singular judgment
and experience in marine matters, Giacomo Venieri returns safe to the fleet.
did comfort his soldiers, and willed them to hope well: but in the darkness
of the night, he returned toward the enemies, sailing fair and softly without
use of Oars. Diverse c^non shot were made at him, and to speak truly, he did
not avoid them all, yet at last, with the loss of some few of his men, he did
contrary to all men's hope return to the fleet.

This same Summer Pope Pius determined to set on foot the voyage against the
Pope Pius comes to Ancona to prepare an Army against the Turks.
Turks which had been propounded in the Council at Mantua, and was afterward
neglected by the ambition and avarice of some Princes. For although all his
associates should have failed him (the Venetians excepted) he nevertheless
resolving Christophero Moro, the Venetian Prince, came to meet him there with
ten well-armed Galleys, to the end the Venetians might have a share in the
honor of that war. Two days after his arrival the The Pope dies at ^ncona.
Pope died of a lingering fever. To speak truly he had but small store of
money for Moro, on condition that he should send it to Mathias king of Hungary
toward the expenses of his ordinary war with the Turks.

Some think that the whole sum amounted but to five and forty thousand
^uccats. But the Venetian did not only send this sun into Hungary to king
Mathias, but a greater quantity of gold for many years after, that he might
with his forces stop the incursions of those Barbarians into Dalmatia and
Histria. After Pope Pius death, the Venetians alone did for a long time undergo
the burden of so great a war, in the view not only of all Italy, but of all
the Princes of Europe, who were not ashamed to be idle spectators, whilst the
cruel enemy had already overthrown two mighty Empires, and many kingdoms:
and yet it cannot be denied but that king Ferdinand and the Pope did at times
send aid by Sea, but it was seldom; and then, when as they had no need of it.
There was no memorable matter either by Sea or Land done during that Winter in
Grecia. The next Summer, the Sigismond went into Laconia, against whom came
ten thousand Turks, but upon their arrival, he with his soldiers retired to
Mantinea. After his departure the enemies assailed Pithimia, and having beaten
down the fortifications, entered it by force. In the mean time Victor Capello
succeeded Vittore Cape^o General of the nauall Army.
Lauretano, who having received the flee at Sapienza, sailed to Modon, from
thence departing within a while after with five and twenty Galleys, he went to
Nigrepont, and afterward, going into the enemies country, he took Aulida by
force, Capel his exploits.
which stands in the firm land over against Nigrepont, with Larsa on the
Salonicke Sea. Then he took Imbra in the AEgean Sea betwixt Thrace and
Samothrace near to the mount Athis. At the last, coming to Pirea, he besieged
the Capel sacked the City, the booty whereof was so great, as it did enrich
the Mariners and Rowers.

Within a while after, the Fleet left Pirea, and came to Nigrepont, where
taking in victuals, it went to Modon, from whence departing in secret, it
sailed into the Gulf of Corinth. Those of Patras had promised him to deliver
the city into his hands, and to kill all the garrison. Capel had three and
twenty Galleys, and six and thirty other lesser vessels well armed for the
fight; and besides the soldiers and mariners, Nicolao Ragio was there with two
hundred men at arms. The soldiers, Giacomo Barbadico the Prouidator, they
were in number four thousand: And being come The Venetian^ are defeated, and
Barbadico the Prouidator is slain.
to certain Farms within a mile of the city, the soldiers being desirous
of booty, did without any commandment fall to pillaging those country
houses. Whilst these were busied in spoiling, and expected nothing less than
the enemies arrival, three hundred Turkish horse did with great cries inuiron
and assail them, who were all slain there, having no means of defense or
escape. Barbadico riding upon a Mule, and coming by chance to that place where
the enemies made great slaughter, was beaten down among a number of thick
bushes, and there trodden Ragio being taken by the enemies, was impaled alive.

Capel for all this was not discouraged, supposing it to have happened, rather
by the carelessness of his own soldiers, than by the enemies valor and
prowess. Therefore eight days after, he sent the brauest men of his troops
together with the Ensigns to assail the City. Vincimanica the Sicillian,
who commanded the nauall Army as Vice Admiral, with Dominicke the Black,
and other valiant men that followed the Ensigns, went and displayed them
before the city. The enemies Ragios, down the hill which was on the one
side, to charge the enemy in flank, and thereby to make him retire, and
abandon his standing: but they were not gone far ere they discovered the
Turks coming forward for the same purpose; at the sight of whom, Ragios horse
betook themselves to flight, and fell in among the troops of the Islanders.
There a great slaughter of men, and horses, was presently made. The Turks in
the mean time arrived who did cut the disordered squadrons in pieces. And this
loss would have proved far greater than the former, had not a great dust
risen up into the air like to a black The Uenetians are again put to rout
near to the former place
clould which took away the sight both of Turks and Christians. A thousand
Christians lay dead upon the place, and the rest with the ensigns escaped to
the vesels.

Capello being daunted with these two overthrows, went to Xant, from thence to
Modon, and within a while after to Nigrepont where he remained six whole
months without any memorable exploit. After the overthrow at Patras, he was
never seen to smile, though Giouanni Diede the States Secretary with diverse
others of his familiar friends told him that it hapened not through his
default. At the last being wasted with grief and melancholy, eight months
after the battle of Patras, he died at Nigrepont. Giacomo Venieri after his
death commanded the Army Capello dies with griese.
until that Giacomo Lauretano sent by the Senate to succeed the late Capello,
arrived in the Province.

This man for the space of sixteen months that he was General of the Army,

About the same time likewise, or soon after, or rather a little before
Lauretans departure to the Army, although the Venetians were in some sort
quiet in Italy, the cause nevertheless is not known why Bartholomeo of
Bergamo a great Captain in his time, did by his sudden incursions into
Romagnia, in a manner trouble and entangle them in a new war. This man
departed from Lombardie with great troops of horse and foot at the pursuit of
Angelo Accaiuola, and Nicolao Soderino that were banished from Florence, upon
hope that they gave him of good success in Tuscanie by means of a popular
commotion: this was the common rumor. Bartolomeo of Bergamo brings sorces
into* Tuscanie.
But others supposed that he departed in Arms from Lombardie at the soliciting
of Pope Paul, to the end, that bringing his troops through Romagnia and La
Marca, he might on a sudden in his name make war on king Ferdinand, who
refused to pay usual tribute to the Church of Rome. But whatsoever the cause
was, it is certain that al his attempts which seemed at the first to be
fearful to all Italy, did soon deceive every man's expectation. For so
soon as he came into Romagnia Galeas Maria Duke of Milan, a brave and
courageous young Prince, made head against him: Then did the forces of king
Ferdinand and the Florentines withstand him, wherewith this great Captain
being troubled, did in some sort begin to decline. A battle was presently
given at Molinella, a town on the confines of Bolognia, The battle of
Molinella.
which was fought in the absence of Galeas under the conduct of Frederick of
Vrbin. Those that were at the battle affirm that in memory of man there was
never a more furious or mortal in Italy.

The Senate fearing if his forces should be broken (for till then he had ever
been in the Venetians pay, and therefore it was thought that the Venetians did
favor him) the adverse Princes and Commonwealths being armed, would cast the
whole burden of the war upon them, sent him some supplies of horse and
foot, with express charge to make peace, and safely to bring back the Army
into Lombardy. Ieronimo Barbadico, a man of excellent wisdom and advise, and
who not long before was made Procurator of S. Mark, was in the Army; yet this
new dignity, The death of Ieronimo Bardidico
from assisting the Republike in so great a danger. But his authority and
wisdom being grealy feared of the enemies, it fell out that before peace was
concluded, he was by their means, (for so it was thought) poisoned. There is
no other mention made of Lauretans exploits at Sea, besides that which has
already been said.

Nicolao Canalis succeeded him. He departing from Venice with two Galleys
arrived Nicolao Canalis General of the nauall Army.
at Nigrepont, from whence setting sa le with twenty Galleys, he spoiled
certain farm houses, and villages in Thessalie, and then returned to
Nigrepont; and from thence went to Modon, and afterward to Coron. He resolved
to seize upon the city of Lagostitia on the Sea of Patras, which the Turks
had forsaken, and speedily to fortify it, the which he easily performed
without any resistance. Ieronimo Nouello (for Malateste had left Morea) had
well fortified it; and there the whole Army remained, consisting of six
thousand men, at such time as two thousand Turks made an attempt to recover
it: but they being beaten from the rampires

Canalis having left Giacomo Venieri with six Galleys for the guard of the
city, returned with the rest of the fleet to Nigrepont; and having there
re-enforced the fleet with fresh supplies he sailed to Lemnos, and thence to
Imbres, where he determined to assault Oenos; and coming by day-breake to
assail the city he commanded The venetians take Oenos.
his soldiers to rear ladders against the walls, which being done, they
mounted them, and having broken open the Gates, they gave entrance to the rest
of the Army. The town was spoiled, and for the most part burnt, many were
slain, but more were made slaves, men and women that were taken prisoners
Great outrage committed in Oenos.
were villainously handled, the Sacred places were polluted and profaned
without Canalis upon report hereof, being come to Lemnos with four Alexis, and
Nicholas brethren, straue for the principality there, who followed several
parties. Nicholas being aided by the Venetians, had 1200. soldiers, which were
commanded by Iosepho Barbaro as Prouidator. Alexis had Canalis was still at
Nigrepont, when news was brought him thither, that the Turks had above an
hundred Galleys near to Tenedos, and that their fleet did daily increase by
new supplies. Being moved The Turkish fleet at Tenedos.
with this report* he departed from Nigrepont, and went to Lemnos, and from
thence to Imbres, where at his arrival he understood by the Islanders, that
the Turkish fleet lay upon the other side of the Island, and they being not
able to tell him in Latin the number of their vessels, did by plucking the
hairs from their

The Venetian gave no great credit to this advertisement, nor did he altogether
reject it. Matters seemed more terrible by the Islanders report, than they were
discerned then to be. Now because he would be thoroughly satisfied, he
commanded Lorenzo Lauretano to go with ten of the best Galleys in the
fleet, to discover the enemy, and if he should perceive that he had but
three score Galleys, to turn his prowes toward him, and he forthwith would
come to his reskew with the rest of the fleet; if they were more, then to put
to Sea, and to avoid the fight.

Lauretano sent Francisco Quirini with one Gallie, to descrie the enemies
number, who should afar make it known to him by his ordnance shot. Their
number being known by Quirini his signal, the Venetian fleet speedily
returned, and put to Sea-ward. The Galleys that were sent abroad for discovery,
so soon as they saw the Turkish fleet, began to fly with sail and oars:
for so soon as the enemies had from far descried the Venetian Auisoes, and
the rest of the fleet that The Uenetian fleet escapes from the Turks
came after, they presently sent ten Galleys forth of the Haven, who gave
chase to the Venetian fleet till late in the evening. Canalis with four
Galleys went into the Haven of Paleocastra. The Turks having by the darkness
of the night lost sight of the Venetians directed their course to the Isle of
Scyros.

The morrow after, the Venetian Galleys being all together, sailed in close
battallion toward the Isle of Scyros. The enemy was on the other side of the
Island, and fiercely battered the city. Against him thus busied in the siege
the Venetian sent ten Galleys which durst not go near to fight, but by
their Ordnance shot, did from far attempt to offend them. The Venetian would
not assail them, fearing lest the rest of the enemies fleet should come and
inuest his Galleys, the The Turkish fleet before Nigrepont.
that of Basilica: both which were burnt and spoiled. This being done, they
went directly to besiege Nigrepont. The Venetian was come from Scyros to Cape
Martillo. This place is near to Nigrepont, and from thence before he had
possessed all the passages, he sent three Galleys laden with victuals,
through the channel of Loretto to Nigrepont, and commanded the Captains of
them to tarry there for the guard of the City, if the officers of the Town
should think it expedient. The victuals being received, the Galleys were
returned to the fleet.

Not long after Giouanni Troni was commanded to go thither with two Galleys.
But all passages near to the City being already stopped, and his own Gallie
being bruised with the shot of the enemies canon, he was enforced to return.

Now the better to understand the State of the siege, we will make a brief
description here of the situation of the Island. The Isle of Nigrepont being
divided The description of the Isle of Nigrepont.
from Boetia, is an hundred and fifty thousand paces in length, the breadth
thereof is not above forty thousand, and the narrowest not above twenty
thousand. It is in circuit three hundred three score and five thousand paces.
There are two little hills in it, the one termed Gerasa, and the other Capharea.
It was in ancient time enriched with very goodly cities, at this day there is
in it but Nigrepont. The

On the fifth of June the enemies fleet, wherein were three hundred vessels,
and amongst others above an hundred Galleys, approached the city; but by the
valor of the Inhabitants and the soldiers which were in it, the enemies that
then (...) were beaten back to their ships. The 13. of the said month, the
Emperor Ottoman being come with threescore thousand soldiers through Beotia,
caused a bridge to be made over the channel, as far as Saint Marks Church,
within a mile of the The enemy buildes a bridge over the Gulf.
City. In that place all the forces being landed, the City was environed,
and d^uers thousand men, as it was afterward known at the muster of the
Army. Some report that they have heard the Turks say, that after the taking
of Nigrepont, more than forty thousand were found to be wanting in their Army.

But during this siege by Sea and Land, the Venetian Fleet wanting victuals
by continuing too near Nigrepont, sailed to Candie, whereby the way meeting
with some Turkish Fusts, it sanke them, and tarried there four days. Ieronimo
Molino Governor of the Island, did presently take order to furnish them with
necessary victuals, and did besides in that short space cause seven ships of
burden to be armed. Being strengthened with these armed vessels, and with his
own fleet of 35* armed Galleys, the Venetian returned from whence he came.
The news in the mean time The Senate is grieved at the news of the siege of
Nigrepont.
Island of all others of the Aegean Sea would be subdued by that cruel enemy,
to the great loss of the Commonwealth: whereupon they speedily decreed to
send as many Galleys as could possibly be made ready one after an other
without intermission, to the relief of Nigrepont. Canalis in the mean time,
departing from the place where he ankored, went with his whole fleet, and lay
in the straight of the channel The Venetian Fleet enters the the channel of
Nigrepont.
near to Laureta: then with sails, oars, wind and tide, he went forwards
against the enemy.

Those within the City being tired with continual fight, had already endured
Thomaso of Sclauonia that was sent with a troop of Soldiers to guard the
city, being convicted of treason, and sent for before the Magistrates, was by
commandment cut in pieces, Some say that he did by secret intelligence
solicit the Turk to undertake that enterprise: and that at the beginning he
would have delivered the City to Ottoman, if he would have but granted him
and the townsmen their lives and liberties. Ottoman promised the traitor any
thing saving that which he demanded, and he would have none other recompense
but that. Now whilst these The treason is discovered.
practizes continued on either side as well by those which fled to the enemies,
as by letters tied to arrows, the whole matter was discovered to the
Magistrate by a young

The besieged being afflicted with so many miseries, had in their extremity
but only one hope left, which was, that the Venetian Nauall Army, having first
broken the bridge over the channel, would come and bring them aid and
assistance. This did they talk of day and night, and wished for it with tears
in their eyes, when on a sudden they descried fourteen Galleys and two ships
of burden, within view of the City, with which Canalis was come before the
rest of the Fleet* There was then great joy in the City, and the townsmen
from the walls began to cry out upon the enemies thereby to terrify them.
This General noise did altogether amaze them.

Some say that Ottoman having intelligence of the Venetians approach, began to
think on flight, and to that end he mounted a very swift horse, determining
presently to pass forth of the Island into the firm Land, and that without
all doubt he would have gone his way, had not Mahomet the Governor of Asia, a
valliant and courageous man, dissuaded him from it, telling him, That if he
fled, the Soldiers and his Navy being affrighted with the departure of their
General, would at one time together fall into great danger: And therefore that
he should do better, to give a general assault to the City by Land and Sea,
more fierce than all the former, and promise the spoil thereof to the
Soldiers, with a great recompense to him that should first advance his
Ensigns on the Walls. The great Turk being moved with

The Venetians that were come forward with the General (as has been said)
went with full sail within a mile of the bridge. Then, because the wind,
tide, and necessity did inuit them to set forward against the enemy with as
great courage as they were come thither, all men cried out that a fit time and
occasion was offered to do a notable piece of service. Canalis alone was of
opinion to tarry for the rest of the Fleet, which stayed at Politia; no man
knows whether they did it for fear, or else because the Captains of the
Galleys were commanded so to do; howbeit Canalis did condemn their slownesse:
Those which were there did earnestly solicit him to set forward, saying aloud
that there was no good meaning in that delay. The Picemanes of Candie,
brethren, Captains of a ship of Burden, craved leave that they A memorable
^ffer of two brethren of Candy.
with theit ship might Sail against the enemy, promising, by the force of
their ship, and by the wind and tide to break the bridge, and if their
enterprise should succeed

Those of Nigrepont who in the mean time were furiously assaulted by Sea and
Land, perceiving by day-breake that their Fleet Lay still, like men amazed
could hardly hold their weapons in their hands. Great numbers of Arrows
covered A general assalt given to the city
the wretched inhabitants: The ordnance confusedly beat down whatsoever it
encountered, steeples, towers, walls, and people. Leonardo Caluo Governor of
the City, Giouanni Bondomaria the Prouidator, Paulo Hericio the Magistrate,
and many The Turks take the Nigrepont.


Then they began in every place to murder the poor inhabitants, together
with the Magistrates and officers. Leonardo Caluo was murhered in the Palace,
Bondemario in the house of Paulo Andreatio, who has written the history of
the taking of Nigrepont. And Hericio coming upon Ottomans word forth of a
very strong place which he had made good, was by the tirants command sawed a
sunder in the middle; that treacherous scoffer saying, That he had promised to
pardon his head, but not his flanks. Then he made a cruel decree, That all
young men of twenty years of age should be slain, and that he which should
save any one of that age, should himself be put Francis marketplace near to
the Palace before the Patriarchs house, did serve for a pitiful spectacle to
women and children. The dead bodies lying here and there, for fear least the
stench should infect the air, were thrown into the neighbor channel. At the
very same time that the city was taken, the Galleys whom the General had
ouernight sent for, arrived when it was too late: And perceiving that the
Venetian Ensigns were no more upon the towers, and that by other evident
signs they knew that the City was lost, they did in sad and lamentable manner
with tears in their eyes, behold the

The end of the eighth book of the third Decad.
THE NINTH BOOK OF THE THIRD DECAD Venice.
The Contents of the ninth Book of the third Decad.
OTTOMANS nauall Army contrary to all men's expectation returns whole and
unbroken to Constantinople. CANALIS attempteth in vain to recover Nigrepont.
PIETRO MOCENIGO comes to the Army. CANALIS is confined to the Port Gruario a
Castle of the Forlani. Peace being for a time treated of with OTTOMAN, takes
none effect. MOCENIGO goes to the frontires of Ionia* and returning within a
while after into the same Province, he mightily wastes Pergamene, and the
inhabitants of Gnidos. He does the same on the confines of Caria. He does with
the supplies of the Pope, and King FERDINAND take the City of Sattalia in
Pamphilia. MOCENIGO gives courteous entertainment to the Ambassador of
VSSAN-CASSAN king of Persia, who was sent to the Venetians. The Turks begin to
make incursions into Albania, Dalmatia, and other places on the frontires of
Italy. The troubles of Ferrara do for a time hold the Venetians MOCENIGO
takes the City of Smyrna by assault: He wastes and spoileth the territory
of Clazomene. A young man of a noble house does in a night burn OTTOMANS
Arcenall at Gallipolis. MOCENIGO rest^reth CARAMAN to his kingdom. He does
confirm the widow of the late king of Cyprus, who was a Venetian Lady of the
family of the CORNARES, in her kingdom. OTTOMAN fights with good success
against VSSAN-CASSAN the Persian.

AAter the taking of Nigrepont, the Venetian fleet was for a time banished as
it were from their country, wandering up and down in the neighbor Islandes.
Giacomo Venieri came to it with five and twenty well-armed vessels, and within
a while after fourteen other Galleys arrived, who were followed with sixteen
others, after them presently came diverse more, so as in a very short time, the
number amounted to more than an hundred vessels fit for service. The ships of
burden, because they would not sail without wind, were left at the Isle of
Cea, near to Negrepont. The Galleys gave chase to the enemies fleet which was
laden Ottoman having left a stong Garrison in Nigrepont was gone forth of the
Island, and retired by land with all his troops.

The Isle of Chios lies betwixt Lesbos and Samos, Ephorus has termed it
Ethalia Description of the Isle of Chios.
by the ancient name: Methodorus and Cleobulus say that it was called Chios, of
the Nymph Chione. It is in circuit an hundred and five and twenty thousand
paces, and it is seated right over against Erithrea. It was in former times
free, now it acknowledges the Genoueses for her Lords, who by a corrupted
speech call it Sio. The Venetians being come to the Promontorie of Mastic in
the enemies view, Canalis fearing if he should loose the battle which he
determined to give, that then he should more increase men's hatred toward him,
called all the Captains of the Galleys to council, and craved their advise,
if they thought it expedient for the Commonwealth to fight that day with all
their forces, and to give the enemies battle. Their opinions thereupon were
various. At last, most of them being of opinion

It is reported that so soon as the enemy descried the Venetian Galleys near
to Chios, he presently determined to make away, resolving by no means to fight
in The enemies fleet is afraid of that of the Uenetians.
regard of his small number of men, so as some of them were already embarked in
light vessels fit for flight; and others so soon as they perceived the
Venetians coming toward them, determined to leave their vessels, and to
swim to the neighbor shoares. But when they descried that the Venetian fleet
shaped another course, they presently left Chios and sailed to Lesbos to man
their vessels with rowers. From Lesbos going to the straight, they were afraid
lest the Venetian fleet should be

The loss of Nigrepont did affect the Senate and people with such discontent,
as they would hardly have received greater if they had lost all that they
possessed on the firm land or at sea. All men generally said that this loss
did not only concern the Venetian State, but all Italy: That they had no
Island, channel or sea-streight The venetians great grief for the loss of
Nigrepont.
left, that was able to withstand the attempts of that barbarous enemy, but
that he might at his pleasure with a direct course sail to Italy: That their
own negligence with that of others, had been the cause thereof, who having
been able in time to have quenched that fire* had by their mutual hatred and
avarice, suffered it to increase: That they were to blush for shame, and to
repent that they had not relieved that loyal City, during the siege. Therefore
all men with one consent detested both the fleet and the General: and a Decree
was made that he should be dismissed of his place, and being sent for home, he
should give an account why he had not relieved Nigrepont. Pietro Mocenigo was
by a general consent subrogated in his place: who Pietro Mocenigo is chosen
General of the naual Army.
was presently commanded to make have to the Army. In the mean time, after
Canalis and the rest determined to surprise Nigrepont, and by an unlooked for
assault to attempt the recovery of the City. They concluded then among
themselves that Giouanni Trono, Nocolao Molino, and Frederico Iustiniano should
sail before with nine Galleys, and so soon as they from the channel should
perceive the fleet to be near the City, then to land their men, and march to
assail it on the other side. But these men were somewhat too forward, for
being euuironed with great troops of Turks, more than two hundred of them
were in a moment slain: among whom was Giouani Trono, a man whose valor did
greatly appear in that fight, although their forces were not equal. The rest
of the fleet landing on the shore being daunted with the death The venetians
enterprise upon Nigrepont is to no purpose.
of their fellows, and perceiving those in the channel to go slowly to
work, escaped to their Galleys: And in this manner the fleet retired without
any good success to Aulida, not far from Nigrepont.

The same day somewhat before Sunne-set Pietro Mocenigo with three Galleys came
to the fleet, so soon as Canalis descried him, he descended into a long boat,
and went to meet him, where after mutual embracements, he acquainted him
what his purpose had been, and why he had assembled that great fleet, for the
Mocenigo comes to the army. Canalis speech to Mocenigo.
recovery of Nigrepont, which he hoped to have effected if he had any longer
tarried in commission. But his hope was, that what himself could not execute
by reason of the loss of his place, the new General by his valor and conduct
would fortunately bring to pass, all things being in a readiness for that
purpose. Mocenigo said unto him; Pursue what thou have begun, and if thou
have any hope to Mocenigo his answer to Canalis.
recover the City, go on a Gods name: as for my self, I am so far off in
this my new authority from hindering the public good, as on the contrary I
freely offer Mocenigo dismissed the Galleys that had been sent for, and
determined not to continue, to the weal publiques loss, and his own
dishonor, an enterprise which had been so unfortunately begun. Then he
departed (for winter was at hand) with the rest of the fleet into Morea,
determining at the Spring to remove from thence, and to attempt some notable
exploit which should recompense the loss of Nigrepont. Canalis so soon as
Canalis is condemned to perpetual banishment.
he came to Venice was condemned to perpetual banishment. He was confined to
the Port of Gruare, a town of the Forlani, where to lessen the grief for the
loss of his country, he spent the time in hunting and study.

Mocenigo during that winter was not idle, for he repaired his Galleys, and
sent to the Islands on the Aegean Sea to comfort and assure the Inhabitants,
who were yet daunted with the loss of Nigrepont. Thus was he busied when
Marino Maripietro and Lodouico Bembo, did about the beginning of the Spring
come as Prouidators to the Army, who were sent thither, that Mocenigo together
with them might manage the affairs of the Republique. Ricaosa came thither
likewise from Apulia with ten Galleys, being sent by King Ferdinand to make
war on the Turks, in the company and by the advice of the Venetian General.

The loss of Nigrepont had troubled all the Princes of Italy, and especially
king Ferdinand, who, the more he perceived the frontires of Apulia and Calabria
to lie Ottoman fearing that by his taking of Nigrepont from the venetians all
Christian princes would arm against him, was willing to try if he could make
peace with the Venetians, or at least, if that could not be done, to draw the
business out in length, to the end that time might sweeten the sharpness of
that loss. But because he would not have them think that he did it for
fear, he was content to A new pol^icie of Ottoman.
use the mediation of his mother in law, who was a Christian, and Daughter to
George, who in former times had been Prince of the Tribulles.

She having been made acquainted with her son in laws meaning, sent one of
her household servants to Venice, from her to aduertize the Venetians that they
Nicolao Coco and Francisco Capello were sent to her by Sea, who found her in a
village of Macedonia where she remained, and from thence they went by land to
Ottoman. But peace being treated of, and the Conditions propounded not
pleasing, and the Commissioners being by Letters called home to Venice,
Capello being troubled with a fever, died at Constantinople: Coco in a fisher
boat went to Lemnos, and from thence in a Gallie that he found The
Commissioners return without any conclusion.
there by chance* sailed to Candie: And thus by the going to and fro of
Ambassadors by treaties of peace at Constantinople, and by transporting of
Letters from

Winter drawing near, the Kings navy returned to Naples, and the Prouidators
being called home by the Senate, went back to Venice. Within a while after,
Prince Moro died, having governed the Commonwealth nine years and six
months: He was buried in Saint Jobs Church, which, together with the
Monastery near adjoining, he had erected at his own proper costs. During
his government, the City was not only beautified with that building, but the
inner side of the entry into the Palace, which was begun before then under
Maripietro, was in his time wholly finished, where his Marble Statue is to be
seen, with two others underneath him, representing our two first parents,
wrought by Antonio Crispe the skilfullest Caruer of his time. Saint Peter's
Steeple of the Castle made of a white square stone, which is an excellent piece
of work, was then builded.



NICOLAO TRONO, the 68. Duke of Venice.



NIcolao Trono succeeded Moro, whose short government was very fortunate,

The Senate sent Messengers to the Pope, and to King Ferdinand, to entreat the,
that they would the summer following arm against their common enemy the Turk,
and to tell them that the matter was not to be delayed, but that it was time
already to be at Sea. The Ambassadors were courteously entertained by either
of them, who promised all assistance according to their power. Mocenigo
likewise, did by Letters entreat the King of Cyprus, and the great Master of
Rhodes, that they would arm against the Turks: Himself in the mean time
visited all the Islands of the Aegean seas, and confirmed them by his presence.
Mocenigo having intelligence that the same place was without garrison, came
with his fleet before day near to the shore, and sent his Mariners and some of
the Rowers to fetch Mocenigo his first exploit.
this rich booty. The Inhabitants of this Town being affrighted at this sudden
incursion escaped into the neighbour-mountaines: the Shoppes full of Asian
merchandise were rissed; and the whole booty being brought to the Galleys,
the town was burnt. Mocenigo returning to Modon (for Winter was not yet spent)
made some stay there. Then being provoked by the common report, how that
Coccina in the Isle of (...) is reedified.
to have his coming thither to be to no purpose, he caused the town of
Coccina in the Isle of Lemnos to be repaired, which before had been
overthrown by an Earthquake, and having reedified it, he manned it with a
strong Gar rison.

Having provided for the assaires of the Island, he returned to Modon where he
found two new Prouidators sent from Venice, who were Stephano Maripietro, and
Vittori Soranza, two of the chief Senators. At their arrival, they concluded
betwixt themselves, that in every Gallie, besides the Soldiers and Mariners,
ten horsemen whom the Greeks call Stradiots, should be placed: These men
are more apt to take booties than to fight. They use a buckler, sword and
lance, few of them waere curases, but they quilt their doubtless and casocks
with cotton to bear off the enemies strokes. They have very swift horse and
well breathed. The Venetians did Ottoman. From Morea he went to Lesbos, where
near to the Promontorie on the East Side, where the Island is least habitable,
the Fleet cast Ankor in a safe Haven. Right over against it on the Sea shore
stands the City of Pergamus, a town The city of Pergamus.
in old time very famous in the lesser Asia, it was well known to the Romans
for the Tapestrie that was made there, but much more because it was the
inheritance of king Attalus. There is nothing to be seen at this day but the
ruins of Attalus. There is nothing to be seen at this day but the ruins of
old buildings. The Territory by reason of the fertility thereof is stored
with villages. The Venetian departing about midnight from Lesbos, landed his
troops on the opposite shore in the lesser Asia, and commanded Giacomo
Parisotto the Admiral of the Fleet, to place part of his troops in Ambush,
and with the rest to spoil and wast the enemies Country, putting all to fire
and sword According to this commandment, all places were spoiled to the great
terror of the Countrie-people, and great store of cattaile with many prisoners
were carried thence: But the Turkish horsemen of the neighbor Garrisons,
hearing the lamentations of the poor people that fled, did fiercely charge
the Venetians, The Turks are put to rout.
Soldiers that were laden with booty: Then the light horse of Morea coming
speedily to their reskew, did easily chase and pursue them with great
slaughter. The enemies heads together with the booty were brought to the
vessels, and for every head the Soldier received a Ducat, the which
recompense the General promised to all those that served him in that journey
against the Turks, and was exactly performed during that war. The Fleet
departing from the enemies Country, went and cast Ankour in a desert Island
betwixt Chios and the firm Land: There was the booty laid abroad, and sold
to them that offered most. The Treasourers appointed for that purpose What
Gnidos was in former times.
past among the Cities of Caria was very famous, in regard of her Arsenall and
two Havens, and at this day sundry ruins of old buildings are to be seen
there. The Territory near adioining, is not tilled, but frequented by
sheepheardes. The Fleet being come to this place, both horse and foot were
landed to waste the Country: many of all sex and ages were taken and brought
to the Galleys, but of Cattaile no more than served for their present use. They
found nothing else there but certain tapestrie and fustians to make tents,
such as the Numidians used when

The Venetian putting to Sea went to Delos an Island of the Ciclades, famous
The Isle of Delos
informer times for Apollos Temple, and the great concourse of people that
resorted thither; it is now desolate and inhabitable; there is nothing now to
be seen but the ruins of the temple with those of an amphitheater of white
marble, columns and other statues, with a Colossus of fifteen cubits high.
From Delos, Mocenigo directed his course to Morea because victuals grew scant.
By the way near The Venetians join with King (...) fleet
to the Cape of Mailles he met with Rachainesis the General of King Ferdinando
his fleet with seventeen Galleys, and after reciprocal salutations with
great acclamations and other signs of joy after the manner at Sea, they went
together to Modon. There the Venetian had intelligence that the Popes Fleet
would soon arrive there. But because he would make no long abode there, having
victualled his Fleet, he and the Kings General departed from Modon, and with a
fair wind sailed to the Islands of the Rhodian Sea next to Asia.

Those of Rhodes possessed the City (which was exceeding strong by art and
manned with a strong Garrison) called the Castle of S. Peter, seated in that
part of Caria opposite to the Isle of Coos, the only refuge of the Christians
that fled forth of Asia. The Turks were Masters of all places near to the
Rampires, so as the inhabitants durst not come forth of their fortifications by
reason of the enemies daily incursions,

There the Venetians were told a wonder of the skillful sent of their dogs,
how that the inhabitants kept fifty dogs which in the night time they did
put forth of the Rampires for the guard of the City, and that their manner
was, if any Christian did by chance come thither in the night they would gently
fawn upon him and The defeat of the Barbarians.
battle, and gave them a fierce charge. They did not refuse the fight, but
answered them as bravely, the bickering was for a time doubtful, and the
horsemen could do no great matter by reason of the stony and steep ways: the
Soldiers and Mariners did with darts and arrows charge the enemies from
far, and at last came to handie strokes with swords, pikes, and iron maces,
but many of them being sore wounded by the Turks fell down dead. In the end
the Venetian being stronger both in valor and number, euforced the enemy to
quit the place, and with great slaughter brake and defeated him, diverse threw
away their weapons and were taken

In that part of Asia the women are cunning in weauing of tapestrie, and do not
only deal in household business, but in trade of Merchandise. The heads of
those that were slain being numberless were carried to the General; many
were taken in the fight, but very few in the fields and villages.

Four days after the fight, the Fleet departed thence, and in a morning
before Tabia a City of Caria.
day drew near to Tabia a City of Caria. In that place, two Seas coming to
join together, make part of Caria in a manner like an Island: The Territory
in time past Mausolus: there is yet to this day (as Cariolan writes) among the
ruins of the city certain marks of that admirable work to be seen: The
inhabitants of those places, detesting husbandry give them selves to feeding
of Cattaile: from thence great store of Cattaile and many prisoners were
brought to the Galleys. Then Mocenigo sailed to the desert Island, called
Capraria, where whilst the booty was divided; news was brought that the
Popes Legate was at hand with his Fleet: The Venetian to do him honor prepared
certain Galleys and went to meet him, and after that he had welcomed him
with the general applause of all men with sound of trumpets and reciprocal
embracements, Mocenigo said unto him.

Mocenigo his Oration to the Popes Legate.


I Am sure (most reverend and excellent Father) that you are not ignorant how
valiantly hither to the Venetians have borne them selves for the Christian
faith. This is the ninth year we have fought by Sea and Land against this
cruel enemy, without the assistance of any Christian Princes, but of King
Ferdinand only: It is needelesse to rehearse the losses, travails, and
dangers which we have sustained; for there is no place in all Morea, no shore
in Greece, nor Island in all the Ionian and Aegaan Seas which is not watered
with our blood, or with that of our enemies: we have not spared our labor, nor
expenses, and we heartily wish that whatsoever we now do, or shall hereafter
execute, may be for the wealth of Christendom. We have lately with fire and
sword wasted Aeolia and Caria two rich Provinces of the enemies; and now we
hope by thine happy arrival to bring to pass some nobler enterprise: It rests
therefore on your part to teach us what you know to be profitable for
Christendom, and to prescribe unto us what to execute; and on our parts
forthwith to obey thy commandments.

The Legate answered. It is sufficiently known with what zeal and affection the
Venetians The Legates answer to Mocenigo.
have till this present defended Christian Religion; and how by their valor
and industry they have preserved, Cities, Commonwealths and Islands: But for
thy own particular, I may well say, That although other Generals have done
valiantly, yet thou have not only c^rried thy self valiantly, but most
fortunately, and (if I may so say) almost divinely. This being thus, I entreat
thee to continue as thou have begun, and let not our conductor that of any
else, interrupt the course of thy happy fortune: For my self (as it becomes
a Churchman) I will pray unto God and his Saints, that all thy entreprizes may
succeed fortunatly, and those troops which I have brought with me, shall follow
thy commandment.

After this they sailed into the Isle of Samos, intending there to consult
whether they should shape their next course. This Samos is at this day
desolate: for we Of which (...)* he speaks.
speak not of that which is near to Thrace, but rather of that which is right
over against it. This that we now speak of is upon the coast of Ionia, and is
(according to Isidorus) an hundred thousand paces in circuit, called in old
time Parthenia, afterward Adrisia, and Anthemusa, Melamphila, and Ciparissa,
and lastly Samos. At this day it abounds in wild Beasts, in regard of many
desert places thereof. In this Island the Fleet made some abode, till such
time as the horse that were tired Attalus. This City is at this day the
greatest of all the Sea-townes of Asia. It has an Haven fortified on both
sides, and is embarred with a mighty iron chain. The Syrian and Egyptian
merchants do usually come thither as to the ordinary Mart of the whole
Province. Mocenigo commanded the Captains of the Galleys speedily to prepare
ladders the which being made ready, he departed from Samos with a gentlegale
of wind, and sailed to the assault of Satalia: Being come to the Islands of
Calidonia, The number of the Venetians nauall Army.
Fleet consisted of four score and five Galleys, namely twenty which the Pope
sent, seventeen from King Ferdinand, two from Rhodes, and six and forty of
the Venetians: The Fleet departing at Sunset from the Calidonian Islands, did
the next day by three of the clock in the morning arrive upon the enemies
shore. Mocenigo presently commanded Victor Soranza one of the Prouidators to
go with ten Galleys to seize upon the Haven, and Maripietro the other
Prouidator, to Land his Soldiers, and with them to give an assault to the
City on the other side, and he commanded the horsemen speedily to make good a
little Hill near to the City, from thence to send supplies where need should
be: He did moreover exhort them to remember their accustomed valor, and to
consider that they were to deal with an unexperienced enemy, and such an one
as was to be taken unprovided; and that they did assail a City, which being
taken would for ever enrich them. Thus being full of hope and valor they
marched toward the City: Himself with the Captains Souranza with force of
oars being come to the Haven, after that he had in the midst of a terrible
shower of darts and arrows broaken the chain, was himself the foremost that
entered into the Haven. The other Galleys that followed him seized on the Fortes
on both sides the Haven and slew all those that were within them; then they
brake in to the houses in the Suburbs and into them that were near the walls,
where the Merchants for the most part dwelt in regard of their traffic, who
at the first approach of the Fleet had abandoned their wares and retired them
selves into the City: All the storehouses were full of pepper, cinamom,
ginger, perfumes, and other costly merchandise. All The nauall Army gives an
assault to Sat^alia.
which being taken and brought to the Galleys, they set fire on the houses the
more to terrify the inhabitants: Then because their ladders were unprofitable
by reason of the great height of the Walls, the Soldiers fell to the spade
and mattock.

The General of the Rhodes, whilst inconsiderately with his Soldiers he was
busied in breaking open one of the City* Gates, was slain outright with the
fall of a great stone which fell upon his head. His Soldiers carried his body
to the Galleys. The death of this valliant man did greatly afflict the
Soldiers, but their fierworkes most of all, which being thrown into the air
were by the wind carried into their faces, and falling thick amongst the
assailants did grievously scalde them, Maripietro likewise with his Soldiers
fought valiantly on the other side of the City, which being encompassed with a
double wall, the first was presently entered by scaling ladders with no mean
slaughter of the Turks; but coming to the second, and the ladders proving to
short, the courageous Soldiers fell instantly to undermining. Our men did many
gallant exploits there, and it was certainly thought that the City would have
been taken that day, had not the darkness of the night prevented them, which
enforced them to retire.

It is reported that a Dalmatian woman who had a long time been a slave to the
A Generous act of a Dalmatian woman.
Turks, was so valiant as with cries and exhortations from the walls she
encouraged The Venetians resolution.
from Morea, and very dangerous to bring it thither in regard of the continual
tempests which are usual along the coast of Pamphilia, exposed to the
South-east wind

The Fleet being gone from Sathalia, did within a few days after come to
Rhoades, where, whilst it remained, the Ambassador of Vsan-cassan King of
Persia came thither. He told them, that at the entreaty and pursuit of
Catharin Zeno a Venetian Gentleman and their Ambassador in Persia, his King
had determined to join his forces with those of the Venetians to overthrow the
power of Ottoman, The Ambassador of Vsancassan king of Persia.
and that his troops were already entered into the greater Armenia which was
subject to Ottoman, and had taken the City of Toccata the wealthiest of all
the Province, and some other towns of great worth. He told them besides, that
he had great numbers of men and horse: That the Persians in their wars did
skilfully handle the lance, sword, and bow, but that they were not accustomed
to other arms: That he was sent to the Venetians, Pope, and other Christian
Princes,

Mocenigo and the rest gave a willing ear to the Ambassadors discourse, and
did put him in good hope that he should easily obtain all his demands: They
showed him their mighty fleet well furnished with men and armor, and told him
that it was ready to sail whither his King should command it, if his pleasure
were to employ it. The Persian being in this sort dismissed, went toward
Italy, and they made themselves ready for some other enterprise, wherein to
spend the remainder of that Autumn. But whilst these things were done at sea,
Ottoman did invade the Venetians in sundry places: For the Turks made
incursions Ottoman, Amurath his father had a long time before made war in
Albania, and especially then, when he came to invade Scanderbeg, who
Scanderbeg a famous caplaine
in his time was a famous and valiant Captain, and such an one, as next to
Pyrrhu^, who warred on the Romans in Italy, Albania never bred the like. Those
which have seen him in Apulia when he came thither to the aid of king
Ferdinand with six hundred horse, say, that he fought with his arms bare,
sometimes with an iron Mocenigo executed his fortunate exploits in Asia, did
enter the Confines of Italy, and came as far as Vdina.

About the midst of Autumn, a company of Turkish horse in an evening The
Turks incarsions into Italy.
the Venetian troops. For diverse troops of horse lying in the Villages here
and there upon the river, assembled themselves upon the enemies arrival to
stop their passage; and although the Venetians used great speed, the Turks
nevertheless by their swiftness were gotten before them, and some of their
cauallerie had already crossed the River, when as the Venetians upon their
first charge did beat them into the water, and enforced them to return to the
other side to their fellows. The Italian cauallery remained on the river
banks most part of the night, but through fear of the enemies great number,
before day they retired into the Isle of Ceruia. This place is near to
Aquileia, and is made an Island by the circumfluence of the Rivers Ronedula,
Amosore, and Alsa. But so soon as it The Turks come into the country of the
Forlani.
was day, and that the enemy had lost sight of the Venetians, he speedily
crossed the River, and with great outcries made incursions into the Country
of the

All those in the villages betook themselves to flight, and they in the Towns
thought themselves not secure. The smoke of the Villages and Countrey-houses
which were seen to burn a far off, had greatly terrified the Inhabitants of
the cities, but much more the sight of the poor Country people, who dragged
their wives, children, and cattle to their very gates. The Inhabitants of
Vdina, which at this day in wealth and populousness is one of the most
renowned of the whole Province, was greatly affrighted with the approach of the
Turks, who were come within three miles of the city, no less than if the
enemy had been at their gates. In which amazement, mothers with their
children stood weeping before the Altars, The city of Vdina is mightily
affrighted at the coming of the Turks.
and others ran up and down to the Marketplace, and to the Castle. And it
was certainly thought, That if the City had been assailed by the Turks in
that general confusion, it might have been endangered without any notable
danger. But so it was, That the Turks fearing some Ambuscado, because they
knew not whither the Venetian cauallerie was retired, went back the same way
they came with great numbers of prisoners and cattle. Now the Venetians at the
same time were not only molested in that place, but near to the Po likewise,
by reason of the troubles of Ferrara. After the death of Borsia d'Aeste the
Venetians assisted The venetians install Hercules d'Este in the principality
of Ferrara.
Hercules his brother with men, money, and shipping, for the obtaining of the
principality of Ferrara against his Nephew Nicolao son to his brother
Lionello, who effigies upon it. After the Persian Ambassadors departure forth
of Asia, Mocenigo, and the Associates, being desirous Mocenigo his incursions
into Asia.
to spend the small remainder of Autumn in some honorable exploits, directed
their course toward that part of Asia which is opposite to Chios near to
Thermena a Promontorie of those of Mindos. The horsemen and mariners being
landed Mocenigo, and with his fleet went home into his Country.

The Venetian and the Popes Legate being desirous to attempt some memorable
action before winter, leaving Nasso, sailed directly to besiege Smirna, in
times past a famous City of Ionia. They had intelligence, that because it was
seated they came the third day after in the morning to the strond of Smirna. A
great part of the City stands upon the hill, but the better half of it is
in the plain, and The Christians besiege Smirna.
yet the hill is most inhabited. The troops being presently landed, gave a
furious assault to the walls of the City where they found small resistance:
but so great was the terror of the distressed Citizens, as all their attempts
could not long bold out the Christians: for whilst they ran up and down
confusedly, the City was spoiled Smirna is taken
by the soldiers and mariners. Great was the lamentation of the flying
townsmen, whilst women with their children, ran into their Temples or
Mesquets, embracing the Altars, and imploring the aid of Mahomet. At length
the inhabitants being reduced to all extremity, did from the ^ops of the
houses throw tyles and stones

It is reported that a young woman being perforce led toward the Galleys, did
by The lamentation and great courage of a woman.
the way fall down upon her husbands grave, and embracing it with warm
tears, did often repeat his name, and spoke in this manner. O my dear and
well-beloved husband, the misfortune and fate of my country compels me, whom
neither love nor force could ever change from being thine, to be at this
present carried away by And in this manner lying close to the grave, she could
not be removed thence, neither by threatenings nor force, whereupon a rash
young soldier thrust his sword through her body: happy only in this to be
entombed there where she desired.

Balaban Governor of the Province, upon report that the City was taken, came
from the neighbor Garrisons where he lay, with great troops levied in have.
The Cepio says, that he saw there among other old monuments, that of the
excellent Poet Homer with his picture, and over his head his name written in
Greek. The town being sacked and burnt, the whole territory was wasted. Two
hundred and fifteen of the enemies heads were carried to the Galleys. The
fleet departed thence, and sailed to the desert Islands of Ionia, where the
booty was sold to them that

The fourth day after, the troops landed on the shore of Clazomene. This The
City of Clazomene.
town is seated in the farthest part of the Gulf of Smirna, and was in old
time very famous in Ionia: From thence they carried away no great booty. For
the news of the taking of Smirna had caused the people of the count^ey to
retire with their goods, wives, and children into the mountains: very few
tarried in their houses, who were carried away prisoners, and with them many
Camels and much cattle. From thence, because winter approached, the two fleets
left Ionia, and with a fair wind sailed directly into Morea.

When they came to Modon, it is reported, That the Popes Legate after he had
The Popes Legate his speech to Mocenigo when he took his leave of him.
embraced Mocenigo, spoke thus unto him. I will take my leave of thee O thou
valiant man, and will be the public witness and trumpet of thy heroicke
deeds. And if it shall please God to send me safe into Italy, not only the
Pope and our most Reverend College of Cardinals, but all Italy, together
with the Princes and remetest nations of Christendom, shall understand what
the Venetians under thy conduct, skill, and counsel, have done against our
common enemies the Turks, in Asia, Licia, and Pamphilia. Go forward brave
Captain as thou have begun to enlarge the Venetian glory, to defend
Christian Religion: and thereby to immortalize thine own name. I beseech
Almighty God to favor thine enterprises, and I hope it will come to pass,
that all the losses which Christendom has sustained by this barbarous enemy,
shall ere long by thine only valor, and to their ruin, be fully recompensed.

Mocenigo in his own behalf answered him briefly; but for the Venetians he
promised Ottomans Navy at Gallipolis and his Arsenall there, and that it was
an easy matter to burn them both, in regard they kept no nightly watch, and
if that he would furnish him with some trustic mariners, he should shortly
find that he had told him nothing but the truth. The Venetian embraced the
young man, and promised him great matters. The Sicilian having A brave deed of
a young man.
received sailers and a ship, counterfeited the Merchant, and with his vessel
laden

This being done, he sought to escape forth of the straight, but his own ship
by mishap being likewise set on fire, he with his fellows were enforced to
hide themselves in the next wood. But when the Turks saw the Apples float up
and down the water, and the Bark sunk not far from thence, they presently
imagined that the Merchant of Apples had done the deed. The next day the
Sicilian and Ottoman, who demanding of this young man what had moved him to
do it, he bravely and fearelesly answered, That he had done it to hinder the
common enemy of Christendom, and that his attempt would be much more
glorious, if he might as easily run his sword through his body, as he had
set fire on his Galleys. Mahomet wondering at the young man's courage, did not
like King Porsenna, but according to his barbarous cruelty he commanded the
bodies of him and his fellows to be sawen a sunder in the midst. The
Venetian Senate in regard it could not recompense him according to The Senate
recompenceth the young man's brother and sister.
his desert, gave his sister a dowry forth of the public treasury, and to a
brother of his, a yearly pension during his life.

The Fleet wintered at Naples, and the General was busied in providing all
necessaries for the City and fleet, when as letters came thither from the
king of Persia and Catharin Zeno directed to the Prince, and Senate, containing
the self same demands which the Ambassador had craved certain months
before: Mocenigo in an express Galley sent them to Venice. The Senate being
moved by these letters, did presently from all parts cause great quantity of
Ordnance to be provided, The Uenetians present sent to the Persian king.
and gold plate curiously wrought, with many pieces of Scarlet cloth of Verona,
and a certain sum of Duccates likewise for a present to the Persian king,
with an hundred young men skillful in Gunners art to attend upon the Ordnance,
whose Captain was Tomaso Himolao. Iosepho Barbaro an old Senator, a man
skillful in the Barbaro embarked himself, and with a fair wind sailed to
Cyprus, from thence along the coast of Cilicia and Syria, he arrived in the
country of the king their friend.

Moreover, the Senate commanded Mocenigo to make his fleet ready to sail
with it whither soever it should please Vssan-Cassan to command it.

Mahomet in the mean time having left a strong Garrison in Constantinople,
marched with great forces into Asia, to oppose himself against that war. The
Venetian lik^wise (because the common rumor was, that the Caramani, brethren,
associates to the King of Persia, whom Mahomet had bereft of their fathers
Kingdom, did invade the Sea-townes of Cilicia) did at the Spring time in the
behalf of the king of Persia, sail with his fleet to Cyprus, from thence to
go to the aid of the Caramans. He had as many horse and foot troops, and
the same provision for war, as the year before. The Rhodians sent him two
well-armed Galleys, and The Venetian fleet in Cilicia


The Venetian fleet being thus augmented, sailed into Cilicia, near to
Seleucia, at the siege whereof Caraman was then encamped. There is an haven
called Theodora, which the Venetian fleet made good. There in old time stood a
Temple of Venu^, and the place by reason of the commodiousnesse thereof was
much frequented by Pirates; without the ruins of the City on the shore there
is at this day a very ancient Temple to be seen, builded of square stone.
Cassambet the younger of the Caraman brethren (for the eldest whose name was
Piramet, and king of Cilicia remained in the king of Persias Amie) sent
Ambassadors to the Venetian, Ambassadors come to Mocenigo.
who after they had congratulated his safe arrival, told him that the Caraman
brethren, Cassambet had for four months besieged three Cities of Cilicia;
Sichin, Seleucia, and Coric: which if he might take, he did assure himself in
short space to recover his whole The Ambassadors request.
Kingdom; that he wanted nothing but Ordnance and other warlike engines to
batter towns: That he did entreat him to aid the king a friend and allie to
the Venetians, till such time as he had recovered his fathers kingdom, which
Ottoman their common enemy did wrongfully possess.

The Venetian after that he had put the Ambassadors in good hope, dispatched
Victor Souranza to Cassambet to consult with him concerning the form of the
war. Mustapha the Cilician was Governor thereof, a treacherous man, and one
that with his fortune had changed Religion, and had in times past been a
friend to Cassambet and his brother, who so soon as he saw their Kingdom to
be taken from them, did follow Ottoman^ Army, and did wrongfully seize on that
City. Cariolan Cepio of Trah^, being sent to view the town, reported that the
City was seated on an high place, but that the wall was weak and unfortified,
the people unskillful and disarmed, with other matters which did promise
victory. The Venetian resolving to besiege that City, sent Lodouico Lombardo
the Venetian with ten Galleys The Venetians besiege Sichin.
to Coric by Sea, to keep all victuals from coming to the inhabitants. By
land Caraman with his troops did nearly press the enemy: the rest of the
Army drew neete to Sichin, and gave an assault, but by reason of the
difficulty of the place the town could not be taken. The inhabitants waxing
proud for that good success, did from the walls mock the Venetians, saying:
Get ye home O Venetians, and command the Sea and fishes, but leave the Empire
of the land to Ottoman. The Venetian by The Uenetians take Sichin.
an Herald of Arms sought to draw Mustapha to a voluntary yielding, wishing
him rather to make proof of the Venetians loyalty and gentleness than of
their Arms: but perceiving that the Turk contemned peace, he gave a more
furious assault to the City, and planting his Ordnance on the North side, and
having made a reasonable

The Venetians suffering Mustapha with his soldiers to go whither he would,
delivered the City to Hisafa Caramans Lieutenant. From thence going to Coric,
he did by the way meet with Zanchio General of the royal Army, with ten
Galleys. The Sea enuironeth two parts of Coric, the rest on the land side has
a very deep ditch fortified with a double wall: The haven lies toward the
East, whose entrance is likewise fortified. On the South side is the Isle of
Eleusia three hundred The sit^atien of Coric.
paces from thence, fortified with a wall of white square stone. The Venetian
from the poope of the Galley having curiously viewed the situation of the
place, made a sign to his Galleys to enter: Thereupon the Galleys with
discharging their Ordnance, and in a shower of arrows did win the Haven,
Mocenigo having landed his troops, sent to the Governor of the City to know
of him whether he would The Governor of Coric his answer to Mocenigos Herald.
yield and go from thence: He made a proud answer, saying: Tell him from me,
that the weak coward Mustapha is not here, but another, who by his deserts
commands

The Turkish Princes do use to appropriate to themselves the fifth part of all
captives. They make choice of male children from ten years old to sixteen. If
there After what sort the Ianizaries are made.
be no captives, they do by their officers carry away children of that age in
despite of their parents, forth of such Provinces as they have won from the
Christians. These by constraint having renounced Christianity, are instructed
in the Mohammedan superstition, and then are delivered over into the hands of
tutors, who teach them martial discipline, and when they come to be men, they
follow the Prince to the wars. The vulgar call them Ianizaries: such among
them as are wise and valiant, attain to great honors: of these, the Baschas,
Governors of Provinces, Ottoman had left many of these men for the Guard of
Coric. Ismael the Cities governor presuming upon them, would not endure to
hear tell of yielding. But when the Venetian perceived it to be time to Coric
yields.
use force and no threatening, he planted his Ordnance on the South and West
sides of the City, and having made a great breach in the wall, Ismael yielded
on conditions to have his own life, and those of his soldiers saved. The
Venetian surrendered the City to Caraman: From thence he went to besiege
Seleucia.

Seleucus one of Alexander of Macedons successors builded it five miles from
Sea. This City is now ruinate. Nessembeg lay in Garrison in the Castle which
was strong by situation and art, who although at first he made show not to
yield, yet so soon as he perceived the ordnance and other engines to be planted
against him, he forthwith yielded the fort and the garrison to the Venetians,
who by Souranza did presently deliver it to the king his friend. Caraman having
won his kingdom, presented the Venetian Seleucia yields to the venetians
general with a horse, bridled, sadled, and barded withsiluer, and with a tame
Leopard giving him infinite thanks, for that by his means he had recovered his
fathers kingdom, Caraman his present to the Venetian.
assuring him that whatsoever his brother and himself should possess, they
would ever confess to hold it of the Venetians. War being in this manner
ended Mocenigo hearing no news of the king of Persias Army determined to
invade Licia, which had not as yet tasted the miseries of war. But news being
brought unto him that James king of Cyprus lay grievously sick of a
Dissenteria or flix, he sailed to Cyprus to visit him. The Venetian being come
into the Island, having after reciprocal salutations enquired of his disease,
and of the remedies applied thereunto, entreated the king to be of good cheer,
and with patience to bear the force of his malady, who made him this answer.
I know very well most excellent Captain, The king of Cyprus speech to
Mocenigo.
and feel how that by the violent torment of my disease. I am in great danger
of life, and not to flatter my self, I have no hope to escape, I make my
dearest wife with the child which she bears in her body mine heirs, and she
is (as thou know) daughter to Marco Cornari, and being adopted by the
Venetian Senate, was by it given to me in marriage. If I die, (which I make no
question of) I recommend my wife, issue, and kingdom to the Venetians. And I
heartily entreat thee, in regard of our friendship, and for the greatness of the
Venetian state (if it come to that) that thou would defend and keep, both
her self, issue and kingdom from all wrong and oppression.

Thy body (quoth Mocenigo) most Royal King, is yet in good estate, and thou in
the Mocenigoes answer to the king.
prime of thine age, which may put thee in good hope of speedy recovery, but if
it should fall out otherwise (which God forbid) I bescech thee be confident,
that neither my self, nor the Venetians forces will ever be wanting to thee or
thine. And then taking leave of him, he speedily sailed with all his fleet to
the Islands near to Licia, from thence going to the firm land, and carrying
away a great booty from that coast, he resolved to besiege The venetians
besiege Micra.
Micra a town near to the sea; and because he had small hope that it would
otherwise yield, he planted his ordnance on both sides. The wall was in some
places very much shaken, when Aiasabet Governor of Lycia showed himself with
great troops of soldiers. The light horse of Morea went against him, and
there Aiasabet being slain, the Turks were with great slaughter broken and
put to rout. An hundred and fifty of the enemies heads were brought to the
Camp, and being fixed upon lances with that of Aiasabet, were set up near to
the walls, to the end the besieged might behold them. Charago the Tribull, who
commanded in the City, being daunted with the disaster of his Countrymen, and
perceiving a great part of the wall to be beaten down, he capitulated Micra is
taken by (...).
for himself and the Inhabitants, that they might have their lives saved, and
depart whither they pleased. This being granted, the Venetians sacked and
burnt the city.

From thence the fleet sailed to Flisca, which in times past was opposite to
Rhodes, Charlotta sister to the King of Cyprus, (whom her brother Ambassadors
come ^o Mocenigo from the king of Cyprus sister.
had driven forth of the kingdom, and like a banished woman had lived a long
time at Rhodes) arrived, who certified the General of the King of Cyprus
death, by whom his sister Charlotta (being borne in lawful matrimony) had
been wrongfully expelled from her fathers kingdom. They craved his aid, and
entreated him to assist the King of Cyprus daughter, and kinswoman to the Duke
of Sauoy, Mocenigo, after that he had acquainted them with the ancient league
and alliance which had been betwixt the Venetians and King James, answered;
That in the Commonwealths name, he would do the Lady Charlotta Mocenigo his
answer to the Ambassadors.
all right: yet he did greatly wonder that she did not remember how that the
right of Kingdoms is rather debated by the Sword, than by Law. And that the
Realm of Cyprus had not been only taken from her, and from the Genoueses,
who then held a part thereof: That for his part, he knew how that the wife of
the late King, the adoptiue daughter of the Venetian Senate being left with
child, had been, together with the fruit of her womb, made heirs by the
deceased King before his death; and therefore he told them plainly, That he
would in that just quarrel take upon him the defense of the Queen wife to the
late King, who did hope ere long to be mother to a King. He willed them then
to depart, and to seek aid elsewhere against her, for he was resolved, in
honor of the Republique to defend her from all wrongs and oppression. The
Ambassadors being dismissed with this answer, he determined to pass the
straight, but in the mean time he received Letters Mocenigo his determination
is broken (...).
from Catharine Zeno which did aduertize him, that the Armies of the Persian
king and the Turk were not far off from one an other, and that their meaning
was to fight with displayed ensigns for the final deciding of their
controversy; that he should do well, speedily to bring his fleet to the sea
coast of Cilicia, whither

These Letters made the Venetian to give over his journey into the straight,
and to shape his course toward Cilicia, and after that he had suddenly wasted
the territories of the Mireneans in Lycia, he failed to Cyprus, where after
that he had comforted the mournful Queen for her husbands death, he
entreated her to be of good cheer, and to fear no warrelike menaces; for he
was ready to defend her and her kingdom from all assaults and attempts
whatsoever. Then he made haste toward Cilicia. So soon as the fleet came to
Coric. Lodouico Lauretano Captain of one of the Popes Galleys came thither to
him, and told him that he came from Lodouico Lauretano comm^h from the Popes
Legate.
the Archbishop of Spalatra the Popes Legate who was arrived with ten Galleys
at Rhodes, to know of him what he meant to do, and whether he intended to
prefer some notable service against the Turks; for if his intention were
such, he would meet him with his fleet, by which speech he gave him to
understand, That the Popes Legate had no meaning to come forward, but upon hope
of some great Mocenigo taking his speech in bad part, could not so much master
Mocenigo his answer to Lauretano.
himself, but that he told him, That peradventure the new Legate thought,
that what he till then bad done against the enemy, was but a trifle, yet
those who had felt his forces, did think that no greater mischief could light
upon them, and that it was at his own choice, whether he would join with the
Venetians fleet, or not: but for his own part he promised for the Popes sake,
to have the galleys, soldiers, and Legates self in singular estimation, and
that he would have no less care of them in all places than of the Venetians.

The Venetian fleet had already remained certain days on the confines of
Catharine Zeno, that the Persian had fought twice with the Turks. Ottoman had
two of his chiefest Officers in his company, the one was the Governor of
Natolia, and the other of Romagnia; The first commanded the Provinces of Asia,
and the second, those of Europe. Modern Cosmographers have termed Romagnia,
all the coast of the Ponticke sea from Tauris of Chersonessus, to the furthest
part of Morea. This name (as some do think) was given it, at such time as the
seat of the Empire was transported from Rome to Constantinople. Natolia, which
in time past was called Ponticke contains (with whatsoever belongs to the
straight,) all Caria, Lycia, and Pamphilia. The great Lord uses the advice and
council of these men in

The Governor of Romagnia then, coming to fight with Vssancassans son, A
battle betwixt the Turks and Persians. Vssan-cassan his son is victorious.
was vanquished and slain in fight. Some think that the Persians are
superior to the Turks in number of men and horse, as the event of that battle
did testify: For Ottomans army being broken and put to rout, they were in a
manner all slain, together with their General. The king being puffed up with
pride for this victory, did the next day encompasse the enemies Camp. Ottoman
in the mean time had fortified himself in the midst of his Camp where he
remained as in a strong fort; he had enclosed it with a trench of four
thousand paces in compass with The order of Ottomans camp.
it fifteen thousand shot were appointed, continually to play upon the enemy:
within the rampires were five and twenty thousand choice horse, all Thracians
and Tribulls, and twenty thousand Ianissaries reputed invincible, and like to
the Macedonian Phalange.

At the enemies first approach, infinite cannon shot were at one time bestowed
upon his troops which made a great slaughter of men and horse. In that place
Vssancassans son a brave young Prince being emboldened by the precedent
victory, The Persians are vanquished by the Turks.
amazed with the great slaughter of their men and horse, and being affrighted
with the unusual report of the ordnance, turned their backs. The Turks
coming furiously forth of their Camp, did pursue the vanquished, and made a
great execution. All the Persian Army consisted of horse^, who by their
swiftness did in a moment escape far from thence. The victorious Turks
durst pursue them no further* The King retired into the mountains of Armenia,
where his wife and children were. Ot^oman accounting himself the Conqueror,
for that he had won the enemies Camp, dismissed his Army, and returned to
Constantinople. The number of both Armies.


The Persians were reckoned to be three hundred and fifty thousand fighting
men, and the Turks three hundred and twenty thousand: of the Turks forty
thousand were slain, and ten thousand of the Persians. The General having
intelligence hereof by Zenos letters, went from Cilicia into Cyprus. For Zeno
sent him

Mocenigo held the Queens son which she lay in off, at the Font, and was his
Godfather. Andrea Cornari the Queens uncle was at the same time in the Island.
The Queen and her Council governed the affairs of the Kingdom. Mocenigo
enquiring of Cornari concerning the state of the Kingdom found that all
things were quiet there: Nevertheless, being unwilling to leave such a Realm
altogether naked of forces, he added two Galleys to those that were come
thither at the beginning of Summer, and commanded them to remain at Famagosta
under the command of Cornari. The Popes Legate likewise came thither Mocenigo
went to Modon. This is all that was done abroad during that Summer. In the
midst of Autumn Prince (...) died, having governed one year and eight
months. He was buried in the Church of the Frie^s Minors, where his son
Philip did afterward build him a very sumptuous Tomb of white and black
marble curiously guilt, near to the high Altar.







NICOLAO MARCELLO, the 69. Duke of Uenice.



NIcolao Marcello a man of singular virtue succeeded him. In his time they
began orderly to paint in the great Councell-chamber that which the Venetians
had done in times past for Pope Alexander against the Emperor Frederick. The
undertaker of this work was Gentile Bellino, the excellentest painter of his
time, who after the peace being sent to Constantinople to the Emperor Mahomet
showed so many excellent Marcello by the Authors name.

The end of the ninth book of the third Decad.
THE TENTH BOOK Venice.
The Contents of the tenth Book of the third Decad.
THE description of the Isle of Cyprus. The Islanders sedition, and CORNARI
Venetian fleet. MOCENTOO by his presence assures the state of the Island. The
description of Albania and (...). SOLIMAN the Eunuch with great forces
besieges Scutarie. The Venetians^ se all means by land and water, toraise the
siege. The Venetians Galleys fight fortunately with the Turks, at the mouth of
the Boiano. The Turks are with great loss repu^ed from the walls of
Scutarie. TRIADAN GRI^TI being infected with the ^adayre of the Boyano dies at
Catharra. The king of Hungary at the same time f^ghteth often with good
success against the Turks. The siege of Scutarie is raised. ANTONIO
LAVRETANO, who had defended Scutarie, being made Lepanto, and afterward
Lemnos. The Venetians are vanquished, and receive a great utter throw in (...)
before Croya, and within ^ while after, another in Italy near ^o the River
Lizonza, where they loose their Cauallerie. The Turks put all the country of
Friull to fire and sword. Scutarie is again besieged by the Turks more
fiercely than it had been four years before. The Turks make incursions into
Italy. Peace is made with OTTOMAN during the siege of Scutarie; Yet scarce
observed in the Islands, about controuer sie for the Garrison of Xant. Peace
being made with the Turk, war is continued for a time in Tuscanie in the
behalf of the Florentines.

THE Isle of Cyprus being afterward entangled in new broils, did in the
midst of winter call the Venetian to heraide. The family of the Goth^lans
was very powerful in that Island, for king (...) having in a manner thrust
all the nobility forth the country together with his sister Charlotta, had
mightily enriched these men, and seated them in the chiefest places of his
kingdom. In former times they had given themselves to piracie, and lived only
by theft. But Ferdinand. This Bishop determined to invade the Realm by
tyranny, and the better to effect his purpose, he persuaded King Ferdinand to
pursue by his means the marriage betwixt his bastard son, and the bastard
daughter of the late King James gotten on a concubine. And for speedy
conclusion of the business, the Bishop with two Galleys returned to Cyprus,
with one of King Ferdinands trustiest Councellers.

Mocenigo who lay at Modon having intelligen^e of the arrival of the kings
Galleys, began to suspect that they were not sent thither but upon some great
occasion, whereupon he presently dispatched Coriolan Cepio, and Pietro Tolmiere
the Dalmamatian with two Galleys into Cyprus, and commanded them to enquire of
the Queen, whether those of the Island practiced any innovation, and if the
feared any Mocenigo had intelligence by letters from the Governor of Candie,
that the Mocenigo is aduertized of the enemies purpose.
Cypriots had an intent to rebel, and that it was to be feared, that unless
their designs were broken by the sudden arrival of the Venetian fleet in
Cyprus, that the state of the Island would be greatly endangered. The General
being moved by these letters, did speedily send Victor Souranza with eight
Galleys into Cyprus, who coming to Candie before that the two Galleys which
were first sent, were gone from thence, Souranza commanded Coriolan to pursue
his journey, and told him, that he with the rest of the Galleys would follow
after.

Whilst the Venetians were on their way, the Cypriots having commplotted with
their Bishop, did in the night come forth of their houses armed, and s^ue
Polizappa of Cyprus, and the Queens Physician, who being (...) with that
sudden rumor ran to his chamber. Andrea Cornari at the first noise fled to
the Castle, where the Captain refusing to give him entrance, he hid himself
betwixt the two walls, but being discovered, and coming forth upon the
conspirators Andrea Cornari murdered.
words, that he should have no harm, he was presently by them murdered
together with Marco Bembo his Nephew, son to his sister. They left their
bodies naked in the place. These murders being committed, they ran with the
self same fury to the Venetian Magistrates house, who remained in the Island
to do justice, to his Nicolao Pascali was then Magistrate: they told him that
the soldiers had slain Cornari, because he would not give them their pay, and
that they would not have that nights murder committed through the
covetousness of one man to be by the Venetians imputed to them, who protested
still to continue loyal to the Queen and the Venetians, entreating him to
write to the Venetian General, that Cornari had been slain by his own fault
for defrauding the soldiers of their pay: they told him besides, that they
would send messengers to the Prince and Senate to assure them of the Islanders
loyalty toward the Queeene and her son, and of their friendship toward the
Venetians.

Although Pascali knew all this to be false, he made show nevertheless to
believe Mocenigo. They in the mean time entering into the Palace, betrothed
the kings bastard daughter of six years old to king Ferdinands bastard. They
entitled him Prince of Galilee (wherewith the successors in the Kingdom were
wont to be honored,) and assigned him diverse lands and signori^s for her
dowry. These things being done, they presently in a Galley sent away King
Ferdinands counselor, who came th^ther with the Bishop, to acquaint the King
his master what had past. They sent messengers likewise to Venice to satisfy
the Senators with words, and to sweeten the bitterness of (...) death, or if
they could not appease them, yet at least in some sort to defe^ the war which
the Venetians might make upon them, before their forces could be united. They
Mocenigo that Cornari her uncle had been slain^ by the soldiers for his
covetousness; that with her son she freely governed the kingd^me: that all
the Cypriots were dutiful and loyal: all which the poor Princess being
environed with traitors durst not refuse to write.

That done, they began to strengthen their faction, and manned the Castles
and strong places with men at their own devotion, and sharers in the
conspiracy.

In the mean time Cariolan arrived, who seeming to be ignorant of matters
past, The Prouidator comes to the Island.
told the Queen that the Venetians had received aduertizement, that the king
of Egypt had promised the Realm of Cyprus to Charlotta, and therefore the
General had sent him thither to confirm her and the Cypriots likewise: That
Souzanza the Prouidator would shortly be there with eight Galleys, and that the
General would follow him with the rest of the Fleet: That the Venetians
determined to defend her self, her son, and kingdom against all foreign
attempts. These news did comfort the Queen and her followers; and on the
contrary, the Conspirators Cornares death to his only covetousness, promised
to continue loyal and obedient, and to account nothing so dear to them as the
Venetians friendship. Souranza although he knew the Islanders actions not to be
answerable to their words, did nevertheless labor to quiet all matters, and
promised them, that by surrendering to the Queen the forts and reuenew of the
kingdom, they should not only be accounted friends, but inward friends to the
Venetians. As for Cornares death, it concerned one private man alone, and not
the commonwealth: He told them that they might depart and show Souranza his
proposition to the conspirators.
by those means which he had propounded to them, what love they did bear
toward the Venetians. They promised to accomplish the Prouidators demand. But
procrastinating the performance, all their promises were found deceipts.

Then did Souranza write both to the General and Senate, that the Queen and
her son were by the conspiracy of some traitors straightly kept, and that
unless some speedy remedy were used, it was ^o be feared that she would
shortly loose both the kingdom and the name royal.

In the mean time the Conspirators messengers being come to Mocenigo were
roughly entreated, and sent back without any hope of peace: Then being
provoked by the present danger, although he knew that Triadin Gritti was
appointed Moceniga^s diligence to relieve Cyprus.
merchandise to Alexandria, and sent those of Alexandria to Candie, and them of
Syria to Naples, that they might return to him laden with horsemen of Morea,
and the other with Candiots. He commanded the Magistrates of the Island to
load as many ships as they could find with victuals, and to send them to
Cyprus. And himself on the other side having assembled all the soldiers of
the neighbor garrisons, and embarking them in the vessels, which he had made
ready in the Island, and in other places of Greece, he sailed toward Rhodes.
By the way he received Letters from Souranza the Prouidator which aduertized
him of the manifest The conspirators fly from C^prus.
though they imported the same, entreated him, if his journey might not
prejudice the Commonwealth, to come into the Island, because that diverse
partakers in the conspiracy were there, and did disquiet the peace of the
Country, and that she was well assured unless the authority of some of them
were abated, the Realm would ere long be greatly endaungered. Mocenigo being
moved by these Letters,

This Island is seated upon sundry seas: on the West side it is watered with
the The description of the Isle of Cyprus.
sea of Pamphilia, toward the South with that of Egypt, toward the East with
the Syrian, and on the North with that of Cilicia. It was in old time called
Achamante. Philonides says, That it was termed Cerasa: Xenagoras, Aspelia,
Amathusa, and Machare: Astimones, Chritona and Colinnia. There were in it in
former time^ fifteen goodly Cities, but at this day there are very few.
Tymostenes writes, That it is in circuit four hundred and nine and twenty
thousand paces, and Isidorus mentions but three hundred seventy five
thousand: and in length from the East to the West, betwixt the Promontories of
Dinareta and Achamante, Artemidorus faith, an hundred sixty two thousand, and
Timostenes two hundred thousand. Damastus was deceived to take the length
thereof from the North to the South. Cyprus is inferior to none other Island
whatsoever: it abounds in wine and oil, it has corn sufficient, it
produces metals, and diverse other necessaries; in which

The Venetian after his arrival landed all his troops at Famagosta, and
embattailed them, as if he intended to have mustered them in S. Nicholas
marketplace, beneath the Royal Palace, in the sight of the Queen and the
Cypriots, who were greatly terrified therewith. His musters being ended, he did
on a sudden dismiss the Galleys which went for traffic, and all the rest
likewise which he had brought from the neighbor Islands, together with all the
Cauallerie: he only retained with Mocenigo at his arrival in Cyprus punishes
those that were guilty of Cornares death.
him the Candiot Archers, and the old Army. Then he mand the forts with
natural Venetians. He did afterward make a diligent inquiry of Cornares
death, and Marcello, and a Decree from the Mocenigo is chosen Governor of
Cyprus.
Senate, whereby he was made Governor of Cyprus: where although he had
carefully provided for whatsoever was necessary for the peace of the Island,
and that all matters there were quiet, the public Decree did nevertheless
enforce him to remain there for the defense of the Island.

In the mean time Giacomo Marcello, Prouidator to the new General, arrived in
the Province, unto whom at his coming into Cyprus Mocenigo surrendered ten
Triadans arrival: but being certified by letters, that Triadan was come into
Greece, and perceiving the Realm of Cyprus to be quiet, leaving Souranza the
Prouidator (who likewise by the Senates Decree was appointed to command the
foot forces in the Island) with ten Galleys for the defense of the Kingdom,
he took leave of the Queen, and entreated her to fear nothing, telling her,
that the Venetian forces should be ever ready for the preservation of her
State. She gave him a Targuet curiously wrought, and a purple banner in
consideration of his brave exploits; then departing from the Island with the
rest of the Fleet, he went first to Rhodes, from The Turks besiege Scutari.
thence to Candie, and lastly to Modon. Thither news was brought him, how that

This City stands in that part of Dalmatia, which being possessed by the
Epirots, was by the modernes termed Albania by a particular name: it is seated
on an hanging hill, and in some places the access to it is very difficult. On
the West side The situation of Scutari.
is a lake, in circuit fourscore thousand paces, though Authors make no
mention of it. The inhabitants call it the lake of Scutari, out of which
issues a nauigable River called Boyano. Pliny says, That in former time the
River Drina did run on the East side thereof, very near to the City walls,
where at this day the ruins of the bridge are to be seen: now the River
changing her course, it runs near to the Island, and delivers it self by
two channels to the sea, ten miles from Boyano. goodly woods, wherewith they
build ships.

Ottoman, who aspired to the Empire of Italy, being allured by these
commodities, resolved to attempt Scutari, the chief City of that Province,
hoping by taking thereof, with ease to become master of the rest: he committed
the charge of the Soliman the Eu^ General of the Turks army before Scutari.
siege to Soliman the Eunuch, whom he made Governor of the Provinces of Europe
in his stead, who the year before was slain in the Persian war. And besides
his other forces, he gave him eight thousand Ianizaries of his own guard, with
an hundred Canoniers. He, having assembled great forces forth of all Provinces
subject to Mahomet, had fourscore thousand men in his army. The City being
besieged, he made a bridge over the river Boyano, the guard whereof he committed
to Alibeg, The number of the Turk^sh army.
with his fierce troops of Tribulls. Then he caused four pieces of ordnance
of a wonderful bigness to be planted near the walls, to make a breach: the
munition belonging to those pieces did load four hundred Camels. He did
besides cause twelve other smaller pieces to be planted to batter the houses of
the town. So soon as Mocenigo had intelligence of the siege of Scutary, he
went to Corfu, where he received letters from the Prince, and a commandment
from the Senate, to be careful of the defense of Scutari, and of the seacoast
of Albania. Therefore he presently passed over into the firm land, where at the
mouth of the Boyano he met with Triadin Gritti his successor, and Lodouico
Bembo the Prouidator. Then, although he might have commanded alone, yet being
in no sort ambitious, he resolved to do Leonardo Bolda with four Galleys to
Catharra, and commanded him to go to John Cernouich, who The venetian
Captains ^are for the relief of Scutari.
commanded the Sclauonians, neighbors to the Lake, and to entreat him from
them, that he would (as became a faithful associate) levy forces from all
parts, in some sort to relieve Scutari, if it were possible: That Leonardos
self, with his vessels appointed for that purpose, should together with
Ceruouich use means to put some supplies into the town by water. They did
afterward send five Galleys by the River Drinon for the guard of the Island.
The City is seated on a plain, and is in no sort strong by Art or Nature. The
river Drinon falling by two channells into the sea makes an Island, whither all
the Country people of that Province which dwelt

Now for the defense of this Island, the Venetian Generals sent diverse armed
vessels beside the Galleys. They did moreover assure Durazzo, with four
galleys, and certain troops of Albanian horse.

This city was in former time called Epidamnum, by the Founders name: his
From whence Dirrachium took the name.
Nephew son to his daughter, added the Haven to the City, and would have it
to be called Dirrachium after his own name. He lost his son Ionius in the
war against his brethren under the conduct of Hercules, who slew him by
misfortune, and threw him into the neighbor Sea, of whom it afterward took the
name. This Pompey in that place made all his warrelike preparations against
Caesar; but it is now desolate and uninhabited. The Venetians kept it for the
commodiousnesse of the haven. They did afterward place garrisons in Buda,*
Antiuari, and Olchina, which in former times, according to Pliny, was called
Colchina, founded by the Colchians, who pursuing Medea, entered into the
Adriatticke sea and Ionian seas. Some Authors worthy of credit affirm,

The Venetian Generals went and encamped with the rest of the army at Saint
Sergius Church in view of the Inhabitants. This place is five miles from
Scutari, and fourteen from the Sea. The Galleys could not sail up the River
beyond the Church, by reason of the shallowness of the water. From thence the
fleet gave signs of encouragement morning and evening to the City, by
making fires. The The Turks design.
river Boyano diuides it self into two very narrow channels beneath the Temple
Eschella eight miles from the Army. The Turks went about to embarre those
streights with iron chains and piles, to shut in the Venetian Galleys; which
would have mightily endaungered the Venetians, had not a fugitive given them
notice thereof in time; whereat they being somewhat troubled, did suddenly
sail in order of battle to seize upon the mouth of the River. The enemy upon
the galleys The venetians prevail against the Turks.
being begun, the Turks did extremely afflict the Venetians with their
arrows, and they them with their ordnance, howbeit in the end the enemy was
enforced to quit the place with the loss of five hundred of his men.

The victorious Venetians having left four galleys for the defense of the
place, returned to their camp near the Temple. Many that were present at this
exploit affirm that this fight against the Turks at the entry of the river
Boyano happened under the conduct of Triadin before Mocenigo his arrival. But
whilst this was done upon the River, the Turks did continually with the cannon
batter the city walls, and overthrew the houses. Antonio Lauretano, a valiant
gentleman commanded

The siege which began in the end of May, had continued many days, when
Lauretano sent a boy through the enemies camp to let the Venetian Generals
understand, That though himself and fellows were bold and resolute to endure
a long siege, yet because the events of war are still uncertain, they
requested them to think upon some means to relieve the City. Triadin and
Mocenigo did their best to effect that which Lauretano craved, by the means of
Leonardo Bolda, and John Cernouich: who having levied foot companies and
prepared a strong fleet upon

Triadin in the mean time, with Bembo the Prouidator, by reason of the fennish
air fell sick; and not they alone, but the whole fleet in a manner
languished. Mocenigo (although he were crazie) resolved, with Maripietro the
Prouidator, to tarry till the end of the siege.

The Turk on the other side, the city walls being beaten down, attempted
sometimes by menaces, and afterward by entreaties, to induce Lauretano to
yield. But his answer not sorting to the Turks expectation, he caused
certain engines The manner of the Turks assault.
to be brought near to the walls, with which his soldiers being protected,
might with more safety approach the rampires. Afterward he commanded his
Ianissaries, who were armed with swords and targets to second them. Moreover,
he caused great numbers of Archers to gall those that were on the walls. His
battaillions being thus ordered, he did by day-breake march to the assault.

Those of Scutarie likewise prepared for defense, They had great store of
wildfier, The Scutarians prepare for defense:
which at the assault they abundantly bestowed upon the enemies. They had
besides laid store of great stones upon the Rampires, and did much hurt with
their Murderers. The Turks with great cries according to their manner,
environed the City, and attempted to enter at the breach. The besieged without
any fear at all, did bravely repulse them with shot and wild-fier, which they
could not escape, and the huge stones being thrown down upon them, made a
great slaughter. But the Turks like brute beasts marching upon the dead bodies,
did fearelessely assail the Rampires. Those of Scutarie on the contrary, did
beat them thence with pikes and shot. Lauretano in the mean time went up and
down encouraging his soldiors, furnishing them with necessaries, and planting
fresh men in their steeds that were hurt and wearied. Soliman on the other side
was not idle, but with an iron mace did drive his slow soldiers forward to the
assault. At the last, the Turks being The Turks retire from the assault.
tired and mastered by the defendants valor, retired. Those of Scutarie being

Cepio, who has curiously written the occurrents of this warr^, says, That
three thousand Turks were slain at this assault, and the number of those that
were hurt, did far exceed it: the greatest part of whom died soon after. Those
of Scutarie say, That, at the assaults, and other incounters during the siege,
sixteen thousand Turks were slain and perished.

All things succeeding prosperously at Scutarie, Mocenigo thought good to
provide Lodouico Bembo died at Catharra, and that Triadan drew toward his end.
And fearing that the like might befall himself, he went to Ragusa to take
physic. Ragusa is a City in Dalmatia, builded in times past by the
Epidaures, in a more happy seat, having their own Country by the Goaths
formerly ruined. It is a free City, and adorned with good Ragusa a free City.
laws and customs. Whilst Mocenigo remained at Raguza, Soliman still held
Scutarie straightly besieged, and was fully resolved not to have risen from
before it, till he should constrain them to yield either by force or famine,
had not the warlike preparations of Mathias king of Hungary enforced his
dislodgement.

The Venetians from the first time of their war with Ottoman, had made a
Mathias king of Hungary (...) great soldior.
league with that martial king, and had promised to give him a yearly
pension. Francisco Venieri was sent thither Ambassador at the beginning, to
procure him to make war with the Turks: Giouanni Hemo followed him. During
the time of his embassage, he fought fortunately twice with Ali Bey upon the
frontiers of Hungaria: Francisco died, and Francisco Iustiniano succeeded Hemo.
At the last the Senate, having intelligence of the siege of Scutarie, sent
Sebastian Badoario to the king with a great sum of gold. At his arrival, he
obtained such interest in the King, not so much for his gold he brought with
him, as for his good carriage and discretion, as procuring him presently to
take Arms, he did in such sort afright Ottoman, as he presently wrote to the
Eunuch to raise his siege from before Scutarie, and to return Badoario by the
Senats appointment tarried with the king, and continued with him more than two
years. During which time the Hungarian performed many notable exploits upon
the Turks: For besides six battails wherein he overthrew them, he took
Subassa, a very strong town, from Ottoman, together with a thousand of his
Ianisaries.

Besides, at that time when war was denounced to Stephen the Vaiuode, and The
Italian Princes send a present to Mathias king of Hungary.
that the Turks had besieged Zuzan, a very famous City, so soon as he
understood that the Hungarian was coming thither, he left his ordnance and
bagage behind him, and basely fled from them: whereby it came to pass, that
the Commonwealth being supported by the protection of so great a Prince, did
for a time receive no loss Antonio Vitturi, who succeeded Badoario.

Soliman being called home by Ottoman, did forthwith mount his Artillery, and
raised his Camp, having besieged the City almost three months, and marched
into Macedonia. This report is more credible than that which says, That he
discamped for fear of the great preparations which were made against him in
Italy. Those of Scutarie (of whom two thousand died in the siege) were reduced
The siege raised from before Scutarie.
to such scarcity of water, as the want thereof would have enforced them to
have yielded, if he had maintained his siege but a while longer. Whereupon so
soon as the enemy was dislodged, they ran with such earnestness to the river,
and drank so excessiuely of the water, which had a long time been kept from
them, as many of them surfeted, and died suddenly. Mocenigo being advertised of
the enemies dep^rture, and being not able to recover his health at Ragusa, went
to Venice. Within Triadin the General of the Army, a man of four score
years, died ^r Catharra* Stefano Maripietro whom Mocenigo had left with the
Fleet at St. Ser^ Church, having after the siege commanded all the Captains of
Galleis, soldiors, and mariners, who in a manner were all sick, by reason of
the fenny air of the Boyano, to remove to a wholsomer air, himself being
very sick also, retired to Venice.

The report of the enemies discamping being brought to Venice before Maripietro
his arrival, they did highly rejoice the whole City, which whilst the siege
lasted, had been greatly afflicted with care. All men extolled Laure^ano, and a
decree was made, that the Commonwealth should send him presents. The Captains
of Mocenigo, who after the death of Prince Marcello, which deceased about the
beginning of Winter, was by the general consent of the whole Senate declared
Prince. Marcello governed one year and three months, and was honorably buried
in the Chartreux.

PIETRO MOCENIGO, the Duke of Venice.



ANtonio Lauretano, who for that he had bravely defended Scutarie, Georgio
Dragone arrived with a Venetian Argozie, and then it yielded, her mast being
struck ouerboord with a Cannon shot.

Not long after, Solomon who the year before had besieged Scutari, did with
thirty Solomon besieges Lepanto.
thousand Turks besiege the city of Naupactum, called at this day Lepanto,
seated on the Corinthian Gulf, and in times past amongst the cities of
Aetolia, next to Calidonia, very famous, but at this day it is not much
inhabited, and her walls are in a manner ruined. Toward the North on the top
of an hill it has a castle: This fort was valiantly defended, as well by
reason of the trenches and rampires, as by the magnanimity of those within it:
For Lauretano came thither with a mighty fleet before the Turks arrived. The
enemies on all sides made a great battery. The Turk besieges the ^sle of
L^mnos.


This is all which the enemy attempted by land that Summer. But at Sea
Ottomans fleet after it departed from Lepanto, went to the Isle of Lemnos,
where, having besieged the city of Coccina, and with their ordnance beaten
down a great part of the walls, the enemy undoubtedly would have taken it,
had not Lauretano The Turks leave Lemnos.
in a manner all sick. But the enemy interpreting his delay in an other
sense, as though the Venetian tarried there, but till all things were in
readiness for the battle, did put to Sea, and sailed thence. Then did Lauretano
go to the Island. The Inhabitants and soldiers of the garrison were highly
commended.

It is reported, that a young Maid of the Island was presented to him that had
The great valor of a young maid.
chiefly defended. This Maid whose name was Muralla, her father being slain
fighting valiantly at the Coccine Gate, ran to him and took up his sword and
target, where alone she withstoode for a time the Turks assault, who had
almost made themselves Masters of the Gate, and then being assisted by her
Countrymen, they repulsed the enemy with great slaughter to their ships: in
regard whereof the General gave her double pay, and the Prouidators with all
the Captains of the Galleys gave her crowns a piece: The General bid her
make choice among all those brave Captains which she would have to be her
husband, and promised her that the commonwealth should give her a dowry. She
gave him many thanks, Hipsiphile of old times, and from the rest, who with her
did command that Island, and that the common Proverb is most true, How that
the fortune of places is very often changed, but not the manners and behavior
of the Inhabitants.

This is all that was done by land and sea during that Summer; after which the
Armies went to Garrison. About the Spring time of the year following, upon a
Ferdinand determined to invade the Isle of Cyprus* John, of the illustrious
family of the Georges was sent thither with five galleys, and many ships of
burden, but this report being found to be idle, vanished. Lauretano in the
mean time took special care for the defense of the seacoasts of Morea with
the Isles near adjacent. We do not find that the same Summer or the next that
insued it, till peace was made with the Turk, which happened four years after,
any memorable matter was done in the Islands. Prince Mocenigo, the second
month of his government died, and was buried in the Church of the Twins,
where at this day his sumptuous monument is to be seen, enriched with the
spoils of Asia. Andrea Vendramino was chosen in his place.



ANDREA VENDRAMINO, the 71. Duke of Uenice.



THE Summer following, which was the third after the siege of Scutari, The
Turk besieges Croia.
have been unprofitable, had not famine afflicted them.

The first Summer of the siege was already spent, and a great part of the
Autumn, when two thousand Venetians came into the Island, to relieve the
afflicted Croians: Among these were five hundred light horse commanded by
Nicolas Ducan the Albanese, a man famous among his Countrymen. The Captains of
the Antonioatio Docia, and Lodouico Tifernato: Leon of Dalmatia, and Carlino
commanded the chief troops of foot. These men on the sixth of December
marched in a square battallion against the Turks, who were encamped in a
plain which the Inhabitants call Tyranna four miles from Croya. Being come to
strokes, the enemy presuming on the swiftness of his horse, made an attempt
to disorder the Venetian Army. The Venetian footmen on the contrary fighting
at times upon occasion forth of their ranckes, after that they had repulsed the
enemy with loss, retired into the close battallion of their horsemen, fearing
to be cut off The Turks are put to war before Croia.
from their troops. The fight had continued from the sixth hour of the day
till Evening when on a sudden the Turks turned their backs, and betook
themselves

But the joy for this victory continued not long: For whilst that Contareni
the Prouidator, and the other Captains were consulting, whether it were best
to remain that night in the enemies camp, or to return back to their
quarter, the enemies returned with great cries upon the Venetians, and
presently environed those of the foremost ranks. Then a cruel fight began. The
Albanese cauallerie, so soon as it perceived the foot troops to be enclosed,
fled. The Italian cauallerie did the like. The Turks by reason it was
Moonlight, chaced and slew them up and down the plain, The venetians are
defeated.
and followed the execution as far as the river Lamissa. The enemy that day
and the night following made a great slaughter, but the treachery of the
Albaneses did them more hurt, who to the number of eight thousand horse stood
all day long in order Francisco Contareni the Prouidator with diverse
Captains. The bickering was no less bloody to the enemies: for so long as
the Venetians battallion stood firm and unbroken, they slew great numbers of
them.

The news of this loss was grievous to the City, but that which they within
a while after received in Italy, did much more afflict them. The Venetians
after the first incursions of the Turks into Italy had stopped up with strong
Rampi^es and Causies all places that were footdable betwixt the bridge Gorician
and the marshes The venetians fortifications against the enemies incursions.
of the river not far from the new channel. They had employed thousands of
Pioners in this work, who were commanded by Citadino Fratrinas a famous
Ingenere. And they did not only make Rampires, but likewise near to the
marshes, where the woods were very thick, they cut down diverse great trees,
binding them so fast together as they could not be separated, and there left
them, and on the champaine they laid earthen turfes of seven foot broad all
along, and in them they did set branches of willow, and other small trees apt
to take root, then upon them they laid other ranks of turfes, so as thereby
the fortification was drawn forth to the very end toward those places, by
which the enemies were wont to pass: this fortification Francisco Trono sent
thither to that end is reduced into the form of a strong town. This work was
in length more than an hundred furlongs. But these fortifications are almost
ruined, and especially where the matter was but sand, which the continual
raines have easily washed away. The Turks come to the banks of the river
Lizonza.


But by how much their security seemed great, by so much more was the Province
others make the number greater, and other-somelesse. There was a great clamor
in the two Forts when they first descried them, and presently the alarm was
given, and had not night prevented them, the fight would have begun on both
sides. The Venetian troops that were in the two Forts kept watch all night
long, the horsemen were commanded to let their horse stand bridled, and
themselves to be ready armed. Ieronimo Nouello was their Captain, a man from
his youth bred up in the wars, and had been employed with great command.
There were likewise diverse noble persons, as Giouanni Antonio Gaudolisca, with
his son Anastasio of Romagnia, Hercole Maluecia, Giacomo Picinino son to
that great Captain Picinino, Giacomo Badoario, Philippo Nefalone, Georgio
Galesia, Giouanni Clericato of Vincenza, with The venetian Captains resolution
more valiant than discreet.
not go far forward, for fear least all means of return should be taken
from him: yet at last they made a more valiant than a discreet resolution,
which was to oppose themselves against the enemies which way soever they should
pass. They divided their Cauallerie into three troops, and over every troop
appointed a Captain.

But the Turk in the mean time intending to use policy as well as force,
coming to the opposite shore did about sunset rome up and down with his
horse: The Turks took the Fort near to the bridge.
of the soldiers retired to the bridge, resolving to break both the ends, and
to defend themselves in the midst; but being on a sudden overwhelmed with
great showers of darts and arrows, they were beaten into the river. This place
was four miles from the camp, so that they had no news of the taking of the
Fort till it was late in the night, and then they hardly believed it. Marbeg
(for so was the Turkish General named) having taken the bridge, did send up
and down to discover some fit place for an ambuscado, and finding one not
far from thence, he commanded a thousand choice horse, to pass over the
river about midnight at a Ford, and to lie in ambush till a signal were given
them to break out, then to fall on a sudden

So soon as it was day, the Turk caused a troop of horse to cross the
river, and commanded them to go as far as the enemies camp, and to gallop
even to their gates to draw them forth to fight, and then to retire by little
and little to the place of ambuscado. But by the way they encountered Ieronimo,
and the rest of the Cauallerie which followed him in order of battle. At
first they fought valiantly on both sides, but the Turks at last did of set
purpose give back, the Christians pursuing them. Ieronimo his son a
courageous young man made a fiercer pursuit than any of the rest, and was
seconded by a troop of young gallants who were as forward as himself. The
politic old man was displeased with their rashness, Nouello sounded the
retreat. Then the Turks returning to charge, renewed a fierce fight. Ieronimo
sent for the first squadron to come to his reskew. For from the other side of
the river a company of men at Arms were already coming to the aid of their
fellows.

In the mean time a great squadron of Turks had gotten up on the nearest banks
of the river, where the fight being renewed, the Turks were repulsed as far as
Graman (a little stream running a thwart the valleys Pergotanes.) But whilst
the Venetians were wholly busied in the victory the signal being given to the
Ambuscado the hope of their lives consisted only in their Arms, they were
enforced somewhat to give back, that they might fight more at large. But upon
a sudden, the Turks gave them so furious a charge, as being beaten back into
a straight place, they could not have room. In the mean time the cruel enemy
assailed them in The venetians a^e (...) by the Turks.
front and in flank, and made an horrible slaughter of them, so that the first
band was in a moment cut in pieces by the enemies great numbers, and were all
slain, saving a few men of note, who yielded to the enemy.

The Captains of the second squadron perceiving their fellows to be enclosed
I^ronimo General of the Cauallerie his son, Giacomo Badoario, Anastasio of
Romagnia, and many other noble persons: most of the rest were taken.

The Turks likewise bought this victory at a dear rate: Marbeg their
General was grievously wounded, and great numbers of soldiers slain, who
being heaped up all together, were by his commandment burnt.

The news of this overthrow did much terrify the whole Country, for the people
The Turks burn the country of (...).
most of all, when the night following the whole territory near adjoining was
on fire. The Turks spoiled and wasted all places the same night, and by
day-breake, uniting themselves, returned merrily home to their camp beyond the
river Lizonza laden with booty, and store of prisoners.

The next day they marched with their Ensigns into the field, a days journey
Marbeg raised his camp, and left Italy. This overthrow at Lizonza terrified
all men, and affrighted the famous City of Verona. At Venice the fire of the
Country houses which burnt by night, being seen from the highest Turrets of
the City, did much amaze the inhabitants. Many said; That it was a great
dishonor to the Seigniory, to see ^he pleasantest country of the Venetian
Territory, burnt and wasted before their faces by a barbarous

This caused them presently to dispatch certain armed vessels along the
Seacoast, The venetian (...) comes too late into (...)*
and certain troops of horse and foot through the firm land. But they
arrived in Friull, when the ennemie was gone. The two Fortes were for a time
without Garrison, and some were of opinion to have them razed. The Senate sent
certain Gentlemen thither to view the state of the Province: Dominico Georgio,
who in that iourny died at Vdina, was sent thither with Zacharia Barbaro,
Giouanni Hemo, and Candian Bellano to take order for that which should be
expedient for the Commonwealth, and either to raze them both, or else repair
and fortify them. And for safe withstanding the enemies incursions it was
concluded, at the least to place a Carolo Montone who the year before had
been cassed, was called from Tuscanie, and sent into the Province: he placed a
strong Garrison in the Fort of Gradiscan, and fortified it with dikes and
Rampires. But whilst he continewed his works, Prince Vendramino died, the
second year of his Principality being scarce expired. He was honorably
buried in the Church of the Seruians.

GIOVANNI MOCENIGO, the 72. Duke of Uenice.





GIouanni Mocenigo brother to Prince Pietro, a man of singular wisdom and
judgment, was by general consent declared Prince. Such success had the
Venetian affairs in Italy, whilst in Dalmatia the siege of Croia without any
intermission lasted one whole year.

Ottoman not satisfied heerewith did on the fifth day of June with Croia
yielded to the Turks.
greater forces than four years before come and besiege Scutari. At his
arrival Alibeg a little before his coming had with 15000. They besiege
Scutari.
men beguirt Scutari: Four days after Solomon came thither, and encamped on
the east side of it with threescore and ten thousand men: The Governor of
Asia followed him with a power not much inferior, and lodged on the south
side. Last of all, the great Turk himself came thither in person on the
fifteenth day of June. Those which were present at this siege, say, That the
enemies multitude was such, as on the Mountains, Plains, and on all sides of
the City as far as man's sight could discern, there was nothing to be seen
but Tents and Pauillions: The ordnance was forthwith planted to batter the
walls. In the City there were sixeteene Carlino, Antonio Cortone, Antonio
Legiero Governor of Scutari.
Francisco Sanserobar, Micaele Spalatino, and other brave Captains; Antonio
Legiero was Governor and Prouidator of the city.

This small handful of men was in Scutari when it was the second time besieged
by so great a multitude. The Defendants did cheerfully receive the enemies,
for they were now better provided of all necessaries for a siege than at first.
A breach being made, the Turks gave two assaults. Both Christians and Turks
used the self same Arms and Engines as at the former time. But by how much
the preparation Solomon. Those of Scutari were twice assaulted in a short
space, and in both, the retreit was made with great slaughter. The enemies shot
such store of arrows, as some worthy of credit report, That a dog being
frighted with the great noise, ran home to his masters house with eleven
arrows sticking in his hinder parts.

And because the Reader shall not think this to be a ridiculous report, all
writers affirm, that for many months whilst the siege lasted after the
great Turks departure, the inhabitants used no other wood to heat their Ouens,
nor to dress them meat, but fagots made of Turkish arrows. They write beside,
that in the hottest assaults at such time as nothing was heard, but terrible
reports of the Canon imitating thunder, and that a thousand sundry kinds of
death were presented to men's view, the inhabitants and soldiers of Scutari
fought with such animositie and

In the end Mahomets wilfulness being overcome, and diverse telling him that it
was in vain to hazard so many thousand brave men to such manifest dangers, and
tha he had to do with enemies who rather resolved to die that yield, he al
enraged sounded

But whilst he straightly besieged the Scutarians, he forgot not Italy. For he
sent forces to those places, whither, he thought the Venetians would send
least aid, who arrived in Italy the same day as the first assault was given to
Scutari. They encamped with great noise not far from the Forts of Lizonza,
where embattialing themselves, they sought to draw forth Carolo Montane to
fight. But he, remembering the late overthrow, durst attempt nothing rashly, but
containing his soldiers within the enclosure of his Fort, he kept the Turks
in expectation more than half a day. But they perceiving that they could not
draw the Venetians to fight, went from thence, and encamped within four miles
of the Fort Gradiscan, betwixt the The Turks great labor and danger, to pass
the s^eepy mountain^
where having intelligence that the mount Lanca, over which they were to pass
into Germany, was guarded by the inhabitants of the Alps, being come thither,
neither that danger, nor difficulty to ascend to it, could in any sort amaze
them: who leaning on their targets crept up those steepis rocks ind despite of
their enemies; wherewith they that guarded the passages being afrighted,
betook themselves to flight, and thereby goue occasion to the Turks to commit
great slaughter.

This was the last journey which the Turks made into Italy against the
Venetians. But in the mean time Mahomet still continued the siege of Scutari,
battering it continually with his Ordnance: whereupon it lasted till the fifth
of September,

Four days after, Ottoman being wearied with so long a siege, went from
thence with the greatest part of his forces: The same day he departed from
Scutarie he took Lissa on the banks of the river Drimon, with two Venetian
Galleys, wherein finding two hundred rowers and mariners, he sent them to
Marbeg, (who with eight thousand Turks continued the siege) to be massacred
before Scutarie. This siege lasted eight months after, and two forts were
built at the mouth of the Boyano with strong Garrisons in them, to keep all
relief from the City.

In the mean time the Venetian Secretary began to treat with the enemy
concerning peace, which was granted and concluded about the latter end of
Winter, on these conditions: That the Venetian should give over Scutarie to
Ottoman, Peace concluded betwixt Ottoman and the Venetians.
(with liberty to the Garrison and inhabitants to depart whether they pleased)
together Tenarus a Promontorie in Laconia, with the Isle of Lemnos; and should
pay him yearly 8000. crowns; and that the Venetian Merchants might freely The
conditions of peace.
traffic on the Pontick seas. Peace being entertained on these conditions,
the soldiors, and all the inhabitants came forth of Scutarie, and in regard of
their ancient affection to the Venetians, they rather chose to be banished from
their Country, than to undergo the yoke of a barbarous enemy.

The City was yielded according to the agreement upon the fourth day of
April. Of 1600. men which guarded the City, there suruiued only four
hundred and fifty: and of women there remained but one hundred, who followed
their husbands through the enemies Camp, and accompanied them in their

As many of the Scutarians as came to Venice, some of them received yearly
pensions from the public Treasury, others were rewarded with governments of
Towns and Castles, according to every man's former estate and condition, so as
the The Uenetians recompense those of Scutarie.
Commonwealth suffered none of them to be unsatisfied; some write that the like
was done to those which escaped from Nigrepont.

Peace being published, did not so much rejoice the Venetians tired with long
war, as it did fear and terrify other people and Princes of Italy; and not
without cause: For it was likely, that the Venetians being at rest, the Turk
would make some attempts on other parts of Italy, whereto he was already
become too

In the mean time, the Venetians were like to have incurred new troubles. For
the Summer after the peace, a mighty Turkish fleet sailed into the Ionian
seas against the Lords of Cephalonia. This Island is opposite to Natolia: from
whence the Lords being expulsed, Ottoman became master thereof. Pietro Buaillio
was at Xant with five hundred brave horse of Morea, who not long before had
taken it from the Lords of Cephalonia, and till then held it. So soon as the
Turkish fleet came thither, as to an Island which belonged to the Cephalonian
Princes, Loretano, Variance betwixt the Uenetian General, and the Turk^.
saying, That he would never suffer that Island to be besieged, so long as the
horsemen of Morea remained there. He did afterward tell the General, that he
ought not, contrary to the treaty of peace, assail the horsemen being
Venetians. Both of them wrote to Constantinople; the Turk to his Lord and
master; and Loretano to Benedetto Treuisano Ambassador at the same time at the
great Lords Port. He having informed the great Turk of the business, did
freely obtain from him, That it should be lawful for the Venetians, not only
to draw all their horsemen forth of the Island, but as many other as would
willingly depart thence. By this means the Venetians conveyed many thousands
forth of the Island, who otherwise

In Italy the Venetians, before the war with Ottoman was ended, had taken
arms (as at other times) to defend the Florentines liberty. It fell out that
the year before, Iuliano de Medicis was by a conspiracy slain at divine
service in St Liberatos The death of Julian de Medicis.
Church, and his brother Lorenzo like to have been murdered with him, but that
by his own valor and aid of his friends, he escaped. The Florentines being
affrighted with the death of so eminent a person, took arms, and slew many
that had an hand in this murder; imprisoned P^pe Sixtus nephew, who then was
at Florence, and did publicly hang Saluiato Archbishop of Pisa, author of the
conspiracy, with diverse others, who ca^e to Florence to accompany either of
them.

The Pope, incensed with the Florentines rigorous proceedings, having first
interdicted Ferdinand and the Sienois. The year before this murder committed,
The confederate Army against the Florentine^.
a mighty Army was sent into Tuscanie. Frederick of Vrbin was made General,
but the whole honor was attributed to Alphonso Duke of Ca^abria, son to
Ferdinand, a sworn enemy to the Florentines, one, who from his great
grandfather did mortally hate them. He was accompanied by Vrso el Conte,
Roberto Vrsino, and Virginio his nephew, son to his brother Neapolio, Matthew
of Champaine, and Roberto (...) Armini; but this last being afterward
entertained by the Florentines, was created General of their Army.

The Florentines relying on their own forces, and those of their associates,
(for the Venetians, the Milanois, Hercules d'Este, and Frederick Gonzaga, were
leagued Ottoman, both by land and sea, even in the very confines of Italy;
being likewise daunted with the troubles of Milan arising by Duke Galeas death
(who the Galea^ Duke o^ Milan slain in a Church.
year befote was slain in St Stephens Church by Giouanni Lamponiano and his
accomplices at the time of divine service) could not so soon send aid to the
Florentines. But as well the one as other, striving to do their v^most, sent
forces to them, though unequal to the greatness of both Commonwealths, yet at
least such as the quality of those times permitted. The Venetians sent
Francisco Micaeli to the army as Prouidator during that war.

Not long before they had sent Bernardo Bembo to Florence, who for the space
Ottoman by letters and great promises from some Christian Princes was solicited
to do the like to them, they were moved by this common danger; and therefore
first labored about the end of Winter (as has been already said) to free
themselves from that war.

The Spring following they sent Carolo Montone into Tuscanie with a brave
Caualerie: who falling sick presently after his arrival died at Cortona. He
had five and thirty Cornets of horse, and with them he crossed the lake
Pergia, making furious incursions upon the frontiers of the Perusins, where he
took certain Towns of small importance. Those of Perugia, who at the arrival
of the Venetian were thought to have an intent to raise some insurrection in
the City, in regard of the ancient controversies betwixt themselves, being
advertised of his death, durst not rise against the Pope, notwithstanding that
his son Bernardino el Conte revived his fathers practices. By this time half
summer was spent, when as Robert with equal number of horse fought with Mattheo
Campana Governor of Rome, and Nephew Roberto Malateste General of the
Venetian Cauallerie.
to Pope Sixtus, on mount Sperella, in a small village: where, for two hours
space was a fierce fight. But the enemies first squadron being broken which
came forth of the trenches, the rest terrified with the rout of their fellows
betook them^elues to flight, and left a notable victory to Robert, who became
Master of their horse and baggage. After this expedition he retired in safety,
fearing least Alphonso upon news of this defeat should with greater forces
come and assail him. Certain lakes run from Arezzo betwixt the Sienois and
Perusin territories falling into the river Pales, and afterward empty
themselves altogether into Tyber: the Tuscanes call them Chane. Two bridges
cross these waters, the one at Clusina, which the enemies made good; and the
other did Malateste fortify: these rivers ran betwixt the two Armies.
Whilst the Aragonian was coming to the bridge of Clusina, Robert and his
soldiers made a safe return, and from their quarter wasted the Sienois
territories: And if the Duke came to rescue the Sienois, Malateste made
incursions into the Perusins country: And in these idle and unprofitable

In the end about mid-haruest, Frederick of Vrbin, and Alphonso had
intelligence that the Florentine troops at Podia Imperiale were much
diminished, by means of a controversy betwixt the soldiers of Aeste and
Gongaza. For Hercules d'Aeste not long before in a mutiny between the
Regiments was like to have been slain, whereupon he left the Army and
returned home; the (...) went to Milan, from whence Roberto Sanseuerino was at
the same time expulsed, because that he with his complicies had attempted
somewhat against the state: And that this mutiny might grow to no further
inconvenience: Gonzaga came from Tuscanie into Lombardie Andrea Burgensis,
whose quarter was in the midway upon the hill being put to rout, the light
horse seconding their The Arragonois defeat the Florentines.
foot, encouraged their own men, and terrified the enemies: whereupon the
Tuscan troops thus disordered and put to flight, the Dukes of Calabria and
Vrbin did with ease ascend the mountain, and by gaining the Florentines camp,
recompensed the loss of the Perusins. Then drawing near to Colla, after a
long and a tedious siege they took it. The Florentines terrified with this
loss sued for peace: for the obtaining whereof Lorenzo de Medicis the noblest
Citizen, who was both Peace betwixt the Florentine^ and the associates.
from so dangerous a war: whereupon, peace soon ensuing, the Venetians sent
Ieronimo Marcello to call back their forces into Lombardie, which were then
commanded in Tuscanie by Antonio Donato.

The end of the tenth Book of the third Decad.
THE FIRST BOOK Venice.
The Contents of the first Book of the fourth Decad.


A Comparison betwixt the Romans and Venetians. The Isle of Rhodes is in vain
besieged by the Turks. They take Otranto in Italy; and the Venetians the Isle
Coritia. The original of the Ferrarese war. A Council is called, concerning
war against HERCULES D'AESTE. Great preparation for the war resolved. The
description of Lombardie and the River Po. The ways through the marshes near
to the enemy are fortified. Ficarolles is besieged. The nauall Army saileth
on the Po. The Venetians take Hadria, and the towns near adjoining. The
enemies are defeated at Policella. Ficarolles is taken in the night by Scalado.
Many die in the Army by contagion of the air. The whole Island of Rouiga is
reduced under the Venetians command. ALPHONSO of Arragon wastes all Rome.
ROBERTO of Arimini is sent to aid the Pope, and by defeating the Arragonois
gets a gallant victory upon the Veliternian territory. ROBERT of Arimini
dies within a few days after his victory. FREDERICK of Vrbin likewise dies
not long after at Ferrara. VICTOR SOVRANZA vanquisheth SIGISMOND D'AESTE, and
HVGO SANSEVERINO at Argento. SANSEVERINO having crossed the Po at the obscure
lake, encampeth in the view of Ferrara, and does afterward make an
inexpugnable F^rt upon the River banks: wherein he placed a strong Garrison.

THis History which in diverse things resembles that of the Romans, deserves
in this place some comparison Comparison betwixt the Romans and Uenetians.
land; saving in this: That the Romans overthrew themselves by one only
war^e, which the Venetians have not done. For such as at first the Hernici,
Equi, and Vols^ians were to the Romans, such have the Dalmatians, Liburnians,
and Histrians been to the Venetians. The French was a dangerous enemy to them
and left them nothing but the Capitol; the same nation molested the Venetians,
and took all from them but Rialto. The Cimbrians, Teutonians, and Ambrons were
terrible to the Romans Philip and the Siracusans against them: Genoa was never
more terrible to the Venetians, than at that time when in the war of Chioggia
she was backed by Lewis king of Hungary, and the Paduans. Pyrrhus was an enemy
to the Romans, but more mild than the Carthagenians. Pipus was so to the
Venetians, but much more tractable than the Genouese. The Romans had tedious
war with Mithridates, the Venetians with Philippo Visconte. Antiochus was
great, but Ottoman greater. The Romans maintained the confederate war, the
most dangerous that ever was in Italy: and the Venetians to resemble them in
all things, did not only in Lombardie withstand the forces of all the Princes
of Italy, envying their geatnesse, but brake and defeated them.

We will then first speak of the cause and progression of the Ferrarese war,
from Ottoman against the Christians: which, though they may seem impertinent
to our History, I nevertheless thought good to insert, because we account all
Christendom for matters of religion to be but one entire body.

A year and more after peace was concluded, Ottoman besieged Rhodes with as
warlike preparation, as he had certain years before iuuaded Nigrepont. Rhodes
The description of the Isle of Rhodes.
is the goodliest Island of the Aegean and Ionian Seas, wherein in old time were
three beautiful Cities, Camia, Linda, and Lalissa: at this day there is no
more but Rhodes. Isidorus say it is not so much. The Turk at this siege
attempted many notable enterprises, and by frequent assaults went about to
vanquish the Christians, and at times the walls being beaten down, entered the
City, but by the valor of the besieged, most of whom were knights of
Jerusalem (for those of that order had the absolute command of the Island) they
were with great slaughter driven from the walls, and the City by divine and
humane aid was preserved.

The Turks themselves did afterward report, that two men of divine
countenance Ottoman besieges Rhodes.
so long as the siege lasted, with torches in their hands, did every night
walk the round upon the walls with their swords, threatening the enemies, so
as they being Peter and Paul. If this be true, we may then justly affirm, that
Rhodes at that time was not only preserved by humane, but by divine
assistance. It was also accounted for a miracle, That the very day that
Ottoman a cruel enemy to Christians died, the Haven of Rhodes stood dry.
(and yet it is exceeding deep) This happened a year after the siege.

The Spring following, the great Turk resolving of some important enterprise,
did by sudden incursion take Ottranto. This City is in Calabria, divided from
Valona Ottoman takes Otranto.
by a small Arm of Sea. Valona is an ancient Haven. The small space of sea
which separates this place from Italy, containing 50000 paces in length, king
Pirrhus first Marcus Varro Admiral of Pompeis nauall Army against Pirates,
was desirous to do the like: but both of them were diuerted from their
enterprises by sundry accidents. Ottranto being taken, it was to be feared
that Ottoman with all his force would come and invade Italy, which would
mightily have endangered The death of Ottoman.
Christendom, had not Gods providence preserved it from that mischief by the
Tyrants sudden death: for this plague to mankind was cut off even in the
midst of his warlike preparations: whereupon king Ferdinand besieging
Ottranto by land and sea recovered it, and took all the Turks that were in it.

The Venetians in the mean time annexed the Isle of Coritia in Dalmatia to
R^iniero Zen^ it being given in perpetuity to the Schi^els in those days one
of the nobless families of the Island, they and their successors for two
hundred years space continued loyal to the Venetians. But in succession of
time, the affection of these petty kings began to alter in the troubles of
Dalmatia, now following the Venetians party, and then on a sudden that of
Bela, Ladislaus, Lewis, and other Hungarian kings, even till the time of John
son to Bano the last Prince of the Coritans: He having rashly and forcibly
entered certain small towns on the firm land belonging to Prince Martin his
brother, by whose will and testament after his death they were bequeathed to
Mathias king of Hungary, he did in such sort provoke the Hungarian against
him, as he was enforced to have recourse to the Venetians.

Maerblaisius, who to that end was sent from Hungary into Dalmatia, not
satisfied Giacomo Venier^ sent by Antonio Lauretano General of the nauall
Army from Corfu, arrived there, followed afterward by Antonio Vinciguerra one
of the Secretaries sent from the Prince and Senate; who in the Commonwealths
name willed the Hungarian to desist from inuading the Coritans, who were under
the Venetians protection: But the Hungarian was so far off from giving over
his attempt, as on the contrary, having taken Musella by force, he brought
his Army to the chief City of the Island: The Islanders standing ill
affected to their Prince in regard of the grievous subsidies he exacted from
them at the beginning of the war, were in a manner all revolted

Victor Souranza who succeeded Lauretano in the Admiralty, coming thither by
chance, fortified it. The Senate assigned a perpetual pension of a thousand
crowns to the Coritan Prince, and four thousand ducats for his daughters
dowry: The Coritan Prince flies into Germany.
But he accustomed to tyranny, and not being able to live under Laws in a free
State, departed secretly with his household into Germany.

It is now time to return to the propounded war of Ferrara. The Princes of
Ferrara had of a long time been friends to the Venetians, so that Borsia
Predecessor to Hercules, if at any time strife arose concerning their bounds,
came with a small train as a private person to confer with the Prince and
Senate, supposing that he could do them no greater honor, nor better express
his love, than to come himself unlooked for to give them satisfaction. This
Prince to his dying day had nothing in greater admiration than the Venetian
Seigniory, nor accounted any thing comparable to the peace and friendship
thereof. This man's deserts, and the hope Borsia in his behavior and affection
toward them than his brother Hercules, the Venetians did earnestly embrace his
cause, and assisting him by land and water, seated him in the Dukedom, for
which he lately strove with Nicolao, son to Lionello, favored by his uncle
the prince of Mantua, and Galeas Visconte.

But not long after, Hercules married Leonora daughter to king Ferdinand, by
means of which new alliance growing more insolent, his love to the Venetians
waxed cold, and he did not greatly care to infringe his league with them. For
contrary to their The cause of the war of Ferrara.
agreement he had permitted his subjects to make salt at Comachia:
Nevertheless to clear himself thereof, he was content at the Venetians
entreaty by Benedicto Treuisano sent to him to Ferrara to that end, that a
great quantity of salt made there, bounded his own confines. Lastly, the
Venetian Magistrate, which by covenant remained in Ferrara, being outraged,
expulsed and excommunicated by the Cities The Duke of Ferara declares himself
an enemy to the Venetians.
Archbishop, the Duke declared himself an open enemy to the Venetians.

The Senate in the mean time knowing whereunto his designs intended, did
sometime by Letters, then by Ambassadors, entreat him not to enforce the
Venetians to become his enemies, but rather, imitating his brother Borsia and
other his Predecessors to persevere in their ancient friendship, which would
both be profitable and honorable for him. This proud man, who by reason of
his new alliance promised great matters to himself, contemned this counsel.
Nevertheless, the Senate made Pope Sixtus a means to contain him in their
ancient friendship. Ottoman) resolved to invade him, and by Arms to revenge
that which till then for quietness sake they had more kindly than honorably
endured.

This determination did for certain days busy the Council. Some of the
ancient Senators were of opinion not to make war on Hercules upon any
occasion whatsoever; not that it was unlawful, but because the time permitted
it not, and did often advise those The opinion of those dissuading war.
that craved war to take heed, that by desire of revenge, they did not
precipitate the Commonwealth into danger, saying, That the City and Tributary
Towns were tired with long war: That it behooued them sometimes to lay down
arms, lest by heaping one war upon another, the world should say that the
Venetians loved nothing less than peace. Moreover, though there were nothing
else in it, they ought to consider that Hercules besides his own experience in
Martial matters, was allied to two potent Kings, and that undoubtedly he would
never of his own private motion have so mightily provoked them: Besides, it
was certain that diverse Italian Princes were leagued with him, which being so,
they desired those that wished for war to advise themselves, if they had not
more need of a Target than of a Sword.

At this speech most of the Senators, (as every man was inclined) cried out to
the contrary, saying; That the allegations of cowards ought not to divert their
former resolution, Their answer that craved war
and muchlesse cause them to believe them, that by the example of one man,
other Princes their neighbors would rise against them, who would be twice
advised ere they invaded the Venetians. That the City was able to undergo the
whole burden of the war, and being of a long time accustomed to war, would
not live ydlely. That the State by Gods goodness was so wealthy, that
notwithstanding the great mass of gold spent in the war against Ottoman, her
treasure was in a manner infinite, whereby war might be managed to the
honor of the Commonwealth: That all passages to sealay open to the Venetian
Merchants, whose traffic did daily augment their imposts and customs: That
diverse Senators present in Council offered to aid the Commonwealth with
great sums of gold, whereby they might perceive that nothing could be wanting
for the entertainment of the army: That the King of Hungary was in no sort
to be feared: for besides his perpetuallwarre with the Emperor Frederick, the
Turks were still on his confines and wasted his Country, so that he had
enough to do, to defend his kingdom from two such potent enemies: That King
Ferdinand was not to be regarded, who had not yet recovered his losses at the
siege of Ottranto: That the Venetian fleet scoured the Sea coast of Apulia and
Calabria, which if he were desirous to defend, it behooued him whether he
would, or no, to have no hand in the Ferrarese war. But admit (said he which
spoke) that his forces be so great, as they may fitly be divided into sundry
places, by what way shall he come to bring aid to his son in law? His
soldiers have no wings to fly through the air from Calabria into Lombardie.
Rome belongs to Pope Sixtus, so does Sabinia, the Duchy of Spoleta, la
Marea, and all Italy besides, from Tibers mouth, as far as Ancona. His
Holiness so soon as he perceived that he could not prevail with Hercules,
has not only advised us to make war upon him, but together with the Venetians
has an hand therein. The Florentines and Milanois will not take our parts; But
the Genouese and Prince of Montferrat will assist us: The Rubrians of Parma
will do the like, who as we understand are ready to revolt. And seeing we
want neither Arms, money, nor aid, what shall hinder us from inuading
Hercules? When did ever any of your neighbors (most noble Senators) more
provoke you? Over all his Territories he has cancelled your freedom and
immunities. He has of a long time usurped upon the confines of your dominions;
He has suffered your Magistrate to be outraged, expulsed, and excommunicated:
If this wrong cannot move you, what then is able to incite you? Will you tarry
till he invade you first? Questionless he will assail you, and it may be
sooner than you imagine. On then, follow the steps of your Ancestors, and
with fire and sword pursue this open enemy. Let your Arms quench this flame
which our long sufferance has so kindled, as but by this means will hardly be
extinguished. Let all men see, that when need is, the Venetians know how to
draw peace from war, and war from peace.

Hereupon, the Senate with general consent presently resolved to take Arms:
War is resolved against the Duke of Ferrara.
And that all requisite solemnities might be observed therein, it was decreed,
that so soon as the people were made acquainted therewith, it should be
denounced to the enemy. When it was published, the people were so joyful, as
men might easily perceive, that never any war was more pleasing to them than
that. Whereupon the Senate resolved to prepare two fleetes, the one to invade
Apulia and Calabria, Two Venetian fleets.
if Ferdinand should stir; And the other to pass up against the stream of
the River Po into the enemies Territories. That by sea was committed to Victor
Souranza, Damiano Moro, both of them valiant Captains: But when the Senate
considered, that he was not only to be invaded by water, but by land, it
divided the forces into sundry places. Roberto Sanseuerino (who not long before
served them for large entertainment) was appointed to make war upon him on
the hither side of Po, and Robert of Arimini General of all the troops, on the
other side toward Flaminia. Many did voluntarily follow the Venetian ensigns
both by land and water, not so much for hope of booty, as for particular
hatred to the Duke, whose pride they could not endure.

Diverse Vessels were already gone from Venice when Roberto Sanseuerino and
Antonio Lauretano the Prouidator, marched toward Legnaga. These, having viewed

Now this Province is enclosed by part of Flaminia, and La Marca, on every side
The description of Lombardie.
by Mountains, saving on the South and East, where it is watered by the
Adriatic Sea, so, as if it extended no farther to Sea-ward than toward the
Appenine Hills, and Genoa, it would retain the true form of a Theater. And if
it might be called a Theater, it might truly be said to be that of Mars, and
none other, as the Greeks where the greatest part of their power remained,
with Pauia their Royal Seat) it was called Lombardie, one syllable being
taken from their name.

The goodliest and greatest Rivers of this Province, are the Po, Thesin, Oglio,
Abdue, Mincia, and Adice. The Po which as some say the Greeks termed Eridanus,
receives her Spring in the midst of the Mount Vesula, on the confines of
Liguria, The original and spring of the River Po, with ^er course.
from thence falling down into the plain, it runs first toward the South,
then turning toward the East, it enters by six Channells into the Adriatic
Sea, and being augmented by thirty Rivers falling into it, it grows so great,
as some think it nothing inferior to the Danubium or Nilus. The Rivers which
fall into it are very famous, and with great abundance of water, issue from
very excellent

Being thus augmented (as has been said) it runs with a direct course to
Ficarolles Alberts; it prodigally disgorgeth as much water as it took in at
Vaterna, the which gliding through the Lakes of Rauenna, enters like a
nauigable River into the Sea: And in this manner the Haven of Rauenna may be
termed one of the mouths of the Po. The other part which is far greater,
from S. Alberts runs

That branch on the left hand beneath Ferrara, runs into the Sea with the
self same force, as it comes from the City, and the entrance thereof is
called Volana. Betwixt this and Primaria, which we lately mentioned, the Lakes
of Comachia have their mouth, or rather Haven, which is called Magneuaca. But
to speak truly these are arms of the Sea, as may easily be perceived by
reason of salt which is made there.

Now I return to the first division of the River, which we said was a little
beneath Ficarolles: This is esteemed to be new, not so much by the Map of
Italy, which Robert King of Naples, and Francisco Petrarca have made, where
Blondus of Forli affirms no mention at all to be made of this division, as by
the authority of Polibius a learned Author, who says that the Po enters by
two channels into the Adriatic Sea, by Padusa and Volana, which are properly
parts of that River, whereof we even now discoursed. But to return to the
other part, it runs on the left hand without any diminution at all, as far as
the Confines of Hadria, and dividing it self again into two mouths, enters
by two several ways into the Sea: That which is next to Volana is called
Abba, and the other Goria. The Inhabitants of the Country call the other
bigger Channel which runs on the left hand into the Sea, the Fornaces.

This in brief is all we can say of the original of the Po, of her course
and entrances into the Sea. Some think that it was called Paua, because that
round about her spring there grow many trees called in the French tongue Pines.
Pliny says From whence the Po took her name.
that the Ligurians called it Bondimaca, by the name of the Village, and for
proof

The Adice likewise which divided in sundry sorts makes diverse Pollesins,
coming down from the Mountains of Trant runs a thwart through the City of
Verona, from thence being parted in two at Castagnare, beneath Legnaga, that
part which enuironeth the Village, falls into the Tartar, issuing from her
Lakes, and joined together are not long ere with a greater course they meet
with the other part of the Adice at Malopra, and so all these Rivers meeting in
one, do behind enclose the Pollesin of Rouiga. At last falling into the Lakes
they loose the name of Rivers. But the Adice being divided into two above the
Tower Marchiana, That part which runs directly toward Sendouare and Rouiga,
before it comes to Capdarger,

Now these divisions of Lakes and Rivers made the Venetians journey much more
difficult, for in some places they were too deep to be foorded, and in others
too shallow to be passed by Boat. First, Sanseuerino and the Prouidator
Lauretano, Andrea de Parma, and Thomaso Himulano, first to Crocelta, and from
thence to the Mellaritan Confines. By this means the Venetian Soldiers came
on the last of April before day into the Enemies Country. Some of the
Garrison of Mellaria with Francisco Sica coming from Hostilio with troops of
Horse, sought to repel them at their first arrival, but after some light
skirmish they were glad to retire. The next night Antonio Marciano a very
famous Captain, began with three hundred Peasants to cut a way for the Army
through the Lakes near to Casalon, They wrought there all that night, and the
laborers stood in water and mud up to the girdles: but so soon as it was day
Sanseuerino and Lauretano coming thither, and considering the danger which
those troops were exposed unto, that were already in the enemies Country,
they presently sent for all the Country people there abouts of every sex and
age, to help to finish the work: more then one thousand persons labored
there, who the next day after finished it, and by three of the clock after
noone of the same day the troops came to the banks of the River Tartar: so
soon as their fellows which guarded the opposite shore saw them, they
presently made a Bridge over the River, over which every man passed at his
pleasure into the enemies Country.

This way (four and twenty furlongs in length) cut through the Lakes, was by
Fascinada.
Fort was builded on the hither side the Tartar near to the Bridge, and
strongly fortified that men might freely pass up and down. The same day the
forces marched into the Mellarians Territories: some that were there agree not
about their number; saying, that they were 20000. Others mention not so many.
But Sanseuerino marching to besiege Mellaria on the Po, did at the first
assault win the enemies Rampire near to the Castle: whereupon those within
it presently yielded.

Mellaria being taken, the enemy showed himself about Sunne-set on the other
side of the River: this gave a sudden alarm to the Venetian, who in arms
presently ran to the River banks: but perceiving their small number their
fear ceased. They had intelligence afterward that it was Frederick of Vrbin,
who came to cross the Po at Hostilia, from thence to march to Milan, King
Ferdinand and Hercules confederates, had made him General of their Army, and
sent for him to come away Sanseuerino had intelligence that the enemy had
abandoned Trecenta, and some other The Ferrarois abandon Trccenta
lesser Towns of no great moment. He thought it fit there to make a bridge,
by which supplies and victuals might be brought to them from Verona. Though
this was not so near a way as that of Croselta or Fascinada, yet was it more
sure than any of them, whereupon he left a strong Garrison to guard the bridge.

Within a while after, the camp marched from Brigantino toward Castelnouo,
where filling a great trench which the enemy had drawn from the Po to the
lakes, Castelnouo yields to the Venetians.
City yielded. In the mean time they made incursions into the enemies
Country, and every day brought great store of Cattaile and prisoners to the
Camp.

The report of these incursions being bruted in the neighbor Villages,
provoked many to come to the Venetians camp upon hope of booty, so as in a
short space the Army consisted of 30000. able Men. From Castelnouo they went
to Ficarolles, The Venetians besiege Ficarolles.
where an other great trench being likewise made by the enemy, did for a time
restrain the course of their victory; but this impediment taken away, they
planted the Cannon against the walls, when speedy news was brought from
Mellaria, that Frederick of Vrbin with great forces lay at Hostilia. The
Venetian General, fearing if the enemy should at his back shut up all
passages, he should not be able when he would to return, did presently raise
his camp and returned to Castelnouo: There he understood by spies that the
forces which were at Hostilia were not sufficient to make any attempt on this
side the Po: Then Sanseuerino sent word to Count Marcian presently to break
down the cawsies and banks of the River betwixt Mellaria and Hostilia; for
that once done, they needed no more to fear the enemies incursions: and
himself returned again to Ficarolles. But in his absence, the townsmen had
fortified the trench, planted their Ordnance on the opposite shore, broken
down the camps Rampires, and burnt the Soldiers Cabins. Vrbin coming thither

Robert in the mean time being somewhat tired, did again fill the trench, and
encamped on either side thereof. But whilst these things were done there,
Christofero Muletto a valiant Captain, who commanded the small vessels (for
Damiano Moro General of the fleet upon the Po had passed on beyond the
enemy) besieged and took Hadria a very ancient City: The soldiers of the
garrison and townsmen Hadria is taken.
did at first bravely defend it. The situation of the place did greatly avail
Dominico Hericeo a courageous soldier was slain at the first assault. The
Venetians incensed by his death, did with greater fury assault the City, and
without fear of danger mounted the rampires, and never gave over till the
soldiers and mariners entered it. Then the inhabitants casting down their
Arms, cried for mercy. The Conquerors at their first entrance slew diverse,
and the houses in many places were burnt and spoiled, and Hadria had that day
been wholly ruined, had not the Venetian presently commanded the soldiers to
abstain from spoil and murder. We have elsewhere spoken of the situation and
antiquity of this ci^tie. Comachia veeldeth to the Venetians.


Hadria taken, the whole Country round about was wasted. Comachia likewise at
the same time yielded to the Venetians. These Cities with others near
adjoining, some by force, and others voluntarily, being taken by them, and
Moro sailing with the fleet up the River, all men fled on both sides the Po:
for the

Hercules had fortified a place upon the Po called Pilosella, by which the
fleet was to pass, and had there builded three Castles of wood, one in the
midst of the River; and the other on both sides; which he furnished with
ordnaunce and other necessaries, and strong garrisons. Sigismond d'Este
Hercules brother and Giouan Bentiuole of Bolognia lay there with six hundred
horse, and as many foot. Moro had great numbers of vessels, to wit, gall^ots,
small boats, Ganzarioles, with many other of sundry sorts to the number of two
hundred well armed and ready to fight. Himself in his own Gallie, sailed
against the enemy, the like did the forces

Moro victorious, caused his soldiers and mariners to spoil and waste all
places near to the River; they being as well provoked by revenge, as desire of
booty, pillaged all villages, and country houses upon the River, and then
burnt them, and so Frederick of Vrbin, who was on the opposite shore,
beholding the danger of his friends, Cast pieces called Bases.
was not idle, but annoyed the Venetians with his ordnance from the farther
side, and supplied the besieged with armor, victual, and whatsoever else he
knew to be necessary for a siege. But nothing did so much hurt to the Venetian
as certain Sanseuerino sent him word by a Trumpet, that if he did not cease
his new kind of war, he would turn his Cannons from the walls of
Ficarolles upon his Camp, whereupon they agreed together, that when
Sanseuerino should assault the City, or batter the walls with his ordnance,
the enemy might use those pieces.

Moreover, Sanseuerino resolving wholly to shut up the River from the enemy,
commanded certain vessels of the fleet to be drawn by Land up the River,
beyond the enemies camp. Vrbin sent for nine Galeots from Hostilia (of those
five of their landing, and unwilling to omit so fair an occasion, landing on
the farther side of the Island to the number of 150. did suddenly assa^le the
enemy half asleep, who being amazed with such an unlooked for assault, in
sted of defending them Some of the enemies are defeated in an Island.
selves fled toward the vessels: most of them were slain or taken;
threescore and ten being taken alive were brought to Sanseuerino, who
understanding that they were Milaneses and Artificers, not coming thither of
their own accord to fight, but sent by their Princes commandment, did use
them gently, and furnishing them with clothes and money, gave them leave to
depart.

It was not long ere the enemy had his revenge, with greater loss to the
Venetians. The Po diuides it self into two branches (as has been said) five
hundred Antonio Marciano was the first that propounded it, wherefore the charge
thereof was committed to him. He being accompanied by Bartilmeo Falceria,
Tomaso of Immola, and two Companies of foot, did on a sudden seize on the
place, and then with great numbers of peasants brought thither with him to that
end, began the work. The soldiors and mariners in the mean time desirous of
booty, straying far from the work, made incursions as far as Ferrara, from
whence returning with great booty, they went without leave to the Camp on the
opposite shore, leaving Marcian and Hercules, by messengers from the Duke of
Feltre advertised of the enemies deseigne, came speedily thither to defeat
them: For he was not ignorant how discommodious that Fort would be to Ferrara.
At his arrival he charged them, but Marcian in the end being oppressed by the
multitude, was taken, and Falceria The Venetians are put to rout, and their
enterprise made frustra^e.
with him: Many of his soldiors were slain, Thomaso of Imola in a little boat
escaped with some few soldiors, and went over the River. Hercules presently
finished the fortification which the other had begun, and placing a strong
Garrison in it, did greatly relieve Ferrara.

Sanseuerino in the mean time lying longer before Ficarolles than he expected;
Fracasse, G^ouan Maria, and Pietro Marcello the Prouidator, with part of the
troops to take the Towns of the Rhouigian Pollesin: For the enemies Country
near to the Adice had not yet tasted the calamities of war. At their first
arriual there they took Castle-Guillielmo, the tower Sandona environed with
lakes, Rouiga, Lendenara, the Abbey, and other places of the Pollesin, but not
without fight, where Ieronimo, son to Count Marcian a brave young man was
slain.

For the assurance of the Towns yielded to the Venetians, Augustino Barbadico
at that time Governor of Padua, a man of great wisdom and authority, did by
the Senates command go to Rouiga, with whom they joined Pietro Treuisano.

The Province being settled, Barbadico by the same commandment returned to
Padua: Treuisano falling grievously sick, died soon after. Roberto Venieri
son to Francisco, succeeded Treuisano in the Province. This man did not alone
fashion the peoples minds to obedience, but by his meekness confirmed them in
their duties toward the Venetians.

Whilst these things were done near to the Adice, Frederick of Vrbin falling
sick, was carried from the Camp at Stellata to Ferrara. Sanseuerino, though
his sons had part of the forces, did not cease continually to annoy the
enemy, whose walls being beaten down by the Canon, himself impatient of any
longer delay, resolved to give an assault, wherein the Venetian took the
Parapet of the Tower, Hercules soldiors, terrified with the enemies boldness,
did set fire on the piles that supported the Tower, and overthrew it.
Sanseuerino thereby perceived the inhabitants small hope, whereupon he assailed
the City more fiercely. Upon the 29. day of June at midnight the soldiors went
to the assault, and favored by the night, made many bridges over the dikes and
hollow places. The besieged, notwithstanding the A fearful assault by night.
darkness of the night, did bravely defend it, so as this assault both in show
and effect was more furious than that by day. It continued till daylight: but
the enemy being then vanquished, the Venetian in sundry places entered the
City, which taken the soldiers threw down their Arms: some of them were cast
into the river, others The Venetians take Ficarolles.
murdered, very few taken prisoners. This being done, and the Venetian master
of the City, he did forthwith begin to repair it.

Within a while after, Sanseuerin and Lauretano fell sick, by reason of the
unwholesome air of the marshes: both of them were carried to Padua, but with
several Moro likewise, General of the nauall Army, called home by the
Senate, died soon after his arrival at Venice. This Summer was unfortunate,
but the Autumn after it much more: Some that have written the Ferraresse
war, and were present there, affirm that more then 20000. men of those that
were at the siege of Ficarolles by land and water, Great mortality in the
Venetians camp.
by some one accident or other died there, but most of all by reason of feauers
occasioned by the infectious air of the marshes. This is all that happened in
Lombardie during that Summer.

In Flaminia, Robert of Arimini did not cease to annoy the enemy by ordinary
incursions with those forces which he had received at the beginning of the war:
he Bernardin Bembo. Roberto in the heat of Summer was commanded by the Senate
to go to Rome to relieve Pope Sixtus which was besieged.

Alphonso Duke of Calabria at the beginning of the Venetians war sought to
bring 4000. men to aid his brother Hercules. But because his way lay through
the Popes territories, he marched by assistance of the Colonessi, and Sauell^
who The noblest houses of Rome.
were open enemies to the Pope, directly toward Rome, which City has diverse
noble families in it, among whom the Vrsini, Colonesi, and Sauelli, hold the
chief rank, as well for wealth as antiquity of descent. These men of a long
time being ill affected to each other, have often by means of their mortal
hatred banded together, Vrsini have for many years excelled them all both in
wealth and knowledge in martial discipline. Four of this house, sons to
Carolo, have in our time been very famous, Latino, Giouanni, Neapuleo, and
Roberto. The two first followed Pope Eugenius to Florence, where they did win
his love and favor, as Latino the eldest brother was made Cardinal, and
Giouanni elected Bishop of Trani, and being enriched with diverse other
benefices, did much augment the greatness and dignity of his house: These two
did greatly illustrate their family, but not so much as Neapuleo and Roberto,
who by their experience in martial disci The greatness of the Ursini.
pline, purchased such honor, as at one time the first was made General of
the kings Army, and the other of the Popes. They did not only by their valor
keep their paternall principality, but did wonderfully increase it, so as
they became Lords of all the whole country, from the Tyrhene sea as far as
the lake Piscino extends it self.

This prosperity procured them hatred and e^uie. For at one time the
Colonessi, Sauelli, and Anguilares were their enemies: and because they were
all too weak to withstand the power of this one family, they caused Pope
Calixtus likewise to Arm against them, whose attempts they did not only
frustrate, but brake and defeated them, and chiefly at that time when Borsia
Nephew to Calixtus, with Vrsi^os, was by him vanquished at Varro his village.

But if Vrsinis greatness was envied before, it was most of all in the days
of Pope Sixtus, when their enemies desirous wholly to ruin them, had (in their
own opinion,) found out a fit occasion. For these four noble men being
lately dead, they jointly bent all their malice upon Virginio son to
Neapulco, sole heir to Vrsinis principality. But he being young and
powerful, after the Precedent of his Ancestors, did together with Ieronimo
Visconte follow the Popes party, by whose council he was wholly directed. In
hatred to him rather than the Pope, the Colonesi Alphonso aided by the
Colonessi and Sauelli besieges the Pope
and Sauelli did upon Alphonsos arrival practice innovation as well in the
City as abroad, whereupon two Cardinals of both those families, men of great
authority, were by the Popes commandment, as guilty of treason, imprisoned
for a time in Castle Angelo. Their kinsmen incensed thereat, did by their
factions trouble all Rome, aided Alphonso with victuals, and the more to annoy
the City, gave him free entrance into their Towns and Castles. And although
the Pope at that time

Alphonso laying hold on this occasion, took diverse towns from the Pope,
spoiling and wasting the whole country near to Rome. The Pope wrote to the
Venetians to send Roberto Malateste to raise the siege. Though the Senate at
that time was busied in the Ferrarese war, it nevertheless commanded Victor
Souranza to wast the Sea coasts of Apulia and Calabria with a mighty fleet:
They wrote to Francisco Diede their Ambassador with the Pope at their charge to
raise forces in Rome: And willed Robert of Arimini to march speedily thither
with the greatest power he Pietro Diede to be his Prouidator, to raise forces
from all parts: this they did, because they would not only aid his Holiness
with a General, but with soldiers. Robert being commanded to go to Rome,
departed from Flaminia with many troops of horse: but having intelligence by
the way that Nicolao Vitelli aided by the Florentines had taken the town of
Typherna, he went thither, where ruining certain places belonging to the
Typhernians, the danger of Rome calling him thither, by great iournies he
arrived there: At his coming the state of the war was changed, and they
marched against the enemy.

Alphonso having intelligence of the Venetians approach, encamped on the
Veliternian territory in a place called the Dead field. So soon as the
Venetian General Alphonso was likewise strong both in horse and foot, but
chiefly in horse: he had besides four hundred Turks which he had brought from
Ottranto: with these forces he bravely received Malatestes charge. A cruel
fight betwixt Alphonso Duke of Calab^ia and Roberto of Arimini Genenerall to
the Venetians.
The fight was hot for six hours: The Venetian General did greatly annoy
him. The Arragonois on the contrary presuming on the valor of his men,
resolved either to die or conquer: many fell on both sides, in all places the
battle was bloody, especially where the Turks fought. At last the Pope and
Venetians multitude, with the Generals encouragement prevailing, the enemy by
little and little retired. Alphonso

The conqueror within a while after entered Rome with his prisoners,
representing the Romans the form of their ancient triumphs, and having by
this victory The death of Roberto of Arimini.
purchased immortal glory, he died not long after. Some say that he was
poisoned, but it is most likely that he died of asurfet taken by his great
travel in the heat of the battle. He was honorably buried in Rome, where
this Epitaph was written on his monument. Veni, vidi, vici, Laurea^ Pontifici
retuli, Mors secundis rebus inuidit. In English thus, I came, saw, overcame,
brought victory to the Pope, which death took from me. Some write that on one
day two the greatest Captain^s of Italy died: he of whom we now spoke; and
Frederick of Vrbin, that was carried away sick to Ferrara from the camp at
Stellata.

But whilst these things were done near to Rome, Pietro Maria de Rossis
following the Venetians party in Lombardie, ceased not to annoy Sforza's
troops on the Parmesan confines: But the Venetians intention was not so much
to hurt the Milanois, as by entangling him in a domesticke war, to keep him
from aiding Hercules. Sforza's forces suddenly marched toward Parma, where
Rossis being sharply assailed, was not only enforced to retire into his own
territories, but lost Nucetta, and the Castle Candida.

But Pietro Rossis a brave and valiant Gentleman falling sick, died within a
while after. Guidone whom he had made his heir, went with his brethren to
besiege a certain Town, but being abandoned by the Venetian succors, who
could not Sforzas attempts, and sometime defeated his forces, yet being tired
with so long a war, they were enforced to retire.

Autumn was already more than half spent, when Sanseuerin having recouerd his
health returned to his desolate camp, where nothing was to be seen but weak
and sick soldiers. Luca Pisani whom the Senate had sent from Verona after
Lauretanoes death, commanded the Army as Prouidator, till Giouan Heme called
from the confines of Bressia arrived at Ficarolles. He being come, Pisani who
was already infected with the bad air returned to Venice. The new Prouidator
repaired the walls of Ficarolles, when Frederico Cornari, and Francisco Sanuto
came to the Sanseuerine loath to loose any longer time, sent Fraccasso his
son with many troops of horse, to assault the Fort which Hercules had made
upon the River banckes at the obscure Lake, for it did greatly annoy the
Venetian vessels going to and fro: He planted his ordnance on the opposite
shore, from whence in short space by continual shooting he had so beaten
down the Rampires as he was in good hope before long to drive them

But whilst Fracasso was there busied, Victor Souranza General by water,
coming up the River Po as far as the Argentine territory with one and
twenty galleys, fourteen foists, and other lesser vessels, determined to
assault the Town of Ianiola, seated at the mouth of Vaterna: For if it were
not taken, it was certain that the fleet could not go up farther but with
greater danger. To this end Souranza landed four hundred horse, and six
hundred foot at a place opposite to the City. These having begun to
fortify the River banckes to defend themselves from the enemies incursions,
that they might afterward without any let batter the town walls, Sigismundo
d'Este on a sudden with Nicolao Corregio, Hugo Sanseuerino, Andrea Burgensis
quarter, where at first the Venetians had the worst, but so soon as the alarm
was given in the camp, every man armed ran fiercely to the fight. Sigismond
opposed to the Venetians front four wagons, on each of which lay four
falconets. There the battle was very doubtful, till three hundred Venetian
light horse wheeling about to give The defeat of the Ferrarois.
in upon the enemies back, did so terrify Hercules soldiers, as Sigismond
and the other Captains betook themselves to flight, then the Gallie called
Valeresa coming with great rumor up the water upon their backs, the enemies
changed their fight to flight. Sigismond mounting a swift horse, escaped
himself alone to Argento. Many were drowned in the River, more were slain in
the battle, but the number Souranza that day obtained a great and notable
victory. For besides Hugo Sanseuerine, he took three score and ten other
Captains whom he sent prisoners to Venice.

Roberto Sanseuerino being likewise desirous to execute some memorable
enterprise, The venetian army crosses the Po.
resolved to pass over into the Ferrarese Territory, and for effecting it he
commanded a bridge to be made on galliots, and committed the work to Bassan
of Verona, which being soon finished, he left Barbadico at Ficarolles, and
himself with Heme and Sanuto the Prouidators, went a mile beneath the enemies
Fort, where he began to pass over his troops, and so soon as one boat
had passed, it cast anchor, and so the rest served for a bridge. By this time
eighteen hundred horse and foot were already gone over into the enemies
Country, when they perceived that there wanted vessels to finish the bridge,
which happened by their error who had not taken the just breadth of the River:
by the means whereof, a Sanseuerine was moved, in great choler protesting,
that if they did not before day provide boats to finish the bridge, his brauest
troops through the carelessness and indiscretion of some, would undoubtedly be
cut in pieces before his face. But by the Prouidators diligence, it was
prevented, and the bridge being wholly finished, the rest of the Army crossed
the river ere the enemy had any notice thereof.

Hercules soldiers having discovered them, and not trusting to their Fort,
threw their ordnance into the River, and setting fire on their fortification,
retired speedily to Ferrara. By their example others that held certain
fortified places upon the

There is a Park within a mile of Ferrara: Borsia was the first that enclosed
it with A park near to Ferrara.
walls, but Hercules enlarging it, did much beautify it with lakes, ponds,
groves, and other places fit for chase. The Venetian first encamped near to
the walls which are close to the river; and in the mean time made a new bridge
over the Po, stronger than the former. They first placed a rank of ships of
burden, one close to The venetians build a bridge upon the Po, ^eere to Ferrara
joined together, as it resembled a well-framed bridge of stone: This being
done, they builded shoppes upon it on both sides, wherein all sorts of wares
were sold, which hindered Passengers from looking on the water: They made
moreover draw-bridges at both ends, which when they were drawn up, those
shoppes seemed an Island in the midst of the River. And to keep the enemy
from firing it by night, some two hundred paces before it they hung up above
water great wodden plankes fastened to ankors with iron hooks to keep out the
fire works, which might be thrown upon it, till they were either quenched or
burnt out.

The bridge finished, Sanseuerine brake down the Park walls, and through it
marched with his army in battle within a mile of Ferrara, where he remained
for a Sanseuerino in battle before Ferrata.
time in the Cities view, but when he saw that the enemy did not sallie, he
brought back his troops to the Camp: then he began to repair the Fort
upon the river which the enemy had abandoned; he did first enlarge it, then
environed it with trenches of twenty foot deep, with strong bastions, Towers,
and Rauelins: This work undoubtedly was in a manner impregnable, and would
perpetually have terrified the City of Ferrara, had it not by peace been
razed. The Venetian having in this manner assured his Camp, galloped with his
Cauallerie to the very gates of Ferrara, filling all places with fear.

The Citizens viewing the bridge so near them, and the Fort much nearer
began The Ferraroi^ complaints.
to lament their own and Commonwealths estate, saying, That Hercules
Principality was overthrown, themselves in great danger, and that the
strokes of war had pierced their very heart, that they were out of hope ever
to have peace with the Venetians, who had displayed their victorious Ensigns
at their gates: That the Marshes, Lakes, and Rivers had not been of force to
restrain the course of their Victory, of whom they were to receive very
unjust conditions of peace, or submit themselves to their mercy. The Venetian
in the mean time omitted nothing that might further his Victory, he did shut
up the rivers and lakes, placing corpse du guard and garrisons in all passages.
In a word, he held those of Ferrara at such a bay, as Conquerours are wont to
do the vanquished, when they are desirous speedily to end the War.



The end of the first Book of the fourth Decad.
THE SECOND BOOK Venice.
The Contents of the second Book of the fourth Decad.
THe Pope makes a new league, and abandoneth the Venetians. The Duke Calabria
comes to Ferrara. All Princes and Commonwealths of Italy band themselves
against the Venetians. The Senate sends for the Duke of Lorraine into Italy,
and gives him large pay. SANSEVERINO with great forces crosses the Adda by a
bridge, and encampeth at Frezzia. LODOVICO SFORZA does easily overthrow the
ROSSIANS. ALPHONSO takes diverse towns from the Venetians on the Bressian and
Verona territories: then crossing the Mincia, he scoures the country as far
as the River Adice, and not long after takes Azzola. The Venetian Infanterie
upon HERCULES arrival at Stellata leapes into the River. ALPHONSO leaving
Azzola with an intent wholly to overthrow the Venetian forces upon Po, being
stopped by SANSEVERINO returns without effecting it. GIACOMO MARCELLO Venetian
fleet, dies at the siege of Gallipolis, which being taken, the Venetians make
farther incursions into Calabria. The enemies Army comes to Baignols where
peace in vain before motioned at Cesenna, is determined and concluded. And
lastly the triumphs, tournaments, and barriers made at Venice for joy of this
peace.

THE Venetians had already mightily prevailed, and the war with Hercules
would soon have been ended, Pope Sixtus withdrawes himself from the
venetians friendship.
had not Pope Sixtus by his sudden alteration not only snatched the victory
forth of their hands, but that which worse is, thrown them headlong into
Ieronimo Visconte by whose council and advise all matters were directed,
^alling by little and little from the Venetians after Malatestes death, did at
last openly declare themselves friends to the Fe^arois. Francisco Diede, who at
that ^ime was Ambassador with the Pope, had of a long time foreseen it, and a
little before had by letters aduertized the Prince and Senate thereof, who to
contain them still in league, omitted no kind offices of good friends and
confederates. It is not certainly known upon what cause they did it.

The Pope having made a league with the enemy, did by letters go about to
cause the Venetians to lay down Arms, to induce them no more to war upon
the Ferrarois, and to restore unto him whatsoever till then they had taken from
him. The Senate moved by these letters, were unwilling to let go the victory
whereof they had so sure hold, and yet desirous to answer the Pope, and to let
him and all the Princes of Italy and Europe understand that they were not
Authors of that war: for they would never have taken arms against Hercules,
had not Pope Sixtus provoked them thereunto. They decreed that Bernardo
Iustiniano a very eloquent person should, in the Commonwealths name, answer
the Pope.

The effect of those letters which he composed, and after the Senates
approbation The Venetians answer to the Pope.
were sent to Rome, is this. That the Senate were so far from entertaining
this war without his Holiness consent, as they did it by his instigation:
That as at first so now they did not only prefer peace before war, but
before victory, so it Ottoman, none of the Princes of Italy afforded one drop
of blood toward the quenching of this neighbor flame, but seemed deaf to all
solicitations, lame in assistance: But in this private cause of Ferrara those
which shranke back from the public quarrel could all bandie together, not as
if they would arbitrate, but enforce peace: That they humbly desired his
Holiness to deliberate this business temperately

This is in sum the import of the Venetian letters: But the Pope not
respecting He excommunicateth the Venetians.
his ancient league, and perceiving the Venetians to continue their resolution,
excommunicated them. He had already leagued himself with Ferdinand and
others. And whilst this business was pursued by letters to and f^o, Alphonso
Duke of Calabria came to Ferrara with two thousand men, among whom were four
hundred Turks which he brought from Otranto, but they within a while after
ran over Frederick Gonzaga Prince of Mantua had the title of General of the
Army, but Alphonso Duke of Calabria the honor. The Senate having intelligence
of what had been concluded in that assembly, and considering the dangerous
war they were to oppose the next Spring, (For the Genoueses excepted whom
Giouanni Pascalis sent to that end had exempted, all other Princes and States
of Italy had coniured their destruction) Renatus Duke of Lorraine, unto whom
they gave honorable entertainment. Antonio Vinciguerra one of the Secretaries
had long before solicited him from the Pope and Venetians to come into Italy
against the Ferrarois, who now the Pope relinquishing the cause remained firm
to the Venetians, and brought two hundred horse, and one thousand foot to
their aid. Vinciguerra conducted him through the Alps: Bartilmeo Victurini,
and Nicolao Foscarini Venetian gentlemen, went as far as Trent on the
confines of Italy to meet him.

The Duke of Austria and the other Potentates of Germany in favor of the Pope
denied passage to the Sauoyards, and other French whom Lorraine had enrolled.
Pietro de Priuli, and Marco Antonio Morosini came to the Army as Prouidators.
The enemies comminations were great: but the Senate having intelligence that
their favorites in Milan which yet stirred not, would if Sanseuerin crossed the
Adda, raise some commotion upon difference betwixt the widow of Galeas and
Lodouico Sforza, after mature deliberation, commanded one part of the Army to
pass into Lombardie, and the other to remain before Ferrara Deifebo
A^guillare went before with a brave troop of horse, and expected Sanseuerino
at Azzola upon the Bressan Confines. Roberto soon followed him, leaving the
Prince of Mirandola, Bernar dino Montone, Antoniace Dulcino, Gasparo Perussini,
Alessandro surnamed the Turk, and diverse other Captains at the siege before
Ferrara. The French General went thither likewise with his forces: But their
arrival was more terrible to their enemy than profitable to the Venetian, the
French every day mutining.

Sanseuerino with Marc-Antonio Morosini the Prouidator being come to the
Bressan Lodouico Sforza, with a mighty Army was in field against The state of
the Rossians of Parma yields to Lodowick.
the Rossians of Parma, who till then had bravely defended their patrimony,
but now seeing so unequal a power bent against them, fortified their towns,
and yet not thinking themselves secure, retired with their children into the
Genoueses territories. Their Tenants following not their Lords but their
fortune, Sforza. Lodouico* upon this victory marched unto the territory of
Gremona where Alphonso expected him, (as some say) called in by the Milaneses
upon Sanseuerins arrival to guard the frontiers in the absence of Lodouico.
Others affirm that he came voluntarly offering his assistance against
Sanseuerino.

Such was the state of the Venetian affairs, when the Commonwealth was shaken
with a new fear by a transcursion of two of S^ins sons to the enemy. Two of
Sanseuerins sons fly to the enemy.
He had four sons which served in this Army, all valiant and brave young
Gentlemen, of whom Francisco and Galeas unknown to their father, dishonorably
fled to the enemy, allured (as it seems) by fair promises: yet their error
was so Sanscuerino's Apology to the Senate, with their gracious acceptance.
Venetians, and should every day be more and more manifested: whereupon, he
sent messengers to Venice to make his own Apology, and excuse the temeritie
of his children, which he hoped ere long to redeem with his own service and
loyalty, and let the world know that he esteemed nothing so dear, as the
safety and honor of the Venetian Estate. But the Senate was so far from
imputing the error of his sons to himself, as they did by letters comfort
him.

Alphonso in the mean time having made a bridge over the river beyond Cassian,
passed over his Army with great rumor into the Gyradade, and thence, marching
into the Bergamasco, took Colloigna and Vnguiana. Sanseuerino having
intelligence of his coming, kept strong guard on the bridge on that side and
strengthened his Rampires, and then retired with his forces toward Bergamo:
Thence, crossing the Oglio at Palaznoles, he encamped at the new Orges. The
enemy having taken Trecian, and reenforced the Popes and Florentines troops,
passed over the Oglio betwixt the new Orges and Quintiano. The Senate
considering how dangerous the enemies Army would be to their territories (for
it was reported that he had an hundred companies of men at Arms) did speedily
send the rest of Sanseuerino, that he might be better able to resist him.

Alphonso in the mean time, had taken all that part of the Bressan territory
Alphonsos great progression.
which lies betwixt the River Mella and the new Orges, a very fruitful soil
abounding in towns and villages, which upon terror of his arrival presently
yielded unto him. The Venetian being inferior to the enemy in strength,
resolved not to confront but follow him, and prevent his attempts: And leaving
Antonio Sc^riotto with 300 horse in garrison in the new Orges, himself went
through bywaies first to Maclou, then to Saint Zene three miles from Bressia.
Augusti^ Barbadico and Zacharia Barbaro men of great authority, came from
Venice to the Camp. But Morosmi and Barbadico remaining with Sanseuerino in
the Army, Barbaro went to fortify Bressia. He was son to that Francisco who
in former time had for three years space defended that City against all the
attempts of Duke Philip, worthy indeed of such a father whose wisdom and
virtue he inherited, but more famous H^olao, the learnedest of his time in
Greek and Latin^ Alphonso crossed the River Mella and seized on Baignols.

The Prince of Mantua (who till then had carried himself as a friend not enemy
to the Venetian^) did openly show himself their enemy, joining with Alphonso,
The Mantuan goes to the Consederates A^mie.
whose Army by this addition amounted to one hundred and thirty companies of
horse, which being divided over the Bressan territory took all the towns on
this side the River Mella (Azzola excepted) from the Venetians.

Sanseuerino upon the enemies coming to Baignols, retired to Regiana five
miles from Bressia, but Alphonso taking all the other towns, brought his Army
to Calcina. This is all which that summer, till the beginning of Autumn was
done,

Near to the Po, most of the French being dead by sickness, their General
having The (...) of Lor rain returns into France.
intelligence of King Lewis death, who by his Testament had made him Governor
and Protector of his Realm, returned into France. The Senate being aduertized
about the Spring, that King Ferdinand, assisted by the Pope and Consederates,
had rigged a mighty Fleet, the better to resist the enemy at Sea, wrote to
Iacomo Marcello who succeeded Souranza in the Admira^tie; ^o have a care that
the State were not prejudiced about the Islands, nor in the gulf near to
Histria and Dalmatia; and if he might safely do it, to invade the fro^tien of
Apulia and Calabria as Souranza had done.

Marcello had not long been Admiral, when forty of the enemies Galleys,
under the command of Frederick of Arragon, son to Ferdinand, a brave young
Prince, came into the Haven of Ancona. Their arrival did trouble the Senate,
for it was likely that the enemy, by tarrying in that place, would cut off
the Venetians passage on the Sea. All Venice had their hope fixed on Marcello
and his Fleet, despairing of their Dominion at Sea, unless the enemy could be
speedily repelled; expecting when Marcello should either assail or fire them.

But whilst he intended the supplying of the Galleys, not yet complete with
soldiers and mariners, which he could hardly effect without promise of pardon
and impunitie to the Bandetti of Albania, Dalmatia, and Histria, the enemy
thinking The enemy (...) from (...)
was hardly interpreted, especially by the vulgar, measuring things by the
event. But better understandings made more favorable construction of it,
saying; He did better to absent himself from fight, than unadvisedly hazard
his naked Fleet, and that victory was more easy in discourse then action.
Thus was he variously censured.

The enemy in the mean time being out at Sea un willing to seem idle, made
The enemies take the Isle of Lissa.
sudden incursion upon Lissa an Island in Dalmatia, putting all to fire and
sword^ From thence he sailed to Corfou, Georgio Viare a wise and valiant
Gentleman governed the Island. He descrying the Arragonian Navy, encouraged
the inhabitants, pr^paring all things requisite for defense: The enemies first
assaults were very violent:

Notwithstanding this brave repulse, the assault continuing till night without
intermission, and the Governor fearing, that the Defendants wearied, though
not A subtle (...) of Vi^re.
conquered, would give way to the enemy, invented this stratagem. He diu^ged
that the Venetian fleet would in few hours arrive there, whereupon ^ee
commanded all the bells to be rung, acclamations of joy to be made by the
soldiers on the walls, as though supplies were already arrived. The enemy
terrified with this sudden clamor, having lost 500. men in this assault, put
to Sea. Shortly after The enemy retires from Cors^
the Venetian fleet, arrived and wintered there.

Alphonso was (as has been said) encamped at Calcina, and it was probable,
that from thence he would go and besiege Lonata. Morosini the Prouidator
departed Giacomo Media was likewise there, who not long before had been sent
thither with three hundred men to guard the City. These, together with the
light horse of the Town, did by their frequent incursions, forestall all
things from the enemies forragers so long as they remained there. Moreover, the
Venetian had diuerted the ordinary current of the River Seriola, that if the
enemy came to encampe there, he might want water. Nevertheless he attempted
to take Vidaciolla, which Sanseuerino having strongly fortifyed, and the enemy
twice assaulting it, could not be taken. Then Alphonso being loath to loose

Some say, that the Prince of Mantua, from thence returned home, discontented
The Man discontented lea^ the army.
with Alphonso, for refusing to besiege Lonata and Piscara, which two towns
heespecially desired to take from the Venetians. The Senate had been
aduertized of the enemies desseigne, and therefore sent diverse boats, and a
strong Garrison to Piscara to guard the Town and Lake of La Garda: they had
beside commanded the Gallie which lay at Lalissa to be armed, and brought
into the Lake. The charge thereof was committed to Andrea Marcello, who had
command of those vessels, till Pietro Diede was sent thither by the Senate.

The enemy lying still at Calcina, Thomaso of Imola, who commanded the foot
The Venetians come to Stellata
forces upon the Po, crossing the River before day, gave a sudden assault to
the suburbs of Stellata, and to the rampires next the Castle: the Sailers were
mingled with the Soldiers. The suburbs were easily taken and burnt. The
ordnance and other engines being taken from the enemies rampires were carried
to the vessels: this being done, they gave a fierce assault to the Fort: The
Soldiers and Mariners urged with such fury, as in a moment they became
masters of part thereof: Then they which were in the highest places craved
parley, first of Immola, then of Andrea Zancane, who commanded the vessels,
and of set purpose prolonged their parley, expecting some speedy aid from
Ferrara, wherein they were not deceived. So soon as news came to the City,
that the enemy had taken the bastions, and part of the (...) d Es^e (...) to
the relief of S^.
to yield; Hercules on a sudden taking the light horse with him, and
commanding the rest of his forces to follow in order of battle, showed
himself unlooked for to the Venetians, whom he charged: the Sailers running
to the vessels, left the soldiers to the slaughter, who for a while made
head, but upon the arrival of the rest of the troops, they threw themselves
into the water, trusting to their skill in swimming, hoping thereby to get into
the vessels, but most of them being carried away by the violent swiftnes of
the torrent, perished, those that escaped drowning were taken prisoners, among
whom was Immola, who being but slightly wounded, and dying the night following,
was supposed to have been poisoned.

Those that lay at the obscure Lake, made incursions as far as Ferrara, where
among other places they spoiled the rich and beautiful Monastery of the
Chartreux, The death of Gi^ H^.
burning part thereof. Giouan He^ Prouidator in that Camp having intelligence
that the Fort of Stellata was taken, and making himself ready to march to the
relief of his soldiers, and in joy of that good news curuetting his horse not
well managed, it threw him, of which fall he died not long after. Giacomo
surnamed Media came to the Camp as Prouidator in his sted, who by reason of the
infectious air falling sick was carried back to Venice, where not long after
he died. Lastly, they sent Francisco Troni thither, a discreet and brave young
man, who had no better success than his fellows. Alphonso takes Carpinetta.


Whilstthe is was done on the Po, Alphonso departing from Calcina took
Carpinetta, thence marching to Calauria, he crossed the Mincia with part of
his forces beneath Valegia, where having well viewed the whole Country, he
repassed the River and came to Godia, where again crossing the Mincia at a
bridge, by the The situation of Valegia.
Mantuans confines came into the Veronois. Vallegia stands upon an high hill,
and underneath it runs the Mincia; the walls fortifyed with towers extend
themselves as far as the Marshes of Tartar. In this space stands Villafranca
in the midst of a Plain, strong rather by Art than Nature. The Arragonois
breaking down the walls in that place, approached with his army near to the
City, and battering the Castle, took it the third day after his arrival.

From thence scattering his forces throughout the Veronois, he filled all
places Alphonso upon the Ueronois.
with terror, even to the City walls: He likewise sent some of his
Captains to view the strong towns of the Country, and without difficulty
became Master of Vigatia, the Isle of Escalla and Sanguineta. Then coming to
the River Adice, and Sanseuerino co^ meth to Valegia.
forces to oppose the enemies passage over the Adice. Alphonso stayed not long
at Villafranca, ere Sanseuerino coming up the Lake of Benac encamped near
Valegia, where Marc- Antonio Morosini met him with part of the forces which
were at Lonata; at his arrival Augustino Barbadico his Colleague fell sick,
and was carried to Venice.

Alphonso perceiving the Venetian to be encamped before him, and not able to
draw him to the fight, nor yet safely to assail him, on a sudden rose and
marched Alphonso takes Azzola.
that it was not a public but private surrender. But howsoever, the City
reputed impregnable yielded at the first assault, the Castle following their
example: Sanseuerino after Alphonsoes departure recovered all the Towns which
he had taken upon the Veronois, and leaving Antonio Souranza for the guard of
Valegia, he

While these things were done abroad, the State received an ill presage at
home. For the Dukes palace was in part burnt down by night. It is thought one
of the Part of the dukes palace burnt.
Chapel negligently leaving a candle lighted, the snuff thereof falling
down kindled the fire, which about the second watch of the night brake forth
into a flame: the mischief would have extended farther, as in former time, had
it not bin speedily prevented. Sanseuerino strengthened at Calcina with new
supplies, was desirous to pursue the enemy, when contrary to all expectation
he understood the loss of Azzola and the Castle. This news bred general
amazement, many expostulating Diverse expostulations upon the yielding of Azzola.
why the Azolans ever favored by the Venetians should so betray them? why the
Castle should so distrust it own strength? That this yielding proceeded
Alphonso delivering the Town to the Mantuan, resolved by all means to free
his brother Hercules from the siege, from whom he daily received letters full
of complaint, how thath e gained not by the Venetians loss; that his Victories
benefited others, not secured his subjects still besieged: That the Venetian
Ensigns still braued Ferrara, Hercules plaintiue Letters to Alphonso his
brother.
and possessed the banks of Po: Therefore he entreated him in such extremity
not to relinquish his sister Leonora and her children parts of himself, and
desired him to consider how that he should be able to hold out a winter siege;
if the enemy should persevere and his associates fall from him, (the only
thought whereof was terrible) were not he and his whole estate ruined?
Therefore he importuned him whilst he had time and means, that he would do
his utmost to remove the enemy from the Po, and raise the siege ere Winter.

These Letters did not move but spur this forward Prince, who sending his
infanterie before by the Po to Hostilia, himself about midnight followed with
the horse by land. Sanseuerino having intelligence of the enemies departure,
and assured that his haste tended to the surprisall of the Venetians on the Po,
removed likewise before day, and by great iournies came to Verona with two
companies of men at arms, and sent order to the magistrates to prepare all the
vessels upon the Adice, that nothing might retard his desseigne. Francisco
Diede was then Governor of the City, the year before Ambassador with Pope
Sixtus (as has been said) and Francisco Marcello Provost. These spending most
part of the day in gathering the boats, and the business not yet ended, were
feign to labor all night, so that upon Sanseuerines arrival, the soldiers
imbarqued and sailed directly toward the enemy.

The Venetian troops following after the General being come to Piscara, they
divided themselves and took sundry ways. Morosini the Prouidator, and
Fracasso coming to Verona with certain companies of horse, followed
Sanseuerino to aid him if need required. Antonio Victorini who had been
Prouidator at Verona returned to the Camp at Calcina with Deifebo Anguilare,
and the other part of the army. The Venetians had the good fortune that those
whom Alphonso had sent to Hostilia by the Po, were detained by a south wind.
They being wind-bouud, Sanseuerins speed.
Sanseuerino with a more favorable gale arrived at Castel-Nouo as soon as
Alphonso. Sanseuerino to be come, Alphonso brake into these words; O immortal
God! does this old fellow fly now ^e can not go? must the vigor of my youth
be out-stripped by his deerepitude? and, his journey being greater than mine,
must his speed Alphonso^s ^xclamations.
be so too? Then turning to his Captains and Pilots, he exclaimed against the
winds and waters, as confederate against him; and so grinding his teeth, and
bewraying much passion, returned frustrate to Hostilia.

Victorini in the mean time, Deifebo, and Rodolpho Gonzaga departing from
Calcina, went to Castagnolles. There they understood that Lodouico Sforza did
with Thomaso Primania was sent to Bergamo, and Pietro of Carthage to Martinenga
to secure those Towns: But Sforza remaining before Romagnia after long siege
took it. The Venetian Army coming afterward to Pontoglio, and from thence,
near to the Oglio, did in short space recover diverse towns lost that Summer.

In the mean time, Sanseuerino and Morosini the Prouidator returning from the
Po, joined with the Army. All things succeeding prosperously, Pietro Marcello
as Prouidator was left to winter at Valegia, and the Albanian horsemen at
Villafranca under the command of Nicolao Enonio and his brother, two brave
young men, Sanseuerino united with Victorini and Rodolpho Gonzaga, took
Manerbia and the strong garrison in it: From thence Morosini by the Senates
license returned to Venice, leaving Victorini in the Camp. Manerbia taken, the
Venetian General recovered Valeriota, Scorsariola, and to conclude, all towns
lost that Summer, but Azola, Quinciana, and Senica: Then, sending the troops
to Garrison, himself in mid winter honorably accompanied, went to Venice.
Prince Moc^nigo attended Sanseuerino's magnifi^nt (...) at Venice.
by the noblest Senators in the Bucentauro richly hung, went to meet him, and
because he had honorably borne himself in his place, the State gave him many
rich gifts: they afterward bestowed upon him Catadella a town on the Paduan
territory, and Montorio on the Veronois, with a delicate and pleasant place
near to the city, with a goodly palace in it: and that his wife might be a
sharer of his good fortune the Senate enriched her with many costly jewels. The
like acknowledgement Rossians of Parma receive, who being by Sforza expulsed
their Country, were at the same time in Venice, where they were bountifully
entertained The Senat^ compen^th (...) Russians of Parma.
by the Prince and Senate, promising never to forget their good service, and
for the time present gave them certain sums of gold forth of the public
treasury for the entertainment of their great family: afterward assigning a
perpetual annuitie of 32000. crowns to the two brethren Guido and Giacomo,
and to the third, who had taken holy Orders, a very rich benefice upon the
Veronois.

Whilst these magnificent rewards were given at Venice, it fell out after
Sanseuerines departure forth of Lombardie, Giouanni Antonio Scariotta leading
five hundred Sanseuerino toward the latter end of winter together with Nicolao
Pisaura the Prouidator came to the new Orges where Fracasso lay in garrison;
upon their arrival, Antonio Vittorini by the Senates Sanseuerino comes to the
new Orges.
permission returned to Venice, so that Pisaura was sole Prouidator in the
Army, till the coming of Luca Pisani, who after Zacharia Barbaro had for a
while commanded Bressia. They remained still in the Army till the end of the
war, and in the mean time weary of Idleness, made a bridge over Oglio, and
a Fort at it, which crossing, they took the Tower Tristania on the farther
side the River, and The tower Tristania taken.
finding store of corn, victual and hay, it was a great help to them that
winter: And because the place seemed of some importance, they suddenly
fortified it, placing a strong Garrison there.

The spring already approached when a rumor was spread that the Consultation of
the confederate Princes which Alfonso held at Cremona had no prosperous issue,
and that they dissented concerning the renouation of the war. This did put
the Venetians in some hope that peace propounded in Flaminia by the Popes
Ambassadors, might upon reasonable terms take effect, and to these ends being
solicited, the Senate sent Zacharia Barbosa and Frederico Cornari to Lesenna;
where after long consultation, they perceived by the unjust conditions
propounded, that this treaty

The Venetians the precedent summer, careful of the issue of that war, and
incensed against Pope Sixtus had sent Ambassadors to the French Army and
German Princes to incite them to summon the Pope and all Christendom to a
general Council, wherein it might be lawful to complain of the Pope, and to
implore The Venetians c^aue a general Council.
the aid of all Christians against him; and to this end they sent Seb^stiano
Badoario to the Emperor Frederick, Antonio Lauretano to the French king, Paulo
Pisani to the Duke of Austria, and Nicolao Foscarini into Flaunders to
Maximillian, the Emperor Fredericks son.

The Pope fearing this matter, was desirous to hearken unto peace. The
Venetians in the mean time, though they intended peace, did not omit their
warlike preparations against the Spring: for besides the Italian forces which
by new supplies were mightily increased by sea and land, they drew from Morea
and the Islands next adjacent to Corfou, from Albania, and Dalmatia, twelve
hundred The Uenetians receive new supplies.
horse, one part of these were quartered in the villages near to the enemy,
from whence they daily made roads into his Country, and the rest upon the
Bressan.

The Spring was already past when Sanseuerino sent commandment to all the
Garrisons, to meet him on the 27* of May, betwixt Variola and Cortiana. But
whilst this was done on the Bressan, the sailers of Diede his Galley, and
four other Galleys of Marcello's Fleet mutined. The Authors of the mutiny
were secretly punished by the commandment of Tomaso Zeno General of the
Fleet on the Po: which the other Mariners having notice of, went with their
Gallie to the enemies side, who lay near to Philocina, but they were by him
basely stripped, spoiled

At the same time that this Galley was lost, Captain Porco, agreat enemy to
the Venetians, made daily incursions from Hostilio even to the trenches of
Mellaria, and among other brauadoes against the Venetians, he did by oath
protest unto The arrogant brag of Porco.
Giouanni Canalis (at that time Governor of the Castle) that within few days
he would come knock a nail into the gates of Mellaria. This brag cost him
dear; for being taken and brought before Canalis, the Venetian said to him;
Thou arrogant

Marcello, General of the Venetian Fleet, toward the latter end of the Spring
left Corfou, and went to besiege Gallipolis. This city is like an* Island, and
seated in The Venetians besiege Gallipolis
that part of Calabria aduauncing toward the Ionian sea, confining upon it and
the Adriatic. Pliny says, That in time past it did belong to the Gauls,
which is not unlikely to be true in regard of the name. The Nauall Army
consisted of 56. vessels, among which were 16. Galleys, and five ships of
burden. The Venetian Marcello from his Admiral Galley encouraged his soldiers,
willing them bravely to mount the Rampires; the soldiers obeyed and desperately
ran through the midst of the enemies shot. Dominico Delfino, Lodouico
Garzone, Constantino Lauretano, Tomaso Diede, and many other Captains of
Galleys, did bravely acquit themselves at the assault: And the Venetians had
already, not without great slaughter, reared ladders against the walls, on
which some were mounted, when Marcello from the poope of his Admiral Galley,
Sagidino the Secretary saw him fall, and covered him with a cloak, and after
that he had conveyed the body into The death of General Marcello.
his Cabin, encouraged his Countrymen to pursue the victory, telling them that
the General was slightly hurt, and gone to be dressed, willing them, in the
mean time, to let the enemy see that they could fight valliantly without a
Commander, and in recompense of their valor, the Cities sack was theirs, it
being once taken.

Dominico Maripietro Captain of the ships of burden, so encouraged his
soldiers, as in despite of the enemy they mounted the walls. At last the
victorious Gallipolis taken.
Venetian entered the City, not yet knowing their General was dead. Every
street was filled with slaughter and spoil. Commandment was given not to
ravish women or spoil Churches. The Citizens threw down their arms and cried
for mercy: all places ecchoed the cries and lamentations of women and
children. The noble Venetian presently grew passionate, and pitied their
distress, by sound of Trumpet commanding his Soldiers and Mariners to
abstain from spoil and slaughter. Gallipolis taken, the command of the fleet
was by a General consent committed to Maripietro, till such time as the Senate
should provide a new Genenerall. The victorious Venetians did forth with
fortify the City, and made it a safe retreat for their forces.

In the mean time Nerita a City of the Salentines Radisca and many other
neighbor towns daunted with the disaster of the Gallipolitans, voluntarily
yielded. Marcellos death reported at Venice, did somewhat sower the sweetness
of the victory. The City nevertheless rejoiced, because that by the taking
of Gallipolis, Ferdinand their enemy, whose pride was no whit daunted,
notwithstanding that he saw the Venetians make incursions into the very bowels
of his Kingdom; yet that turbulent spirit of his when it perceived his
country entangled in a difficult and tedious war inclined to peace.

His son Alphonso who lay on the Cremonese, having intelligence by spies that
the Venetians coming from their Garrisons, were with a mighty Army encamped
at Varioles, did with his troops (which were far inferior to the Venetians)
march to Quintiana, where fortifying himself, his Army by supplies from
Alphonsos Army at Quintiana.
the confederates, did daily increase. Sanseuerino in the mean time, because
he would Nicolao Pisauro the Prouidator, and his son Francisco should with
certain troops of horse make incursions into the enemies country: The
Venetians take Calice.
These having at a bridge crossed the Oglio, did on a sudden surprise Calce,
and other towns of small importance, some of which they fortified, and razed
the rest.

The enemy being not far off, lay still and would not remove, so as all that
harvest there was no other memorable exploit done. In the end, after that
Alphonso had assembled all the confederate forces consisting of six score
companies of men at Arms, with an infanterie to their Cauallerie, he marched
against the new Orges. Sanseuerino though he were inferior to him in number of
horse, yet being his superior Nicolao Treuisano Governor of Bressia,
accompanied Sanseuerino with a gallant troop to the new Orges.

Alphonso in the mean time being come to Metella, enforced the townsmen to
Alphonso takes Metela.
yield, together with some other places of mean importance: From thence he
went and seized on Varioles and Scosariolles, and then continued at Baignolles:
But the Venetian who still followed him, seeking for a fit occasion to give him
battle, went from Maclodia to Torbolles, and from thence not long after
encamped at S. Zenes betwixt Bressia and the enemies camp. There peace was
motioned with more likelihood of good success, than before at Cesenna, and as
it had a better beginning, A motion of peace.
so was the end more prosperous. For the Captains (which seldom happens) who
were wont to abhor the name of peace, became Authors and Vmpires thereof.

Sanseuerino on the one side, and Lodouico Sforza on the other, after sundry
messages from both parts undertook this treaty so much desired, not only in
Lombardie, where war was hot, but over all Italy.

During this treaty of peace, or not long before, the Venetians received a
great overthrow near to Ferrara. Certain foot-companies of the Garrison of
the obscure lake had made incursions to the very gates of Ferrara, seeking to
draw forth the enemy into some Ambuscado: but the Ferrarois still contained
themselves within their walls till the Venetians retired toward their camp:
for then they sent The Venetians are put to rout.
certain troops of horse against them, who skirmished with them as far as
the Park corner which confrontes Cassagio, where the Venetians in disorder
were put to rout, diverse were there slain, and many wounded: but the number of
prisoners was very great, who (according to the manner of the Italian war)
being stripped, were dismissed. Troni Prouidator at that time of the obscure
lake, falling sick, and being carried to Venice, died there.

Peace (as has been said) being motioned by the Captains did then take
effect, on Peace concluded with the Venetians.
these conditions: That the Venetians should reenter Asola Romania, and all
other towns lost during that war of Lombardie* That they should withdraw all
their Garrisons on this side, and beyond the Po; raze all the Forts built upon
the river banks; and should surrender to Hercules whatsoever they had taken
from him: the Pollesin Condition of peace.
of Rouigo excepted, which themselves retained; and should enjoy the same
liberties old and new as they were wont to have in Ferrara, and places near
adjoining: That Sanseuerino should still continue in the Venetians pay, and yet
should be General

Such was the end of the confederate war of all Italy against the Venetians,
the greatness of whose preparations may be imagined by this: That in two
years space or little more whilst this war lasted, they spent three
millions and 600000. Ducates. How much the Venetians spent in this war.
The Venetians of a long time had not so willingly entertained peace. In all
Towns and Castles over their dominions, bonefires were made in sign of joy.

Besides, triumphs, tournaments, and fight at barriers, were proclaimed which
should continue certain days. The rewards propounded to the combatants were
two pieces, the one of cloth of gold, and the other of silver. Great multitudes
Hercules de Oeste, and Iulio Count of Camerin were present at them, whom the
Prince and Senate went to meet. Leon, son to Lodouico Sforza, and Galeas
Sanseuerino came from Milan to Venice. Old Sanseuerino chose rather to be a
dealer in the triumphs than a spectator. The Rossians of Parma, and the Prince
of Mirandula came thither likewise, with many other great Lords, some to fight,
others to look on. The marketplace of S. Mark as far as S. Geminians
Church was to this end sumptuously adorned. The combatants preparations were
magnificent: Three of Sanseuerines sons, who sundry times made shows
apart, caused five and twenty brave coursers to be richly trapt with gold and
purple. The Rossians of Parmas shows were in a manner like Count Camerins
nephew, son to his brother, was accounted more sumptuous than all the rest.
More than an hundred thousand persons beheld these triumphs.

Prince Mocenigo accompanied with the Senate and City Magistrates had a place
prepared for them. These tournaments lasted certain days. In the end, the
honor of the triumph was adjudged to Sanseuerines sons, as they that had
best deserved it, Fracasso and Antonio Maria divided the cloth of gold betwixt
themselves, and Galeas alone had that of silver. Count Camerins nephew, who in
all men's judgments had done bravely, refused three hundred crowns, which the
State would have given him. Some thought he did it in disdain, because others
were preferred before Mariotto, a younger brother of the Rossians of Parma,
doing more at barriers than his years promised, was rewarded with a horse
richly barded. Many others were rcompenced according to their merit, many were
likewise knighted. Iulio Count of Camerin was made General of the Venetian
troops, seeing Sanseuerino commanded those of all Italy.

The end of the second Book of the fourth Decad.
THE THIRD BOOK Venice.
The Contents of the third Book of the fourth Decad.
THE Dukes Palace burnt during the war, is sumptuously reedified. The
Pestilence begun in Summer does in Autumn make diverse places in the city
desolate. A brief Description of their Sea-trafficke. Four Galleys trading
into France are taken by Pirates on the coast of Portugal. Troubles in Friull
by the sudden arrival of the Hungarians. ROBERTO SANSEVERINO with a brave
Cauallerie goes to the war lately begun near Rome. The election of MARCO
BARBADICO who succeeds MOCENIGO in the Principality of Venice. A brief
Declaration of the war of Rome betwixt Pope INNOCENT and king FERDINAND Three
Commissioners are appointed to provide all things requisite to purge
SANSEVERINO dispoiled of his troops, returns to the Austria, and sudden
commotions of the enemy on the very confines of Italy. The beginning and end
of the Rethicke war. The kingdom of Cyprus is joined to the Venetians
Dominions; by a conueyance made by Queen KATHERINE in her life time. The
invention of harquebuzes, and the recompense of such as learned to shoot in
them. An extreme cold frost at Venice, and over all the Lakes. A league
betwixt the Pope, Venetians, and GALE AS SFORZA. The preparations of CHARLES
the French King for the conquest of the kingdom of Naples.

THat part of the Dukes Palace which was burnt during The Dukes palace is
reedified
this first year of the peace: It is an admirable piece of work, and likely
to last long. The City was greatly molested with the Infection the next
Summer, which increasing in Autumn, did make Venice very desolate. This
domesticke loss was accompanied A great plague at Venice.
toward the end of Summer with an other far from home. But before we enter
into this Discourse, it shall not be impertinent to mention the Venetians
great industry, and wealth, purchased by traffike at sea.

There is no place in all the Sea from Gades, betwixt Affricke and Europe,
toward Syria and Egypt in the Leuant; nor from the North and West toward
Bosphorus and the Fennes Meotides; nor any place so remote, which the Venetian
Galleys have not at all times frequented in trade of Merchandise. It is almost
incredible to think how the Venetian vessels do ordinarily enter into the
Havens, not only of Italy, but of Liburnia, Dalmatia, Macedonia and Grecce,
as if it were in the suburbs of Venice. We will speak of those, who at the
Commonwealths charge are yearly sent to take in lading in the remotest places
of the world.

Of these, four great galleys bring home into Italy, Spice, Silk, Precious
stones, and Pearls from Syria and Egypt. Three others go into Lybia, for
gold, jewels, and slaves. Two sail into France and bring home wool and
Spanish silk. Others go toward the Tana is, and Fennes Meotides, from whence
they return laden with Tapistrie and Emeraldes. And besides this number, four
direct their course into the French Ocean, and from the Martes there, load
themselves abundantly

According to this custom four Galleys for this purpose were abroad under the
command of Bartilomeo Minio, who coming into the Spanish Seas, met with
young Columbus, (nephew to Columbus the famous Mariner) who with seven tall
ships of war incountered them in the night near to the sacred Promontorie,
modernely termed S. Vincents Cape. But although at first he determined to
assault the Venetian Galleys, yet he abstained that night, and resolving to
fight with them, came so near, as the prowes of the pirates ships were
asterne the poopes The Venetian galleys are assailed by Pirates.
of the Venetian Galleys. So soon as it was day Columbus assailed the
Venetians, who were inferior to him in men and vessels, but superior in
courage and resolution. Lorenzo Michael Captain of a Gallie, and Giouanni
Delfino brother to another Captain. The Venetians were wearied with long
fight. The Gallie Delfina was taken by the enemies, whereupon the rest yielded.
Some say, that in one Gallie four score dead bodies lay betwixt the prow and
poope, which spectacle the victorious enemy lamented, saying in despite, That
the Venetians by their wilfulness had procured that loss. The dead bodies
were thrown into the Sea, and the Lisbone a City of Portugal.


Lisbone is a City of Portugal standing upon the Sea, I think it was in old
time called Olisipone. It is at this day very famous, as well for the ordinary
residence of kings, as for her great wealth. The Venetians were there very
kindly entertained by the king, and those that were sick he commanded to be
carefully looked to, the rest, according to each man's quality, received money
and clothes, and were sent home into their country.

The Venetians are in ancient league with the kings of Portugal, the which
being League betwixt the venetians and kings of Portugal. The cause of this
league.
derived from the Father to the Son, they inuiolably observe. They say, that
he did likewise command that none of his subjects should buy any part of the
Venetians goods which had been stolen from them. The news of this loss did
greatly afflict the City, the which exceeding (as it was reported) the sum
of 20000. crowns, touched some particular persons: But the death of so many
men did much augment their sorrow. The pestilence at this time did greatly
infect the City, in regard whereof, the Senate was of opinion at that time
not to revenge that wrong, but to defer it to a fitter time.

At the same time there arose some troubles in Friull. Certain light horse,
sent by the King of Hungary (as it was afterward known) made sudden
incursions Frederick, and that those troops were expressly sent into Italy to
surprise Porto-nouo and Tryeste, which Frederick yet held; yet because they
were not well assured of the Kings intention, they forthwith sent certain
troops of horse which lay in Garrison betwixt Verona and Padua, to the Carnons
territories. But the Hungarians passing quietly through the territory of
Vdina, and frustrate of their hope to take the City, which the Bandetti had
assured them of, left Italy, and returned without any farther attempt.

The better part of Harvest was already spent, when Roberto Sanseuerino (who
Sanseuerino aideth Pope Innocent.
notwithstanding the peace in Lombardie still remained in the Venetians pay)
earnestly solicited by Letters from Pope Innocent who succeeded Sixtus, went
without the Senates consent or knowledge (who were then at peace by sea and
land) with his sons Fracasso and Galeas and two and thirty companies of
horse, first into Faminia, and afterward to Rome in the midst of winter: but
he arrived somewhat before his forces; for the Pope being pressed by Alphonso,
hastened his coming.

The cause of this war proceeded from the commotions of the Volaterrans, and
rebellion of certain Princes, who by a sudden conspiracy, revolted from
Ferdinand, Innocent, requesting his aid against that King. The Pope finding
them not only worthy to be protected by his authority, but likewise to be
freed from all wrong by the forces of the Church of Rome, it fell out that
Virgino Vrsino, who (as we have elsewhere said) besides sundry towns which he
possessed near Rome on this side, and beyond Tiber, had likewise diverse others
in the Marshes as far as the lake Fuscino in the confines of the Realm of
Naples, remained still loyal to the King. At first he resolved (as it is
reported) not wholly to abandon the King, nor likewise in any sort to take
Arms against the Pope, but together with Ferdinand defending the Realms
frontiers, following his Ancestors steps, to make no attempt near Rome. In
this manner, he remained, as it were, neuter amidst Sanseuerins arriual, by the
persuasion (as it was thought) of some chief Commanders of the contrary
faction, the Palace of the Vrsini upon Mount Iordano, (which is the name of
some part of the City) was suddenly by the soldiers spoiled and burnt: whereat
Virginio being incensed, did presently declare himself together with the other
Lords of that family, an enemy to the Pope. Alfonso strengthened by this man's
power, and having seized on certain bridges near Rome, began after
Sanseuerines arrival, to waste and spoil all places round about the City. We
only mention this to acquaint the reader with the cause of the war betwixt
the Pope and King Ferdinand.

Now while these things were done near Rome, Prince Mocenigo died the seventh
year of his Government.

MARCO BARBADICO, the 73. Duke of Uenice.





MArco Barbadico, a Senator of great wisdom and authority, was by a general
consent chosen Prince in his stead. This man (the Commonwealth being quiet at
home and abroad) repaired the Ducall Palace begun a while before, with such
expedition, as in a few months whilst he remained Prince all that part
thereof toward the East was with stately Architecture almost finished. The
cold weather nothing abating the fury of the Pestilence, it did greatly
afflict the City. Therefore three Senators were appointed, who had ample
commission to do whatsoever they should find necessary, to free it from that
calamity. These men, that they might the

In the mean time, war betwixt the Pope and the Vrsini (who as has been
said, showed themselves openly for Ferdinand) brake forth into great flames,
after Sanseuerines forces. For Pontenomentana being recovered, which they had
taken, and Fracasso, son to old Sanseuerino almost slain with a bullet,
Sanseuerino recouereth Pontenomentana.
the whole burden of the war fellon Paulo Vrsino, and other of Virginio's
kinsmen. For Nomentana being taken by force, was sacked and ruined. Sanseuerino
marched toward Monterotonda, when Cardinal Baptista Vrsino came to the Pope,
and assured him that himself and friends would be obedient to the holy Sea,
by means whereof there were none other attempts made near Rome.

Virginio's troops of horse did in the mean time waste the Roman territory,
till Alphonso's return from Tuscanie, where according to their agreement they
received a brave cauallery from the Florentines and Milaneses, with which they
made Sanseuerino with far fewer number went to encounter him near Flisco;
there in skirmish the enemy lost certain horse; but this notwithstanding,
Alphonso presuming on his own strength did in despite of Sanseuerino make
furious incursions upon the Romanesca.

The Pope who till then had constantly maintained this great war, though he
already before resolved (as some say) to crave aid from France, having sent
for Renatus Duke of Lorraine to come into Italy against Ferdinand; and had
likewise by his Nuncio Nicolao Franco elect Bishop of Treuiso, requested the
Venetians to associate him in that war; yet because supplies from France are
accounted far off, and tedious, and that the Venetians in respect of their
league sworn in Lombardie at the finishing of the Ferrarois war, with
Lodouico Sforza, Alphonso and the Florentines, would not take Arms; having
thereby lost all hope of aid from any other place, and fearing to precipitate
the State of Rome into greater dangers, he did willingly incline to peace which
the enemy offered him on honorable terms. Peace betwixt the Pope and
Ferdinand.
quietness, in concluding whereof, he did as much as in him lay, procure the
wealth and advancement of the Church of Rome, together with that of his friends
and confederates.

Sanseuerino presently after peace was made, being casheerd, and resolving to
carry back his troops of horse into Lombardie, did by letters and express
messengers Sanseuerino dispo^sed of his forces.
crave leave of the Senate to retire with two thousand horse into some town
belonging to their territories: But his demand not granted, himself destitute
of all counsel, as a man forsaken, having no safe place of retreat, and
Alphonso still at his back, who had followed him into Flaminia, was enforced
to leave his Cauallerie to

Such was the end of Sanseuerino and his sons renowned journey from Lombardie
to the war of Rome, which we have not so much mentioned for himself, as to
The venetians loyalty.
let the world understand the Venetians great constancy and loyalty. For
although an occasion was offered to ruin king Ferdinand entangled in a
domesticke war, or at least mightily to endanger him if they would have
embraced those offers, promises and conditions, yet because they would in no
sort violate the treaty of peace which they had once sworn to, they stopped
their ears to these motions. Now whilst Maximilian son to the Emperor
Frederick was chosen King of the Romans, a name Maximilian is chosen king of
the Romans.
very hateful to the City of Rome, taking it original in the days of that
Charles who overthrew the Lombards greatness in Italy. For many Historians
affirm, That he did afterward make his son Pipin, King of Italy, himself
being Emperor: and by this means it came to pass in time, that he is not
only called king of Italy, but of Romans, which enjoys the same digintie and
greatness like him.

Maximiliam had married the daughter and heir of Charles Duke of Burgondie, who
died in the war against the Suisses, and by this marriage purchasing great and
ample Signories, being young, valiant and apt either for war or peace, had
after some Frederick his father, acquainted the Venetians, (...).
(as their great friends) with this new election. Dominico Treuisano, and
Hermolao Barbaro were sent Ambassadors to them both, with commission in the
States name to congratulate that royal election: They were both knighted.
Another Ambassador was likewise sent into Portugal, to thank that king from
the Prince and Senate, for that not long before he had relieved and assisted
the Venetians, who by Pirates had been robbed and spoiled and set on shore in
his country. Ambassade into Portugal.
Ieronimo Donato a very excellent Philosopher was appointed to go thither.
Toward the Spring, the sickness lessened, and before Summer ended, it wholly
ceased, so as of a long time before, the City was not seen more Great
prosperity of the venetia^* State.
Barbadicos care and diligence, which was, great plenty and abundance of all
things, for such store of corn, wine, oil, and all sorts of meat was brought
to the City, as in the memory of man the like had not been seen. This joy
was likewise seconded by another: for the Venetians at that time had peace both
by land and sea, so as the Commonwealth was never more happy than at that time.

The Prince was not only busied in maintaining the State in this prosperity,
but in augmenting it, when on a sudden to all men's grief, death prevented
him. He died in the ninth month of his government: and therein perhaps more
happy than all his predecessors: because, that besides a goodly race which he
left behind him, himself having well deserved of Religion, Country, and
Citizens, the City at his death was clear from pestilence, and abounded in
plenty. We may moreover add this to his good fortune, That upon his deathbed
an Ambassador came to him from Bajazet son to Mahomet Emperor of Turks, and
brought him rich presents. It The Princes instruction to his children on his
deathbed.
the State, entreating them often to remember the honor it had done him, for
raising him from a mean Citizen to the highest and sovereign dignity, the
which ought to make them to render that piety to their country which their
father by reason of his short government could not perform. The whole City
did infinitely bewail his death. Every one did publicly speak of his
meekness toward all men. For besides other pious examples toward the poor,
he did at the beginning of his government, (fearing that by reason of
multiplicitie of causes the poor should have no free access to him) make a
decree, That the names of those who Twins. But his body lies buried in the
Church of the Public charity.

It shall not be impertinent to set down briefly in this place, the ceremony
The ceremony at the Princes funerals.
which is at this day used at the interment of the Venetian Dukes. After he is
dead and bowelled, they embalme the body, and lay it under a Canopie of Gold,
with his guilt sword and spurs reuersed: he is publicly kept in the Palace
for three



AVGVSTINO BARBADICO, the 74. Duke of Venice.





AVgustino Barbadico, brother to the deceased Prince, a man of singular
wisdom and gravity, and at that time Procurator of S. Mark, succeeded his
brother. This election was by so much more pleasing to the City, by how much
every man thought, that they could not have chosen a man more resembling the
late Prince in all virtuous qualities, than this man. The next day after his
creation he made a sweet and gentle Speech to the people, but his maiestike and
reverend presence, with a long white beard hanging down beneath his girdle,
made him more venerable. After his election

The next Winter, Antonio Ferriere, and within a while after Giouanni Baria
were sent to Constantinople to the Turkish Emperor. Antonio Lauretano
Ambassador at Rome was called home, because the Senate supposed that he had
not faithfully discharged his place; he was a very wise man and excellently
learned: he was banished the City for ten years. Sebastiano Badoario and
Bernardo Bembo were sent to Rome in his stead, where Antonio Vinciguerra the
Secretary after A league betwixt the Pope and venetians.
Lauretans departure, had in the mean time by the Senates command treated
with his Holiness, whereupon at their arrival, they made a league with him.

At the same time almost that this league was published, Francisco Priuli was
made Admiral of the Sea. He at the Spring receiving the public ensigns in
S. Marks Church from the Princes hand, departed from Venice. Certain armed
Galleys to secure the Sea-frontires, were gone before, and some others followed
them. So great care had the Senate at that time for the guard of the Seas, when
an unlooked for war from Germany assailed them, about contending for their
bounds; the beginning and progression whereof was thus. Sigismond, brother to
the Emperor Frederick, was Lord and Sovereign Prince of the Rheticke and
Noricke Commonwealths, and other Countries of Germany near adjacent: He was
a meek The original of the Rheticke war.
and courteous Prince, but inclining too much to flatterers: He had ever been
in

Now the Venetians coming to this Fair after their usual manner, in the
year 1487, were by Sigismunds commandment (contrary to the law of Nations)
taken The law of Nations violated.
and imprisoned, and their goods seized to the Princes use. His subjects had
not long before driven the Venetians from the silver Mines in the Alps, bought
by the Seigniorie, and because they were near to them, they withheld them by
force. When they were demanded why they did so, their excuse was; That
Sigismonds subjects inhabiting upon the Lake of La Garda, were dispossessed of
their dwellings, making this a color to shadow their malice: for the strife of
those men being referred to arbitrament, was in friendly manner debated by
Commissioners from both sides.

And the better to manifest that their project was not new, after the
imprisonment of the Venetian Merchants, they levied forces from all parts,
as well of their own, as Swisses and Grisons to the number of ten thousand men.
Then at the Spring they came into the field under Gaudentius Amasianus their
General, and entered furiously upon the Confines of Verona: and from thence
running fifteen miles into The Almaines besiege Rouero.
the Country, along the River Adice; they drew near to Rouero, a Castle
belonging to the Venetians, seated in a straight of the Alps upon that River,
which they being not able to take as they supposed to have done, they wasted
the Country round about, and then made Sturma their Rendezuous.

These incursions being known at Venice, the Senate commanded that their
Pietro Diede Governor of Verona, and Ieronimo Marcello were made Pietro Diede,
and Ieronimo Marcello Prouidators.
Prouidators, and the Signiorie committed unto them the command of that war.
The Senate aftewards thought good to make Iulio Caesare Varrana Count of
Cameryna General of their Army, who presently came to Verona.

The Almains in the mean time being provided of all necessaries to besiege and
take that place, approaching near the walls, battred it with their ordnance,
whereof they had great store: and the battery continuing certain days, they
did beat Ronero yielded to the Almaines on composition*
down a great part of the wall; the Captain of the Castle, by reason of their
great

The Senate, perceiving that the war would continue longer than they had
imagined, The Venetians entreat old Sanseuerino to be their General.
and in some sort distrusting the speedy finishing of it by the valor and
skill of one General, entreated Roberto Sanseuerino, (who after that Pope
Innocent Julius Caesar Varran, and to make all haste possible to the Alps
above Verona, with certain troops of horse, together with his sons, two
brave young men. Sanseuerino entertained the offer, and speedily went thither;
At his arrival the army was filled with hope: he made certain light
skirmishes, whose event was somewhat doubtful, and made a bridge over the
River, that the soldiers might pass from one side to the other, and that by
it, victualles might likewise be brought to the camp.

At the same time certain companies of Almaines made incursions on the
Territories of Vincenza, Feltre, and Friul; the fear of their coming doing
more hurt Ieronimo Sauorgnano issued from a noble and ancient family in Vdina,
and a great friend to the Venetians, who had made him a Gentleman of Venice, so
soon as he had notice of the Almaines incursions, did speedily arm the
greatest forces he could, and together with many Country people whom he
assembled, marching from the mountain tops and bad ways which were not
usually Sauorgnane defeats the Almaines.
passed, he came down unlooked for upon the enemies, and assailing them on
their backs, brake and defeated them, many of whom perished in those deep and
fearful precipices. The Senate in acknowledgement of this notable service,
gave him great thanks, and recompensed him with the command of three hundred
foot men, which him self bestowed on his brother Giacomo, choosing rather to
live quietly at home, than to meddle any more in martial matters.

The Almaines puffed up with pride, after they had taken Rouero (as has been
said) made many incursions into the Venetians Country, who determined to
surprise them: which they by their spies having notice of, laid an ambush to
entrap the Roberto Sanseuerino by the valor and The Venetians are defeated.
prowess of his son Antonio Maria, hardly escaped: Not long after Iulio
Caesare Varrano Count of Camerina being afflicted with a fever, went from the
Camp to Verona.

The Almaines afterward, wanting victuals and pay, were ready to mutiny;
which the Captains fearing, craved of Sanseuerino a suspension of Arms for a
time, which he refusing, they did about midnight set fire on the Castle, and
with their Arms and bagage dislodged before day. The Venetians wondering in
the morning that they heard no noise in the enemies Camp, could hardly believe
that they were wholly gone, but doubted some treachery or ambuscado: but

Sanseuerino being assured of the enemies return, and strengthened with new
supplies from Rauenna, La Marca, and Vmbria, resolved boldly to pass on and
besiege Sanseuerino's resolution.
Trent, to let the Almaines know that the Venetians could and durst invade them
likewise in their own Country. He imparted his desseigne to the Prouidators,
whereupon Luca Pisani an ancient man whom the Senate had sent in Pietro Diede
his place, who was gone home to Verona, answered;

That he did not think that this enterprise could any way profit the State;
because first, Luca Pisani his opinion on Sanseuerino his design.
it was not a thing likely to be true that the enemies, who of late were so
many, and so gallantly armed, were so far gone into Germany, but at their
pleasures they may return and reunite themselves, yea and confront us ere
long, so ready is that nation to take Arms: and by that means, we shall be
in danger of loosing this place, so commodious for barring strangers forth of
Italy: Secondly, if our men have been now strong enough to drive the enemies
hence, we will not say that they went away of themselves or unconstrained, but
that they have been enforced so to do: But admit it were so, we are too
weak to invade them, and to enter into their Country, there to maintain a
siege, if need were: For we must persuade our selves, that all Germany, with
forces infinite, would unite themselves and come into the field, rather then
endure such disgrace: Lastly, if we should enter their Country and he there
broken and put to rout, what place of retreat have we, having the Alps on one
side and our enemies on the other? Besides, we are to fear the passages, which
are so narrow, as in time of peace they are hardly passable. And therefore it
is better for the State to protract the war, rather then on hope of
uncertain victory to tempt Fortune. Again, the City being much tired with
the Ferraresewarre, ought to make more account of peace without glory, than of
war, though honorable, and of an assured good event. This is mine opinion,
which peradventure, in regard of an error, common to those of many yceres,
(fear) I will entreat you, if you so please, to declare your advise, that we
may follow that which is most expedient.

Ieronimo Marcello replied in this manner. I would not doubt but that it were
dangerous to enter into the enemies Country, and to besiege Trent, if that
were true which my Colleague has alleged, Because that the Province or City
which we should take, might animate all Germany against us. Yet according to
his own opinion the matter is far otherwise, for the enemy is not gone away
of his own accord, but desperately enforced, as well through want of victuals
as pay. Now, he that cannot entertain an Army already levied, with victuals
and money, which are the true sinews of war, hardly for want of these two
will he raise a new. For it is much easier, to preserve things already made,
than to renew those which are overthrown and wasted. It is not credible that
all Germany, to assist Sigismund, would take Arms against the Venetians, who
have ever been their good friends and Confederates: For Sigismund, unknown to
all other German Princes, without being provoked, has insolently begun
war. The Emperor Frederick his brother, approues not what he has done, he
would neither aid him with money, men or ought else, but seems to be highly
displeased with this war. Who will then suppose that he which is forsaken of
his own friends and countrymen, should ever be relieved by strangers? And if
any man shall say that all the Princes of Germany will not stir in
Sigismunds behalf, but in their own; fearing that the taking of Trent would
open the Venetians a passage into their Country: and this alone might excite
them to unite their forces to expulse us: This objection is easily answered,
for the Venetian Signorie has many towns and Castles through which they may
easily pass into Germany. Feltre is not far off, nor Belluna likewise; and
least of all Ciuidalla in Friull: Besides these towns, it has many strong
Castles toward the East, as Buerna and Lodron on the Bressan, and the Fort of
the lake Isea, together with the Topine valley in the Bergamasco, with all that
Country which extends it self from the lake of Coma to the Grisons; And yet
the German Princes have never attempted to drive the Venetians thence for
fear of the passage. And though we should take Trent, they would not stir,
but rather confess and freely say, that Sigismund deserved it for unjustly
provoking the Venetian Signorie their friend and Confederate. As for the
straight and narrow ways we are to pass from hence to Trent, it is nothing;
Yet we must open them, and foot by foot seize upon whatsoever we shall find by
the way does belong to the Almaines, and leave nothing at our backs which may
prove our enemy: And whereas my fellow has alleged that the State wanting
money, by reason of the Ferrarese troubles, is weary of war; I say we need
not care for that. For if we take Trent, all the expense of this war shall be
well recompensed with profit and usury, and our wrongs justly revenged, to the
honor of our Commonwealth, which shall extend her bounds further; The which
our ancestors have so highly esteemed, as they have never cared for any
expense, so that they might augment their State. A fair accasion is now
offered to take Trent, as well because our valliant soldiers will enter it, the
City being not well fortified, as also for that the townsmen fearing the
sack thereof, will yield upon the first summons, and therefore our forces are
sufficient to hazard the matter without expecting any further aid: If the
enterprise prosper, my Lord Pisani will be the first that shall commend the
Author thereof. If the City shall resist, and we cannot take it, yet having
first wasted the Country, burnt their Country houses and villages, and filled
all places with fear and amazement, we shall bring back our victorious Army
into these parts: And thus being revenged, we may more easily treat of accord,
than if we now retire without any further exploit. We must think that
opportunity does not every day offer it self, and therefore we are to take it
when it is opportunely offered, and not let it slip, least the remembrance of
not accepting it, together with repentance, torment those who have so lost it.

Marcello's speech ended, Pisani freely allowed his opinion: The Prouidators
thought The siege of Trent is resolved.
it fit that the General should execute that which he had propounded, who
spedily caused all things to be made ready: But because that betwixt Rouero
and Trent upon the River toward the left hand, there stands a Castle called
Pietro, seated on a little hill, commanding the high way, the General
determined to take it, from thence to bring victuals to the Camp, and because
(according to Marcello's advice) he would not leave any enemy place behind
him. This thus resolved, because that on Rouero's side they could not march to
this Castle by reason of the difficult hanging of the mountain, he caused his
Army to cross the River at a bridge Pietro, where on small boats making
another bridge, he repassed the River, and encamped in a plain six hundred
paces from it, betwixt the mountain and the river, and from thence sent his
light horse to make dscouerie, who were to aduertize him if they should chance
to descrie any of the enemies ensigns. These light horse for getting the
Generals commandment, rode up and down wasting and spoiling the country,
only intending to get booty. Those of Trent in the mean time aduertized of
the making of the bridge, and fearing their own danger as much as their
neighbors, their Army being far off, and their City badly fortified and
unprovided of all necessaries, entreated George, Lord of Pietro Plana a Castle
be* yond Trent, to make speedy head against the Venetian Army, with such
forces as he had, and the greatest numbers of Boores he could levy, and with
them to amuze the enemy, till Sigismond should come to their rescue. He
presently did what The Venetians in amaze.
seeing them to approach with such great rumors, turned their backs and fled,
and meeting with their fellows which followed them, caused them likewise to
run away toward the Camp, the horse and foot being pell-mell together.

The Almaines being more encouraged by the Venetians flight than their own
valor, were presently at their heels, and so terrified their enemies camp,
as every man fled and retired to the Generals troops, who having notice of
his soldiers flight was coming to back them, where he bravely resisting the
enemy, and reprehending the baseness of his own troops, fought very
valiantly for a time: Many on both sides were slain. And noble Sanseuerino
perceiving the enemies squadron The death of old Sanseuerine the noble Venetian
General.
to press in upon him, acted wonders with his sword, till at last being beaten
to the very brinke of the River, still advancing one of his own ensigns, and
being oppressed with multitudes, wrapped himself in his colors, and so
mortally wounded Andrea de Burgo Colonel of the infanterie perceiving this
disorder, and that no man had any care to resist the enemies, supposing that if
the bridge were broken, the runnawaies would stand to it, and be enforced to
fight, ran presently to cut the ropes which held the boats: But it fell out
otherwise than he imagined: For fear does commonly entertain no The Venetians
are wholly put to rout.
counsel; even so those who fled, hoping to escape by crossing the river, when
they saw the bridge broken, did headlong with their horse and Arms throw
themselves into the river, where they all perished by the violence of the
stream. Few or none escaped to the other side, so, that of the Venetians,
accounting as well those that A generous act of Guido Maria de Rossis.
the place. Only Guido Maria de Rossis with his troop of horse, fighting
valiantly, manifested the worth of carriage and magnanimity in war, who
being environed by the victorious enemy, made way through the midst of them,
and came off bravely. Other Captains and Soldiers that could not cross the
river, some by unknown ways got up to the tops of the mountains, and others,
but very few, A bloody victory to the Almanes.
entered into boats and escaped to Rouero, among whom was De Rossis and his
company. There died great numbers of the Almaines, who with a bloody victory
returned home.

The Venetians spent some time in renewing their Army, which was almost
disbanded. The Almaines in the mean time did not stir, but were glad to do
the others took a Castle near to the lake, called Arques, which by the
Senates decree was burnt and ruined, because it had been the principal motive
of the war, and had caused the strife concerning their bounds, as also
because that the Lords of that The Castle of Arques taken and burnt.
Castle were capital enemies to the Venetians.

In the meanetime Andrea de Burgo accused before the Council of Ten, for that
he had treacherously, and of malice, broken the bridge at Caillan, was
committed to prison, but upon report of Marco Beazana Chanceller of the Senate,
who had been in that encounter, he was enlarged, and restored to his place.
Pope Innocent, being displeased with this war, at that time dispatched the
Bishop of Ozima to Sigismond, to entreat him in his name to give an end to to
that war, and to tell him that the Turk The Venetians refuse the Articles of
peace.
made some stay with Sigsmond, till articles of peace were drawn, which he
carried with him to Venice, who imparting them to the Senate, they were
rejected: In this manner without effecting his legation, he returned to Rome.

The Pope made the same motion of peace to the Venetians by Nicolao Franco
Bishop of Treuiso his Nuncio, who earnestly entreated the Senate to embrace it,
assuring them that his Holiness would employ his credit and authority to
effect it. But all was in vain, till Sigismond, tired with the heavy burden
and expense of Peace concluded betwixt Sigismond and the venetians.
Fair of Bolzana, should be set at liberty, and their losses recompensed.
Other matters not here mentioned, were referred to the Pope.

Such was the end of the Rethicke war. The Senate recompensed the Captains
and Soldiers according to their merits. Julius Caesar Varran was casseerd,
because he had behaved himself negligently in his place. The two sons of
noble Sanseuerino were still retained in the Signories pay, and each of them
made Captain of Sebastiano Badoario, and Bernardo Bembo were sent to the Pope
to accomplish this Treaty. All matters thus concluded, the Senate made decrees
concerning the expenses of private families, women's garments, and generally
against all superfluities, namely, dice and cards-play, saving a^ weddings,
Innes, and under the two Columns in S. Marks place, with this addition: That
the sum which was played for should not exceed the fifth part of an ounce of
gold.

There was a rumor at the same time, That Bajazet the Turkish Emperor made
incursions on the Aegean Sea. The Senate hereupon commanded Francisco Priuli
The venetians send a fleet to guard Cyprus.
at that time General of the Galleys to be in readiness to put to Sea. And
because Priuli embarking his soldiers in April, went to Corfou, and from
thence to Modon, accompanied by Cosmo Pascalis the Prouidator, where Nicolao
Capello the other Prouidator met them, augmenting the number of their vessels;
with which, being five and twenty Galleys, and ten Brigandines they set
sail, and the fifth day after arrived in Cyprus.

The report of this Turkish fleet consisting of many long vessels which had
sailed by Cyprus through the Gulf of Aiazza, and then returned into the
Hellespont What moved the Senate to desire the Realm of Cyprus.
without any exploit, bred a longing in the Senate to impatronize the Realm of
Cyprus: As also because Ferdinand king of Naples went about to make it his, by
means of a marriage which he secretly treated betwixt his son and Queen
Katherine, Cornares, given in marriage by her father Marco Cornari to James of
Lufignan king of Cyprus, with a dowry of a thousand pound of gold.

This Queen a little after her husbands death, being a widow, and with child
by him, was by his last will and testament left coheire with the child she
should bring forth, and yet committed to the protection of the Venetian
Senate, who at her marriage adopted her their daughter. After the kings death
she was delivered of a son, who died before the year was expired: Then did
certain Lords of the Island go about to raise commotions, but the Senate sent
forces thither under the command of a Prouidator together with the Queens
father, who were still to attend upon her, so as these stirs were on a
sudden appeased.

The Realm then being at quiet, the Queen under the Senates protection had
for the space of fifteen years peaceably governed that kingdom, when
Ferdinand underhand by two of his familiar friends practiced the said marriage:
Their names Riccio Marini of Naples, an inward friend with the late king, and
Tristan Cybelletto of Cyprus, who had a sister attending on the Queen: these
two coming thither from Ferdinand, were apprehended by the General of the
fleet, and presently sent to Venice: but Tristan died by the way, having
swallowed a Diamond, and druncke Seawater after it: for he knew that if he
came to Venice, the Senate would punish him according to his deserts, because
after the kings death he had raised tumults in the Realm, and slain Andrea
Cornari the Queens uncle.

The Council of Ten, moved by these practizes, fearing Ferdinands policies,
and the Turkish preparations, together with the king of Syriaesneere
neighborhood, The Senate send George Cornari into Cyprus.
commanded Georgio Cornari the Queens brother, to go into Cyprus to

Georgio Cornari embarked himself in a small vessel to make the more haste,
and in the winter time in a short space arrived in Cyprus, where he presently
acquainted his sister with the cause of his coming. The Queen wondered at his
demand (as one that had been wont to live royally, and knew the sparing and
parcimonious The Queen resuseth her brothers request.
life of the Citizens of Venice) and boldly refused it, saying: That she would
not for the world forsake so rich and goodly a Realm; and that the Senate
ought to be satisfied with enjoying it after her death. He, insisting on the
contrary, entreated her not to make Cornari his reply.
more account of Cyprus, than of her own Country; because that worldly
affairs being variable and inconstant, it might in short space come to pass
that she might be expulsed her kingdom, it being so desired by many great
and potent Lords, and her self envied by her own subjects, who disdained to
be governed by a woman. One only means was left her whereby to prevent all
these mischiefs, which was, seeing she had no children to refer the
government of the Realm to the Venetian State, now in her life time: That the
Venetian Commonwealth had been well pleased to suffer her to govern the
Realm, so long as the time had been quiet and void of suspicions: But now
when all her neighbors wait for occasions, and lay snares to surprise it, the
Senate has thought this only remedy most expedient: But if she feared not
these dangers, he besought her to consider the peril she was likely to have
fallen into the precedent Summer; had not the State of Venice reskewed her with
their Galleys, the Turkish army would have taken her kingdom from her, and
her self have been enforced to fly, or else in danger to have been carried
as a captive to Constantinople. It is good to foresee that which a small
accident or some error may cause us fall into, and to prevent it. Fortune is
variable, sudden and inconstant, and we cannot ever prevent the enemies
desseignes, nor can our friends be always ready to help us when we please.
There is a great distance by land, but far greater by Sea betwixt the
farthest part of the Adriatticke Gulf, and the Isle of Cyprus: This ought you
(Madame) to remember and especially consider, that though nothing enforced you
thereunto, yet what greater honor, or more lasting praise can you leave behind
you, than to have given so flourishing a kingdom to your Country? and to have
it written in the Annals, That the Venetian State was honored and augmented
with the kingdom of Cyprus, by a Lady her own Citizen. You shall still be a
Queen. And if the case were mine, I should be desirous, especially having
lived so long in Cyprus as you have done, to behold my native country and
place of birth, there to show my greatness and magnificence, there to embrace
my brethren, sisters and kinsfolk. Never was the arrival of any Lord or Lady
so welcome to Venice as yours will be: And if Venice were a base and abject
village; yet in you it would be a pious duty to be willing to reuiew the place
where you first drew breath, and those who of a long time you have not long
seen. But it is certain that Venice in all men's opinions, is preferred before
all other cities under heaven, and accounted the goodliest of all Italy. What
cause then is able to move you after so long absence, especially, your country
requesting you to come home, to refuse it? You are to thank the Senate, for
being Queen, and for that you have reigned so long in peace, but it seems you
have no desire to acknowledge it; if otherwise, you would not neglect and
refuse their entreaty. In a word, I being your brother, and one who ought to
have some interest in you, if you deny me this request: all men will think
that it is not you which have refused to gratify the State, but that I have
advised you to the contrary, whereby I shall purchase my countries hatred, and
blot my children with infamy. And therefore (Madame) I humbly beseech you to
grant the Senates request, and to respect me and mine. There is nothing more
worthy commendation, than to know modestly how to entertain Fortune when she
smiles on us, and not to desire to be still on the wheels top. Almighty God
does sometime by adversity try those whom he has a long time favored, to
make them remember that they are mortal. To conclude, you can offer up to his
divine Majesty no prayer more pleasing, nor sacrifice more acceptable, than to
submit your self to his will, which you must be persuaded is, that you grant
your Countries request.

Georgio more eloquent by Nature than Art, having thus discoursed with his
sister, prevailed so far with her as melting into tears, she made him this
unwilling answer. Brother, if this be your opinion, I will yield unto it, and
will strive to ouer-master The Queens answer.
my self: But our Country shall thank you for my kingdom, and not me. Their
departure concluded, and order taken for all things, the General and
Prouidators commanded a solemn Mass to be celebrated in the Cathedral Church
of Famagosta: then by the Queens commandment and in her presence, the
Standard of the Venetian Commonwealth was e^ected in the Cities Marketplace,
and by this means was the kingdom of Cyprus* reduced to a Province.

The Queen and her brother did afterward embarque them selves, train, and
royal provision in the Venetian Galleys, and in short space in the midst of
winter arrived in the haven of Venice. She was honorably received by Prince
Augustino Barbadico, and by all the Senate who met her at Saint Nicholas Church
with infinite multitudes of people of all sorts, who entering into their
Gondolas, did with great joy accompany her. Herself in the Bucentauro sitting
in the midst of the The reception of the Queen of Cyprus at Venice.
Senate and illustrious Ladies of the City, did in that magnificence enter
Venice: The like honor was never done to any Venetian Lady, and her arrival
was most pleasing to the people. Not long after, the Council of Ten
presented her with the Castle of Azzola, seated on the Treuisan hills, and
appointed fifty pounds

Within a while after, the king of Tremisen in Affricke, did by his Ambassadors
request the Senate to send some Venetian Gentleman to do justice to the
Venetians that lived in three of his Cities. The Senate to satisfy the king,
created a new Magistrate A new magistrate sent by the Senate into Affricke.
to goethither, who for his entertainment should have the hundred part of all
merchandise sold by the Venetians. Lodouico Pizamane was the first that was
appointed to this office. At the same time they builded a Fort upon an hill
near to the Lake Ider not far from Anfer a small Town on the Bressan, which
did greatly secure the country.

About the same time there arose some contention betwixt Mathias the valiant
Contention betw^xt the Emperor Frederick and Mathias king of Hungary.
king of Hungary, and the Emperor Frederick: Mathias levied two armies to
invade his enemy in two several places; the one he sent into Friull, and the
other to the confines of Liburnia. The Senate being troubled with this
neighbor war, dispatched two Ambassadors, Antonio Bolda, to the Emperor,
and Dominico Bollano to Mathias, who dealt so wisely with these two enemy
Princes, as they appeased them and procured truce for a certain time.

Frederick in the mean time freed from war, came to Trent, to know if the
Senate would give him leave to pass through that part of Italy, which
stretches along the Alps from the lake of La Garda, as far as Aquileia. The
Senate aduertized of his coming, sent four Gentlemen in Embassage to him,
Ieronimo Barbaro, Dominico Grimani, who was afterward Cardinal, Paulo
Treuisano, and Ieronimo Leone, who meeting him near to Rouero, did in the
States name honorably salute and receive him, and accompanied him so long as
he remained on their territories,

Now, although the City was peaceable, they did not for all that cease to
provide The invention of Harquebuses.
things necessary for war. Harquebuses were at that time much in use, an
engine which footmen used in war, devised at first by the Almains. The State
unwilling to be without such weapons, when need should be, did by a decree of
the A decree for the exercise of youth
this exercize, and for recompense, should be freed from all subsidies and
impositions: and that those young men at a certain day in the year should
meet at the next Castle or City to shoot at a mark, where his village that
should shoot best, was for one whole year freed from all tax and tribute.

The ensuing winter was so sharp and cold by reason of snow which fell, as all
An extreme frost at Uenice.
the marshes round about the City was frozen over, the Country people coming
S. Secondo's in the midst of the lakes. And the horsemen for disport armed
themselves, and ran at Tilt upon the great Channel: so sharp and vehement
was the frost.

Not long after, Marco Barba Cardinal, and Patriarch of Aquileia died at Rome.
Pope Innocent bestowed the Patriark ship on Hermalao Barbaro the Venetian
Ambassador A law carefully observed by the Uenetians.
then at Rome. This being known at Venice, notwithstanding that Hermolao was a
man of great desert, and had written to the Senate that the Pope had enforced
him to forsake his order of Senator, and put on that of Patriarch, yet because
there was an express law, forbidding all Venetian Gentlemen, being Ambasdors
Great justice of the Venetians.
from his Father the Procuratorship of S. Mark, and to confiscate all his
goods. His father not being able to moderate the sentence given by the Council
of Ten, fell sick with grief, and within a while after died: The son
likewise, having published certain excellent books of his own composing, did
before the

The same year Lorenzo de Medicis died at Florence, a man of a rare and
excellent The death of Lorenzo de Medicis.
judgment, governing his Country in Peace: He left three children living, who
were afterward expulsed the government and banished. The summer following Pope
Innocent died, in whose stead by gifts and briberie, Alexander Borgia a
Spaniard, borne in Valentia, was chosen. This Pope made a league offensive and
defensive for five and twenty years with the Venetians and Galeas Sforza Lord
of Milan, who was at that time very young and ruled by Lodouico his uncle.

By this league they were tied to defend and maintain one another
territories, and to destroy their enemies: And because Zemes, brother to
Baiazeth the Turkish Emperor, lived at that time in Rome, there was an
addition made in the treaty of the league, that if Baiazeth should make war
on the Venetians, the Pope should deliver him unto them that they by him might
invade his brother. This Zemes, being by his brother driven forth of his
kingdom, fled to Rhodes. The Rhodians Innocent who had earnestly craved him.
Pope Alexander at his election found him at Rome, where he was carefully
guarded, lest he should renew war against his brother, in recompense whereof
Baiazeth sent yearly to Rome to the Pope 400. pounds of gold: Hercules de A
Este Duke of Ferrara did afterward enter into this league.

The Venetian State thus peaceable, Charles the eight French King sent a
Gentleman to Venice, who being brought before the Senate, told them, That his
King Charles the eight French king, sends an Ambassador to Venice.
being resolved to come into Italy with a mighty Army to conquer the
kingdom of Naples, which by hereditarie right belonged to him, did desire
therein to know

After sundry opinions, the Council answered the Ambassador, that the Signorie
had ever preferred peace before war, and did now desire it more than ever,
therefore they could wish, that his King living at peace, would suffer other
Princes The Venetians answer.
of Italy to do the like: yet if he came thither with an intent to make
war, they would in no sort stir, nor quit his league and friendship.

This Gentleman with their answer left Venice and went to Rome. After him, two
others in less than two months came to Venice one after another from the same
King for the same business, who received the self same answer as the first.
But Lodouico Sforza was the only motive that provoked this King to the
enterprise of Naples. He after the death of his brother Galeas Sforza Duke of
Millan, took upon him the government of the State, and expulsed his widow, who
would have managed it in the behalf of her son John Galeas that was very
young, when his father died. Then by little and little, he dismissed the
ancient Officers, placing others in their rooms, and in this manner had
commanded the Duchy above thirteen years. And though in outward show he
seemed very careful of his Nephew,

Alphonso, son to Ferdinand King of Naples, gave his daughter Isabell in
marriage to this young John Galeas* yet though he were married and had children
by his wife, his uncle nevertheless still governed the State, meaning to leave
it to his own children. Ferdinand and Alphonso taking his vsurpatio (for it
was no better) in bad part, moved by the continual and lamentable letters of
their daughter, did lovingly entreat Lodouick (according to equity and reason)
to surrender the government of the State of Milan to his nephew, son to his
brother, unto whom it belonged,

Lodouico fearing their power and threatening, and having intelligence that the
French Lodouico Sforza sends Ambassadors into France to king Charles.
Kngs laid claim to the kingdom of Naples, sent an honorable Ambassade into
France, under color to salute king Charles, not acquainting Pope Alexander or
the Venetians with it, with whom he was in league, and commanded his
Ambassador, secretly to motion the matter, and to assure the king, that if he
would attempt the recovery of that Realm, he would assist him with all his
forces and means; and that the conquest would be easy, so that he would only
pass the Alps, and show himself in Italy. This advertisement coming from
such a person, did greatly prevail with the king to cause him to undertake
this journey, being besides incited thereunto from another place. Antonio
Prince of Salern maligned by Ferdinand, Antonio Prince of Salern incites king
Charles to this journey.
him, That he should do ill to let slip so fair an occasion, offered for the
recovery of his own right: assuring him besides, that Ferdinand was generally
hated for his avarice, cruelty, and treachery; and therefore it would be an
easy matter to dispossess him, especially for a king of France, whose
authority and credit in those countries was very great. Besides all this,
Pope Alexander was no friend to Ferdinand in regard of Virginio Vrsino that
served him, whose open enemy the Pope had declared himself in regard of the
town of Anguilare.

All these reasons were approved by the Lords of France that were in favor
with What moved the French Lords to persuade the king to this journey.
the king, who desired nothing more than this journey. For some of them hoped
by the Popes means to obtain Ecclesiastical dignities, others expected some
honorable command in the Army, and to be governors of Cities and Towns
which the king should conquer, and some likewise were possessed with a desire of
novelty.

King Charles lending a willing ear to this Ambassade, and tasting the Prince
of Salernes proposition, a rumor was presently spread, That the French were
coming into Italy, to invade the Realm of Naples. Upon these news king
Ferdinand began to arm by sea and land, and to invent means to draw Pope
Lodouicos fear.
Alexander to his side. Lodouico foreseeing, that if they leagued themselves
together, Ferdinand might join his Army with that of the Pope, and send them
both into Lombardie, before the kings arrival, and by the same means expulse
him from Milan, entreated the Venetians to send their horse and foot troops to
the river Oglio in the Bressian territory, to divert king Ferdinand from his
design, or else to let them cross the river to defend his State. The
Venetians answered, that it was needless: for his country was out of danger.

Lodouico perceiving the French delays, and fearing that it might breed his
ruin, did again send Ambassadors to Charles to hasten his journey, promising
to assist He sends another Ambassade into France.
him with men and money, and victuals, so soon as he should set foot in
Italy. King Charles who had spent certain months in the only consultation of
this business, Lodouico, presently resolve upon it.

Now because he would not in any sort be hindered in his conquest, he renewed
the ancient league with the kings of Castill, and surrendered to them the
county of Rossillon, engaged to king Lewis his father for three thousand
crowns by John king of Arragon, father to Ferdinand, on condition that the
said kings should in no sort aid the Arragonois against him in his conquest of
the Realm of Naples. This The death of Ferdinand king of Naples.
league sworn to, the king made all things ready for his journey. Ferdinand
had intelligence hereof one day as he came from hunting* whereupon he fell
sick, and within two days after, died of an Apoplexy. Alphonso his eldest
son was by his Alphonsos request to the Uenetians.
younger brother and all the Princes of the Realm saluted king. He entreated
the Venetians by their Ambassador resident in his Court to persuade Lodouico to
desist from soliciting the French king to come into Italy, and that he would
not be a means of his ruin, promising no more to tax his usurpation of the
State of Milan, which he should enjoy so long as he pleased. The Senate by
letters acquainted The Senate write to Lodouico in Alphonsos behalf.
Lodouico with Alphonsos request, and entreated him not to draw the French into
Italy: But perceiving that he made no direct answer they gave over and
solicited him no more. Philip de Comines, Ambassador for king Charles at Venice.


King Charles having resolved upon the enterprise, sent Philip de Comines Lord
of Argenton his Ambassador to Venice, who in his kings name made a proposition
to the Senate, That if they would join with him in this war of Naples, they
should have a great share in the kingdom, and if they would not accept that
offer, to entreat them at least to persevere in their ancient league and
friendship with the The Venetians answer to Philip de Comines.
constraint, and that they would crave no part in a kingdom whereunto they had
no right. For the rest, they would never go from that which they had promised
to the kings Ambassador; that they would ever make great account of his leage
and friendship; that they had willingly heard him for his kings sake, and would
still do so if he remained among them; that he might at his pleasure familiarly
discourse Lewis, as to himself.

In the mean time Pope Alexander (who repented that he had incited the French
League betwixt Pope Alexander and Alphonso king of Naples.
king to this war) and king Alphonso by the mediation of Virginio Vrsin,
coming to Viconare, a Castle of his own, to see one another, and to discourse
together of their affairs, made a league on this condition: That the Pope
should take Alphonso into the protection of the Roman Church, and with all his
power defend him against his enemies: and in counterchange, Alphonso promised
to pay him down in ready money a thousand pounds of gold for the arrerages of
the tribute due to the Church of Rome for the Realm of Naples, and to pay him
yearly afterward, Alphonso promised to give one of his daughters in marriage
to Guifredo son to Pope Alexander. This thus concluded, both of them made
preparations for war.

Alphonso had already armed thirty Galleys, and eighteen great vessels to
scour along the River of Genoa, and to annoy the enemies fleet which was
making ready in the City; and he was to make a leauie of horse and foot in
Calabria to send them into Lombardie, when news came that Baiazeth the Turkish
Emperor made new preparations, whereupon the State of Venice determined
likewise to arm. The Venetians fleet in Sclauonia.
Antonio Grimani made General of the Galleys, Commanded all Galleys that were
ready to be lanched, and with them sailed into Sclauonia, where commissioners

Alphonsos fleet, whereof his brother Frederick was General, entering the
River of Genoa, came to Portouenere, where Ob^eto de Fiesca, a man highly
esteemed among his country men, landed with certain soldiers, but being
repulsed by the enemy, he returned to his Galleys, and presently made toward
Liuorne, and from thence held his course to Naples. Alphonso having lost all
hope by Sea, sent his Army united with the Popes, into Romagnia, having
intelligence that part of the enemies forces had already crossed the Po.

Ferdinand, son to Alphonso, a young Prince of great hope, assisted by
Nicolao Vrsin, Count Petillan, Virginio Vrsin, and John James Triuulce the
Milanese, commanded the Arragonoise army, consisting of two thousand five
hundred horse, and eight thousand foot.

Whilst the Venetian fleet was at sea, Ambassadors from Florence came to
Venice, to crave the Senates advise how they should answer king Charles, who
had entreated them to give his army passage through their territories, and
also how The Florentines crave council of the Veneti^s.
they should behave themselves in those occurrents; for they referred
themselves wholly to them, and determined directly to follow their Council. The
Senate knowing very well, that whatsoever they should say to the Florentines,
would be reported to king Charles and Alphonso* answered; That in so difficult
a business, subject The Senates answer.
to sundry accidents, they knew not what was best to be done; and though they
loved the one better than the other, yet they durst not deliver their opinion,
because that Fortune is commonly Mistress in war, and that it usually comes
to pass, that matters done by chance and adventure, did oftentimes prosper
better than those which are premeditated, and debated with long consultation:
and therefore they ought to crave council of none but Almighty God, who only
knew what was best for men to embrace or avoid: and with this answer
dismissed them.

Now the forces which king Charles and Lodouico had sent before, being come
near the enemies, neither the one or other durst come to strokes, but marched
close together, being still protected by some fort or river, which was ever
betwixt them: yet they made sundry light skirmishes to show their valor. King
Charles had sent the Duke of Orleans, Julian the Cardinal nephew to Pope
Sixtus, and Antonio Prince of Salerne (of whom we have heretofore spoken) to
Genoa, with brave troops of foot, to man the Galleys which were ready rigd,

The end of the third Book of the fourth Decad.
THE FOVRTH BOOK OF THE FOVRTH DECAD Venice.
The Contents of the fourth Book of the fourth Decad.
KING CHARLES departs from Vienna in Daulphine toward Italy. Ast. The death of
JOHN GALEAS Duke of Milan, whereupon LODOVICO his uncle vsurps the Title and
Arms of Duke of Milan. The French take Fiuizana and sackeit. PIETRO DE MEDICIS
grants all King CHARLES demands, and for his labor is driven from Florence,
and declared an enemy to the Common wealth. The King restores the PISANS
liberty. The French take Bertinora. King GHARLES his victorious entry into
Florence. The King makes an accord with Pope ALEXANDER, and kisseth his feet
and cheek. ALPHONSO in love to his son FERDINAND deposes himself from the
Kingdom of Naples. FERDINAND retires into the Isle of Ischia. King CHARLES
enters Naples, and takes the Cities two Castles. Aleague made at Venice
Spain, Venetians, and Duke of Milan. King CHARLES is crowned in Naples, and
departs from thence to return into France. The preparation of the League to
stop King CHARLES his passage. The Duke of Orleance his incursions on the
Leagues territories: he takes Nouara. The battle of Fornouo betwixt King
CHARLES and the Confederates. And lastly, King CHALES his arrival at Ast.

SOON after the departure of the Duke of Orleance and his troops toward
Genoa, King Charles leaving Vienna in Daulphine on the 23. of August King
Charles departs toward Italy.
1493. iourneyed toward Ast by the mount Geneua. Galeas of S. Seuerine met him
at Suza, and accompanied him to Ast: whither Lodouico Sforza came presently to
him, with his wife and many fair and gallant Ladies of the Duchy of Milan.
Hercules Duke of Ferrara came thither likewise, where after consultation of
sundry affairs, it was concluded that the Army should presently march.
Lodouico in the The King by reason of his sickness, stayed at Ast.
mean time retired to Number, a Castle on the Milanois a mile from Ast, whither
those of the Council went often to see him, whilst the King tarried at Ast
sick of the The number of the Kings Army.
(accounting the Suisses that were gone before with the Bailey of Dijon to
Genoa, and those troops in Romagnia under the command of Aubigni) amounted to
1600 men at Arms, 6000. Suisse, and 6000. French footmen: And for the use of
this Army they had brought by sea to Genoa great store of Ordnance both for
battery and the field, with munition, in such abundance, as the like before
was never seen in Italy.

The King, during his abode at Ast, had sent for the Duke of Orleans from
Genoa, willing him to attend him there. This town belonged unto him by his
grandmother, unto whom it was given in dowry by the Duke of Milan her father.
Now so soon as king Charles had recovered his health, he sent his Army into
the field, and himself went to Pauia, where being lodged in the Castle he went
to visit John The King visits John Galeas Duke of Milan.
Galeas Duke of Milan, his cofin german, (the king and he were sons to two
sisters, Lewis the second Duke of Sauoy) who lay daungerously sick in the same
Castle. His talk to him was general, by reason of Lodouico's presence: he
told him that he was extremely grieved for his sickness, comforted him, and
willed him to be of good cheer, and to use all means for the recovery of his
health: But the hope thereof being small, the King and as many as beheld him
did lament his estate, and perceived that this young Prince, through his uncles
treachery, would not live long.

This compassion was augmented by the presence of Princess Isabell his wife,
who languishing as well for her husbands sickness, fear of her young son, as
for The Duchess in tears falls down at the Kings feet.
the danger whereunto her father and kinsfolk were exposed, fell down at the
His answer to the Duchess.
to pity her, yet so great an enterprise could not be delayed upon so weak a
ground, whereupon he told her, that war being now begun, he was enforced to
pursue and continue it.

From Pauia the king went to Placentia, where, whilst he remained, he
received news of John Galeas death; whereupon, Lodouico who had followed him,
returned The death of John Galeas Duke of Milan.
in post to Milan, where the chief of the Dukes Council, suborned by him,
provided in open Council, that in regard of the States greatness and misery
of the times, it would be a dangerous matter, to have Francisco, son to the
late Duke Galeas, Lodouico to accept the Ducall dignity. Under this color,
honor giving way to ambition, he did the next morning (though he seemed to be
unwilling) take upon him the Title Lodouico vsurps the title and Arms of Duke
of Milan.
and Arms of Duke of Milan, having first solemnly protested that he received
the Duchy as belonging unto him by the inuestiture of the king of Romans.

The King remaining certain days at Placentia, was in a manner willing to
return home into France, as well for want of money, as also because no Italian
Potentate showed himself on his party, and besides, because this new Duke
returned

The same day that the King went from Placentia Lorenzo and Giouan de Medicis
stole secretly from their Country houses whither the Florentine Magistrate had
Lorenzo and Giouan de Medicis persuade the French King to go to Florence.
confined them at the pursuit of Pietro de Medicis their kin^man and mortal
enemy. They came to his Majesty, and earnestly entreated him to come near
Florence, and told him that he should be honorably entertained there, as well
in regard of the peoples love to the house of France, as for their hatred
toward Pietro de Medicis, who commanded there, and held the Arragonois
party, being by marriage allied to the family of Vrsini.

Upon this proposition the King changed his purpose, for though at his
departure The first resolu^ changed.
from France* it was concluded in his Council, that he should rather pass
through Romagnia and La Marca, than through Tuscanie and the territory of
Rome; yet, the Pope and Florentines being declared his enemies* his Council
thought it a matter unworthy the greatness of such a King, if for fear of
them he should refuse to pass through their territories: As also because it
was dangerous to invade the Realm of Naples, and to leave Tuscany and the
Churches State behind him as enemies. Therefore it was resolved, rather to
pass the Appenine^* by the hills of Parma, then by the direct way of Bolognia,
and to march without delay to Florence.

The vantgard conducted by Guilbert of Burbon, Duke of Montpensier, a The Kings
vantgard at Pontrema.
Prince of the blood, went on to Pontrema, a town feated at the foot of the
Appenine upon the River Magra, the King following with the rest of the army.
From Pontrema the Duke went into the country of Lunigiana, where he joined
Finizana taken and sacked by the French.
to the Florentines, which they took it by force and sacked it, killing all
the soldiers, and many of the inhabitants, the which did merueilously amaze
all Italy not accustomed to such cruel and bloody wars.

Serezzana was not far from thence, where the Florentines determined for to
make their chief resistance, which they had strongly fortified, but not
sufficiently to hold out so mighty an enemy, for it wanted a captain to
command Serezzana and Serezanella two strong places.
it, and men to defend it. Yet because some thought it would not be easily
taken, especially the Cittadell, and least of all, Serezanella, a strong Castle

The Florentines having intelligence that the King resolved for to come to
Florence, and that his army had already passed the Appenine, and then the
cruelty which was used at the taking of Fiuizana, did publicly detest the
rashness of Pietro de Medicis, who of himself, without any necessity had so
inconsiderately The Florentines in alarm.
drawn upon them the army of so potent a King, assisted by the Duke of Milan,
and this rumor had like to have raised a great tumult in

Pietro terrified herewith, and with the danger which he had before rashly
contemned, and perceiving the aid promised by the Pope and Alphonso to The
resolution of Pietro de Medicis.
be but a dream, precipirately resolved, to go seek that safety amongst his
enemies, which he could not hope for with his friends. And there upon, leaving
Florence, and not far on his way from the city, he heard say, that the
troops of horse and foo^ sent by the Florentines to enter Serezzana were
defeated by the French, and all of them either slain or taken. This caused him
to tarry at Pietra Sancta for a passe-port from the King, whether the Bishop of
Saint Malos, and other Lords of the Court went to him to safe conduct him to
the camp, The Articles of agreement.
with his vantgard, which being encamped before Serezanella, battered it with
the ordnance. Presenting himself before the King he was entertained with more
ceremony then love* and perceiving that the King did not much affect him* by
reason of his enemies reports, he resolved by all means to appease and
satisfy him.

The next day being brought before him, he granted all the kings demands*
which were excessive: viz. that the (...) and castles of Pietra-Sanct^,
Serezzana and Serezanella, which were the keys of the Florentine State, and
the forts of Pisa, and of the haven of Liuorne should be delivered to the king,
who by a promise Pietro* should cause the Florentines ^o lend the king (...)*
Ducats, and that then he should receive them into his protection.

The consignation of the strong places was presently made: for the money, they
wrote to Florence. Pietro de Medicis did hereby much assure the State of
Tuscany to the King, and removed all impediments from him on Romagnias side.
The Florentines aduertized of these Articles which Pietro de Medicis had agreed
to, the whole city was highly discontented with this reproachful and dangerous
wound given to their Commonwealth.

Pietro having notice of this rumor; the better to provide for his affairs
before any greater troubles did arise, took leave of the King, under color
of going to accomplish that which he had promised. But at his return to
Florence, he found most of the Magistrates banded against him, and the minds

He returned home to his own house, destitute of courage and council, Pietro
de Medicis flies from Florence.
and presently left Florence, being followed by the Cardinals John and I^lian
his brethren, who after their departure were declared enemies to the
Commonwealth, their houses ransacked which were very rich in moouables, and
their goods confiscate. Two of them, the eldest and the younger went to Venice,
the The Medici are declared enemies to their country.
second which was Cardinal John stayed for a time at Bolognia, and then
retired himself to some of his kinsfolk.

The King went from Serezzana to Luca, and from thence to Pisa, where the
citizens both men and women falling at his feet, began to cry out liberty,
liberty, infinitely complaining of the wrongs and injuries done to them daily
by the Florentines: The King at the persuasion of some of his Lords, not
considering the importancy of the matter, did freely grant their request, The
King gives liberty to the Pisans.
whereupon, the people presently armed themselves, and throwing down the
Florentines arms, that were set up in the public places, recovered their so
much desired liberty, repealing all those whom the Florentine Magistrates had
bannished.

In this confusion of all things the King departed from Pisa, having first
delivered Pietro de Medicis was expulsed; and also to give Aubigni time to come
and meet him, whom he had sent for.

Aubigni was in Romagnia where he had remained ever since his coming Aubigni
with his troops makes head against Ferdinand.
into Italy, making head against Ferdinand Duke of Calabria Alphonsos son,
where after sundry retreates on both sides, being re-enforced by the arrival
of certain companies left behind him, two hundred Lances, and one thousand
Swisses, which the King had sent so soon as he came to Ferdinand to retire
into the Cerca of Faenza, which is a place betwixt the walls of that City,
and a great trench some mile behind it, inuironing them both, which does make
it strong. Aubigni then returned into the Country of Imola, where he took
certain strong towns, filling all Romagnia with fear and amazement* so that
having taken Faenza, after the enemies departure, he marched directly to
Bertinora to pass the Appenine to join with the Kings army: But Bertinora
Bertinora taken.
refusing to give him passage, he assailed and took it by force, and in
despite, sacked it.

Ferdinand perceiving that he could not by any means stop the French
Charles had crossed the Po with a mighty army, the more to honor him, resolved
to send him Ambassadors, whom The Venetians send Ambassadors to the King.
they commanded to tarry still with him, and in the mean time armed at all
adventures. The Ambassadors were Dominico Treuisan, and Antonio Loredano, who
finding the king at Florence, accompanied him whereso ever he went.

Now after sundry commings too and fro, the king with his army marched toward
Florence. There was great magnificence, used both by the Courtiers and
Citizens: The king entered the city like a conqueror, himself and horse armed
at all points, with his Lance on his thigh. They began forthwith to treat of
agreement, but not without great difficulties, the which at last ended by the
valor of Pietro Caponi, one of the four Commissioners appointed Acord sworn
betwixt the ^ King and Florentines.
where the king in person, and the cities Magistrates, promised by sollemne oath
upon the high Altar, in presence of the Court and people of Florence, to
observe the contents thereof.

Two days after, the King departed from Florence, having tarried there ten
days, and went to Sienna, where making short stay, he left a Garrison,
because he suspected it to be at the Empires devotion. Then he iourneyed
toward Rome, where not long before Pope Alexander had given entrance to
Virginio Vrsini, and Count Petillan, captains to King Alphonso and his son
Ferdinand. So as it seemed he meant to have anticipated the enemies, to fortify
the city, and to repulse them from it: But doubting King Charles intention, and
fearing his forces, he had a wonderful conflict in his mind. For now he
determined to defend Rome, and to that end suffered Ferdinand and his captains
whom he had introduced into the city, to fortify the weak places; then
supposing that he should not be able to defend it, he determined to leave
Rome; and thus floating betwixt hope and fear, the French in the mean time
spoiled all the country on the hither side Tiber, taking now one town, then an
other, no place being strong enough to hold them out, so that after diverse
parlies, he resolved, as it were by force, to grant all King Charles his
demands, Ferdinand goes fourth of Rome at one gate, and the French King enters
at an other.
and to receive him into Rome, from whence he caused Ferdinand and his army to
depart, who went to Tiuoli, and from thence into the Realm of Naples, and
whilst he went forth at Saint Sebastians Gate, the French King armed at all
points, with his lance on thigh, entered with his army at the gate of Sancta
Maria del Popolo.

The Pope many times determined to fly, but at last retired into Castle Saint
Angelo, well provided of ordnance, munition and victuals. When the King and his
army were entered, an accord was propounded by means of Cardinal Acord betwixt
the Pope and French King.
Ascanio, on very rough conditions, which nevertheless were effected to the
Kings content, who thereby made a league with the, Pope saluted him,
Luxembourg, Cardinals.

Whilst the King remained at Rome, which was some month or thereabout,
Alphonso in ^ love to his son Ferdinand deposes himself.
Alphonso despayring of his own good fortune, sent for his son Ferdinand to
Naples, and in presence of his brother Frederick tenounced, and made

Alphonso after this voluntary demission, having given his son a large
instruction to recommend himself to God, departed from Naples with four light
Galleys, laden with treasure and rich stuff, and fled into a town in Sicily
called Mazare, where before the year was expired he died.

Ferdinand after his fathers departure, rode in royal habit up and down the
city, attended by his uncle Frederick and other great Lords of the Kingdom,
setting open prisons, pardoning all offenders, promising to repeal those that
had been banished. Then mustering his army, he gave great gifts to his
soldiers, and placed new Garrisons in his towns.

King Charles at the very instant of his departure from Rome received
intelligence of Alphonsos flight, he went to Velitra, and with him Caesar
Borgia Cardinal, The King comes to Velitra Cardinal Borgia flies from the
King by night.
the Popes son, as Legate Apostolical, or rather pawn of his fathers
promises. This Cardinal fled away secretly in the night, and to take away all
suspicion that he did it not by his fathers consent, went not to Rome but to
Spoleta. And at the same time those whom the King sent to the castles of
Hostia, Ciuita-uecchia, and Terracina, to receive them according to the accord
made with the Pope, that they might keep them so long as he remained in Italy,
were repulsed by the Popes soldiers. For the fort of Hostia which Fabricio
Colonna held, was recovered by Count Petillan, and re-deliuered to the Pope.

From Velitra, the vantgard marched to Monte-fortino, a very strong town,
M^nt-fortino taken by the Kings army.
seated in the Churches territories, and subject to Iacomo de Contis a Roman
Ferentino, and Monte Sancto Giouanni, seated on the Kingdoms confines, had the
like fortune, where after breach made, so furious an assault was given to it in
the Kings presence, who was come thither from Verula, as all difficulties
surmounted, it was taken the same day by force, and great slaughter committed
there.

From thence the King sent one of his Gentlemen to the Pope, threatening him
that if he did not perform the accord which he had sworn to, he would come
back and make war upon him. The Pope upon receipt of the Kings letters

In this manner, and without great resistance, did King Charles conquer that
noble and magnificent Kingdom, when Ferdinand, by his fathers flight, taking
upon him the title and authority royal, assembled his forces, and marched to
Saint Germans, where he encamped, thinking to keep the enemies from passing
Ferdinand encampeth at Saint Germains.
on any farther, by reason of the fitness of the place, environed on the one
side with high and steepy mountains, and on the other with a fenny country,
and in front with the River Garillan, whereupon, that place is properly called
one of the keys of the kingdom of Naples. But his army, already terrified
with the only name of the French, no more showed any signs of valor, but all
his soldiers Baserctreat of Ferdinands army.
Germans, and in such amazement retired to Capua, as by the way they left eight
great pieces of ordnance behind them.

Ferdinand and his army were scarce come to Capua, when he received news from
the Queen, that since the loss of Saint Germans, the Neapolitans were risen,
and that unless he speedily came thither, some great tumult was likely to
ensue upon these news, he presently went thither with certain troops
Ferdinandis denied entrance into Naples but with his own family.
of horse, by his presence to prevent so great a danger, promising for to
return to Capua the next day following. The Neapolitans would not suffer him
for to enter with his troops, but only gave entrance to himself and family;
where understanding their resolution, which was, not to endure a seege, for
fear least their city should be sacked, caused two of the three greater ships
in the haven to be buried; and gave the third to Obi^to de Fiesca, bestowing
three hundred brave horse that he had in his Stables upon certain citizens
his friends and servants* and having victualled the new castle and that called
Del Ouo, he returned according to his promise to provide for Capua.

But in his absence the city of Capua, thinking he had forsaken it, Triulcio
the cities Governor being gonne to treat with the French King, his own
soldiers, breaking open his house and ^ansaking it, Virginio Vrsin and Count
Petillan being likewise gonne, his whole army in a manner broken, he was
enforced to give place to the Conqueror. Ferdinand being come within two miles
of Capua yielded to the French.
Capua was aduertized of what had past, by certain Lords sent to tell him that
he should come on no farther: whereupon notwithstanding his entreaties, he was
enforced to return to Naples, where having made some bootlesse speech to the
Nobillity, unto whom the name of his grandfather and father were odious, he
withdrew himself into the new castle, from whence within a while after he
departed, and embarking himself in the Galleys, which attended him in the
Ferdinand flies from Naples.
haven, with Frederick his uncle, and the old Queen and her daughter Ioane,
sailed into the Isle of Isehia, thirty miles from Naples, where he was
enforced to make trial of his virtue and patience.

After his departure from Naples, all places yielded to the victors fame, so as
Virginio Vrsin and Count Petillan taken by the French.
Virginio Vrsin, and Count Petillan prisoners, who were come thither with four
hundred horse, they were carried to the fort of Montdragon. King Charles having
intelligence of Ferdinands flight, drew near Naples, and came to the city of
Auersa, betwixt Capua and Naples, where the Neapolitan Ambassadors met him, and
presented him with their cities keys, unto whom he having freely granted
sundry privileges and exemptions, the day following he entered Naples, where
with incredible joy and contentment he was received by the Nobility King
Charles received into Naples.
and people. He had sent his captains before to restrain the insolency of
his soldiers: He was accompanied to the Cathedral Church by multitudes

The King, peaceable possessor of the city (though not of the castles) did by
letters, and by their own Ambassadors gratify the Signory of Venice for that
it King Charles writes to the Uenetians.
had kept promise with him and continued his friend. The report of King Charles
his arrival and success in the Realm of Naples, was bruted so far, as the
very Turk feared him; because that the king had publicly vanted, that after
the conquest of the kingdom of Naples, he would turn his forces upon him, so
Bajazeth understood that he was come to Florence, he began to trim his old
vessels and to build new.

About the same time, threescore ships of war, wherein were six thousand A
Nauall army comes from Spain to Liuorne.
foot, and three hundred horse, arrived at Liuorne, sent by the kings of
Spain for the guard of Sicily, with Lorenzo Suares, deputed by their Majesty's,
for Ambassador to the Venetian Senate.

He told the Senate, that the cause of his arrival with those forces, was The
Spanish Ambassadors speech to the Venetians.
the king his Masters fear, least after the conquest of the Realm of Naples,
king Charles would make an attempt upon Sicily, which in former time had
belonged unto the French kings: That their Majesty's knowing the pride and
great power of the French, did suppose that the Venetians, moved with the
neerenesse of the danger to see so mighty a King in Italy, would be possessed
with the like fear; and therefore had commanded him in their names to salute
the Prince and Senate, and to assure them that if they desired ought of them,
they were ready to bear a part in their fortune: for in regard of their
wisdom and loyalty there was no Prince or King whatsoever with whom they more
desired to enter into league then with them: That Pope Alexander likewise would
make one, who desired nothing more then to be united with Spain and Venice;
and if any thing should happen otherwise then well, their forces thus joined
together, they might easily prevent it.

This speech of Suares did highly content the Senate, who being already jealous
Charles his greatness and good fortune, began to look about them, and to fear
other matters not yet thought of* Lodouicos distrust likewise of King Charles,
as well for that John James Triuulce, whom he had driven forth of Milan,
received the Kings pay, as because he had commanded the Duke of Orleance to
attend him at Ast: for Lodonico complained thereof to the Venetian Ambassador,
and told him, that he would gladly leave the French parts* and make a league
with the Venetians. Beside all this, Maximillians Ambassadors (whose father the
Emperor Frederick died that year) did not cease to solicit the Senate to
league it self with them against the French.

In the mean time, Castelnouo and that Del-Ouo two Cittadels in Naples, The
two Castles of Naples yielded to King Charles.
which yet held for Ferdinand yielded to the French. For Castelnouo, the abode
of Kings, seated on the shore, was after some small defense yielded to King
Charles, by the cowardice and baseness of five hundred Lansequenets that lay
there in Garrison. And the castle Del Ouo built upon a Rock in the sea, being
continually battered with Ordnance, was content to yield, if it were not
relieved within eight days. The fort likewise of Gayetta, notwithstanding that
it was The fort of Gayetta yielded to the King.
provided of all necessaries did after some slight assaults, yield: so as in a
very short space, the whole kingdom, in a manner, was with great facility
reduced under the Kings obedience, the Isle of Ischia excepted, and certain
towns in Puglia and Calabria which still held out for the Arragonois.

King Charles did now no more entertain the Venetian Ambassadors with such
cheerful countenance as he was wont; but oftentimes said, That those who
were not pleased with his coming into Italy, for the conquest of the Realm of
Naples, should repent it.

This being reported at Venice, caused them to hasten the conclusion of a new
league, to which end, Lodouico had sent new Ambassadors. Lorenzo Suares at his
arrival, told them, that his Kings pleasure was to have him in his name to
enter into the league, on any conditions pleasing to the Senate. Pope Alexander
likewise did daily expect a fit time to join himself with the Venetians and
the rest, having openly said, that if the French returned to Rome, he would
go to Venice, A league made by sundry great Princes against the French.
the Emperor, Kings of Spain, Venetians, and Duke of Milan: it was only
published for the defense of one an others States, with reservation of place
for any else to enter into it that would. But all of them thinking it more then
necessary, to draw the French King forth of the Realm of Naples, concluded, in
their more secret capitulations, that the Spanish companies that were in Sicily
should aid Ferdinand of Arragon to recover his Kingdom, who much presuming of
his peoples love, made means to enter into Calabria.

In this confederacy it was concluded, that the Confederates should make
account to entertain an army of four and thirty thousand horse, and twenty
thousand foot, viz. That the Pope should furnish four thousand horse,
Maximillian 6000. the King of Spain 8000. the Venetians the like number, and
Lodouico as many. And if any of them by reason of the long distance of place,
could not so soon as need were, leuy the number of soldiers he was rated at,
in sending to his associates six hundred pounds of gold, they should for him
furnish such forces.

These were the conditions of the Consederacie, the which was so speedily and
secretly concluded, as Philip de Comines, Lord of Argenton, Ambassador for king
Philip de Comines King Charles his Ambassador at Venice, daunted with the news
of the league.
Charles at Venice, who went daily to the Palace, and conferred with the other
Ambassadors, had never any inckling thereof: and being the next day after it
was concluded, sent for into the Senate, and understanding by the Prince and
Senators what had been done, he was in a manner like a man berest of his
senses: My King then shall not return into France? The Prince answered, But
he shall, if he will return The Princes answer to Comines.
as our friend, and we will willingly help him with whatsoever he shall
need. After this answer, he went forth of the Senate so amazed, as being at
the stairs foot he turned toward the Chancellor, who accompanied him, and
said to him, Good Sir, tell me what the Prince said, for I have for gotten it,
which he did.

Beside, the insolency of the French, by reason of the facility of their
victory was so increased, as in respect of themselves they contemned all
Italians: for which, the peoples love toward them was already converted into
mortal hatred: Ferdinand. Whereupon, Naples and all the rest of the kingdom,
waited but for a fit occasion to repeal him.

King Charles had in a manner resolved, before the conclusion of the league, to
return presently into France, provoked thereunto by some occasion unknown to
me, notwithstanding that diverse important businesses were not ended in
Naples, his victory being not fully perfected, by reason that the Realm was
not yet altogether conquered. But having intelligence that so many Princes were
leagued against him, and that the Venetians had called home their Ambassadors,
resident with him, his mind was much troubled, and he consulted with his
Lords what King Charles his resolution.
Thereupon, the King resolved to return by land, maugre all the Confederates;
seeing that he wanted vessels to transport so great an Army by sea: for the
fleet which he had prepared at Genoa, was wrackt by tempest, upon the shore
of Plombino, the Admiral whereof, and Antonio Prince of Salerno, came to him
by land.

In the mean time, King Charles perceiving that Lodouico as well as others had
deceived him, was desirous to take the City of Genoa from him, and to that
Pietro Fregosa Cardinal, thither, who had been Duke thereof, and Obietta de
Fiesca, with eleven Galleys, the remainder of his whole fleet. Then desirous
Guilbert of Bourbon Viceroy of Naples.
to prosecute his own return, he left Guilbert of Bourbon, Duke of
Montpensier, Prince of the blood, his Lieutenant General in the kingdom, with
the moiety of the Suisse, and part of the French footmen, eight hundred French
lances, and five hundred Italian men at arms, which were in his pay, part of
them under the command of the Provost of Rome, and the rest under Prospero, and
Fabricio Colonni, and Antonello Sauello, all three great Captains, on whom he
had bestowed many benefits. This done, he departed from Naples with the rest
of his Army, on the twentieth of May, and marched directly toward Rome. But
King Charles is crowned King of Naples
with great solemnity in the Cathedral Church of Naples, where with great pomp
he received the honors and oaths which are usually made to new Kings. The King
carried away with him eight hundred French Lances, the two hundred Gentlemen of
his guard, the Lord Triuulcio with a hundred lances, three thousand Suisse, and
two thousand French footmen: and appointed Camillo Vitelli and his brethren to
meet him in Tuscany with two hundred and fifty men at arms.

In this equipage did King Charles march toward Rome: Pope Alexander, although
two days before he came thither had promised where to attend him, did
nevertheless after he had left a strong garrison in Castle Angelo, retire to
Oruietta, accompanied by the whole College of Cardinals, two hundred men at
arms, a thousand light horse, and three thousand foot, leaving the Cardinal
Santo Anastasio his Legate in Rome, to entertain and honor the King. The
Venetians not long before, had for his better safety sent him five hundred
Albanese

The King being come to Rome, refused to lie in the Palace of the Vatican,
which the Pope had appointed for him, and lodged in the suburbs: From thence
King Charles sends a messenger to Uenice.
he sent a Gentleman to the Venetian Senate, to tell them from him, that his
King had yet never entreated or sued to any; but now he was only desirous to
know of them, whether their State were his friend or enemy. The Prince answered
The Princes answer to him.
him. That wise and discreet men were wont sometime to refer them selves to
the will and opinion of others, and in time of need to request their aid: That
he spoke this, only to let him understand, that it lay in his Kings power, to
Philip de Comines the Ambassador.

The Florentines likewise, so soon as they had intelligence of this new
confederacy, and that King Charles was come from Naples, to return home into
France, began to leuy soldiers, and to fortify their towns, to stop the
Kings passage, if he intended to pass through their City. The King departed
from Rome, and though at his approach near Viterbo, the Pope had again
promised The Popes inconstancy.
to confer with him in some fit place, yet he went from Oruietta to Perousa,
meaning if the King directed his course thither, to go to Ancona. The King
never the less, though he were highly incensed against the Pope, did
re-deliuer the Castles of Ciuata-uechia and Terracina, reserving that of Hostia
to himself, and

The Venetian Senate being advertised that one of their chief Confederates
territories had been so spoiled by the French, thought that King Charles had
begun war against them, fearing that coming upon theirs, or on those of
the Duchy of Milan, he would do the like: Whereupon they commanded their
General Antonio Grimani, to sail with their Fleet into Puglia. The King
afterward arrived at Sienna, where he remained six days, notwithstanding
that every man advised him to depart speedily: but there they

The King leaving Florence on his right hand, took the high way of Pisa, and
from thence went to Luca. The Pope perceiving the King was past, sent back the
Venetians and Lodouicos forces which they had lent him, and returned to Rome.

In the mean time they in Lombardy began to stir. For the Venetians and
Lodouico Great preparations made by the Venetians and Lodouico Sforza.
Sforza made great preparations to hinder the Kings return into France,
Lodouico being very desirous to perform that whereunto he was tied by the
Confederacy, concerning the City of Ast, sent Galeas of Saint Seuerine to that
enterprise with 700. men at arms and three thousand foot making no other
account but to take it.

The Duke of Orleance, who remained in it, upon the first intelligence of the
The Duke of Orleance takes Valfenieres.
new League, had fortified Ast, and with great earnestness solicited new
supplies from France to relieve the King. On a sudden forces from all parts
were assembled, Antonio Maria of Saint Seuerin, whereupon Galeas with his army
retired into Anon, dispairing to execute any notable matter.

The Duke returning to Ast, an occasion being offered to take Nouara, would
not omit it, and having concluded with those that offered to give him entrance
The French take the town and Castle of Nouara.
he crossed the Po by night at the bridge of Stura, and with his forces,
without any resistance, was received into the City by them: from thence he
sent part of his Cauallery to make incursions as far as Vigeua. The Castle of
Nouara still held out for Lodouico, but the Duke of Orleance to assure his
conquest, resolved to take it; whereupon, on the fifth day after, it promised to
yield (which it did) if it were not reieeued within 24. hours.

The Venetians having intelligence that Lodouico was invaded, and that the

Now after some controversy with the Florentines concerning the restitution
The number of the Confederate Army.
of their Forts, the Kings vantgard led by the Marshall of Gie went to
Pontrema. In the mean time the Confederate Army was spedily assembled near to
Parma in number two thousand five hundred men at arms, 8000. foot and 2000.
light horse called stradiots, most of whom were Albaneses, and of the neighbor
Francesco Gonzaga the young Marquis of Mantoa was General of the Venetian
troops, whose valor surmounted his years, and with him two principal
Senators, Luca Pisani and Melchior Treuisan, as Prouidators The Count Gaiazza
commanded Lodouicos troops, Francisco Bernardino Viscount being joined in
Commission with him.

All the Confederate Captains consulted whether they should encampe at
Fornouo, a small Village at the foot of the hill, and it was concluded because
the place was very straight, and peradventure likewise to give the enemy means
to descend into the plain, that they would lodge in the Abbey of Guiaruola,
three

The Marshall de Gie being come thus foreward, sent a trumpet to the
Confederate Army, in his Kings name to crave passage, who without offense to
any man, and taking victuals at a reasonable price, was desirous to pass on
and return into France. The Confederates consulting upon an answer for the
Marshalls trumpet, the Captains opinions were different, in the end they
concluded to send to Milan, where the Duke and Confederate Ambassadors lay, to
know their pleasures. But the matter being delayed, the Captains sent back the
Trumpet

The King at last joining with his Vantgard, did with his whole army the next
The King lodges at Fornouo.
day following lodge at Fornouo. The French, who till then had marched with
great boldness and assurance, making no account of the Italians arms, so
soon as at their going down the hill they discovered the enemies army with
infinite numbers of tents and pauilions, and considering their resolution to
fight, began a little to abate their former heat, and would have been well
pleased, so that the Italians would have suffered them to pass. The King
enforced to embrace new Council commanded the Lord of Argenton to send
atrumpet to the Venetian Prouidators, to let them understand that he desired to
confer with them The two armies near to one another.
for the public good: They accepted the parley in some fit place betwixt both
Armies: but the King, altring his purpose, would not attend the issue of this
parley.

The two armies were quartered within three miles of one another along the
Turo, which is rather a torrent then a river, which running betwixt two little
hills does in a manner enuiron them. On one of those hills was the Confederate
army lodged on the right hand toward the river banks, they had fortefied
themselves with Dikes and Rampires well flanked with ordnance, and the French
were of necessity to go that way to Ast, nothing but the river being betwixt
the enemies and them.

All that night was very tedious to the French, both in regard of the Stradiots
continual alarmes, as for a sudden shower of rain, entermingled with The
French army crosses the Turo.
fearful thunder and lightening, Which they interpreted as a presage of some
sinister John James Triuulcio with his company of an hundred Lances, and 3000.
Suisses, to whom the King added three hundred archers and The order of the
Kings ar^.
some crosbowes on horseback of his guards whom he caused to march on foot,
for he supposed that the enemy would turn his cheese forces upon it. The
battle followed the vantgard, in midst whereof was the Kings person, armed
at all points, mounted on a gallant courser, and the Lord Tremouille near him
with his authority and Council to govern that part of the army. Next followed
the rereward conducted by the Earl of Foix, and behind it the

So soon as the two armies began to move, the light horse on both sides
skirmished, the ordnance flew from both parts, and the Italians, prepared for
the battle, extended their Squadrons on the river banks. The French marched
on notwithstanding, so as their Vantgard was already led to the right side of
the The Marquis of Mantu ^ his order to assail the King.
enemies Camp, when the Marquis of Mantua crossed the river at the back of the
French rereward, with a Squadron of 600. men at arms, a great troop of
Stradiots, and other light horse, and 5000. foot, having commanded Antonio of
Montfeltre to be ready with his troops when he should be sent for to refresh
the first battaillon, and the light Cauallery to give in in flank upon the
enemies so

But the King perceiving that contrary to his expectation the whole burden
lighted on the rere-ward, turned his back to the Vantgard, and drew near to
the King Charles his ^alour.
Rere with the battle, and came with such speed, one squadr on before
another, as himself was at the front among those that fought brauest. And
though the Marquis assault was brave and furious, the French did as bravely
answer him, charge, yet being pressed by multitudes, began to stagger, the King
himself being in danger, who though he had not many of his own soldiers
about him, did valiantly defend himself, the goodness and firecenesse of his
horse doing him better service then the aid of his people, and then he made
a vow to Saint His vow.
Denis and Saint Martin, that if he might safely pass into Piedmont, he would
at his return into France, with great gifts go and visit their Churches, the
one being near Paris, and the other in the City of Tours. These vows made,
he began to fight with greater courage then before, till his soldiers that
were next him, being incited by his danger, did all of them with their own
lives, run to save the Kings, and repulse the Italians, whither the battle
that stayed behind, The King rescued by the battle.
arriving in time, and giving in furiously upon the enemies flanques, stayed
their fury: in this charge Rodolfo Gonzaga, Uncle to the Marquis of Mantua, a
very famous Captain, hurt in the face with a sword as he lifted up his Beuer,
and falling from his horse, was miserably trod to death by the horse, and
could not be saved.

The battle thus changing by sundry accidents, and no advantage on either
side appearing, made all men more and more to wonder unto whom the victory
would incline: The French were enflamed by the presence and danger of their
King, and because they were in a place where they could hope for no safety but
in victory. The Italians on the other side were incited by a covetous desire of
rich

Whilst they fought so valiantly on that side of the Army, the French
Vantgard, against which Count Gajazza brought part of his Cauallery, presented
it The French vantgard disordereth the enemy.
self in battle, with such fury, as the Italians, daunted, because they
were not seconded, did of themselves fall into disorder, and fled to the body
of their Army which was on the farther side of the river, whereupon the
Marshall de Gie would not pursue them any farther, some afterward, reputing it
to wisdom and discretion, others to cowardice. The Marquis of Mantua passed
the River in the best and closest order he could, where he found his troops so
disordered, as every man with his booty thought on nothing but means how to
escape; but his presence and authority, stayed that confusion.

The King with his troops coming to his Vantgard, which had not stird,
demanded The King determines to assail the enemies in their Camp.
his Captains advise, whether he should suddenly cross the River, and
assail the enemies in their Camp, but their opinions being various, and also
the troops which had fought, wearied, they resolved to take up their lodging:
and for that night, they lodged on the hill, in the village called Medezana, a
mile from the place where they fought.

Such was the end of the battle betwixt the French and the Italians near the
River Tarro, where of the French side dyed scarce two hundred, but of Italians
more then three hundred men at arms, and as many others as amounted to three
thousand men, in regard of which number of dead so disproportionable, the
victory was attributed to the French, though the Venetians challenge to
themselves the glory of the day, because that their camp and baggage remained
whole and entire, whereas the French on the contrary, lost much of theirs, and
among others, some of the Kings rich stuff: Whereupon, by public Decree, over
all the territories under their obedience, and especially at Venice, bonefiers
and other signs of joy were made. The day following, the King remained in the
same village,

The next morning before day, the King with his Army dislodged, sounding
neither d^um nor trumpet, the better to conceal his departure; and all that
day he was not pursued by the Confederate Army, by reason that the Taro was
exceedingly swelled, and could not that day be foorded. Sanseuerine whose self
and soldiers had not fought in that battle, made an offer to the Marquis and
Prouidators, that if they would give him a troop of light horse to cut off the
Sanseuerin his offers.
tail of the Kings army, he by his incursions would amuze the French, so
long, The small effect thereof.
troops: but so soon as he drew near them, he served rather for a guide to
conduct them to Ast, then a disturber of their journey: so, as it seemed that
his request to the Marquis and Prouidators, was only to accompany and safe
conduct the King. His intent was afterward known to be such, by Lodouicos
commandment, who when Bernardo Contaren would have given in upon the Kings
reregard, could not be suffered so to do.

So soon as the waters were down, the Marquis pursued the Kings Army, The
King arr^neth at Ast.
march, without loss of men or other encombrances, came before the walls of
Ast, where after the King was entered he caused his Army to be lodged in the
field.

The Camp of the league which had followed him into the Tortonois, being no
more able to annoy him, joined with Lodouicos Sforzas forces before Nouara. The
Kings retreat being known at Venice, the Senate commanded general
Precessions, and public prayers to be made, to give God thanks for that by
his

The end of the fourth Book of the fourth Decade.
The Contents of the fifth Book of
THe Venetians at Genoa arm by Sea against the French, and take Rapalla in the
Realm of Naples. Lodouico and the Confederates besiege Nouara. Peace concluded
betwixt King Charles and the Confederates, the King returns into France. The
Neapolitans revolt from the French, and bring Ferdinand into Naples. A General
rebellion over the whole kingdom Ferdinand, he giving them three Cities in
Puglia. The Venetians resolving to defend Pisa against the Florentines, send
aid thither. King Charles determines to return into Italy, and makes great
preparation for it. The Duke of Montpensier, besieged in Attella, is through
want of victuals enforced to Capitulate, and quit the Realm of Naples. The
death of Duke Montpensier and other great Captains. King Ferdinands death. The
pursutes of Lodouico and the other Confederates to have Pisa restored Charles
the eight French King. Lewis Duke of Orleans, French King. Coruin, son to the
King of Hungary, made a Gentleman of Venice. Caesar Borgia, son to Pope
Alexander, quitts his Cardinals Hatte, and is made by King Lewis Duke of
Valentinois. Lodouico procures the Turkish fleet to invade the Venetians.
League betwixt Lewis the French King and the Venetians. The French King sends
an Army into Italy, under the command of John James Triuulce.

The fifth Book of the fourth Decade, of the History of Uenice.
THE Venetians, advertised that King Charles at his departure from Naples, had
sent diverse vessels to make incursions into The Venetians arm certain
vessels at Genoa against the French.
the river of Genoa (as has been said) sent one of their Citizens to Genoa
with money to rigge certain great Argozies. Lodouica Sforza had likewise given
order to arm a certain number of Galleys, so as together they prepared a
fleet, the which departing from Genoa, did by night land The Venetian flette
takes Rapalla.
with the French fleet, it assailed and defeated it, the Admiral thereof being
taken, and four French Ensigns, which the Geneuois sent to Lodouico Sforza,
who presently gave two of them to the Venetian Ambassador, resident with him,
saying that he did present them to the honor and merit of the Venetian
commonwealth. The French nauall army is defeated.
The Marquis of Mantua in the mean time being at Clastegia, following King
Charles his Army, requested by Lodouico, and commanded by the Senates decree,
sent two thousand foot in Garrison to Tortona and Alexandria. Then he
entreated the Senate to send two Senators, who as Prouidators should manage the
war with him: whereupon Luca Zeno, and Andrea Venieri were appointed,
Lodouico with a mighty Army did straightly besiege. The Venetians sent so great
aid, as scarce any enterprise can be remembered, wherein they spent more money,
so that in a short space, there were three thousand men at arms, three The
number of the Army before Nauara.
thousand Almaine horse, five thousand Italian foot, and ten thousand
Lancequenets, in the confederate camp.

The Venetian Senate was not only careful to send forces to this siege, but
the more to encourage their soldiers, had from Lieutenant of the Army made the
Marquis of Mantua Captain General thereof, the better to honor his courage
and valor manifested at the battle of Fornouo: and with a very gracious
example,

The seege still continuing before Nouara, those of the town were in great
want of victuals, by reason of the great number of soldiers and Country people
that were in it, nor could the King, who lay at Ast, relieve it, for want of
men: and though the Duke of Orleance, when he was made acquainted with the
dearth, did put forth all unprofitable eaters, yet this remedy was to no
purpose: The French made many attempts by night to victual it, but being
still discovered,

The King then, out of hope to raise the siege in any time, and daily
importuned The King resolves to hearken unto peace.
by the Duke of Orleans, who was in great want, determined to hearken unto
peace. But the difficulty to obtain it was very great, in regard of the
iealozie and distrust betwixt the King and Duke of Milan: yet it was motioned
by an unexpected means. For the Lady Marquis of Mont-ferate being dead, the
King wishing well to that State, sent the Lord of Argenton to Cassall, to
consult with her subjects concerning the profit and commodity of a young son
she had A motion of peace made at Casall.
left behind her. The Marquis of Mantuas Steward came thither likewise in his
Masters name to bewail her death. They two entered so far into discourse of
peace, as the Lord of Argenton, by the persuasion of this Steward, did write
thereof to the Venetian Prouidators, who inclining thereunto, acquainted the
Duke of Milans Captains with it, who with one consent, sent to entreat the
King which lay at Ver^eill, to appoint some of his officers to meet them in
some fit place

The Venetians were displeased with Lodouico, for that without the advice and
consent of all the Confederates he had made peace with King Charles, seeing
The Venetians are displeased with Lodouico.
that they having been often entreated by the King, and him, to hearken
thereunto, had ever answered, that they would do nothing but by the consent of
all

Lodouico was much troubled with these news, and perceiving that the Venetians
were no more his friends, gave secret commandment to all his Garrisons, by
which the Venetian Camp was to pass, to guard the passages, and especially
the Rivers, and to shut up all the boats, to stay their departure against
his will. This being known to the Prouidators, they were much amazed, in
regard they were to pass many great rivers: and conferring heerevpon with
Bernardo Contaren, A bold enterprise of Bernardo Contaren.
not knowing what to resolve on, he offered to poinard Lodouico in open

But to return to that which was done at the same time in the Realm of
Naples, where war was managed as well as in Lombardy. So soon as Ferdinand
had intelligence of King Charles his departure from Naples, (being then in
Sicill) attended by the Spaniards who were come thither by Sea, he landed in
Calabria, Antonio Grimani, a man of great authority in the State, was General,
who coming near to Monopoli a City in Puglia, landed the Stradiots The
Venetians take Monopoli.
and certain foot companies, then by land and sea, gave an assault to the
City, which was taken by force, whereupon the Castle soon yielded: This
fleet likewise took the City of Pulignana by composition.

Ferdinand in the mean time with many vessels, but few soldiers, leaving
Sicily, having besides the love and favor of the people of the Realm of
Naples, in the City (which had been promised) but it was in vain, for the
French took good order there for that time, so that the third day after
Ferdinand dispayring of any good success, made to Sea, determining to return
to Ischia.

The Citizens of Naples, who had resolved to deliver the town to Ferdinand,
(their plot being half discovered), determined to make a virtue of necessity,
and to win or loose all, according to this resolution secretly sent a small
boat to call back Ferdinand, entreating him to land all, or part of his forces
to give encouragement to those that intended to rise in his behalf. Upon this
aduertizement, Ferdinand Tee Neapolitans re^ult i^ favor of Ferdinand.
returned again before Naples, and then landed, a mile from the City; which
the Duke Montpensier perceiving sallied forth of Naples with all his Ferdinand,
Ferdinand. The French amazed at this sudden tumult, thinking it dangerous to
abide betwixt the rebellious City and the enemies, determined to return to
Naples, but they were enforced to fetch a great compass, to come to the Gate
near Castelnouo, for that through which they came forth was seized on by the
Neopolitans. Ferdinand in the mean time entered the City on horseback, where,
to the peoples incredible joy, he rode up and down. The French entering at the
Gate next the Castle, did their best to get into the heart of the City, but
their attempts were Yues of Alegre a famous Captain, Antonio Prince of
Salerne, and many other French A General revolt made oaer the whole Kingdom
and Italian Captains of note. Those of Capua, Auersa, the Fort Montdragon,
and other towns near adjoining, and the greatest part of the Kingdom did the
like. Those of Gayetta going about to follow their example were with great
slaughter prevented by the French Garrison, who in heat of blood sacked the
City. The Venetian Senate having intelligence that Ferdinand had recovered the
City of Naples, wrote to Antonio Grimani that he should no more assault any
town of the Kingdom in the Venetians name, but to remain at Monopoli to
Ferdinand: this was granted, and Antonio Grimani leaving 100. light horse and
two Galleys for the guard of Monopoli, went to Tarentum which held out against
Ferdinand. But Grimani being there aflicted with a flix, sent twenty Galleys to
Ferdinand, under the command of Contaren the Prouidator, and himself, with the
rest of the fleet (for he had in the mean time received new supplies) directed
his course to Corfou. At the same time, the Florentines being desirous by all
means to recover Pisa, and the Pisans being to weak to resist, sent secret
messengers to the Venetian The Pisans commit themselves to the Veneti^ns
Senate, to entreat them to receive their City into their protection, and to

Lodouico likewise was greedy to impatronize this City, and thereupon seemed
very ready underhand to aid the (...) against the Florentines, whom he
entertained with sundry practices.

The Pope moved by Ferdinands entreaties, wrote at the same time to the
Venetians, to send part of their Army returned from the seege of Nouara, to aid
Ferdinand to drive the French forth of the Realm of Naples, promising that
Ferdinand should engage certain sea towns to them, till they were satisfied
for their expense in that war. The Senate not fully resolved to send the Army
to the King, commanded Bernarao Contaren to go before to Rauenna, with 600.
light horse, to the end that if they should determine to send it, he might be
so far onwards on his way. This being understood at Rome, the business was
prolonged, Ascanio, brother to Lodouico, made a proposition that the Venetians
should assist the King in that war, and yet have no towns engaged to them.

Ferdinands Ambassadors, that came to Venice to make an accord, following the
Cardinals advice; demanded the army, but offered no pawn. The Senate knowing
that this was Lodouicoes practice, who envied their greatness, did on a
sudaine dismiss the Ambassadors, not suffering them to remain a moment in the
City. The Ambassadors spent many days to pacify the Senate, and
notwithstanding that they promised that Ferdinand should deliver three of his
best Cities, The Uenetians (...) an ac (...) with Fer^ Ambassadors.
with their territories, unto them, namely Trani, Brundusium and O^ranto,
Ferdinand: and the Treasorer to the State did deliver to Ferdinands
Ambassadors. 150. pounds of gold by way of loan, with diverse other conditions,
which the Pope approved and ratified, as one having interest in the Realm of
Naples.

The League thus made, Commissioners were sent to Ferdinand to receive the The
Venetians send aid to Ferdinand.
three towns, and messengers to the Marquis of Mantoua* to will him without
delay to lead his troops into the Realm of Naples. These things thus
concluded Ferdinand; the like did the two Castles in Naples. King Charles after
his return into France sent the Lord of Argenton to Venice to tell the Senate,
that he accounted their State to be comprehended in the accord made King
Charles sends an Ambassador to Uenice.
with Lodouico, because their Generals and Prouidators were present at it, in
which regard, he entreated the Senate to surrender Monopoli to him which their
Army had taken from his subjects, and that they would no more assist Ferdinand:
The Venetians sent him back without satisfying his Kings demands. Charles
raised a new army, determining to send it by Sea to the relief of Caietta,
under the Conduct of the Duke of Orleans, who craving to be excused from that
journey,

Lodouico, having intelligence of what-soeuer was done in France, and now no
more fearing the French, was advertised by letters from his friends of the
Pisans request made to the Venetians, whervppon he entreated the Senate to
receive him as an associate in the defense and protection of Pisa, because that
the Florentines were leagued with King Charles, and himself had taken their
Ambassador in his own Dominions which was going into France.

This business, sundry times debated in the Senate, it was at last concluded
The resolution for the defense of Pisa.
by the general consent of the Ambassadors, that Pisa should be defended at
the common charge of the Pope, Venetians, and Duke of Milan, and that two
thousand foot should be leuyed at Genoa by the Venetians, to be sent to Pisa.

Hereupon the Florentines raised 6000. foot, and with the ordnance sent them to
Pisa before the enemies forces were assembled, hoping to take the city. But
coming near to the gates, those within the town made a salley, and after a
furious charge upon the enemy, defeated and put them to route, and took their
ordnance. Not long after, Paulo Vitelli the Roman, a valiant and brave
Captain, forsook the Pisans, and went to Florence, where being honorably
entertained and made General of their Army, he marched with 10000. foot
against the Pisans, and at his arrival lodged in the Cities suburbs, from
whence the townsmen did beat and repulse him: but the Florentines winning
them again, were enforced to quit them, and to give over the siege, to defend
their own confines Pietro de Medicis, who was said to be coming with great
forces against the city of Florence, accompanied by this kinsmen the Vrsini.

The Venetians in the mean time levied five hundred foot at Genoa, whom The
Venetians and Lodouico send aid to Pisa.
they sent to Pisa, the like did Lodouico: The Florentines having used all
their cunning to take the Cittadell of Pisa, as well by means of the King, as
money; the governor thereof, provoked by his own inclination to the French,
that were in Pisa, or by secret Commissions from the Lord of Ligni, whose
Lieutenant he was, or else being enamored on a young maiden of Pisa (for it
is not likely that money alone would have prevailed with him, seeing he might
have received a greater sum of the Florentines) was very loath to yield up
the Castle, but

The Pisans running in heaps to the Cittadell, razed it down to the ground:
The Pisans raze their Cittadell.
But because they found themselves too weak to resist the Florentines, they
sent to crave aid at one time of the Pope, Emperor, Venetians, Duke of Milan,
Geneuois, Seinoi^, and Lukeses: but they were most earnest with the Venetians
and Duke of Milan, on whom they relied more then on any other, because he had
provoked them to rebel, and had speedily relieved them. But the Duke, And
crave aid of sundry Princes.
though he extremely desired it, did nevertheless doubt whither he should
accept it or no, fearing least the other confederates should take it ill, by
whose council the treaty of the State of Pisa had bin begun, as a matter
common to them all, and standing in need of them, he durst not openly declare
himself until the King were wholly forth of Italy: But the Pisans then grew
cold, hoping to be relieved by the Venetians, who without sparing for any cost
did bountifully supply them with all things: whereupon they betook themselves
to their The Venetians protect the Pisans.
protection, and were received by the Senate, after long cont^station among the
Senators.

The Venetians at the same time had taken Astor, Lord of Faenza into their
Ferdinand. In the mean time Antonio Grimani being enforced by his
indisposition of body to retire from Corfou to Venice, Melchior Treuisan was in
his steed sent as General to the fleet, who going to Corfou with certain
Galleys, did presently sail into Puglia, and from thence into Calabria, where
he united himself with the rest of the Venetian vessels, and with them
enforced diverse towns to yield to Ferdinand.

Whilst the whole kingdom of Naples was filled with war and troubles, King
Charles having understood the loss of the two Castles in Naples, through want
of supplies, began a new to bend his thoughts on the affairs of Italy, and to
determine to go thither again in person: This desire daily increasing in him,
whereunto diverse great Lords both French and strangers provoked him. Therefore
his council concluded, that Triuu^cio, who not long before was come forth of
Italy to his Court, should return in post to Ast, as Lieutenant to the King,
and with him eight hundred Lances, two thousand Swisses, and two thousand
French foot; that the Duke of Orleance should ere long follow him Resolution of
the Kings council or his journey into Italy.
with greater forces, and the King last of all with all provisions: moreover,
that thirty ships in the havens of Prouence, where thirty Galleys and Gallions
were to be armed, should sail through the Ocean with supplies of men,
victuals, munition and money into the Realm of Naples, and that in the mean
time, whilst the fleet was making ready, certain vessels well manned and
victualled should be

The rumor of these preparations in France diuulged in Italy, did much trouble
Lodouico send^ every where to get force^ to secure himself from the French.
the Confederates, especially Lodouico Sforza, who was the first to be exposed
to the enemies fury, but most of all when he understood that the King had
dismissed his Agents with sharp and bitter speeches. He sent Ambassadors to
the Emperor, to draw him into Italy, and others to Venice to request the
Venetians to contribute toward this expense, to prevent this common danger,
and to send certain troops to Alexandria to make head against the French. The
Venetians freely offered to send forces to Alexandria; but they were not so
willing to give their consent for the Emperors passage, who was no great friend
to their State, Lodouico, whom they knew to be fearful and timorous, should
fully reconcile himself to the French King, they agreed to send Ambassadors to
the Emperor to the same end. And standing in doubt of the Florentines, they The
Uenetian^ join with Lodouico.
sent word to Giouan Bentiuole to make war upon them with such forces as the
Confederates should furnish him on the frontier toward the Bolognese;
promising him that they should be at the same time invaded by the (...), and
Pisans: yet though Bentiuole promised so to do, his meaning was clean
contrary. But the French affairs being prolonged by the Cardinal of Saint
Malo, who, besides the superintendency of the treasure, managed all matters,
did so delay the execution of things, already resolved upon, as one accident
more happened, The King tak^s his (...) of the Saints* Denis and Martin.
King would have gonne into Italy, he determined a journey to Paris (according
to the custom of ancient Kings) before his departure forth of France to take
his leave of Saint Denis, and likewise of Saint Martin, passing by Tours,
promising within a month to return to Lions to pursue his journey into Italy.
The advice of his Lords, nor urgent entreaties and tears of the Italians,
could not alter this determination. The Duke of Orleance, Cardinal of Saint
Malo, and the whole council remained at Lions to hasten the provisions, and
the King went to Tours, where the Queen lay.

The affairs of Naples were in the mean time brought to great extremity,
Ferdinands army, re-enforced with men, victuals and money, did still attend the
French, and were continually at their backs. But that which did most ruin
them, was the Lord D' Aubignis sickness, which caused diverse to forsake him,
and to go to the Duke Mo^tpensier his army: Calabria by that means being
unfurnished of men, so as Gonsaluo that was come thither, took diverse towns
in that Province, and obtained a Ferdinands camp before Atella, where Duke
Montpensier lay with diverse other Barons and great Lords, both French and
Italians, which followed Ferdinand does straightly beseege At^lla.
the French Kings party.

By Gonsaluos coming to the camp, the beseeged were more straightly enclosed,
the town being wholly environed, both by the Arragoneses, Venetians and
Spaniards, so as no victuals could enter into it, especially in regard of the
Stradiots and Venetians who scoured the country: neither could they go forth
to forage as they were wont, so that being deprived of all commodities, they
were brought to such extremity, as they could not get water from the River,
either for themselves or horse.

Being then oppressed with so many miseries, they craved a safe conduct,
At^lla enforced to capitulate.
which was granted them, whereupon, the Lord of Persi, Barthelmeo Aluiana and a
Swisse captain were sent to capitulate with Ferdinand, with whom they thus
agreed. That there should be truce for thirty days: That in the mean time the
Charles. That none of the beseeged should go forth of Atella, and that the
Arragonois should daily give them competent victuals. If they were not relieved
in that time, he should leave Atella, and whatsoever else was under his
command in the Realm of Naples, together with all the ordnance. That the
soldiers might depart with their lives and baggage, with permission to return
home into France either by sea or land. That the Vrsini and other Italian
soldiers might with their companies depart forth of the Realm whither soever
they pleased. The truce expired Duke Montpensier came forth, with all the
French, Swisse, and the Vrsini, and was conducted by the Marquis of Mantua and
his light horse in safety to Baja, where Montpensier and great numbers of his
people died, so Montpensier his death.
that of five thousand, five hundred hardly returned into France.

After the taking of Atella, Ferdinand divided his army into sundry parts, for
the recovery of the rest of the kingdom. He sent Don Frederico of Arragon his
uncle, and Prospero Colonna before Caietta: Fabricio Colonna into Abruzzo, and
himself went and encamped before Salerno, where he made an accord with the
Princes of Besignano and Salerno. (...) returned into Calabria, which for the
most part was held by the French, where although the Lord Aubigni Aubigni is
enforced to leave Calabria to return into France.
made some resistance, yet at last being coopt up in Gropoli, having lost
Manfredonia and certain other towns, and despayring of all aid, he consented
to leave Calabria, and was suffered to return by land into France.

Thus, no other towns holding out in the whole Kingdom but Tarentum and
Caietta, it seemed that Ferdinand had attained the height of his desires, when
coming to Somma a town seated at the foot of Mount Vesuua, to visit the
Queen his wife, he fell grievously sick, and was carried to Naples where
within a while after he died: but before his death, he commanded the Bishop of
A great desire of revenge.
Theanas head, whom he kept in prison, to be cut off, and fearing that they
would not obey him by reason of his sickness, he caused the head to be
brought into Frederick coming in have from Caietta to Naples with Melchior
Tre^isan, was by the Princes of the Realm saluted King, his Nephew dying
without children. This Prince beloved of all men for his meekness labored to
reconcile to himself all those who in any sort had favored the French, and
freely restored their castles to them. In this manner winning the peoples
hearts, the war against the French Tarentum and Cai^tia yield to Frederick.
in the Realm of Naples was almost ended, for the city of Tarentum, oppressed
with famine, did with her castles yield to the Venetians, which beseeged it by
sea, who presently delivered it to Frederick. Those of Caietta within a while
after, did the like; and by this means the French lost the Realm of Naples.
The Venetians hold Pisa.
the Venetians had placed four hundred men at arms, seven hundred light
horse, and two thousand foot, against the Florentines. They went moreover with
the Emperor Maximillian to beseege Liuorne, where their enterprise succeeding
badly, they were enforced to discampe, and from thence, the Emperor returned
with speed into Germany, with small honor to the Imperial dignity, whereupon
he was contemned over all Italy. King Charles resolves to afsaile Genoa.


King Charles likewise being dispited with his loss and infamy, determined to
assail Genoa, presuming upon Baptist a Fregosa his party. The Pope on the
other side, desirous to possess the Vrsins States, the chief of that family
being imprisoned at Naples, did in open consistory declare Virginio and the
rest traitors, and confiscated their lands. This did no whit please the
Venetians, who were very desirous to win the love of that family, and draw
them to their service: yet not daring to contradict the Pope, they were
unwilling at that time Lodouicos flatteries, he could not but with grief
endure to let Pisa, which he had pursued with such labor, fall to their
share; whereupon he caused the Pope, and the Ambassadors to the Kings of
Spain (who were jealous of the Venetians greatness) to propound the drawing
of the Florentines into the league by restoring Pisa unto Lodouicos pra^
against the Venetians.
them, seeing by other means they could not be induced to it. The Venetian
Ambassador with great earnestness oppugning this proposition, the motion was
dashed, for fear of loosing the Venetians friendship.

But the hope of King Charles his return into Italy being wholly lost, and
most of the Italians that held his party otherwise employed, Lodouico hereby
Lodouicos practices against the Venetians.
concerning Pisa, inciting the Pope, and Kings of Spain with greater efficacy
to revive the motion of the restitution thereof: Hereunto he drew the
Florentines, who to that end sent their Ambassadors to Rome.

This treaty was continued there many days where the Pope and Ambassadors of
the King of Spain, Duke of Milan, and King of Naples, did openly urge the
Venetian Ambassador to this restitution, thereby to join the Florentines to
their party against the French, to the end that all seeds of discord being
rooted out, no man might again have any cause to call the French into Italy.

But the Senate contradicting all this, and sufficiently perceiving from whom
this earnest motion proceeded, answered by the same Ambassador, that it The
Senates answer to this motion.
was a very dangerous matter to deliver that City to the Florentines, whose
minds were strictly united with the French, and that the surrendering of Pisa
would not divert their inclination: and also that thereby the fidelity of all
the Confederates would be called in question, who had taken upon them to
protect the Pisans, especially the Venetians, who when others did shut their
pursses had freely opened theirs, and to defend them had spared for no cost or
labor, whereupon it would be great dishonor to them to leave them then and
to falsify their promise. Now whilst this business was treated betwixt the
Confederates, The death of Charles the eight, French King.
effects in men's minds. It was the death of King Charles, who on the seventh
day of April died at Amboise, of an Apoplexy as he stood looking on some of
his Courtiers that played at tennis; and because he died without children, the
crown of France descended to Lewis Duke of Orleance, the next Prince of the
blood, as heir male. Italy by King Charles his death was somewhat freed from
fear: for no man supposed that King Lewis the twelfth coming newly Lewis Duke
of Orleance French King.
to the crown, would at the beginning of his reign make war in Italy: But
the same right to the Realm of Naples (he being French King) belonged as well
to him as to his Predecessor, and beside that, the Duchy of Milan which
Valentine.

After his Coronation, he desired nothing so much, as to conquer that Duchy:
and though from his infancy he had ever carried that mind, yet his success
at Nouara had much inkindled him, together with his hatred to Lodouico Sforza,
by reason of his insolent carriage toward him when he was at Ast. And for an
introduction to his deseigne, he did not only entitle himself King of France,
Naples, Jerusalem, both the Sicilies, but likewise Duke of Milan: This was as a
summons to Frederick and Lodouico. He wrote letters full of friendly
congratulation to the Pope, Venetians and Florentines concerning his coming to
the crown.

These three seemed to be highly pleased with those letters, being desirous to
advance and revenge themselves: Lodouico nevertheless, though he knew that he
had to do with a rougher enemy, feeding himself with hope, as Frederick of
Arragon likewise did, that the new King would not so intend the affairs

The Venetians notwithstanding his opposition chose three Ambassadors The
Uenetians send Ambassadors to the French King.
to go and congratulate the King for his coming to the crown, and by way of
excuse to tell him, that the only suspicion (and not without cause) which they
had of King Charles, least after the conquest of the Realm of Naples, he
should have attempted that of all Italy, had enforced them to take arms
against him: The Pope for the same purpose sent a Nuncio into France, being
desirous to inuest his son Caesar, then Cardinal, with temporal greatness.
The Florentines likewise, according unto their ancient custom to the crown
Lodouico, who by their means thought to frustrate the Venetians practizes for
Pisa, and also to mediate some accord betwixt himself and the King.

The King did very lovingly entertain all these Ambassadors, and gave them
audience, concluding nothing till he had first secured the Realm of France by
new leagues with the Princes his neighbors. The Florentines in the mean time
still pursuing their deseigne against the Pisans, their forces Encounter
betwixt the Florentines and Pisans.
which lay Pontadera, having intelligence that certain troops gonne forth of
Pisa, returned homewards with great booty, went to intercept them, and

During these troubles in Tuscany, the Venetians reputation was every where so
augmented, as Coruin, son to Mathias King of Hungary, sent an Ambassador to
the Senate to certify it that he was very desirous to make a perpetual
league of friendship with them, and to be received into the number of the
Venetian Gentlemen: This, propounded to the great Council, was freely
granted.

Lodouico in the mean time fearing that the Venetians by reason of that
defeat of the Florentines, would grow so great as it would be an hard matter
to repulse them forth of Tuscany, offered to relieve the Florentines: and to
the same end was desirous to know what provisions were necessary, not only for
defense, but to execute the enterprise of Pisa. For though at first he did not
determine openly for to relieve the Florentines, but only to aid and succor
them secretly with money; yet, being transported with choler Lodouico o^
declares himself for the Florentines.
and disdain, using insolent and threatening speeches against the Venetians;
he resolved openly for to declare himself their friend: And therefore having
first denied passage to their people, which went to Pisa, and enforced His
practi^es against the Venetians.
Florentines to send them an hundred men at arms, and three Galleys, under the
command of Captain Villamarini, who should keep all victuals from entering
into Pisa by sea, yet afterward delaying to send them he did at last openly
refuse it, fearing by favoring them, to offend the Venetians, with whom he was
desirous to join.

Moreover, Lodouico did draw Giouan Bentiuole with the State of Bolognia to his
part, and caused the Florentines to take his son Alessandro into their pay,
together with Octaniano de Riare Lord of Imola and Furli, with an hundred and
fifty men at arms. He did in like manner cause the Lukeses to promise, never
more to favor the Pisans.

The Florentines having in vain attempted to draw the Geneuois and Sienois to
their side, went into the field under the command of Paulo Vitelli their
Vitelli placing an Ambuscado, assailed them, and slew many Stradiots, and took
Franco their captain prisoner with an hundred horse: In this manner did the
Florentines annoy the city of Pisa, having taken diverse towns round about it,
when they received some likely aduertizement from the Duke of Ferrara and
others, that the Venetians would be content to harken unto peace, provided that
they would proceed in the treaty, not as with their equals, but superiors. They
then sent Ambassadors to Venice, to sound their meaning. Guido Antonio Vespuc^,
and Bernardo Rucelli two of the honorablest Citizens went thither, who after
kind

This treaty broken, the Venetians on the one side, and Florentines on the
other, New treaty: on both sides.
began to strengthen their party with new leagues and treaties, the one with
the Sienois, and the other with Pietro de Medicis and the Lord of Faonza,
Lodouico still showing himself very much affected to the Florentines.

The Venetians hope from Syen^a and Perousa being by this means frustrate,
Pietro de Medicis attempt to relieve Pisa, on Romagnias The Florentines take
Li^.
side, but in vain. In the mean time Paulo Vitelli, General to the
Florentines, took the town and castle of Librafa^ta: whereat the Venetians
being incensed, sought again to draw the Marquis of Mantua to their pay, whom
not long before they had dismissed (he leaving them by means of Al^iana) the
Florentines army being turned from Pisa, but so, as the whole burden of war
fell upon the Venetians, who wisely procured means of agreement: For although
the Florentine Ambassadors departed from Venice, hopeless of any accord, yet
at Ferrara a new treaty of composition was made, propounded by the Duke, at the
Venetians entreaty.

During these troubles in Italy by reason of Pisa the new French King made
preparations against the next year to invade the Duchy of Milan, where he
hoped to have the Venetians on his side, who mortally hating Lodouico, did
particularly negociate with him; so did the Pope, who sent his son (which had
Caesar B^rgla the Popes son is made Duke (...) Valencia by the French King.
cast of his Cardinals hat) into France, in secular habit, to carry a
dispensation to the King to repudiate his wife Ioan^, and to marry his
Predecessors widow. Caesar Borgia came to the French Court in great pomp,
where the King very honorably entertained him, giving him a company of an
hundred men at arms, a yearly pention of 20000. French pounds, and made him
Duke of Valence in Daulphine. Then desirous to pursue his journey into Italy,
he made peace Gonsaluo with all his forces: The King likewise made an
agreement with the Emperor, unto whom, for his son the (...) sake he
promised to surrender the towns in Artois. He did moreover confirm the peace
made by his predecessor with the King of England.

Whilst the Senate was busied in providing for the relief of Pisa, news came
to Venice that the Turk prepared a great fleet, which caused them to send an
Ambassador to him: for they were afraid that he was offended with them
because that toward the end of the precedent summer, Nicolo Priuli, Prouidator
of their fleet had on the Aegean Sea sunk a great ship belonging to one of his
Bashas which first assailed the Prouidator. Zancani, whom the Senate sent,
being come to Constantinople, had notice of the great numbers of vessels which
the Turk had caused to be armed: The great Lord courteously entertained
Lodouico incites the Turk against the Uene^ians.
whilst they should be busied in Lombardy with making head against Lodouicos
forces, who had promised to invade them in those parts.

Zancani entreating him to renew the league with the Signory, he the better to
deceive him, granted it, giving him the Articles of the league written in
Latin. Now their law says, that they are not bound to perform any thing
unless it be written in their own language. Zancani aduertized thereof by
Andre Gritti, a Venetian Gentleman, skillful in the Turkish laws and customs,
and for his bounty and other good parts beloved of that nation, having dwelt a
long time at Constantinople, was by him in some sort put in hope to have them
written Zancani returned with the Articles in Latin, concealing what Gritti had
told him, because his journey should not be thought vain.

Now the French King so soon as he had made peace with his neighbor Princes,
and in his absence secured his Realm, made a Confederacy with the Venetians
(not mentioning Pisa as he^ had done at the beginning) wherein it League
betwixt the French and Venetians.
was concluded that at the same time as he with a mighty army should invade the
Duchy of Milan, they on the other side from their frontiers should do the
like, and the Duchy being wor^* (...) with the country of Gyradade should
remain to the Venetians, on this condition, that after this conquest they
should Capitulation of the league.
be bound to defend the King for a certain time, with certain number of horse
and foot, the King being bound to do the like for Cremona and what soever they
possessed in Lombardy. This contract was so secretly made, as Lodouico, nor yet
the Pope who was very inward with the King, could (but very late) have any
certain knowledge thereof.

The King, not mentioning Pisa, did afterward propound conditions to the
Florentines far different from the former; whereupon they resolved to rely on
the Duke of Milan, by whose assistance their affairs prospered in the
Casentine territory, where they were Lords, their enemies having been enforced
to abandon the towns by reason of great difficulties.

Lodouico who never imagined that the Venetians would have leagued themselves
with the French King, who was greater and more potent then they, and least of
all change his neighborhood for that of the French, was wonderfully danted
when he understood that the league betwixt the King and Venetians was resolved,
he not knowing the particularities thereof. He was then ready to send
Francesco of Sanseuerine with great forces to aid the Florentines, but he
detained them, upon intelligence that Triuulcio leauied soldiers near Ast.
He Lodouico amazed at the league, goes about to divert the Venetians from it.
likewise thought that if the accord betwixt the Venetians and Florentines
should take effect, they would peradventure moderate their indignation
conceived against him, and forsake the French King. Herein he employed
Hercules D'Aeste Duke of Ferrara his father in law, and by forcible reasons
enforced the Florentines in some sort to condescend to the Venetians desire,
sending them word that if they did not agree, he should be constrained for
fear of the French King, to call home those forces he had sent to aid them.

Hercules the better to effect it came in person to Venice, whither Lodouico
sent his Agents, and from the Florentins Giou^n Baptista R^dolfi, and Pa^ic
Antonio Soderini, two of the wisest and chiefest Citizens came thither: all
which, after long disputation concerning the means to be observed in that
accord, made an absolute compromise for eigh^ days, in the person of Hercules
Duke of Ferrara, who having well considered the matter, did on the sixth of
April prouounce his sentence. But the Venetians, not satisfied therewith, in
regard of the small consideration had of their expenses in war; nor yet the
Pisans, who obtained nothing but a servile kind of liberty, contrary to the
intention of most of the Venetian nobility; nor the Florentines, who thought
themselves over burdened, for Geneaois, Lukeses, and by Pandolfo Petrucci. And
so soon as they understood the tenure of the sentence, being wonderfully
incensed against the Venetians, they took the guard of the Cities fortes, and
gates, from their soldiers, and would not longer suffer them to lodge in the
City. The Florentines, despayring by this accord to obtain Pisa, resolved to
win it by force. King Lewis in The Florentines resolution conce^ning Pisa.
the mean time commanded his forces to march into Italy, his army consisted
Giouan Iacomo Triuulcio was made General: This army coming before the fort of
Arazza, seated on the river Tana^e, took it in a short space, notwithstanding
that there were five hundred footmen in it: from thence it went to Anon, a
little town betwixt Ast and Alexandria upon the same River, The French Kings
army (...) into Italy under Triuulcio his command.
which being battered in four several places, was in two days taken by
force, notwithstanding that the Duke of Milan some few months before had well
fortified it, and placed seven hundred men in Garrison there. The King came
after as far as Lions, intending to pass the mounts, from whence he sent an
Ambassador to Venice, for to accompany the Venetian army whether soever
Melch^or Treu^san, and Marc Antonio Morosini were sent as Prouidators: And the
Senate presented this French Ambassador, with a gallant horse ritchly
caparisond, a pauillon for the field, and two pounds of gold.

The Venetians having intelligence of Triuulcio his good success, caused their
The number of the Venetian army.
army to march, consisting of seven thousand horse, and as many foot, which
under the command of Aluiana, having crossed the Oglio, and entered the enemy
country, did in a short space take diverse towns and castles; and coming
before Carauagia, the chief City of the country, took it by force, with other
towns near the River Adda.

The end of the fifth Book of the fourth Decade.
The Contents of the sixth Book of the
LOdouico is troubled with the news of the league betwixt the French King and
Venetians against him. Alexandria is taken by the French. The Milaneses revolt,
and Triuulcio enters Milan for the King. The Venetians take Cremona. King
Lewis comes to Milan. Bajazeth. It sustaines great hurt by fire. The Turk
takes Lepanto. Lodouico is received into Milan by the disloyalty of the
Inhabitants. Lodouico, going forth of Nouara, is taken by the French and sent
prisoner into France. The Venetians great war with Bajazeth. The Venetians
through want of wind at sea lose the battle. The Turk takes Modon. Coron
and the fort of Iunca are yielded to the Turk on composition. Naples in Morea,
beseeged by the Turk, is bravely defended. The Isle of Samothrace yields to
the Venetians. They take the City Ladislaus King of Hungary and the Venetians
against the Turk: Peace betwixt the Venetians and Turk: The Portugals
traffic to Calicut for spices: The castles of Moua and Faenza are re-deliuered
to the Venetians: The Pope complains against the Venetians in regard of the
Cities of Romagnia: And lastly, are set down the Venetians Ambassadors
inuectiue to the Emperor Maximillian and French King against the Pope.



The sixth Book of the fourth Decade, of the History of Uenice.
THese news did greatly afflict Lodouico Sforza, putting him in fear of his
State: who lost (as it often happens in sudden Adversities) both courage and
council, flying to bootlesse and unprofitable remedies.

He sent an Ambassador to Venice to use some means to Hercules sent one of his
Gentlemen before to the Senate with Lodouicos letters, entreating them to
suffer his Ambassador to come thither: The contents The Venetians refuse to
give auaience to Lodouicos Ambassador.
of his letters were, that himself and his brother Ascanio sent an Ambassador
to them on great and important affairs, requesting them to give him audience.
The Senate having read both their letters, commanded the Ferrarois presently to
leave the City, and gave Lodouicos letters to the French Ambassador.

At the same time Frederick King of Naples did by his Ambassador acquaint the
Senate with his desire to send five hundred horse to Lodouicos aid. The Senate
told the Ambassador, that he should make his King this answer; That the
Cauallery he intended to send to the Duke of Milan would do him small good,

In the end, Lodouico, frustrate of all hope, made means to the people of
Milan, who extremely hated him for his great exactions: and having assembled
them, he did acquit and release part of his imposts to them, and thereunto
added very

The Venetian army in the mean time still prevailed, and after the taking of
the town and ^astle of Carauagia, crossed the River Adda, on a bridge of
boats, and made incursions as far as Lodi. The French army on the other side
beseeged Alexandria, where Galleas, Lodouicos son in law, lay with twelve
hundred men at arms, twelve hundred light horse and three thousand foot, who
the third night after the seege, acquainting none of his captains with his
intent, but only Maluezza, did secretly fly from Alexandria to Milan, with
certain lighthorse.

The taking of Alexandria caused those of Placentia to send their Commissioners
to Triuulcio with their Cities keys; the like did those of Pauia, and all
other towns round about. There was the like confusion at Milan as in other
places, where the foot companies demanding pay, Lodouico sent them to his
chief Treasurer, who giving them no satisfaction was by them wounded and left
for dead.

This accident did so terrify Lodouico, as he sent his children to Coma,
together Lodouico determines to fly into Germany.
his with mistress, (for his wife was dead) Cardinal Ascanio his brother, and
Cardinal Sanseuerine brother to Galeas, and from thence into Germany, himself
resolving ere long to go thither. The Milaneses perceiving Lodouico to
destrust Lodouico told him that they were resolved to yield to the French King
seeing that in distrust he had sent his children and family forth of the City:
So soon as he heard this, he caused pay to be given to five hundred
light horse and with tears in his eyes, departed with them and Galeas of
Sanseuerin his son in law toward Germany. He was scarce gonne forth of the
castle, when Count Gayazza came to him, and the better to color his
disloyalty told him, that he Count Gayazza takes the Kings part.
now thought himself freed from the martial oath which he had made him, seeing
that he abandoned his State, and that he was now at liberty to go whether
Lodouicos cost. Before his departure from Milan, he left Bernardin de Corte of
Pauia, whom he had brought up of a child, to guard the castle, whereof he was
then Governor, with three thousand footmen, under captains whom he greatly
trusted, with provision of victuals, munition, and money sufficient to defend
it for a long time, preferring this man before his brother Ascanio, who had
offered to take that charge upon him.

Four days after his departure Triuulcio, sent for by the Milaneses, entered
the Millan receives Triu^lcio for the King.
City, where he was received with great joy, reserving the capitulations till
the Triuulcio, to request him to receive them for the King, for they abhorted
the Venetians government but answered, that by agreement made betwixt the King
and them, that city was theirs, the chiefest Citizens, with the Bishop and
Clergy, went to the Gates and there receiving the Prouidators, placed them
under a Canopy, and in this manner accompanied them through Cremona ye^ldeth to
the Venetians.
the City to their lodging, where they entreated the Venetians to free them
from the taxes and impositions where with Lodouico had oppressed them, the which
was

There is in that City, a very strong castle which being well furnished with
all necessaries, it was a hard matter to take it. Antonio Battaglione was
Governor there, unto whom Lodouico had committed the guard of that place. The
next day the Prouidators sent to him, willing him to yield up the castle to the
Venetian State: at first he made refusal, but after sundry messages too and
fro, the The castle of Cremona yields to the Uenetians, upon recompense.
Prouidators^ntred it by means of an hundred and fifty pounds of gold, which
they paid him, some in hand, and the rest by promise, with letters of a
Venetian Gentleman's place, and an house in Venice, and an other in the country
near to Padua with diverse other lands.

The same day that the Venetians entered the castle of Cremona, Triuulcio did
The castle of Milan does the like to Triuulcio for money.
the like into that of Milan, which was yielded unto him by Berdardino de
Corte, with all Lodouicos and Galleas rich mouables in recompense of a certain
sum of money, a company of an hundred Lances, and a perpetual pension.

Cremona obeying the Venetians, the Senate sent two Presidents thither to
govern it, and to do justice, Dominico Treuisan, and Nicola Foscarin^ were
sent thither: and beside these, two Ambassadors were chosen, and all four of
them appointed to go to Milan to receive the King, and in the States name to
congratulate his new conquest; so soon as he should ariue there.

The King receiving news at Lions of such fortunate success his expectatioon,
rode presently in post to Milan, where received with in credible joy, he King
Lewis comes in post to Milan.
granted to the people, unreasonable in their demands, exemption from diverse
t^xes, but not from all, as they vainly presumed, and gave great rewards to
many Milanese Gentlemen, and among others to Triuulcio, unto whom he gave
Frederick excepted) some personally and All the Princes of Italy come to him to
Milan.
some by Ambassadors, some to congratulate his happy success, and others to
clear themselves from imputation of inclyning to Lodouico Sforza more then to
him, and others likewise to secure their own ever after. The King gently
received them all, and compounded with them all, but after different manner,
according to the diversity of the conditions, and greatness of the profit he
expected from them. But whilst these things were done in Lombardy, the Senate
having intelligence that Bajazeth armed by sea and land, made Antonio Grimany
General of their Naual army, commanding him speedily to depart.

He unwilling to prolong his journey for want of money, their treasure being
The Venetians send a fleet against the Turks.
much wasted by continual war, lent the State four score pounds of gold to
pay the mariners and other officers of the fleet, and promised to carry as
much with him to Corfou and other places to supply the fleets want when need
should be.

Those of Corfou upon intelligence that the Turkish fleet was under sail, and
that the State was not able in a short space to set forth a Navy able to resist
it offered men and money to arm three score vessels, provided that the Senate
would furnish them with bread and ordnance. The Senate willingly accepted this
offer, and command a florin of gold to be given to every man which should

The Governor of Zara aduertized the Senate that two thousand Turkish horse The
Turk on the z^ratin (...)*
were entered on their confines, and had taken great numbers of the country
people, still continuing their incusions. The arrival of the Turkish cauallery
on the Zaratin made the Venetians think that they would not at that time
beseege Rhodes. Whereupon, they forthwith made two Prouidators, namely,
Francesco Cicogna for Morea and Romania, and Andrea Loredano for Corfou: and
beside these, Andres Zancani was with forces sent into Frioull, because they
had intelligence that the Turk determined to come thither.

In the mean time, the Turkish fleet came forth of the Straight, consisting of
Andre Gritti (before mentioned) who was more streighty looked to then any
other, for that in love to his Country, he had by letters written in caractery
aduertized the Governor of Lepanto of all the Turks proceedings against his
country, A^drea Gritti imp^isoned. The number of the (...) fleet.
which had like to have cost him his life. Grimani having speedily assembled
all the vessels which were in the Islands near adjoining, made up the number
of forty six Galleys, seventeen great merchant ships, and forty other lesser
ones,

Having intelligence that the enemy was coming to seek him, he sailed with
all his navy toward the Isle of Sapienza opposite to Modon: and there The two
fleets nere together.
embarrailed his fleet, and having given order for all matters necessary for
fight himself went somewhat forward with four Galleys, the Turkish fleet
being not far from thence, which with the wind he might have assailed at
his pleasure: yet he deferred the fight and returned back to Modon: where
after that the Turk had in a few days made two or three several brauadoes,
Grimani ordered his fleet, resolving to fight with him, when at the very
instant Andrea Loretano with eleauen Brigantines and four great ships arrived;
he came to Grimani and told him that he was come to do service to the State,
intre^ting him to command what he would have him do. He was a valliant

Albano Armerico commanded an other great ship, who in open Council was
enjoined by the General to assail the enemies biggest ship, which he
performed, and Loretan an other, who grapled with it to fight more
conveniently: The Venetian fl^et hurt by fire.
and in the bickering wild fire was thrown into the enemies ship which being
on fire, was by the wind carried amongst the Venetians and fiered them: This
accident did more hurt to the Venetians then Turks, because that they did
easily save their men with other small vessels, but our men Tomaso Duodo
recovered in his long boat, Albano was saved by the Turks.

Grimani wonderfully troubled with this loss, sounded the retreat, and
without any farther fight retired to the Isle of Podroma: the Turkish fleet for
a time remained in the self same place where it had fought. Albano, brought to
Constantinople was solicited by Bajazeth to turn Turk, which he boldly
refusing Turkish cruelty.
to do, was sawed a sunder in the middle and so constantly died.

The French King, solicited by the great Master of Rhodes (whether it was
reported the Turk would come) to relieve him, dispatched two and twenty
Galleys, which being rigged in Prouence sailed toward Rhodes. But that Island
G^imani los^th his place of General.
Grimani in the mean time omitted a second opportunity to fight with, and
vanquish the enemy, whereupon, an other being sent into his place, and himself
cited to Venice, he was committed to the examination of the Council de Lepanto
yields to the Turk.
yielded. These news did greatly trouble the Venetians, and augmented their
hatred toward Grimani, every man saying, if he had done his duty, the enemies
fleet would have been defeated.

The Turkish Cauallery on the other side, scouring the confines of Zara, entered
Frioull to spoil and wast, and finding the country not defended, spoiled and
burned all places as far as Liuenza, where they took many prisoners: upon
these news Zancani with great forces was sent to the frontiers.

Seven thousand of the enemies horse came in troops through very badde ways
into Histria, and then crossing the River Liuenza, came and encamped nere unto
Gradisca, where Zancani lay, determining if he came into the field to fight
with him. But the enemies General perceiving that he meant not to come forth,
sent two thousand horse to wast and spoil the Cuntry, whom he commanded to
make no long stay.

These disperfing themselves over that goodly Country, took many prisoners
burning and wasting many Country houses, both on the Treuisan and Paduan
territories. Three hundred Albanese horse fallied forth of Vdina, and defeated
some hundred of the Turks, if Zancani with his forces had done the like, the
Turk would have received a great overthrow, but he would not suffer any one
Zancani confined ^o Padu^
to go forth of the Town: whereof, accused at Venice, he was sent for
thither

On such terms stood the Venetian State at home and abroad, when Caesar Borgia
with the King and Senates forces, went into Romagnia to beseege certain towns
which of right did belong to the Church, and being conquered Pope Alexander
gave them to his son.

This Borgia, was a Cardinal (as has been said) and casting off his robe and
Hatte of Cardinal, married a wife in France. He coming before Imola and
Furli, after some assaults enforced the inhabitants to yield; but the Castles
which were very strong held out longer, especially that of Furli, for the other
yielded sooner.

The Senate in the mean time to secure their own territories during the war
in Romagnia, sent three thousand foot, and two thousand horse to Rauenna, under
Aluianaes command, to distribute them through the territories of the
Confederates near adjoining, with two prouidators, Francesco Capello and
Christophoro Moro, the one for Arimini, and the other for Faenza: So soon as
Borgia had taken the Castle of Furli, Gionan Sforza Lord of Pessa^e, knowing
that Borgia hated him, fearing least he would come and assail him, was
desirous to commit himself and State to the Venetians protection. The Senate
answered that they would never defend one that had been so great an enemy to
them: for he had concealed the Ambassador which Lodouico sent to the Turk
against the State of Venice, and furthered his passage: The like had he done
by the Lodouico, whom he entertained in his house, and caused him secretly to
be conducted to Milan, himself likewise having often acquainted the Turk with
the occurrents in Venice.

Borgia deferred his punishment till some other time, because Triuulcio was
enforced to call back those troops which he had lent him, by reason of some
tumults Lodouico re^urnes with forces out of Gema^y.
feared in Milan, in regard of Lodouicos arriual, who had brought some small aid
forth of Germany, with which, and by their assistance who distasted the French,
he hoped to recover what he had lost. The Senate presently commanded their
forces, both horse and foot, to pass into the Cremonese, levied three thousand
Suisses, and appointed Pietro Marsello and Christophoro Moro prouidators in

Lodouico coming at the same time to Coma, took it without strokes: for
Lodouico recouereth* (...)
the French within it fearing to be shut in betwixt the Inhabitants, and
Lodouicos troops, went their way. He sent his brother Ascanio before to
Milan, from whence the King, not long before, was gone home into France; having
left a strong Garrison in the City, and Triuulcio his Governor General in
the Duchy: but the Lombards not so well rewa^ded by the King as they had
expected, proved false to him and refused to obey Triuulcio, who was chief of
the Guelph faction, for the Gibeline party was very strong in the City:
whereupon, the most Lodouicos return, and openly proclaimed his name, and so
soon as they heard of the loss of Coma, and that Ascanio was not far from
Milan, the people rose, and the chief of the Gibelline faction, began to
tumult: so as Triuulcio was glad to retire to the Castle: and the night
following from thence to Nouara.

The morrow after Cardinal Ascanio entered Milan, Lodouico followed him, who by
this means recovered it as easily as it was lost; Pauia and Parma presently
Lodouico enters Milan by the disloially of the Inhabitants.
ecchoed his name: Lodi and Placentia would have done the like, had not the
Venetian companies by their arrival prevented it. The Senate advertised of
this revolt, determined to send a man of worth to command the Castle of
Cremona. Lodouico in the mean time, desirous to have the Senate his friend,
made suit that Ascanio his brother might send the Bishop of Cremona to Venice,
to offer them his service: but it was in vain, for the Senate resolved not to
quitte the French Kings confederacy. The Genois refused to obey him, and the
Florentines contemned him.

The King in the mean time having intelligence of the rebellion of Milan, used
great speed and sent the Lord Trimouille into Italy with six hundred lances,
The King sends an army to recover Milan.
levied great numbers of Suisses, and appointed the Cardinal of Ambois his
Lieuetenant General beyond the mounts, who coming to Ast, had in short space
assembled one thousand five hundred lances, ten thousand Suisse, and 6000.
French under the command of the Lords Trimouille, Trivulcio and Ligni.

Lodouico before these supplies came from France, went and beseeged Nouara,
which he took* but not the Castle. The French Army assembled at Mortara drew
near him, and did cut off his victuals: then both sides falling to blows,
Lodouico was enforced to retire into the City; where the Suisses mutined for
want of pay; he being not able to pacify them. They told him that they would
Lodouico is taken prisoner by the French and sent aw^y into France.
suddenly depart home into their country; whereupon he earnestly entreated them
to safe conduct him to some secure place, which they denying did at last
consent that he should march amongst them disguised like one of their footmen,
and in this manner marching amiddest their troops was by them discovered to
those that sought after him, who presently apprehended him as the Kings
prisoner and sent him into France to the tower of Loches,

His brother Ascanio followed him, who taken by the Venetians and carried to
Venice was delivered to the King and sent into France, where he was more
honorably and with greater courtesy entertained then his brother, for he was
sent

Now to return to the Turks. After the taking of Lepanto, the Senate despatcht
Lodouico Manenti, Secretary to the Council of ten, to Bajazeth, to complain
for that he had without cause invaded them by sea, and had contrary to the
treaty Lodouico Manenti sent to the great Turk
of peace made not long before with him in the Signories name by Andrew Zancani
their Ambassador, and to entreat him to enlarge the Venetian Merchants, which
by his commandment at the beginning of the war had been imprisoned. That it
might likewise please him to surrender Lepanto unto them,

Two things moved the Senate to send this Embassage; the one, because some that
were very inward with the great Lord, had written to them, that if they sent
The cause which moved the Venetians to send Manenti.
an Ambassador to Constantinople, they might be reconciled to his favor: the
second, for that they considered how chargeable it would be for them, if they
should be enforced to set forth a new Army against him, their treasure both
public and particular being exhausted. Whereby all their attempts would prove
vain and unprofitable against so mighty an enemy.

Manenti ariuing at Constantinople, all his demandes were crossed: for the The
Turk answer to Manenti.
they should deliver unto him, Modon, Coron, and Naples, three Cities which
they held in Morea, and pay unto him as his tributaries an hundred pound in
gould yearly: otherwise he protested to make war upon them. with this
answer Manenti returned. But because at Manenti his departure from Venice,
there was a report, that great numbers of Turkish horse were come into Albania:
the Senate fearing least the desire to spoil the Country of Frioul, might draw
them thither, as the precedent year, appointed Pietro Doria, and Angelo
Barozzi Prouidators, who taking along with them the Governor of Vdina and
others of the Country should consult together about repairing and fortifying
the towns and ways necessary and fit to repulse the enemy; giving them The
Venetians take order for the defense of Frioul.
for assistants Aluiana with his light horse, and Gurlin of Rauenna with two
thousand foot. Pietro Marcello likewise one of the Prouidators of the Army in
Lombardy, was commanded to carry forces into Frioul, but the Turks came not
thither

This report again revived about Midsommer, that the Turkish army was in field
to waste the Venetians confines, Count Petillan with a great part of the
forces, and Giouan Baptista Caracciola Colonel of the States Fantery, did by
the Senates command march into Frioull, where all the inhabitants of the
plains retired with their goods to the Castles and strong Towns: yet the
enemies came not thither, either for that they had intelligence* that the
towns were fortified, or else being employed by their Emperor in the war of
Peloponessus.

Manenti was newly returned to Venice, when the Senate fearing to loose the
Angelo Quirini and Lodouico Canalis, with a hundred foot Supplies sent to
Corfou.
to guard the two fortes of the Island which are seated on two Promontaries
near one another, and not far from the City, being so small, as they
needed no greater forces to defend them. News was afterward brought that the
Turkish fleet which had wintered at Lepanto much increased, determined to
sail into Morea (their Emperor being with them in person) to take those
towns which The deseigne of the Turkish fleet.
he had demanded of Manenti.

Hereupon the Senate commanded ten great Galleys, and four great ships to be
made ready under the command of Iacomo Venieri, with a particular Captain to
every vessel, whose pay was augmented, the better to incite them to go
Melchior Treuisan which lay not far from Cephalonia, to keep out all Turkish
aid, being assured of the enemies deseigne, made speedy means to send men,
victuals and ordnance from Candy to Naples, because all men thought that the
Turk would make his first attempt there: he likewise sent victuals to Modon.

The Modonois having wasted the country round about their City, and burnt
Those of Modon fortify against the Turk.
the houses, because the enemy should not make use of them, builded a Forte
near to the Haven, to keep the enemies vessels from the walls, leaving but a
Melchior Treuisan being come to Zant, sent for the whole fleet thither,
consisting of seventy vessels, both Galleys and ships of burden: but that of
the Turk in number more then two hundred, coming to the confines of Naples,
had sent part of the cauallery before by land to scour as far as the city. The
horse within the town to the number of one thousand five hundred, made a sally
upon the enemies, and in a manner defeated them all. Thereupon, the enemy
leaving Naples went to Modon, from whence he sent forces to besiege Iunca,
which is a Castle seated on a hill with a haven beneath it some ten mile from
Modon. Those within it having been newly supplied with men and victuals by
Ieronimo Contaren the Melchior Treuisan fell sick and dyed near Melchior
Treuisan his death.
to Cephalonia, whereupon by a General consent, Contaren the Prouidator was
chosen to command the Army, till the Senate had otherwise provided.

The Turk came and assailed the Burrow of Modon, and with his Canon did beat
down a great part of the wall, those within it being out of hope to defend the
breach carried away all their goods into the City, and abandoned it. The enemy
entered it, and hoping ere long to become Lord of all, did without intermission
batter the walls of the City.

Whilst this siege lasted, Contaren left Zant, determining if it were possible
to relieve Modon, or at least to annoy the enemies fleet, whose great ships
lay near Sapienza, and the Galleys and other lesser vessels in the Haven of
Iunca: So soon as the Venetian descried them, he resolved to fight with them,
and ordering his fleet, did bravely set forward. The Turk seeing them to come
on, Contarens Galley being shot through both sides, and a great leake in her,
himself leapt into an other and retired to Zant, to trim his vessels which
were much bruzed. Pesare General of the Venetian fleet.


The Senate having notice of Treuisans sickness and death, chose Benedetto
Pesare to succeed him, who receiving money to pay the Army, departed from
Venice three days after his election. Contaren having trimmed his Galleys,
resolved to relieve Modon, fearing least the besieged dispairing of help
should yield to the enemy: He chose five Galleys out of the whole fleet,
which he loded with all necessaries: yet before their departure, he thought
good to advertise the besieged thereof, that they might be ready to receive
supplies. To this end he sent a valiant and courageous fellow in a Frigate
with ten Oars: He at noone days passed through the enemies fleet, even in
their view, and entered Modon, doing his message.

The next day Contaren with the whole fleet, sailed toward Modon, Supplies
enter into Modon.
and being in sight of the enemy, he called for the Captains of those five
Galleys, entreating them valiantly to relieve the besieged, four of them with
great difficulty passing through the midst of the enemies, entered the Haven;
the fifth, slower then the rest, perceiving diverse of the enemy Galleys to
come up toward her, returned to the fleet.

The Modonois greatly cheered, ran presently to the Haven to receive those
supplies and to carry them into the City, and they were so earnest in it, as
those on the other side of the City which were on the walls forsook their
guard, and ran thither likewise, so as the walls were bared of defense; which
The Turk takes Modon.
the Townsmen and Soldiers ran upon them, and fought valiantly with them a
long time in the midst of the City, killing great numbers of them. But the
multitude of enemies still increasing, and all the streets stopped, the
Christians were in a manner all cut in pieces. Those which escaped the
slaughter, fired the City, and with it burnt themselves and goods.

In this manner was the City of Modon taken: The Venetian Magistrate being
tied in chains, was by the Turks command carried to Iunca, to be The Castle
of Iunca yielded to the Turk^.
seen of the Captain of the Castle, and all those within it, who thereupon
yielded, taken, the Turk sent one of his Baschas and part of his fleet to
Coron, who told them that if upon honorable composition the would yield before
he beseeged them, he would use them curreously, otherwise, if they stayed till
the Canon were planted, he would put them all to the sword. They terrified with
the desaster Coron yields to the Turk on composition.
of the Modonois, without respect to the Magistrates or Captains, who had
prepared all things for defense, did upon very profitable conditions receive
the Bascha into their walls.

The Turk supposing to take Naples in the same manner, and as soon as he had
done Coron, sent part of his army to their Confines, and sent thither with Paul
Contaren a Venetian Gentleman that was married in Coron, and well known in
those Cuntryes, who after Coron A brave and bold deed of Paul Contaren
was taken, the Turk took along with him to this end, to persuade the
Neapolitans to yield. He conferring with those in the City concerning their
yielding, and standing upon the edge of the Dike right over against the Gate,
did on a sudden and unperceived spur his horse, and leaping into the Dike
presently entered the City. The Neapolitans both by his advice, and being
willing of themselves, The Turkish army before Naples.
did very valiantly repulse all the enemies attempts; and did moreover as
occasion was offerred, make very fortunate sallies. And the Turk sending for
his whole army thither, thereby thinking to terrify them, they despised all
his threatenings,

In the mean time, Pesare coming to Corfou, and from thence to Zant, tarried
there, till the fleet, dispersed by tempest, was reunited. The Vessels trimmed
and made ready, there were 18. great Galleys and 25. lesser ones, and 20.
ships well rigde and armed; with these he determined to seek the enemies
fleet and The Turk discampeth from before Naples.
fight with it. But the Tuke having intelligence of his coming to Zant
commanded his Baschas to raise the Seege, and to carry back the fleet to
Constantinople, and himself, with his whole army departed from thence the next
day. Pesare at the The Uenetians take the Isle of Legina.
same time sent a Fregate to Naples to view the enemy fleet: but perceiving
they were gone, he sailed to Legina, which the Turk had taken during the seege
of Naples, where landing his soldiers, he took the Fort, and slew all the
Turks within They recover Mitelyn.
State. From thence he went to Mittilyn, where he did the like, giving the
spoil to his soldiers and mariners. The next day he sailed to Tenedos which
he burnt down to the ground. And finding the enemies fleet, which fled at the
mouth of Pesare assails the enemy fleet
the Straight, he gave in upon their tail, and took diverse vessels and many
prisoners, whom, upon Gibets set up on the two shores that divide the confines
of Europe and Asia he hanged; and afterward spoiled and wasted the Country
with fire and sword.

From thence he directed his course to the Isle of Samothrace, where
understanding that the Islanders obeyed the Turk on constraint, he sent
Lodouico Canalis

Then after that he had taken and sacked Carista, he returned with his fleet to
Naples laden with spoil: and having there made a reuiew of his forces, he did
Samothrace yielded to the Venetians.
by his bounty highly please and content his soldiers. And upon intelligence
that the King of Spaines fleet, commanded by Gonsaluo Ferdinandes, came to aid
the Venetians and was at Zant, he sailed thitherward, and passing along by
Iunca, he caused Charles Contarens head to be cut off upon the Prow of his
Galley, who Charles Contaren beheaded*
nature and art, had yielded it to the enemy upon the first summons, not
being enforced by a seege.

Being come to Zante, he there found Gonsaluo, with whom and the Spanish
Captains that were with him, having consulted upon the affairs of war, by
their advise and consent of the Prouidators, he determined to go and besiege
Coron yields to the Turk on composition.
Modon: But because they wanted store of vessels, they sent all their workmen
to Cephalonia (which a bounds in woods and Forests,) to cut downcitees.

Whilst some were busied in cutting of wood, because they would not loose
time, they resolved to besiege the town of Cephalonia, because the Turks
should not say that two fleetes united, durst not assail them. This thus
resolved, Pesare and Gonsaluo, caused Ordnance to be brought from the ships

The same day as they would have begun the battery, there fell such store of
rain, as they were enforced to defer it till some other time. The weather at
last being fair, the Ordnance was planted against the walls, where after a
breach made, an assault was given; but the enemies did with all sorts of
weapons so valiantly desend themselves, as the town could not be taken, so as
our men were enforced to retire, and great numbers of them hurt. The Generals
thus repulsed, raised a mount higher then the enemies fortifications, from
Cephalonia yields to Gonsaluo.
themselves, as they constrained the Turks to retire into the Forte, who
within a while after yielded to Gonsaluo, fearing the Venetians indignation
whom they had so often deluded and offended.

During the siege of Cephalonia, the Castle of Iunca returned to the Venetians,
by means of one called Demetrius of Modon, who practiced it with an Iunca
returns to the Venetians.
Albanese, a friend of his, which was of the guard of the Castle: where killing
fifty Turks that lay there in garrison, and enforcing the rest to leap over
the walls, they became Masters of the place, whether Pesare presently sent
Ieronimo Pisani, the Prouidator with forces, and after him Siluestro Troni for
Judge. In this manner in a short space they took Cephalonia and Iunca.
Gonsaluo who had already made war at sea many months, perceiving that Pesare
deferred the siege of Modon till some other fit time, and that the enemies
had strongly fortified it since the recovery of Iunca, returned into Sicely.
Pesare presented him with five hundred pieces of Malmsey, and seventy thousand
weight of sweet meats of all sorts, which the Senate had sent him from Venice.

Pesare, advertised that the enemy had made certain Galleys at Preueze, and
that some of them were already lanched, sailed thither with fourteen League
betwixt the Venetians and King of Hungary against the Turk.
to Ladislaus King of Hungary, to move him to war upon the Turk, who after
a long discourse, did in the Senates name make a league and confederacy with
him, by which the King was bound, to make war on the Turk with his whole
force, and the Venetians to give the King yearly, at three distinct times,
three thousand pounds of gold. The Pope would needs make one in this Pesare
having repaired his fleet, determined to burn the Turkish Galleis at the
mouth of the river Bojan: but this enterprise took none effect because that
the Turks had inteligence of it, who fearing the like danger as at Pre^ese,
withdrew their vessels fourteen miles up the river from sea. The Turk at the
same time recovered the Castle of Iunca. The (...) (...)* (...) ^unca.


Pesari returning to Corfou had inteligence that the enemies Galleis upon the
river Bojan would shortly come forth, he sent certain of his Galleis thither
to keep them in; himself in the mean time with the rest of the fleet
consisting of five and twenty Galleys returned into Morea, where from the
confines of Coron, he laded his Galleys with great numbers of men, women and
young children, carrying them into Cephalonia desolute of inhabitants. From
thence

Whilst these things were done abroad, Prince Augustino Barbadico dyed at
home, hauiuing governed the Commonwealth fifteen year: and in his place,
according to the usual manner, Leonardo Loredano, a man wise and noble, was
chosen.

LEONARDO LOREDANO the 75. Duke.



AT the first great Council held after he was made Prince, Benedetto Pesare,
Captain General of the fleet, was made Philippo Troni, who was newly dead. In
his time the French Fleet went to aid the Venetians against the Turk, the
like did that of Portugal, according to both those Kings promises, but they
came not both at one time, nor to one place, for that of Portugal went to
Corfou, and the French to The French and Portugal fleets aid the Venetians
against the Turk.
Zant, and yet neither the one or other did any great service to the State,
which having long time mainetained war against the Turk, alone of it self,
and in the company of the King of Hungary, did at last make peace when it least
thought thereof.

For those being redeemed, who at the beginning of the war were imprisoned
at Constantinople, Andre Gritti was one of the number* who returning to Venice,
was by his Contrey-men kindly welcomed home. He brought letters to the Senate
from Achmet, one of Baziazets chief Captains, which contained, that if they
were desirous to end the war they should send one to Constantinople to treat
of the conditions of peace, and that he would be their friend.

The Senate upon these letters sent word to Pesare to dissolve the fleet,
twenty Galleys excepted which he should keep with him, and wrote to Ladislaus
King of Hungary, (sending him Achmets letters) that they determined to send an
Agent to Constantinople, entreating him to do the like, to the end peace might
be made with more honor. Ladislaus understanding the Senates determination did
highly commend it, and promised to grant what they demanded: But the King
prolonged the matter, because if the Senate made peace with the Turk, A new
agreement with the King of Hungary.
yearly sum which the Signory gave him: whereupon the Venetian Ambassadors that
were in Hungary fearing to prolong the treaty with the Turk, granted that the
three thousand pounds of gold which they paid him yearly toward the war,
should (if peace were made) be reduced to three hundred pounds of gold so long
as Bajazet lived.

In the mean time Baiazeth made peace with the Sophi, and thereby finding
himself more fit to continue war against the Venetians, grew haughty, and
told Achmet that he would not have peace with the Venetians, except they would
redeliuer the Isle of Saint Maur which not long before they had taken from him.
The Peace betwixt the Venetians and Turk.
Senate aduertized thereof by Achmets letters written to Gritti, and sent by an
express messenger, unwilling any longer to consume them selves in expense by
continuing the war, quitted that Island to Baiazeth, and made peace with him,
reserving the Isle of Cephalonia to them selves, in old time called Leucadia.

The Venetians were much troubled for that the King of Portugal forestalling
their traffic, had appropriated unto himself the trade for spices, which
their vessels and Merchants bringing from Alexandria, did with marvelous
profit vent The Portugals trade for spice.
into all places of Christendom: For the Portugalls going by Sea into those
remote parts, and in the Indian Sea insinuating themselves into the friendship
of

But to return to the Peace, the Senate commanded thanks to be given to God:
and three pounds of gold to be distributed to the Priests. Baiazeth sent an
ambassador unto whom the Prince should swear to observe the peace, as he had
done to the Venetian Ambassador.

At the same time Lewis the French King, sent John Lascaris of Constantinople
his Ambassador to the Venetians to request them to renew the league and
Gonsaluo The Venetians refuse to reew the league with King Lewis.
Lieftenant General to the King of Spain, who had defeated his Army in
Calabria, was desirous to have the Venetians take arms in his behalf: and to
induce them thereunto propounded many fair conditions, but they refused to
renew the Confederacy and also his offers, saying that they were satisfied with
the old one. Pope Alexander in the mean time supping in a Garden near to the
Vatican with the Duke Valentinois his son, was on a sudden carried thence
for dead to his Palace, whither his son was likewise carried sick like the
father, and the day following, the Pope dyed, black and swelled and very ugly:
very evident signs of poison, but the Duke his son, by reason of his youth,
and presently The death of Pope Alexander.
grievous disease. At the same time, Benedeto Pesare General of the Venetian
fleet, being ready to return from Corfou to Venice fell sick of a Quotidian
and there dyed.

In the place of the deceassed Pope, Cardinal Picolhuomini of Syena was
chosen, a man Noble and for his other qualities not unworthy such a dignity,
who to Pius Terti^ Pope dies*
revive the memory of his Uncle Pius Secundus, entitled him self Pius the
third: But the 26 day after his election he died, whereupon the Cardinal of
Saint Peter ad Vincula, mighty in reputation and wealth was chosen in his
stead, and was called Julius Secundus; this did highly please the venetians:
They presently appointed Julius Secundus Pope.
eight Senators to go as Ambassadors to him to congratulate his election,
Antonio Iustiniano being one of them. At their arrival in Rome, being brought
to the Popes presence, he lovingly entertained, and embraced them, saying;
that he was much bound to the state of Venice, and that he would deny
Valentinois, The Venetian^ send Ambassa* dors to Pope Julius.
Justinian told him, all men thought that his Holiness would aid and assist
him: that he was desirous to have the Towns and Castles which he held in
Romagnia to be taken from him.

This saying of his did highly content the Venetian Senate, which aspired to
the peaceable possession of the whole dominion of Romagnia, and had presently
after Pope Alexanders death sent forces to Rauenna, with which the City of
Cesenna was on a sudden in a night assaulted: but the people valliantly
defending it, they were enforced to retire to Rauenna, being come thither
without ordnance: Dyonisius the noble, and the Fauentines, who were desirous to
repeal the Manfredi: This did Dyonisius contradict, and in despite sent for
the Venetians, unto whom he gave the Castle of Val de Lamone which he kept,
in which the Venetians placed a strong Garrison, they did the like in the
castle of Faenza, which the Captain, corrupted with money, delivered unto them.
The Castles of Valdelamona and Faenza, yielded to the Venetians.


They did like wise hold Forlimpopolj and Rimini by the peoples consent,
recompencing Pandolfo Malateste in an other Province: then they went and
beseeged Faenza, because that the Fauentines, nothing terrified with the loss
of their Castle, which, seated in a low place, they had divided from the City
by a Manfredi, as provoked there* unto by the Florentines, who feared nothing
more, then to suffer The Pope against the Ve* netians*
Faenza to be the Venetians: And to these ends employed the aid and credit of
Cardinal Francisco Sonderini their country*man, to make the new Pope grow
jealous of the Venetians, who one day talking with his Holiness told him that
the Venetians did already possess the Castle of Faenza, and all places near
the City, the which they shortly hoped to win; not so much to take from the
Valentinois that which he unjustly possessed by usurpation, as to appropriate
it to them selves. And that their custom was, never to restore any thing they
held: That Faenza being a territory belonging to the Church, the Pope could do
The Popes answer to the Venetian (...)* bassad^.


The Venetians being aduertized of this discourse of the Cardinal, Justinian
went to the Pope to excuse the state, and to entreat him not to give credit to
their enemies tales: and after a long discourse there-vpon made, the Pope
replied, that he had never believed any thing against them, being well assured
of their love and friendship toward him, as they of his: But for that which
concerned Valentinois state, he could have wished that what-so-euer did belong
to the Church might have first been surrendered up, with this answer the
Ambassador took his leave.

The Venetians notwithstanding all this continued the seege of Faenza, and
Faenza yielded.
beginning their battery, the beseeged, dispairing of all aid, yielded, the
venetians having agreed to give Astor a small pention to live by. They could as
easily have taken Imo^a and Furli: but they determined as then to pass on no
farther, because they would not incense the Pope: where upon they sent their
forces to Garrison, having beside Faenza and Rimini taken diverse towns in
Romagnia. At the same time Andre Gritti returned from his Ambassade of
Constantinople, where he had confirmed certain Articles of Peace with the
Turk, to the profit of the Signory. Not long after, Justinian acquainted the
Senate that the Pope had given the Valentinois leave to go and recover his
State. These news caused them to write to the Prouidators that were in
Romagnia, to use means to take whatsoever might be for the profit of the
State, from Duke Valentinois: by means whereof Tossig^rua and Meldola yielded.
Tossignans and Meldola two strong towns, did upon the first summons yield to
the Venetians.

The Pope much incensed against them for this manner of proceeding, sent The
Pope re^kes the Vene^ians.
Angelo Bishop of Tiuolito Venice, to reprehend them for that they had taken
Faenza and Rimini which belonged to the Church, which he craved to have
surrendered to him, entreating them likewise to aid him to recover the rest, he
being resolved to leave the Valentinois nothing, yet he would have whatsoever
should be taken, to be restored to the right owners. The Senate, displeased
with the Popes demands, answered. that they did never expect this from him, in
regard Their answer
of their long friendship confirmed by many reciprocal good offices,
especially, because they knew he had no interest therein: that they had
embraced the offered occasion to seize on Faenza and the rest, those towns
being not possessed by the Church, which in open Consistory had disclaimed all
her right therein and transferred

Such was the Senates answer to the Bishop of Triuoli the Popes Nuncio. But the
Pope continuing his resolution, and knowing his own forces to weak to invade
them, said, that he would crave the aid and assistance of foreign Princes.
Justinian did put him in mind that the Signory of Venice had done nothing but
by his council and advice being Cardinal; whereunto he replied, let them
first surrender Tossignan which belongs to the territory of Imola to me, and
then afterward I may chance to do somewhat concerning Faenza and Rimini;
hereof Justinian advertised the Senate, who whilst they were assembled to
determine The Bisoap of Tiuoli comes again to Venice from the Popei
thereof the Bishop of Triuoli arrived with letters from the Pope, whereby he
took from them all hope of agreement with him, unless they did deliver unto
him those Towns they had taken, saying, that to those ends, he would implore
the aid of God and men, threatening, if they did it not; to do his worst
against them.

The Senators were greatly troubled and incensed with these letters, but more
The Uenetians send Ambassadors to the Emperor Miximillan and the French King.
against the Bishop then Pope, whom they thought had incensed his Holiness
against them. This discontent was accompanied by an other: for the Pope had
sent an Ambassador to the French King by whom complaining of the Venetians, he
craved aid and assistance against them, requesting him to enter into league and
Confederacy with himself, and Maximilian, called to be a third man) against
them. This being known at Venice, the Senate presently sent Ambassadors to
those two Princes, to let them understand that the Signory had taken nothing
from the Pope, but only Faenza and Rimini from a wicked man, fearing least the
Florentines, their enemies by reason of Pisa, should seize on them as they had
Church could lay no claim to them, so as they paid the usual Rent, but on
the contrary ought to be content therewith, because they could not fall into
the hands of any, that were better able to defend and keep them then the
Venetians: That the Pope had been the Author and motive of the Signories
taking of Romagnia from Valentinois, and now changing his opinion did
causeless seek all means to expulse them thence. And therefore the State of
Venice did earnestly entreat King Lewis, nor for that regard to infringe the
league made with them; and Maximilian in like manner, that he would rather aid
and assist the Signory, as a good friend and neighbor, in so just and
reasonable a matter, then the Pope who craved a thing wholly unreasonable.

These remonstrances being kindly entertained by both these Princes, they
promised to debate the matter with his Holiness. This answer did in some sort
satisfy the Senate. Count Petellan at the same time, being on great promises
entreated by diverse Kings and Princes to serve them, would never for-sake the
Signory. In acknowledgement whereof, the state of Venice made him General of
their Army for three years, with a yearly annuity of five hundred pounds of
gold.



The end of the sixth Book of the fourth Decade of the History of Uenice.
FINIS.
THE SECOND VOLVME OF THE GENERAL HISTORY OF VENICE.
The Contents of the seventh Book of the fourth Decade.
THe Emperor entreats the Venetians to deliver the Cities of Faenza and
Riminy to the Pope. Lewis the French King makes the same request to them. The
Emperor craves leave of the Venetians to pass in arms through their state to
Rome to his Cornonation, which they deny. John Paul Baillon restores Perugia
with her territory to the Pope. Bolognia is yielded in the same manner to the
Pope by the Bentiuolies. The King comes into Italy, by reason of the revolt of
Genoa. The Pope does greatly suspect and distrust the French King. Enteruiew of
the Kings of France and Arragon at Sauona. The Emperor performs bad offices
in Germany toward the French King. How the report of the Emperors coming
down into Italy did trouble the Venetians. The Emperor comes into Italy,
and returns suddenly into Germany. The Almains are defeated in the vale of
Cadora. The Venetians take the town of Goritia. The conclusion of the truce
betwixt the Emperor and the Venetians did breed some discontent betwixt the
King and them. Confederacy sworn at Cambray against the Venetians, by the
Pope, the Emperor Maximillian, and the Kings of France and Arragon. The
Venetians make great warlike preparations against this confederacy. The Pope
casts aterrible excommunication on the Venetians. The Kings army and that of
the Venetians very near together. The Venetians are defeated by the French in
the Country of Giradade. The great progression of the French army over Italy
after the Battle. All Romagnia in a manner is yielded to the Pope. Lastly the
Venetians resolving to quit the firm land, do leave Padua, Verona, and all
the other, Cities appointed to the Emperor.

The seventh Book of the fourth Decad of the History of Uenice.
MAXIMILLIAN, forgetting the promise which he first made The Emperor
Maximillians Ambassador come to Venice in the Popes behalf.
to the Venetians to debate their cause before the Pope, sent two Ambassadors
to Venice to entreat them to yield Faenza and Ryminy to him. That it belonged
to him to make that request, as Protector of Holy Church and of whatsoever
apperteined thereunto. If they thought it an unreasonable matter, they should
refer it to arbitrament: That he would labor to cause the Pope to condescend
The Senates answer to the Ambassadors.
Senats answer with that of the Great Counsel to these Ambassadors was, (having
reiterated all that which their Ambassadors had first of all declared to the
Emperor from the Senate) that their right to those lands being so plain and
evident, they would not put it to compromise. Upon this answer one of the
Ambassadors departed from Venice to Rome, the other stayed there, whose
expenses were defraied by the State. A league betwixt the Emperor Maximillian
and Lewis the French King.


In the mean time a league and confederacy was made between the Emperor
Maximillian and the French King, after long strife and disputation of their
Ambassadors. Lewis sent again John Lascaris of Constantinople his Ambassador
to Venice, to entreat them to seek all possible means of agreement with the
Pope: for that being done, they were determined to join altogether against the
Turk. He added that his King had sworn King Lewis his Ambassador at Venice.
league and friendship with Maximillian, not to hurt any man, but only for the
safety and preservation of each others State.

The Senate, who had already decreed that the Ambassador should have a The
Senates answer to the Ambassador.
pound weight of gold given him every month toward his expenses, made answer,
that they had omitted nothing, either by entreaty or promises to give the Pope
satisfaction, having not long before made him this offer, that al-be-it Pope
Alexander had given Faenza and the other lands to the Valentinois free from all
conditions, they were content nevertheless to hold Faenza and Riminy of the
Church, on what conditions and rent it pleased, promising to make true payment
every year, but this would not be accepted of: That they were exceeding glad
that two such great Princes, had converted their hatred and contention into a
sound and firm league and friendship. But because it was specified in the
contract betwixt King Lewis and them, that neither of them two might make
alliance with any other Prince whatsoever, without the consent of his fellow,
they did willingly desire to know, why his King had not first aduertized them
thereof.

At this demand the Ambassador made some little pawse, then he answered that

The Ambassadors answer did not greatly content the Senate, and could not
hinder them from suspecting this league contracted without their knowledge. The
Venetians resolution.
Whereupon they thought it most expedient to try if they could appease the
Pope, unto whom, certain months before, they had offered to deliver unto him
Riminy, and withal that which they had possessed in Romagnia since Pope
Alexander his death, provided that he would be content, that they might still
retain Faenza with her Territory. This was for fear of the French King, and
likewise because the Emperor, at the Popes request, had sent an Ambassador
unto them, to will them to make restitution of the lands belonging to the
Church, as has been said.

But the Pope having given them this resolute answer, that he would not in The
Popes answer to the Venetians offers.
any sort consent to the withholding of one only tower: and threatening them
to recover yet before he died Rauenna, and Ceruia, which they possessed as
wrongfully as they did Faenza, they passed on no farther at that time. But
their fear being increased, by reason, of this new confederacy betwixt the
Emperor and the French King, they offered by the means of the Duke of Vrbin,
a friend to both sides, to deliver up all that which they possessed (the
appurtenances of Faenza and Riminy excepted) if the Pope would give admittance
to their Ambassadors to come and make the oath of obedience, whereunto in time
before he would not consent. The Pope inclined to this proposition made by the
Duke of Vrbin Agreement betwixt the Pope and the Venetians.
(though unwillingly) in regard he had so highly threatened them, for he
perceived

Upon this consent, that which they had offered being re-deliuered, the Senate
sent their Ambassadors, who after they had protested obedience with the
accustomed ceremonies, they brought home with them to Venice no sign whereby
it might be perceived that he was become any whit the milder. In the mean
space the Pope perceiving well enough that without the French Kings aid he
could not hurt the Venetians, and that he could not as yet induce him to make
war upon them, to the end his Popedom should not be spent vnproffitably or
The Popes request to the French King.
and Perugia, the which in all ages did belong to the Sea of Rome, and were
possessed, the one by John Paul Baillon, and the other by John Bentiuogle whose
predecessors having usurped them, were become absolute Lords thereof.

The Popes request was very pleasing to the King, because thereby he might
find means to keep his friendship, from which he was in some sort estranged,
in regard of the Kings alliance with the Venetians, which did much trouble him.
Whereupon because he would not disapoint him, he offered him all aid and
succor: and the Pope on the other side gave him the breefes of Cardinalship
Maximillian desired to make into Italy with his The Emperors request to the
Venetians.
army, to receive his Imperial crown at Rome, wherein he being desirous not
to be hindered by the Venetians, he sent four Ambassadors to acquaint them
with his intent, and to entreat them to grant a passage for him and his army
likewise, assuring them that he would pass thorough their territories without
disturbing them in any sort, being desirous likewise to unite himself with
them.

The Venetians having a long time consulted thereupon, made him a pleasant The
Venetians answer to the Emperor.
answer: for after they had given him to understand how much they desired to
lay open a way to new troubles: and that the French King might do the like for
assurance of the state of Millan.

The determination of Maximillian caused the Pope to defetre his enterprise
till an other time, being persuaded thereunto by the King, who was urged of his
promise about that business, least they by reason of that accident of Italy
should rise in arms: as also because he feared to provoke the Venetians, who
had sent him word, that they would take arms for the defense of Bolognia, if
the Pope did not first give over to them the rights to Faenza which did belong
to the Church.

But the Pope being by nature sudden and impatient, would not temporize, but
sought all means to effect his purpose after a furious manner. And without
John Paul Baillon, by the Duke of John Paul Baillon, yields up Porugia and
her territory to the Pope.
Vrbins persuasion, went to him to Oruietta, where he was received into favor,
having wholly referred himself to the Popes discretion and delivered into his
hands the castles of Perugia and the territory thereunto belonging, into which
he afterward entered. Then marching toward Bolognia, being attended on by six
hundred French Lances, and three thousand footmen of the Kings forces, he went
by the way of the mountain, because he would not come upon the territory The
Pope threatncth the Bentiuo^es
of Riminy which the Venerians held, and being come to Cesenna, he commanded
Bentiuoli to depart from Bolognia on pain of most grievous censures

The Bentiuoles had made great preparations for their own defense, but all
their hope was turned to despair, so soon as they heard of the French-mens
arrival in the Popes army, and much more when the Lord of Chaumont, who
conducted them, did tell them the same day that he arrived at Castel-nouo on
the Bolognians territory, that the King being willing to observe whatsoever he
was tied unto, by the capitulations of the protection, did mean to continue
him in the possession of his goods, so that he would leave the Government of
the City to the Church. At these words Bentiuoli and his children, who before,
with great threatenings had published every where that they would defend
themselves, being wholly The Bentiuoles being discouraged, submit to the Pope.*
discouraged made answer that they would altogether refer themselves to his
arbitrament, beseeching him by all means to mediate tolerable conditions.
Upon this answer the Lord of Chaumont being come within three miles nere to
Bolognia, dealt so with the Pope, as he gave him leave safely to depart from
Bolognia with his wife and children, and to dwelin what place of the Duchy of
Milan he pleased, permitting him to sell and carry away with him all his
mouables, and to enjoy the immouables which he possessed with just title.

The Bentiuoles being departed, the people of Bolognia sent their Ambassadors
Bolognia yielded to the Pope.
to the Pope for to give him the entire government of their City. At the same
time the King of Arragon being embarked at Barcelona came along by the The King
of Arragon comes into the Realm of Naples.
Italy came thither with speed, and among others from Venice, whither George
Pisani and Marc Dandulo were sent to congratulate and honor so great a Prince.

The Pope likewise, notwithstanding that he was displeased for that he had not*
sent to offer his obedience as the manner was, sent a Nuntio to him to incite
him against the Venetians, thinking that for the recovery of the Havens of
Apuglia, which the Venetians held, he had wished their overthrow: And the
Venetians on the contrary did still study to keep his friendship.

Soon after King Lewis came into Italy, by reason of the rebellion of Genoa,
Lewis the French King comes in^ Italy.
the Venetians sent Dominico Trenisano, and Paul Pisa^i their Ambassadors to
him to congratulate his arrival, who came to Milan, whether the king came so
soon as he had recovered Genoa.

The Pope being at Bolognia, had solicited the King to come into Italy that
they The great hatred which the Pope did bear to the Venetians.
might confer together, whereunto the King did incline, albeit the Popes
intents were against the Venetians, whom he hated in regard of the Cities of
Romagnia which they possessed. But when he understood that the King determined
to take arms in favor of the Gentlemen against the people of Genoa (because
the strife betwixt the Gentlemen and the Commons had been cause of the
rebellion) he was much discontented thereat* because he had ever favored the
people against the Nobility, and he persuaded the King as much as in him lay to
abstain from arms, alleging that it might kindle some fire in Italy, which
would hinder the war which they had decreed against the Venetians. To the
which, perceiving 1507.
he would return to Rome, saying that the a^e of Bolognia did not agree with
his health^ whereupon the King was troubled, not knowing what to think,
because A strange suspicion of the Pope concerning the King.
he interrupted that which himself had ^raued, and did all he could to alter
his determination. But the Kings earnest instance to change his mind did
increase the Popes suspicion, which he had conceived that the King would keep
him still there, where they might meet together at one self same place, which
did so much the more confirm him in his determination, wherein being
obstinate, he departed from Bolognia about the latter end of February, being
not able to dissemble

By this wrath, the hatred which he did bear to the Venetians being in some
sort mittigated, he determined to pass by the City of Faenza, new quarrels
arising every hour betwixt the King and him, in regard of the Bentinoles, whom
he would have the King to expel from the Duchy of Milan, albeit by his own
consent they were permitted to abide there, in such sort as nothing could
appease him, complaining grievously of the King: and being thereby provoked, he
did The false reports which the Pope threw abroad against the king.
by his Nu^tios and by a Brief, give the Emperor, and the Electors to the
Empire, to understand, that the French Kings preparations for his passage into
Italy, with a mighty army, under pretense to appease the sedition of Genoa, was
in effect

The Venetians likewise fearing the Kings coming into Italy with so great an
army, did give the like aduertizement? Maximillian being desirous of nouelty,
having received these aduertizements, held an Imperial Diet in the City of
Constance where all the Barons, Princes and Commonwealths of Germany being
assembled, he did in such sort agrauate the matter against the French King by
his oration, as the minds of all those that were there present, were
merueilously moved, where he exhibited the Popes and Venetians letters of
aduertizement.

The French King having intelligence of the whole matter, did on a sudden
Enteruiew of king of France and Arragon at Sauona.
leaving Naples came directly to Sauona, where he had appointed to confer
with the French King, who for that cause was come from Millan to attend him
there: where Fernand with the Queen his wife being arrived, all distrusts
being laid aside on both parts, with infinite numbers of reciprocal
embrasings they had diverse long and secret conferences betwixt themselves, and
by that which fell out afterward, it was apparent, that they promised a
perpetual league of friendship one with the other, and that Ferdinand should
use means to reconcile the

The two Kings departed from Sauona the fourth day after their arrival, with
the same shows of love and friendship. The one went by sea to Barcelona, and
the other by land returned into France, leaving the other affairs of Italy at
the same stay. King Lewis in the mean time perceiving that the Diet of
Constance Aduertizements to the Princes of Germany to clear the suspicion of
the French King.
continued, where Maximillian had so highly animated all the German Princes
against him, he sent underhand certain men of purpose to Constance, who
should not be publicly known, but dealing secretly, should work means* by
the hidden favor of the Princes his friends, to appease the minds of the
rest, excusing those slanders which were imposed upon him, by the evidence of
the effects, seeing that after the reduction of Genoa to his obedience, he had
on a sudden cassie^ed his army, and returned with all possible speed into
France, to take away all suspicion that he would attempt nothing against the
Church, nor against the

These things did greatly trouble the French Kings mind, who was altogether
uncertain of the Venetians meanings, who would not openly discover themselves
What was concluded in the Diet at Constance.
but had ever held matters in suspense. The Diet of Constance being ended it
was there concluded, after sundry disputations, that Maximillian should have
for his passage into Italy eight thousand horse, and two and twenty thousand
footmen; paled by the Country for six months, and six score thousand Florins
of the Rhyne for the expense of the Artillery, and other ordinary charges. Upon
the report of these news the Venetians were greatly perplexed in their The
Venetians greatly perplexed.
the great means which every one of them used to win them to his side. The
Emperor at the beginning sent three Ambassadors of great place to them* to
entreat them to give him passage through their territories, and to make a more
strict alliance with him, wherein should be mentioned, that they should be
participants of the reward of the victory. The French King on the other side,
did not cease by his Ambassadors, and by that of Venice, which was resident
with him, to do all he might to induce them to oppose themselves by arms
against the Emperors coming, as hurtful to either of them, offering them for
this purpose all his forces, and to continue for ever their confederate.

The Venetians, who could have been well contented to have lived at quiet as
Newters, perceived themselves to be in such sort pressed by the Emperor, as
they were of necessity either to refuse it, or to grant him passage. For they
feared, that by their refusal they should be troubled first, and by granting
it, they should ensring their confederacy with the King: And yet nevertheless,
each of the Senators did affirm that it was necessary openly to adhere to one
of the sides, but they knew not to which, and after great diversity of
opinions, the remembrance at last of the Emperors continual inclination, to
recover the Cities which they possessed, which he pretended to belong to the
Empire, or to the house of Austria did most prevail.

They made answer then to the Ambassadors, that their determination was to The
Venetians resolute answer to the Emperors ambassadors.
grant him passage coming without an army, and to stop it if he came in arms;
saying that necessity enforced them so to do, in regard of their confederacy
with the French King, by which they were bound to assist him in the defense of
the Duchy of Millan, with a certain number of men specified therein.

Maximillian being frustrate of his hope to have the Venetians on his side, was
incombred with other doubts which did wholly delay the effect of his deseignes.
For first of all; That foundation whereon he chiefly builded, that the Cities
and Potentates of Italy, fearing his name and army, would come to composition,
and The Emperor find to himself frustrate of his hopes.
would furnish him with sufficient sums of money, did daily decay: Then the

The Pope likewise, who would not show himself more affectionate to the one
side then the other, did refuse the demand he made that it might be lawful for
him The Pope refuses the Emperors request.
to take a hundred thousand ducats which were leauied in Germany for the war
against the Turks and were kept in the same Province, and were not to be
converted to any other use without the leave of the Sea of Rome: Yet
nevertheless in the midst of all these difficulties, he forgate nothing
which might nourish the report of his coming down, in such sort as all those
who stood in awe of him made mighty provisions in diverse places, but they were
uncertain, with what forces, at what time, and from whence he would come.

The French King had provided for the Duchy of Milan, and for the frontiers of
The great preparations of King Lewis and the Venetians to stop the Emperors
passage.
Burgondy: And had besides sent John James Triuncle with four hundred French
Bartholmew Aluiana into the Friul with eight hundred men at arms.

The Emperor at the beginning of the year 1508. was desirous to put in
execution the reports which had been spread abroad of his coming down, and
The Emperor summons those of Verona to g^ue him passag.
sent an Herald to Verona to summon the inhabitants to provide lodging for
himself, and for four thousand horse which he brought with him, going to Rome
to take the Imperial crown. The Governor of the City, by the advice of the
Senate, with whom the matter was communicated at Venice, made him answer,

Maximillian upon this answer being already come to Trent departed thence in a
morning before day with fifteen hundred horse, and four thousand footmen, not
of those which had been granted him at Constance, but of those of his The
Emperor comes toward Vincenza and on a sudden returns into Germany.
Court, and of his own state, and took the way of the mountains toward
Vincenza. And the Marquis of Brandenbourge marched at the same time toward
Rouero with five hundred horse and two thousand footmen, but he returned the
next day, not being able to obtain any passage. The Emperor by the way of the
mountains being come within twelve miles of Vincenza, and having taken

This did awake the Venetians courage, did incite them to leauy diverse
foot-troupes, The Venetians great preparations.
and to make great preparations, urging the French King to do the like. They
chose two Prouidatori, Andre Griti and George Cornare, one of whom went toward
the Rheticke, and the other into Friull. Aluiana was commanded speedily into
Friul where George Cornare the Prouidator already was, because four hundred of
Maximillians horse and five thousand of his footmen being come thither and
entered into the vale of Cadora, had taken the Borough and

Aluiana having passed the mountains full of snow, came in two days near to
Cadora, where tarrying for his footmen that came after him; he seized on a
passage, which was not kept by the Germans, by which men enter into that
valley. The coming of Aluiana did encourage those of the Country who did
affect the Venetians, who suddenly did possess the other passages of the
valey, by which the enemies were to retire. The Germans perceiving themselves
to be shut in, and that no hope of safety was left them but in their arms,
they came with great fury to assail Aluiana, who The Almains defeated in the
vale of Cadora.
did bravely receive them, the fight lasted certain hours with great
feruency,

Before this exploite of war, the Emperor had sent Luke de Renaldis his
Ambassador The Emperor reiteraeteth his Am^assadio the Venetians for passage.
to Venice, to entreat the Senators to grant him passage through their
territories, as he had oftentimes before requested them, that he might go
to Rome, saying that his King would come armed for fear of his enemies*
Nevertheless he did assure the Signory of Venice, that he and his would
pass without doing wrong to any of their subjects, or else that he would
pass without Arms, provided that the commonwealth would give him hostages
for the assurance of his passage. To that, Prince Loredano answered, that
Maximillian was not ignorant, how that the Commonwealth had ever been a
friend to him and to his father the Emperor Frederick, and that it was not well
done of him in counterchange,

And because Cornare had written to the Senate, that Aluiana was in great hope,
and would, in a manner, be bound, that the enemies should in short space
recompense the wrongs and spoils which they had committed, the Senate was The
Senates answer to the Emperors Ambassador.
of opinion to defer the answering of Maximillians Ambassadors, till such
time as they had news from Friul. And so soon as they heard from thence, they

Aluiana after the taking of the castle of Cadora would not stand still in so
fair Aluiana his exploits in Friul.
away, but pursuing his good fortune, recovered Portonanoue, then Cremousa
seated on a high hill, and from thence went and encamped before Gorithia, which
is at the foot of the Alps, strong by situation, and well fortified, and
which has a castle of difficult access. But having planted his Artillery
before the town, he took it the fourth day after by composition, by reason
that they within wanted Armor, water, and victuals. The Captain of the castle
yielded up the place in

Aluiana after the taking of Gorithia, went to besiege Thryeste, and took it
with the Castle likewise, which being seated on the Gulphe of Venice, was very
commodious to them for their traffic: whereupon the Venetians being puffed up
with their prosperous success, determined to follow the course of the victory*
and to make war on Maximillian, by entering farther into his country: But
Dominico An old man's speech to the Senate.
Morosino, Procurator of Saint Mark, a man of foure-score and ten years of
age, wise and advised, began to speak and to entreat the Senate, not to
suffer That Germany was not pleased that Maximillian made war on the
commonwealth, when as he might freely live at peace: that it was also to be
feared, that the same Germany would take it in evil part, and would resent it,
if any farther roads were made into their country, for they would not suffer
their Imperial dignity to be so abased and contemned. That the offense which
he had committed against the commonwealth was not great, for which
nevertheless through the goodness of God, he had made a worthy satisfaction,
all his soldiers having been cut in pieces in Friul, Cadora, and Portonanoue
being recovered, and we have lost nothing on the Verona territory, nor
received any disgrace. And heerewith being satisfied without of victuals. That
it was indeed a glorious matter to vanquish a man's enemies in war, and to
augment their own bounds and confines: But that it was more glorious to ^ame
and vanquish a man's own passions and himself* that the events of war
depended commonly on fortune, who is variable and inconstant: But Counsels
proceeding from mature deliberation and from wisdom are firm and stable and
do proffit much more then those which issue from furious rashness.

The good old man having uttered this speech, the heat of those who craved
war was in some sort cooled, and therefore they concluded nothing for that
present, but said only they would consider of it at more leisure. But
Maximilian continuing wars resolved against Maximilian.
against him on the fourth of April. This resolution of the Senate was on a
sudden sent not only to Gr^tle and Cornare Prouidatory, but likewise to
Ieronimo Contaren who was Prouidator in Histria with certain Galleis, to the
end that each of them should enuade whatsoever they found to belong to
Maximilian, either on the firm land or at Sea. According to this commandment
Cornare, and Aluiana, pursuing their victory took Protonoue, then Fume which
is a City of Sclauonia, which they burnt: and passing ouet the Alps they
took Possonia seated on the marches of Hungary* This was done in the Friul,
whilst not far from Trent Flight of the Venetian Garrison
footmen, who being well fortefied on the hill of Bretonic fled thence
nevertheless so soon as they descried the enemies, whervppon the Germans
deriding their cowardice, did raze the fortifications which they had made on
the hill, burning the houses and then went back to Calliana*

But this great army of Maximilian, within a short space came to nothing, by
Maximilians Army desolued for a small occasion.
reason of a contention of small importance which arose about the payment of
the Grisons, who mutining therefore did spoil the victuals of the Camp: by
means whereof all things being in disorder, and all the Grisons being
departed, the residue of the Army, who were about seven thousand men, were
enforced to The Castle of Creste yielded to the Venetians.
reskew the Venetian companies retired, and went to ass^ile the Fort of Creste,
which is a place of importance, which yielded before the supplies from Trent
arrived, which caused the Almaines to re-assemble their foot forces, and to
return with a thousand horses and six thousand Lansquenets to Calliana which
is distant from La Pietra a crosbow shot.

The Venetians returned to beseege this Castle of La Pietra with four thousand
horse and sixteen thousand foot, determining to batter it with sixteen
pieces of Ordinance: The two armies were within a mile one of another, each of
The Venetians retire from before the Fort of la Pietra.
their men there, with two pieces of ordinance which the Almaines took from
them in a salley, thinking it lost time to tarry there any longer, seeing they
could not enforce the enemies to fight they went to Rouero, and the Almains to
Trent, the most part of whom within a while after disbanded.

Mazimilian, who during these warlike exploits had run up and down from
place to place to be releiued with men and money, perceiving all men to forsake
him, after the defeat of his forces at Cadora, sent a Gentleman of his to
Venice to crave truce for three months: but the Senate contemned it, and
would not grant any for less then a whole year, not without the knowledge and
consent The Venetians refuse to grant Maximilian truce for three years*
of the French King: Maximilian being the more danted for the loss of Tryeste,
and other places of the Seacoast, did solicit the Bishop of Trent to inuit
(as of himself) the Venetians to truce, thinking by that means the sooner to
purchase Peace. The Venetians made answer; That it lay not in their power: but
that he ought to move the French King.

For this purpose Commissioners were appointed to meet and confer together,
for Maximilians part, the Bishop or Trent, and Serentano the Emperors
Secretary: for the French King, Triuulce, and Iacomo Galfredo President of
Millan, Iarring betwixt the Com missioners assembled about the truce*
and for the Venetians, Zachary Contarene, a particular Ambassador deputed for
that business. Conferring together they easily condiscended to all conditions
saving that the Frenchmen would have a general truce, and that all the
confederates of either of them, as well out of Italy as within should be
therein comprised, and especially the Duke of Guelders, whereunto Maximilians
Agents would not consent, because their master had determined to ruin that
Duke, saying Truce betwixt the Emperor and the Venetians.
Venetians did all they might to content the French King, but perceiving the
Almaines to be obstinate in that business they resolved for their part to
accept of truce in the same manner as they had concluded it, being desirous to
free themselves from such a war, which lighted wholly on their dominions; and
notwithstanding the protestation of the French Kings Commissioners, that a
mutual enterprise ought not to be finished but in common, the Venetians went
on, and concluded the truce on the twentieth of April, the which was speedily
ratified by the Emperor and the Venetians, by means whereof the wars ceased
betwixt them,

Arms being laid a side, Aluiana and Cornare returned to Venice where they
were received with great pomp, and in a manner triumphall: The French King The
French King complains of the truce.
having intelligence that the truce was concluded and signed, showed signs of
discontent, and complained to Antonio Condelmerio Ambassador for the Venetians
in his Court, saying that he had not deserved of the Seigneiury of Venice that
without staying for his answer and consent they had granted truce to
Maximilian: That he did not greatly care if the confederates of Italy were
comprised therein, provided that the Duke of Guelders might be assured in his
state, whom he much affected, and yet nevertheless the Signory had made his
desire frustrate,

The King having uttered these words in choler did repent him of it, and
feining to forget all matters, he began to entertain him with more pleasing
discourse; namely when the Ambassador had excused the commonwealth, and told
him that the Senate ever had a principal regard to maintain him in the Duchy
of Millan, to the end that whilst the truce lasted he might not be molested
in The French King (...) bleth.
that State. The King gave him then some hope that he would ratify the truce,
but in himself he began to think on all means how to be revenged.

The Emperor on the other side not digesting the brauadoes which the Venetians
had offered him, and being desirous to resent the wrongs which he had received,
because he had no hope to draw any more aid from the German Princes, made
show that he had a will to unite himself with the French King against the
Venetians, as the only remedy to recover his honor and lost states. The Pope
likewise provoked the King against them, because, besides the old hatred which
he did bear to them, he thought that the Bandetti of Furli, who dwelt at
Faenza, had by their means made some attempt on that City.

The King calling to mind (besides his new displeasure for the truce) all the
What was practiced under hand again ct the Venetians.
wrongs which he thought they had done him in his wars of Naples, and being
and for that purpose they chose the City of Cambray for their place of
conference. Whether from the Emperor came the Lady Marguerit his daughter,
Regent of the Low Countries, and Matthew Langy the Secretary, and for the French
Confederacy of the Pope, Emperor, French King, and King of Arragon, against the
Uenetians.
King the Cardinal of Amboise, who under color of treating a peace betwixt
the Archduke and the Duke of Guelders (as they gave it forth) to the end that
the true cause might not be known to the Venetians, they concluded a
perpetual peace and confederacy, betwixt the Pope, the Emperor, the French
King, and the King of Arragon, against the Venetians, each of them to recover
those things which they held from them.

The new confederacy being thus concluded, the Cardinal of Amboise departed
The Confederacy ratified by the Emperor and the two Kings.
from Cambray, the Bishop of Paris, and the Count of Carpy went to the Emperor
from the French King, for the ratification of the peace, who did soon ratify
and confirm it by oath, the like did the French King, and when it was
afterward brought to the King of Arragon, albeit he had some doubt in his
mind, yet nevertheless he did forth with ratify it with the same solemnities:
But the The difficulty which the Pope made to ratify the consederacie.
Pope made more difficulty in the matter, being on the one side swayed by a
desire to recover the cities of Romagnia, and with his hatred to the
Venetians, and on the other side, his fear of the French Kings forces did
greatly move him: As also for that he thought it a dangerous matter for
himself, if the Emperor by recovering from the Venetians the places which
they held, and which

To this purpose then he labored by all means to induce the Venetians to
yield up Riminy and Faenza to him, declaring to them that the great dangers
which threatened them by the combination of so many Princes, would be much
greater if he united himself with them in this confederacy, For he could not
The Popes secret menaces to the Venetians.
choose but pursue them both with spiritual and temporal Arms; He caused in
secret this remonstrance to be made by a Greek called Constantine Comniato to
John Badoario Ambassador for the Signiory of Venice to the Sea Apostolic, for
Constantine.

Now it was told them that they might easily cause Maximillian to change his
mind, and distract him from the alliance with the French King, in regard of
the The Venetians secret practices with Maximilian.
ancient enmity betwixt them: they secretly sent John Peter Stella, Secretary
to the Senate, to Maximillian, who had oftentimes been with him, and was very
well known to the Emperor, to the end he might find means to reconcile him
to the Senate. This man being too hasty in the execution of his desseigne, and
not Lewis his Ambassadors, who were with Maximillian, had knowledge of his
coming, whereby he did no good to the commonwealth. George Pisan likewise
coming to Rome, by the Senates commandment, to treat with the Pope, his
journey was to no purpose.

The Senate despairing of peace, made leuies of men and horse, and decreed to
enrole the greatest number of men at arms and light horse that they could
raise, among whom were diverse Stradiots, and a great number of footmen, they
commanded likewise for resistance at Sea, if King Lewis should come to assail
them, fifteen Galleis to be armed. They likewise dispatched Andre Badoario to

In the mean time Lascaris King Lewis Ambassador at Venice was dismissed, The
Venetians great preparations for their defense.
the like was done to Condelmare, who was their Ambassador in France, unto whom
from the King was presented a chain of gold, the which he refused, saying;
That he would not receive any present from a King, that was their enemy and so
departed. Carsode, in like manner who was Agent at Milan departed thence:
within a while after supplies came to the Senate, of a thousand light horse,
and five thousand strangers foote-men, a thousand Archers from Candy, and
another thousand armed at all sorts from the Country of Albania. They did
after-wards with speed fortify the Castle of Cremona, and furnished it withal
things necessary for a long seege: As also all there Towns, and Castles near
thereunto, of which fortifications Ambuscado (...) surprise the Count Petillan
the Count Petillan had express charge, who coming one day meanly
accompanied to Bergamo, to see what was done there, those of Milan having
notice thereof by their spies, two hundred horse sallied forth of Milan, in the
night, Andrew Gritti and George Cornare for Brouidators, who in the time of the
Rhetick war, had the same command. The Pope who had deferred to ratify the
confederacy, till the very last day assigned for the The Pope ratifieth the
treaty of Ca^bray.
ratification* did confirm it, but with express declaration that he would

The Venetians on the other side with great courage made preparations (as has
The Venetians attempt in vain to be reconciled to the Pope, and the Emperor.
been said:) but considering afterward how all Christendom in a manner were
in arms against them, they desirous to try by all means possible if they
could The Venetians are astonished at sundry bad presages*


Sundry prodegies which did happen did greatly terrify them: First they lost a
bark within the which were ten thousand Ducats, sent by the Senate to Rauenna,
which was drowned: then lightning fell on the Castle of Bressia: after that, the
place where the Charters of the Commonwealth were kept, fell wholly down to
the ground, and fire took either by chance, or by the secret malice of some in
their Arcenall in the same place where their salt peeter lay, where it burnt
twelve Galleis, and a very great quantity of Munition which did much amaze
them, because it presaged nothing but mishap. They made preparations then
cheefely on that side, whereby the French King was to come, which was toward
the Giradade, crossing the river Adda, near to Cassiana, and therefore they
assembled Bartilmeo Aluiana was Governor, and George Cornare and Andre Gritt^
above named were prouidatory.

These men being assembled to determine after what manner the war should be
managed, the opinions were different betwixt the general and the governor:
This man was of opinion to make the seat of the war in the enemies country,
rather The Venetians army on the entry of the country of Giradade.
then in their own, and to go and assaill the Duchy of Milan, before the
French King should pass the Mounts: The other, who for his long experience,
would not hear tell of tempting fortune, was of a contrary opinion, and
counseled, that contemning the loss of the country of Gyradade, they should
encampe near to the City of Orci, as in times past other great Captains had
Sundry opinions of the Venetian Captains.
done in the wars betwixt the Venetians and the Milanois. The Senate rejected
both these counsels; that of Aluiana as to bold, and that of the General as
over fearful: whereupon they determined, that the army should draw near to
the

The French King having passed the Mounts with an intent to fight, sent his
Herald to Venice, to denounce war; and in passing by Cremona to do the like
to the Venetian Magistrates. The Lord of Chaumont began the first motion of
the war on the fifteenth of April, crossing by a foord the river Adda, near
The Lord of Chaumont General of the Kings army.
to Calciana, with three thousand horse; and passed over by boat six thousand
footmen and the Artillery after-wards, marching directly to the town of
Treui, which being beseeged and battered, yielded: whereupon Justinian Morosin,
Viteli de citto de Castello, and Vincenzo de Nalde, who were within it, and
with them an The French take Treui.
hundred light horse, and about a thousand footmen remained prisoners, the
Sradiots saved themselves by flight. Upon report of the taking of this place,
diverse neighbor-towns did like-wise yield. The Lord of Chaumont did soon
after with all his forces repasse the river Adda. The Marquis of Mantua came
with his forcas to Casal-Major, which forthwith yielded. Rocalatin like-wise
Casal-Maior yielded.
having on a bridge of boats passed the river Adda, where it enters into the
Po, came and made incursions on the Cremonois, with an 150. Lances and 3000.
footmen, the like also did they of the Garrison of Loda. The peasants likewise
of the Mountainy of Brianca made incursions as far as Bergamo. After these
first The Popes terrible monitory against the Venetians,
a terrible Bull, in form of a Monitory against them, specyfing all the
usurpations made by the Venetians on the Churches lands, and the authority
which they attributed to themselves to the prejudice thereof: whereby he
admonished them to yield up within four and twenty days next following the
Churches towns which they possessed, with the reuenew received by them ever
since they enjoyed them, upon pain, in case of disobedience of incurring
censures, and interdictions, not only for the City of Venice, but likewise
for all the towns under their obedience: declaring all those to be
excommunicate, who should in any sort detain them, guing power to all men in
all places, to seize on their goods and to make The Duke of Venice his answer
to the French Kings Herald.
persons. At the very same time, in a manner, King Lewis his Herald came to
Venice, who in his Kings name in open Senate did denounce the war already
begun for diverse occasions which he declared in their presence. The Duke by
the advice of the Senate, answered, seeing that the French King did denounce
war, contrary to their aliance with him, the which they had never violated,
they would with their forces, and with the justice of their cause seek to
defend themselves*

After this answer, they gave order to their army, the which being assembled
very commodious for the relief of Cremona, Crema, Carauagia and Bergamo, The
Venetians Army at Foutane lla.
Cities under their obedience. And because they had a fit time to recover
Treui, by reason that the Kings Army was not yet assembled, the Senate was of
opinion to assail it. The ordnance being planted, which made great execution,
those The Venetians recover Treui.
within it did yield the next day following, on condition that the soldiers
lives should be saved, who were disarmed, the Captains to be prisoners, and
the town to be used at their discretion.

The King was at Milan, who departed thence* so soon as he understood that
that town was battered, for to relieve it, and came and passed over the river
of Adda on three bridges made of boats, near to Cassiana, with his whole
Army, Aluiana in a ^age caused the town to be set on fire, to make them to
depart thence. But it was too late* for the French were wholly come over the
river. The Kings Army (...) very near to that of the Venetians.


The King so soon as he had passed over the River, came and lodged within
little more then a mile of the Venetians camp, who being encamped in a place
strong both by sit^ and art, the King could not assail them but with great
disadvantage. The matter was debated, where some of the Kings council were of
opinion to draw out the war in length, expecting the Emperors coming down,
Sundry opinions in the Kings Army.
for then the Venetians should be enforced to come to a battle, not being able
to look to so many places at once. But the King was of a contrary opinion, as
well for fear least the Emperor would come too late, as for the desire which
he had, being there in person with all the forces of his kingdom, that he
might without an others help finish that war by a glorious victory. The
armies in the mean time did not stir, but remained encamped, the one before
the other, for the space of a day, with sundry skirmishes betwixt the light
horse on either side. The next day the King marched toward Riuolta, to provoke
the enemies to come thither, that he might fight with them, but they did not
sti^re, showing thereby that they had no meaning to fight; The Artillery being
brought before

The King wondering at the enemies proceedings, the which to himself he
nevertheless The Kings resolution to enforce the enemies to fight.
commended, resolved to depart thence, and to come into a place where he might
cut off their victuals which came to them from Cremona and Crema, thinking that
the want of victuals would break their determination: wherefore having staid
one day at Riuolta he dislodged and burnt it, and took the way of Vailla and
Paudina, the very next night, because that either of these places were in the
way by which victuals came to the enemy.

The Venetians did very well perceive the Kings meaning, and how they were
Petillan would have them to tarry till the next day, and Aluiana would have
them instantly to depart* to the end to prevent them; the which was done. There
were two ways to go to the places above mentioned, the one lower, and farther
near to the river, with crooked turnings, by which The number of the Kings
Army.
the kings army marched, which was said to consist of more then two thousand
lances, six thousand Swisses, and twelve thousand foot, as well French as
Italians, with great store of Artillery, and Pioners: the other farther off
from the river, and The number of the Venetians Army.
the shorter way, the which led directly for the passage of the Venetia^ army,
wherein were 2000. men at arms, more then 20000. foot, and great numbers of
light horse, some Italians, and some Albaneses: there being nothing betwixt
the two

The two armies marching in this manner, the French vantgard conducted by
Charles of Amboise, and the Venetians rereward conducted by Aluiana, encountered
one another. Aluiana not thinking to fight that day, did not march in good
order. But perceiving himself to be so near the enemy, and in such a place
as he was enforced to fight, advertised the Count Petillan, who went with the
Vantgard, of his necessity, craving his aid. The Earl sent him word to march
on still and to eschew the fight, according to the Senates determination.
Aluiana in the mean time placed his footmen with six pieces of Ordinance on a
little rising: and then assailed the enemies with such force and fury, as he
enforced them to give back: but the Armies battle, wherein the Kings person
was, coming forward: The Kings Army and that of the Venetians, fight
suriously one with an other.
the chance of the Dice soon turned, albeit Aluiana for his luckie beginning
had promised to himself the victory: who running up and down, now here, now
there, encouraged his soldiers: They fought on all sides with great fury. The
The Venetians lose the battle of Gyradade.
the enemies, they fell down in a manner all dead upon the place, and chiefly
the footmen, some of whom affirmed that there were eight thousand of them
slain there. Barthelmew Aluiana was taken prisoner, who being hurt in the
eye, with his face all bloody, was brought to the Kings Pauillion.

Such end had the battle of Gyradade, which was fought on the fourteenth
Mary's of the Victory: then because he would not loose his opportunity, he
came to The King take to Carauagia.
Carauagia, which yielded upon composition, and four and twenty-houres after,
the Castle, on no condition, having been beaten with the Artillery. Bergamo
did the like the next day, and the Castle a day after. From thence he marched
toward Bressia, which by the council of the Gambares, did cast off the
Venetian yoke, and yielded to the King; and the Castle two days after did the
like, on condition that all that were within it might depart, (the Venetian
Gentlemen Bressia yields to the king.
excepted) because the King would not have them comprised in the composition

The news of the battles loss, and of the kings progression after that, did
afflict How the Venetians were daunted at the report of the battails loss.
Venice with such grief and universal fear, as it is scarce credible, so
great it was. For from all parts of the city, people ran to the public
Palace with great cries and pitiful lamentations, where the Senators knew
not on what to resolve, their Council being dulled by despair; so weak were
their remedies. At the last taking courage, they determined to use means to
be reconciled in any sort whatsoever with the Emperor and the Catholic King,
not mentioning the French King, because they did as much distrust his hatred,
as they were

The Senate then did write to Dominico Grimani, and to Marco Cornare, son to
the Prouidator, both of them being Cardinals at Rome, to promise and The
Venetians offer to the Pope.
offer to the Pope, in the Senates name, that the Cities which he demanded in
Romagnia should be yielded unto him, by means whereof they besought him not
to abandon the commonwealth to the pleasure and dispose of barbarous people,
such as the Frenchmen were, who if they should once become masters of all
Lombardy, the Popes themselves should not be safe in Rome.

They likewise decreed, that Antonio Iustiniano (who being chosen Prouidator
for The Venetians seek to be reconciled to the Emperor.
Cremona, was ready to go thither) should directly go to the Emperor
Maximillian, the country called old Venice. So weak and uncertain were their
remedies, as if one of these two did not help to repulse the audatiousnesse of
the French, they had not any sure means left to stay them.

Nevertheless, making a virtue of necessity, they consulted for their defense
how to provide money to wage new companies, for those which remaind alive after
the defeat were bereft of strength and courage. They determined likewise to
augment their army by sea, whereof Andre Treuisan was General with (...)
Galleys to oppose against that of the enemies which was preparing at Genoa. But
the French Kings sudden speed did prevent al their Counsels, unto whom, since
the reduction of Bressia, Cremona was yielded (the Castle expected The great
progression of the French army.
which the Venetians yet held). Pisquetona did the like: then he marched
toward Piscara to take the Castle, for the town was yielded: And as they
began to batter it, the Swisses and Gascons made a furious entry by small
ouctru^es in the walls, and slew all those that were within it, except the
Captain and his son who were Venetian Gentlemen, who were both by the Kings
commandment hanged on the Castles battlements, to the end by that example to
move those of the Castle of Cremona, not obstynately to make defense, nor to
hold out till the very last.

The King in this manner, in less then fifteen days after the victory, had
recovered Francisco Maria de la Rouera his Nephew, Son to his brother John,
who with that army scoured from Cesenna to Ceruia, then took the town of
Sauarolla, betwixt Imola and Faenza, and that of Bre siquella with the Castle,
and all the other towns of the Faentyne territory. Al Romagnia ye^ldeth to the
Pope upon the same only of the Kings victory.


The Burrow of Russi, strong both by nature and art, after the Kings victory
did yield to the Pope on composition, the like did the City of Faenza, which
being The Duke of Terrara declares him*selfe against the Uenetians. The Marquis
of Mantua does the like. The Emperors army under the Duke of Brunswic.


The Duke of Ferrara on a sudden showed himself, who till then had
abstained, and having expelled the Visdoma from Ferrara (a magistrate which the
Venetians kept there) he did forcibly without any let at all recover the
Pollesin of Rouigo. The towns of Azole and Lunate yielded to the Marquis of
Mantua, which the Venetians had in former time taken from John Francisco
Gonzaga his great Grandfather. Christofero Frangipane held Pisinia and Diuinia
in Histria. The Duke of Brunswic with his forces, ent^ing Friull by the
Emperors command, took Feltre and Bellone Thryeste likewise and the other
towns upon his arrival did return to the Emperors obedience. The Earls of
Sodron seized on certain Castles and Villages which lay near them: the like
did the Bishop of Trent who took Riua di Trente, and Agresta. The Venetians
quit Padua Verona, and there places of the firm land.


The Venetians being brought to all extremity determined to quit the Signory
Mandates to the Magistrates and Officers of Padua, Verona, and other Cities
allotted to Maximillian, that they should suddenly depart thence, leaving them
to the power of the people.

During these atchiuements, Antonio Justinian who had been sent to the
Emperor, being admitted to his presence in public audience, did speak with
very great submission, but it was in vain, for he would do nothing without
the French King. The Venetian Cardinals likewise, who besought the Pope to
absolve The Venetians obtain nothing of the Pope nor Emperor.
solue the Monitorie, seeing they had offered to make restitution of the towns
within the space of four and twenty days, could obtain nothing: For the Pope
answered, That they had not obeyed, because they did offer it with limited

In this manner were the affairs of the Venetian commonwealth thrown
headlong down all hopes failing them. Those of Verona would yield to the
King, seeing the Venetians had forsaken them, but he would not receive them,
meaning faithfully and wholly to observe the capitulations made with the
Emperor, seeing he had conquered all that which did belong to himself, and he
commanded

This determination of the French King, not to pass with his Atmie beyond his
limits, gave some beginning of hope and safety to the Venetians, concerning
whom the minds of all Italians were diversely moved: Some were highly pleased
Hope given to the Venetians.
with their misery and calamity, and said, That with great ambition they had
sought to subject all Italy to themselves, by means whereof they had made
their name very odious. Others considering more iudiciously, how unseemly a
thing it would be for all Italy to be brought under the bondage of strangers,
did infinitely lament

This compassion began to touch the Popes heart, who fearing the power of The
Pope being moved with pity, takes compassion on the Venetians.
the Emperor and the French King desired to divert their thoughts from any
more oppressinge it by intangling them in affairs. Therefore he resolved (but
secretly) to hinder as much as he could, that the miseries of that Signory
should go on no farther, and did willingly receive the letters with Denis
Loredan wrote unto him, requesting that it might please him, to receive six
Ambassadors which the Signory would send unto him of the principal Senators,
most humbly to entreare him to pardon and absolve them. The letters were read
in open consistory,

This reception of the Pope did increase their hope, with the news they
Treuiso continues obedient to the Venetians.
heard from Treuiso, which being forsaken by the magistrates, and by the
Venetian companies, as others were, Leonardo of Dressina banished from
Vincenza, being come thither without forces to take possession thereof for the
Emperor, they in the city mutined, and began with a general voice to cry S.
Mark: protesting that they would acknowledge none other Lord, and a fellow
that was a shomaker named Mark being their leader, he carried with great
shoutes and concourse of people the Venetians banners into the market place,
and having driven thence Dressina, they placed soldiers in their City, and
speedily fortified it with victuals, and all other necessaries, the hors-men
which were within it scouring the country round about.

The end of the seventh Book of the fourth Decade.
The Contents of the eight Book of the fourth Decade.
WHat moved the Venetians to hope to raise them selves. An enteruiew resolved
on betwixt the Emperor Maximillian. and Lewis the French King broken on a
sudden by the Emperor. The Venetians recover Padua, whereby they become
masters of the Champaine Country. The Marquis of Mantua is taken by the
Venetians. The Emperors proposition to go and beseege the City of Venice.
Frangipane makes war in Histria. The Venetian Ambassadors come to Rome by
night. The Emperors seege before Padua. The King of Hungary Popes deseignes and
propositions against the French King broken and come to nothing. The King of
Hungary summons the Venetians Ambassador. Lastly the French King resolves to
make war on the Venetians and the Pope.

The eighth Book of the fourth Decade of the History of Uenice.
THe Commotion of Treuiso and the Emperors carelessness The Venetians take
courage.
gave hope to the Venetians to retain some part of their Cambray to get money
by way of loan of the Flemmings and other his subjects, the which he quickly
spent prodigally after his usual manner, beside a hundred thousand crowns
which he had received of the French King, for the inuestiture of the Duchy of
Milan. Forthwith after the news of the battle of Gyradade, he sent the Duke
of

At the last he came to Trent, from whence by letters he thanked the French
An enteruiew resolved on betwixt the Emperor and the French King.
King, for having by his means recovered his due. The Cardinal of Amboise
being come thither from the King to talk with him, they concluded betwixt
themselves that he and the King should see one an other and talk together in
open field, near to the town of La Guard, on the marches of eithers Country.
The King set forward to be there at the day appointed. But the Emperor being
The Emperor on a sudden breaks the enteruiew.
certain accidents newly happened in Friul, he was enforced to return back
again, requesting him to defe^re their meeting till an other time, and in the
mean space to tarry at Cremona.

This alteration of the Emperor, together with his tedious negligence in not
providing sufficient garrisons to defend Padua and the other Cities, were
causes, that the Venetians did help themselves by this opportunity offered them
to recover Padua, which they knew to be badly manned with soldiers, and the
which they had by ouer-hasty counsel too soon given away. They concluded then
Andrew Gritti, one of the Prouidators, should go to Nouale on the Paduan
territory, and that there he should take part of the footmen (who being
followed by diverse of the Country were sent to the village of Mirana) and
should march toward Padua, to assault the Gate of Codalonga, and Christofero
de Mora the other Prouidator, should follow him at the heels with the residue
of the army: This deseigne being thus decreed fell out better then they thought
for: for being early in a morning come to the Gate, they found it half open,
by reason of certain carts laden with hay, which were a little before entered.
So as possessing it without any difficulty, they tarried there without any
noise till their fellows were arrived who were not far of, then they marched
to the marketplace, before any one had descried them.

But Dressina, who was Governor of the City for Maximillian being lodged in the
Cittadell, having heard the noise, came forth with three hundred Lancequenets
which he had only for the guard thereof, with Brunaldo of Saregia with fifty The
Venetians take Padua.
horse, who perceiving the townsmen to forsake them, and no man to offer them
any help made great have to enter into their fort, the which being not well
fortified they were constrained to yield certain hours after. The Venetians
by this means being masters of the City, commanded no hurt to be done to it,
and that the Jews houses only, with certain Paduans who had showed themselves
their enemies, should be spoiled.

The French King, who not long before had by composition taken the Castle The
French Kings resolution.
of Cremona, knowing the Emperors answer, and not staying to do his bidding,
went toward Milan, resolving to cassier his army, for to free himself from so
great expenses and to return into France. But the departure of the Kings The
Venetians masters of the Champaine country.
favor them. Vincenza of it self had done the like, if Constantine of
Macedonia, who by chance was not far off, had not speedily entered it with
certain forces. They recovered nevertheless the town and castle of Legnaga,
a very commodious place to indomage the countries of Verona, Padua, and
Vincenza.

It was supposed that the taking of Padua would delay the Kings return into
France: but that, notwithstanding, he determined to pass forward so soon as
New agreements betwixt the Pope and the King.
he had made new agreements with the Popes Legate in the City of Biagrassa The
Marquis of Mantua taken prisoner and brought to Venice.
an other happy event befell the Venetians, which was, the taking of the
Marquis of Mantua, with the defeat of all his soldiers, who were surprised
half a sleep in the Island of Escalla: who being brought from thence to
Padua, and then to Venice, was imprisoned in the little tower of the public
palace to the great contentment and wonderful joy of the whole City.

The Emperor till now had not hindered nor did hinder the Venetians
proceedings, as well because he had not suffi^ient forces, as also for that he
was kept back Cadora taken and sacked by the Imperials.
in vain to take Monfalcone, but he gave a furious assault on the town and
castle of Cadora where he committed great slaughter on those that were within
it.

The Venetians in the mean time took the town of Valdesera by force, and The
Emperor propounds to assault Venice,
Bellona by composition. The Emperor perceiving that his forces were not
worthy the name of Imperial, propounded to the confederates the uniting of all
their forces in one to assail the city of Venice, and to that intent to use
the help of the sea armies and Galleis of the French King and the Pope. The
French King would willingly have consented thereunto if he had seen any
likelihood of the matter. But the Pope and the Catholic King gainesaid it, as
a thing most unjust and dishonorable. The Duke of Brunswicke on the other side
being sent by the Emperor could not take Vdina the Capital city of Friul nor
Ciuital-D'Austria, which he likewise beseeged. Christoforo Frangipane did the
like in Histria where Frangipane makes war in Histria.
nere to the village of Verme he defeated the Venetian officers, and did
greatly burn and spoil the whole country.

During these temporal accidents of arms in diverse places, they disputed at
Rome on spiritual arms, whither before the recovery of Padua the six
Ambassadors from the Senate were arrived; namely Dominico Treuisan, Leonardo
Moceniga, Paulo Pisani, Ieronimo Donato* Paulo Capello, and Lodouico
Maripietro: who The Venetian Ambassadors come by might into Rome.
entering by night in poor and wretched habit, because the Pope would have it
so, who did not see them, they went to the palace of the Cardinal of Naples
to confer with him and the other Commissioners: Great were the practices of
the Ambassadors of the Emperor, French King, and the King of Spain to hinder
them from obtaining absolution: and on the contrary the Archbishop of York
solicited for them in the behalf of Henry King of England.

The Emperor in the mean time having assembled all the forces he was able to
The Emperor determines to beseege Padua.
make, as well of his own as of others that assisted him, determined with a
mighty army to go and beseege Padua.

The Venetians weighing how much the preservation of that city did import them
did not forget to furnish it with all necessaries for defense. Whereunto Prince
Loredan did greatly incite them in an Oration full of mighty persuasions by
whose counsel two hundred young Gentlemen departed from Venice to go to the
relief of that city, where they were received with incredible joy of al men.
They received letters at Venice at the same time from Andre Foscole Ambassador
at Constantinople for the Commonwealth near to the great Turk: whereby he
assured the Senate that the Turk was mightily dipleased when he understood of
the defeat of their army at Gyradade and for that they had not acquainted The
great Turks offer to the Venetian Senate.
him with their enterprises and requested his aid, and that now he freely
offered Loredan should be speedily aduertized of this offer. The Senate by
their Ambassador did highly thank him, but would not accept the offer, because
it was neither seemly nor proffitable.

But to return to the Emperors preparations, who whilst he tarried for
forces The Emperors progression nere to Padua.
which came to him from all parts, he came to the bridge of Burnt three miles
of from Padua where having taken Rimini by force, and turned aside the current
of the water, he marched toward the Pollesin of Rouigo keeping aloof off from
Padua to open the passage to his victuals, staying for his Artillery which was
to come forth of Germany, and took the village of Este by assault which he

To this place came the artillery and the munition which he expected, with the
The Empero^ beseeged Padua.
residue of his army, wherewith he went forward and encamped nere to the
Suburbs of Saint Cross, determining to give an assault in that place: but
when he understood that it was the strongest part of the city, he changed his
purpose, and removed toward the little Gate on the way to Venice, as well for
that it was the weakest part of the city as also to cut off supplies that might
come thither by Italian men at arms, eighteen thousand Lansquenets, six
thousand Spaniards, The number of the Emperors army.
six thousand boot-halers of sundry nations, and two thousand Italian^. After
these followed a great train of all sorts of pieces of battery, with
wonderful store of munition: so as never any seege in Italy was of the like
expectation as well for the importance of the place, whereon depended the good
or bad success of the Venetians, as in regard of the greatness and authority
of such a leader, which caused the number of the army daily to increase,
al-be-it the soldiers were not paid, who fed themselves nevertheless with
hope of the Cities spoil. On the other side the army which the Venetians had
in Padua for the defense thereof, was The number of the army in Padua.
little inferior, to the Emperors. For there were six hundred men at arms,
fifteen The Count Petillan has the command in Padua.
preparations, the Count Petillan, who was General, caused them all to be
assembled in Saint Anthonies marketplace, where having encouraged them by
grave and valorous speeches, he first bound himself by sollemne oath, and then
the captains; the whole army and the townsmen in like manner, faithfully to
employ themselves in the defense thereof even to the death.

In the mean time, the Pope, the Emperor, and the French King, did earnestly
The King of Hungary will by no means make war on the Venetians, being
solicited thereunto.
solicit the King of Hungary to make war on the Venetians, telling him how
easily he might recover all the lands which they held in Histria and Selauonia,
now when as they had in a manner lost all their forces, and were assailed on
every Vincentio Guidocho their Secretary and Agent in Hungary: sent Petro
Pascalio their Ambassadors to the same King, to entreat him to continue in the
alliance which he had sworn of a long time with them, the which he promised to
do.

Now the Emperor having made his approches near to the walls of Padua, toward
the little Gate, where his army was extended round about the city three miles
in length, he began to plant his pieces of battery, which could not be done
in a long time, by reason of the number of them, some of them being of a
merueilous greatness. Being planted, they would needs see how the enemies
Assault given to a Rauelin of the city.
an assault on that side where the Lord de la Palisse had command at a Rauelin
of a Gate, but it being valliantly defended, they returned to their quarter.
The next day the artillery played with great fury, and did beat down a great
part of the wall: the shot from the city likewise did greatly hurt the whole
army and those within the town made many sallies, especially the Stradiots and
the light horse.

The artillery having played nine days together, and made so large a breach as
all men thought was more then needful, the whole army made preparation the
next day to give an assault: But when they perceived how that the same night
they within had filled the dike with water, the Emperor sent back his
soldiers Assault given to the breach of the Bastion of Codolonga^
to force it, and having overthrown a part thereof with the ordnance, he
caused the Spaniards and Lansquenets two days after to give it an assault, who
fighting furiously did mount it, and placed two Enseignes thereon. But the
valor of the These that came to the assault retire.
defendants was such, and the abundance of defensive engines so great, as they
were enforced to leap down in heaps, and many of them were slain and hurt:
By means whereof those who were already prepared to give an assault to the
wall, thinking that the Bastion was taken, retired and disarmed themselves,
without attempting any farther

Maximillian by this attempt did wholly loose the hope of victory, wherefore
There Emperor raises his camp from before Padua.
resolving to dislodge, having first sent away his artillery to a place of
safety, he raised his camp, and came with his whole army to Limini the
seventeenth day of the seege, from thence he went to Verona, all men generally
blaming him for Brandenbourg for the guard of Verona.

The Emperors return into Germany left all that which he possessed in great
The Emperor re^rneth into Germany.
hazard, and all Italy in doubt, in regard of some contention, arising betwixt
the Pope and the French King, which being soon after appeased there remained
nevertheless some discontent in the Popes mind, whereupon he wished that
Contention betwixt the Pope and the King. What the Popes meaning was.
the King might loose whatsoever he held in Italy, and was willing to employ
himself to effect it: And al-be-it he propounded so great a design to
himself, yet nevertheless he would not enter into league with any one, but
trusting wholly to himself and to the authority which the Papal Sea had over
all Princes, he showed both by deed and words that he did not greatly account
of any one, and waxing strange to all others he inclined only to the Venetians
side, whom for

The Emperors and French Kings Ambassadors opposed it, the like did the
Ambassador for the King of Arragon, alleging the confederacy made at Cambray,
by which they were not yet fully satisfied. The Pope made answer thereunto, The
Popes answer to those who hindered the Venetians absolution.
that it was not the office of Christ's Vicar to pursue with spiritual arms,
to the prejudice of the salvation of so many souls, those who repenting had
with great humility craved absolution: espetially the cause for which they were
censured ceassing. That it was an other matter to pursue them with temporal
arms, and therein he was determined to persevere, and made offer to consent
with the rest Visdomo in Ferrara, which was a City depending on the Church.

The Venetians in the mean time, upon this different meaning of Princes, The
Venetians recover Vincenza.
not greatly esteeming the Emperor, sent forces under the conduct of Andre
Gritti the Prouidator to Vincenza, on assurance that they were wished for by
the people, who at his arrival took the suburbs of Posterla, then being
brought Fracasso retired into the castle, which was yielded four days after.
It was verily thought that he might have taken Verona likewise, if he had gone
thither on a sudden: but whilst he tarried for the reduction of the castle of
Vincenza, new companies of the Emperors entered into it, and three hundred
Lances of the French Kings, commanded by the Lord D' Aubigns, so, as there
being in it five hundred Lances, and The Imperials succor Verona with men and
victuals.
five thousand footmen as well Spaniards as Lansquenets, it was a hard matter
to take it. The Venetian army nevertheless came thither soon after, upon
hope, that at their arrival, they in the city would rise: but because it being
divided into two parts, did not show it self before the walls at one time, the
business fell not out according to their project.

The Venetians at their departure thence took Basciana, then Feltre and
Ciuitall, with the fort of Escalla. At the same time Antonio and Ieronimo
Sauorgniane, gentlemen of the country followinge the Venetians party in Friull,
took The Venetians nauall army scoureth the Po as far as Fiquerolles.
Castel-nouo beyond the river of Tailemont, no news being heard of
Maximillian. The Venetian army for the recovery of the Pollesin of Rouigo,
marched toward Monselecia and Montagnane, to the end from thence to enter on
the territory of Ferrara. Having moreover, sent their nauall army, conducted by
Angelo Treuisano, to make war on the Duke of Ferrara, which entering the Po at
the mouth of Fornaces, burnt Corbolo and other villages near to the Po, not
sparing the whole country as far as the Lake of Scarra, from whence the light
horse which kept way with it by land scoured as far as Fiquerolles.

The incredible hatred which they had conceived against the Duke of Ferrara The
cause of the Venetians hatred to the Duke of Ferrara.
did move them to do so, who not being content with that which he said did

The Duke of Ferrara was much amazed at the coming of this army, and at the
report that their land-army followed it: for he had no means to defend
himself, till the supplies which he expected from the Pope and the French King
were arrived, but only with his artillery planted on the banks of the River to
stop the enemies farther passage, which was the cause that Treuisan lay at
Ankor in the midst of the River behind a little Island, tarrying for the land
forces, without The Venetian General builds two Bastions on the two banks of Po.
til their arriual, he caused two Bastions to be made on the River Po, the one
on Ferraras side, and the other on the opposite shore with a bridge of boats,
to the end he might be able to relieve the Bastions, chiefly that on Ferrara
side.

The Duke determined to hinder the finishing of that work, whereupon having
assembled the greatest forces he could, as well of the City as of strangers, he
sent them before to assail the Bastion, and he himself followed after with
store of horse.

But those of the Bastion being relieved by their own fellows out of the
vessels The Venetians drive the Ferrarois from the Bastions*
did with such fury charge the Ferrarois as they put them to rout, so as the

But this aid would have come to late, if the Venetians had not been enforced
The Venetians recover the Pollesin.
to call back their army, the which having conquered all the Pollesin, was in
readiness to go to the relief of their nauall army: for it was enforced to
return back, having left four hundred light horse, and as many footmen for
the defense of the Pollesin, and for the help of their vessels: because the
Lord of Chaumont having entered Verona with great forces, had lent eight
thousand Ducats to the Emperor who had engaged to the King for the same sum,
and for others to be paid afterward the town of Valeggia, six miles from
Bressia, and a passage of the River Mincia of great importance: and made
preparations beside (as it was said) to go and beseege Vincenza.

The Venetians divided their army into three parts which they placed in
Legnaga, Suaua, and Vincenza: then being desirous to conserve Vincenza, they
began The Venetians provide for Legnaga, Suaua, and Vincenza.
to fortify it with strong rampires, and with deep ditches full of water,
they like they did afterward to Suaua and Legnaga; and in this manner standing
on their guarde, they assured the whole country, especially for that winter.

The Duke and the Cardinal perceiving that the ouer-throw of the vessels would
gain the victory, and that it might easily be effected if means were made The
Duke of Ferraradeseateth the Venetians naual army.
chief standard of the commonwealth, fifteen Galleys fell into the Dukes
power, certain great ships, diverse Fusts, with other small boats, almost
numberless,

The Duke after this defeat, sent forces of horse and foot to do the like to
The Duke of Ferrara takes Loretta.
those who had taken Comachia, who recovered Loretta which the Venetians had
fortified, and they had defeated the army which was there if it had not retired
to Bebies knowing the danger.

Such unfortunate end had the seege of Ferrara which lasted about one month.
Their affairs prospered better on the Paduan territory: for the Emperor
being on the Vincentin with four thousand footmen, the Venetians, The
Emperor goes to bold a Diet at Inspruch.
and thereupon he went to Bolsane, and from thence to Inspruch to hold the
Diet which he had appointed, and the Lord of Chaumont following his example
retired to Milan, leaving strong garrisons in all places on the frontiers, and
especially in Verona, which the Emperor could not have defended alone.

During this cessation of arms, Maximillian sought to take truce with A treaty
of trnce, motioned betwixt the Imperor and the Venctians, broken.
the Venetians: the Bishop of Pescera the Popes Nuntio, practiced it by John
Cornare and Lodouico Mocenigo the Venetian commissioners: But the Emperors
excessive demands brake off this treaty without any conclusion, to the Popes
great grief, who wished that the Venetians might be freed from this war,
that he might join them to himself against the French King, whom he more and
more hated, thereby to lay foundations of great importance, and to this purpose
had secretly sent a meslenger to the King of England.

The Venetian army in the mean time being quartered at Saint Boniface on the
Veronois, held Verona in a manner beseeged, al-be-it deeds of arms were coldly
performed on either part, according to the season which was cold. The Princes
minds nevertheless were greatly troubled, and especially the Emperor, who
inuenting all means to get the vpper-hand of the Venetians, drew his

And considering that the resolutions of Dyets were long and uncertain, he
resolved The Emperors proposition to the French King.
with himself to induce the French King to condescend to take Padua, Vincenza
and Treuiso with his own forces, and to accept of a sufficient recompense for
it. This offer being propounded in the Kings Counsel, was much debated on all
sides, and the King almost consented by the council of diverse, to accept
Albert Count of Carpi, a man of excellent wit and judgment, unto whom were
given very ample instructions, and commission likewise to diswade the Pope from
absoluing the Venetians: but as he arrived, the Pope had already concluded and
promised it: the Venetians having after long disputations for certain months
space consented to those conditions, whereon the difficulty lay: because they
saw none other remedy for their safety,

The Ceremonies of the absolution being ended, the Ambassadors returned The
Pope absolutely the Venetian.
to Venice, leaving at Rome, near to the Pope, Ieronimo Donato a very learned
man, one of their own number, and very pleasing to his Holiness, who did
great good service to his country in matters which he afterward treated with
him. Maximillian and the French King were displeased for that the Pope
Maximillian and the French King are displeased with the Pope for absoluing the
Venetians.
had absolved the Venetians; the one because he had not yet recovered his own
according to the treaty of Cambray, and the other because he desired for his
own particular profit that the Venetians might no more recover themselves: But
neither of them did in any sort perceive the Popes meaning, especially the

For after the absolution, contrary to Kings meaning, he gave leave to the
Feudataries and Tennants of the Church, to receive the Venetians pay, and to
John Paul Baillon to be General of their army in Count Petillans stead, who
The Popes bad meaning to the French King.
was newly dead: Then he used means to reconcile the Venetians with the
Emperor, to the end that they three being joined together might make war on
the French King. But they could not agree, for the Emperor would absolutely
have Verona for his share, and the Venetians stoutly craved it for themselves.

Moreover, the Pope did secretly solicit the King of England to make war

He did besides continue his practizes begun with the Swisses by means of the
Bishop of Syon whose authority was great amongst that Nation, which fell out in
the end as he desired.

For they growing proud that all men sought their friendship, the King
soliciting them to renew the league which was almost expired, with great
boldness and presumption they craved the augmentation of their pentions which
were threescore thousand pounds a year, besides the secret pentions which were
given to private persons: At which insolency the King being moved, he rejected
them The Kings anger against the Swisses.
with haughty speeches, making show that he did not esteem them, and flatly
denied to augment their pentions, having made alliance with the Valesians, and
the Lords of the Grisons.

The Pope being glad of this disunion, made new confederacy with them, and
Whereunto the Popes actions tended.
thought he had done much for the execution of that which he intended, and
first of all he assailed the Duke of Ferrara, for spite that having received
so many benifits at his hands, he depended more on the French King then on him.

And he imperiously forbad him to cause any more salt to be made at Comachia.
Duke Alphonso complaining for that he went about to hinder him from receiving
the profit of his own revenues, would not obey this commandment, whereupon he
threatened him with grievous censures if he did not desist, his thoughts and
actions wholly tending to defend and raise the Venetians.

The Emperor and the French King, who desired nothing so much as their
Cambray; but he answered that he was no more tied to that confederacy, which
was accomplished, it being Maximillians fault that he had not Treuiso, or
recompense in money for it: In the mean time Verona had like to have been
taken by the Venetian Garrison which lay at Saint Boniface, who being sent for
by the townsmen, came by night near to the City, to scale the Castle of
Saint Peter, but in setting The enterprise upon Verona discovered.
up their Ladders, which were to short, they were discovered, whereupon

About the same the Pope having notice that peace was newly concluded betwixt
the Kings of France and England, and perceiving on the other side the brauado
which Maximillian used in his behalf, in demanding of him the loan of two
hundred thousand Ducats, threating him if he refused it to unite himself with
the French King against him, he was desirous to reunite himself with the
King, and began to deal with the Earl of Carpi who was still at Rome.

But on a sudden he changed his mind, so soon as he had notice of the The
Pope in batred to the King does assail the Duke of Ferrara a new.
saying, That by the law, the vassal could not do it without the leave of the
chief Lord, and that the same did prejudice those of Bolognia his subjects,
threatening him, if he did not take away those imposts to make war upon him.

The King hereby found himself greatly perplexed, for on the one side it
grieved him to make war on the Pope, and on the other he would not forsake
The French King greatly perplexed.
his friend the Duke of Ferrara, being obliged to maintai^ and defend him: and
the more the Pope did urge him to forsake him, the more constant he was in his
defense. After diverse reasons alleged on either side, that the King had
propounded conditions, whereby, for the most part, he should be satisfied, for
those losses which he should pretend to have sustained by the Duke, he was
moreover content to be bound, (according to the Popes request made unto him)
that his army should not pass over the River Po, unless it were to protect
the Florentines, and to molest Pandolpho Petrucci, and John Paul Baillon.

During all these differences the Lord of Chaumont had taken without any The
Lord of Chaumont takes the Pollesin of Rouigo.
impediment with fifteen hundred Lances, and ten thousand footmen with
great store of Ordnance, followed by three thousand Pioners, the Pollesin of
Rouigo which the Venetians had abandoned, and the tower Marquisana, the Duke of
Ferrara being joined with him with two hundred men at arms, five hundred

The Prince of Anhalt, the Emperors Lieutenant, came forth of Verona, with
three hundred French Lances, two hundred men at arms, and three thousand
Lansquenets, and following the Lord of Chaumont, they came both together
toward the Vincentine territory, where the whole country did forthwith yield
unto them, the Venetian army being retired into a place of safety: by means
whereof the Vincentines perceiving themselves to be wholly forsaken, having of
themselves no means of defense, had none other hope left but only in the
victors The Vincentine commissioners crave pardon of the Prince of Anbalt.
and the misery and calamity whereto they were brought, to the end to move him
to some compassion, and to appease his wrath, they received but a very
unpleasing and ungentle answer, which in effect was to have their lives, goods
and honors, at his own discretion. The Vincentines being daunted with so
cruel an answer, remained for a certain space like men without any motion or
feeling, and not knowing what to answer or think, they at last, by the Lord
The Vincentines yield themselves to the victors mercy.
refer themselves and their city into the conquerors hands. But the Lord of
Chaumont making intercession for them, with diverse others, the matter was so
handled as the Prince of Anhalt was content to promise them, that their persons
should have no harm, but the disposing of their goods should be absolutely
referred to his will and pleasure.

After the taking of Vincenza, al be-it the Emperor did in no sort stir
against the Venetians, as he had promised he would, but on the contrary, his
companies decreasing daily for want of pay, the Lord of Chaumont nevertheless
perceiving that whatsoever had been done till then, was to The French beseege
Legnaga.
no purpose, unless Legnaga were taken, he determined to go and encampe
before it, where having overcome the difficulties of the waters, which the
Venetians had in such sort let forth, as the whole country was drowned
therewith, he wanne Porto, which is a part of Legnaga, and having caused four
thousand French foot, and six pieces of ordnance to cross over to the farther
side of the River Adice, he began to batter the Bastion on both sides the
River, part whereof being beaten down, the Prouidator who was within it,
al-be-it his soldiers did what they could to rampire it up again, being
dan^ed with fear, retired on a sudden the night following into the castle
with certain Venetian Gentlemen.

This retreat being known by day break, the captain of the footmen Legnaga
taken.
which were in the Bastion, did yield on condition of safety of lives and
goods. The Town was forthwith sacked, and they who kept the other Bastion fled
through the Marshes: The castle yielded soon after, on this condition, that the
Venetian Gentlemen should remain prisoners, and the soldiers should depart
with white wands in their hands. There did the Lord of Chaumontreceiue news of
the death of the Cardinal of Amboise his uncle, whereat the The death of the
Cardinal of Amboyse.
Pope made great show of contentation, thinking that so long as he lived he
should ever have an enemy: And so much he told the Venetian Ambassador,
discoursing with him concerning other occurrents.

The Lord of Chaumont having left for the guard of Legnaga an hundred Lances
with a thousand footmen, determined to return into the Duchy of Milan,
according to the Kings command, but by the Emperors entreaty he The Lord of
Chaumont takes diverse places which stopped the Emperors coming into Italy.
be more easy, the Almaines desiring to recover Marostic, Ciuitella,
Basciana, and other places near about, the Lord of Chaumont came and encamped
with his army at Longare, to keep the Venetians troops from entering into
Vincenza, where was a weak Garrison: but the Venetian army was retired to Padua.

The Almaines who were joined with the Lord of Chaumont went to Torricelles,
then to Ciuitella, which soon yielded; the like did Marostic, Basciana and
other places not far from thence, which were abandoned by the Venetians. From
thence they marched toward Escalla which the Almaines did much desire

From thence the Prince of Anhalt did by an other way send diverse
foot-companies toward Escalla, who passing by Feltre did spoil and burn it:
then being come to the place of Escalla, they found it wholly abandoned, and
Couola likewise. The Country of Friul was no less ruined and assaulted on
every side, now Verona and her territory pawned to the King for a hundred
thousand crowns.
King should receive in pawn Verona, with her whole territory, as well for
these fifty thousand crowns, as for the other fifty thousand which had been
lent him before.

In regard of this agreement, the King sent to command the Lord of Chaumont to
remain there, who soon resolved to assail Monselesia, to pluck forth that
thorn from his foot, for which he made preparation so soon as four hundred
Spanish Lances were arrived, sent by the Catholic King to the Emperors aid.
Having then together crossed the River Burnt, and that of Baquillon at the
village of Purle, they came to Monselesia, which is a town seated on the
plain at the foot of the hill which is very high, on the top whereof is a
castle; and on the back thereof, which as it goes on waxes more narrow,
there are three enclosures of walls: The town was on a sudden abandoned, and
the French men being quartered in it began to batter the first wall, wherein
first wall, did in skirmishing enter pell-mell with them, into the other two,
and Monselesia with her Castle taken and ruyned
then even to the Castle, where the most part of them being slain, the others
retired into the Dongeon, where yielding upon discretion they were massacred by
the Almans, who having not men to keep that place, did race the Castle and
burn the Town.

This exploit being executed, the armies retired, albeit the Almains did incite
the Lord of Chaumont to go and beseege Treuiso, but he answered them, that if
the Emperor had come against the Venetians, with his promised forces, it had
been an easy matter to have done it, but that those who were joined with him,
were brought to a small number, and not sufficient for such an enterprise,
seeing

During these exploits, a new commandment came to the Lord of The Lord of
Chaumont with his forces returns to the Duchy of Milan.
Chaumont, from France, to retire speedily with his army, into the Duchy of
Milan, leaving four hundred Lances, and fifteen hundred Spanish foote-men,
paid by the King to accompany the Almains, the which he did, under command of
the Lord of Perfi, and himself speedily marched whether he was sent for: For
the Pope would never have absolved the Venetians from the censures, nor
practiced the Swisses alliance, but only to bring to pass, that which he had
determined The Popes discontent against the King.
that the King drew near to the Popes demandes, the farther of was the Pope
from coming to any agreement, and seemed to be displeased with nothing, but
for that the King had taken the Duke of Ferrara into his protection, whom he
extremely hated: whereupon the King propounded diverse Articles to give him
content, but he would not accept of any one. At the last he craved that he
would absolutely quit the Dukes protection. The King replying, That in

These were the outward behauiors of the Pope, but he began secretly to
treat of greater matters then against the Duke of Ferrara, seeing that he had
the Swisses on his side, and that the Venetians were on foot again, and also
because The Popes secret practices.
the King of Arragon was not sincerely conjoined with the French King; That the
Emperors forces were weak, and for that he was not out of hope to cause the
King of England to stir. The Pope then working very secretly, would have
Genoa to be beseeged at one time, by sea and land; that twelve thousand
Swisses should come down into the Duchy of Milan; that the Venetians

In the mean time he caused it cunningly to be given forth, that the Swisses
preparations and his own, were but only to assail Ferrara on the sudden.
Genoa assured for the King.
But the coming of Lodouico Fiesca to Genoa, for the King, with eight hundred
men of the country, did assure the City, and brake all the Popes deseignes,
with those of the Bandetti. On the other side the Popes army had entered
Romagnia, under the command of the Duke of Vrbin, who having taken the towns
of retired to Imola, leaving beehind them three pieces of ordnance for a prey
to the enemy.

Alphonso then recovered all that which had bin taken from him in Romagnia, but
he did not long hold it: for the Popes army being increased, it recovered with
ease, the above named place, and the Castle of Lugo likewise, and soon after
the The Popes army takes Modena.
City of Modena, for which Duke Alphonso could not provide: but the loss of
the same town was the cause, that he speedily provided for Regio, fearing the
like mishap as had fortuned to Modena.

The Swisses on the other side, (the confederacy betwixt the French King, and
them being expired, certain Months before,) being vexed that the King had
Bernards Mount, they might pass into Piedmont, he had procured the Duke of
Sauoy to deny them passage, and by the same Dukes consent, he sent five
hundred Lances to Yuree for that purpose. The Swisses being animated (as has
been said) against the King, and paid by the Pope, six thousand of them
without Artillery came by the way of Bellinsona, and having taken the bridge of
Trese, Six thousand Swisses come to Varese against the king
companies.

The Swisses coming did greatly trouble the French, because a great part of
their forces was distributed for the guard of the strong town of the Duchy,
and an other part thereof was joined with the Almains army against the
Venetians: Yet nevertheless, the Lord of Chaumont having assembled, all the
power he could, came with five hundred Lances, and four thousand footmen
into the plain of Chastillon two Miles from Varesa. Four thousand Swisses
more came, and joined in that place with the former six thousand, and all of
them together

After they had in this manner passed along, into diuors places, the Lord of
The six thousand Swisses return home into their contry for want of victuals
and money.
Chaumont still attending on them, they came at last to the bridge of Trese,
and from thence in troops retired home into their country, being brought to
the extremity of hunger, and want of money, which enforced them to retire. If
the

The Venetians also tarried longer, then they thought to have done, who coming
from Padua, recovered without any difficulty, Este, Monselesia, Montagnana, The
Venetians recover all the places near to Padua which had bin taken by the
French.
Marostia, and Basciana, and passing forward, they entered the Vincentine
Territory, the Almains being retired to Verona: So as in a very short space
they recovered whatsoever they had lost the year before (Legnaga excepted,)
and not satisfied here-with, they came and beseeged Verona, where lay three
hundred Spanish Lances, a hundred as well Almains as Italians, and more then

The people of Verona not affecting the Almains, had taken arms, and therein
Verona besieged.
consisted the Venetians chiefest hope, expecting when they within the city
would rise in their behalf. The Venetian Army was of eight hundred men at
Arms, three thousand light horse, the most of whom were Stradiots, and ten
thousand The number of the Venenetian Army.
foot, with great numbers of husbandmen. They began with great fury to batter
the cities walls, (notwithstanding that the towns artillery did greatly hurt
them) and they did beat down a great part of the wall, even to the scarpe: yet
nevertheless, it was more valiantly defended then assailed, whereupon the
Venetian Captains being discouraged, perceiving likewise that the people were
quiet in the city, they determined to raise their Camp, and made have so to
do, upon intelligence,

The Venetians being retired to Saint Martins, five miles from Verona, marched
The Venetians raise their Camp from before Verons.
to Boniface, in regard of the Lord of Chaumonts coming. In the mean time,
Vdislaus King of Hungary, being solicited by Maximillian and the French King,
did at the same time call Petro Pascalic, Ambassador for the Signory in Hungary
into his council chamber, and told him that his meaning was to make war upon
The King of Hungary summoneth the Venetian Ambassador.
them, unless they yielded up Slauonia unto him, which did in times past
belong unto his crown, and that he was resolved to have it: That if the
commonwealth would freely re-deliuer it, he would for ever remain their
friend and confederate,

Now to return to the Venetian Army which was retired to Saint Boniface, The
Venetians take Azola.
those of Treuiso took the town of Azola by composition, whilst in the
Frioull they proceeded with the usual cruelties and variations, in destroying
buildings, and spoiling the country. The Marquis of Mantua was at the same
time delivered from his imprisonment by the Popes means, who did greatly
affect him, meaning to make use of him and his Estate in his war against the
French The Marquis of Mantua is set at liberty.
King. Others say, that it was by the means of Bajazet Emperor of Turks, who
was a great friend to the Marquis, who caused the Bayliffe of the Venetian
Merchants, trading at Pera, to promise that the Senate should* set him at
liberty, the

The Pope was again desirous to make an attempt on the City of Genoa,
promising to him self more then ever the alteration of that State: Whereupon
the Venetians, rather of necessity, then for any liking to his furious motions,
did augment Enterprise upon Genoa.
their sea Army which lay at Ciuita*vecchia, with four great ships, the like
did the Pope, adding one Galeasse, with certain other vessels to his own.
This fleet departing thence, wherein were fifteen light Galleys, three great
Galleys, one Galeasse, and three ships of Biscay, went and showed themselves
before the haven of Genoa. But the City being kept in such manner, as not any
of the contrary consent, were assailed by a terible tempest, in which five
Galleis were cast away, The Venetian fle^ sh^'t by a tempest.
the residew being driven upon the coast of Barbary, did in the end come into
the Venetians havens much broken.

In this manner nothing fell out luckily for the Pope of all that he had
enterprized against the French King: for no commotion arose in Genoa as he had
confidently promised to himself; the Venetians also attempted in vain to
take Verona, and the Swisses, who had rather showed then brandished their
arms, returned, and went on no farther: and in Ferrara, by reason of the
speedy aid of the French who were come thither there was no likelihood of any
danger Modena only taken by stealth, remained to him.

Yetneuerthelesse the Venetians alone took his part, because his enterprises
proceeded not from any particular interest, but from a sole and sincere desire
of the liberty of Italy, but he could not hope much from them, by reason their
treasure was exhausted, and themselves oppressed with sundry difficulties. The
French King being by so many experiences assured of the Popes bad meaning
toward him, determined to strengthen himself as much as he might with the
Emperors friendship, and to pass in person the spring following into Italy, to
make war on the Venetians, or on the Pope, according as the state of his
affairs should petmit.



The end of the eight Book of the fourth Decade.
The Contents of the ninth Book of the
WIth what boldness and resolution Pope Julius marched against the Duke of
Ferrara, and being not able to overcome Triuulcio is made General of the
Army. A great Earthquake at Venice, and in the Country near adjoining. The
Popes Army is defeated before the Bastida Geniuola. The French Kings discontent
for that the Emperor consents to a peace with the Venetians. The King of
Arragons secret practices against the French King. The Cardinal of Pauia flies
from Bolognia at the arrival of the French. The flight of the Duke of Vrbin,
General of the Popes Army. Death of the Cardinal of Pauia, slain by the Duke
of Vrbin. The French King greatly desires Gaston of Foix. And lastly how the
Confederates Army dislodgeth from before Bolognia.



The ninth Book of the fourth Decade of the History of Uenice.
THe Pope continuing his displeasure against the Duke of Ferrara, omitted all
other designs only to pursue this: and to this end he came to Bolognia, at
the later end of The Popes great resolution against the Duke of Ferrara.
September, by his presence to hasten matters, and to give the greater
authority to his affairs, resolving to assaill Ferrara both by land and water,
with all his own forces, and those of the Venetians, who at his Mark Anthony
Colonna, and John Vittelli were gone with two hundred men at arms, and three
hundred foot, for the guard of Modena. In regard whereof he requested, The
Popes preparations against the city of Ferrara.
three hundred lances, which the King of Arragon was bound to send him,
according to the articles of the inuestiture of the realm of Naples, making
account upon the arrival of all these forces to assail Ferrara for his part,
and that the Venetians should do the like for theirs; he persuaded himself
that the people of the City would forthwith take arms in his behalf against
the Duke, and he would not harken to those who told him, That it would not so
fall out, in regard of the garrison within it, which was sufficient to defend
the City, and to hinder the people (if they were so bent) from reuolting.

About the same time an intelligence, which the Venetians had on the City The
Venetians intelligence upon Bressia discovered.
of Bressia was discovered, the Author whereof Earl John Maria of Martinenga
was beheaded there.

Now the Pope perseuering in his hope, did promise to himself though all his
other forces should fail, to be able to take Ferrara with his own, and the
Venetian fleets, notwithstanding all the reasons given by his Captains to the
contrary; but he found himself to be deceived, For the Duke coming forth of
Ferrara, did assaill the Venetians fleet, which was entered by Primaria, and
coming to Hadria with two Galleis, two Fusts, and with diverse small boats,
he did easily defeat it: then he went to meet with the other, the which
consisting only of The Ferrarois defeateth two ^cetes of the Venetians.
fustes, and other small vessels had entered by the fornaces, and was come to
Puliselsa; which attempting to retire into the river Adice, by a channel near
at hand, it could not by reason of the shallowness of the water: whereupon
being assailed, and beaten with the enemies ordnance, those of the fleet not
being able to defend it were enforced to forsake it; and to use means to save
them-sel^es and their ordnance. The Pope perceauing that his temporal arms,
were not of force to execute his deseignes, made use of spiritual, and did
publicly excommunicate Alfonso of Este* and all those who were or should come
to his aid, and The Pope ex^ Alfonso of Este and all his adherents.
namely the Lord of Chaumont, and all the chief persons of the French army.

The French King, who already upon the Popes behavior determined to call a
general council against him, and had caused all the prelates of his Kingdom,
to meet at Orleans and afterward at Tours, having notice of his
Ecclesiastical censure, executed so rashly upon his subjects, was of opinion
in this assembly where he was present diverse times, that before he would free
himself from his A General council published at Lions.
obedience to send Ambassadors to him, to advertise him of the articles
concluded on by the French Clergy, against which if he thought to except, he
should be cited to the general council, which all Christian Princes had
determined should be assembled by a certain day. According to this
resolution, the Council was published at Lions, against the first day of March
next ensuing.

Within a while after, the Bishop of Gurcia, sent from the Emperor arrived at
The Bishop of Gurcia comes into France from the Emperor.
Tours where his entertainment was sumptuous, which showed how greatly his
coming was desired: with whom the King continuing, to treat of matters which
had already been handled, at the first they seemed to be very casie, but they
were afterward drawn forth at length, as well by reason that the New
confederacy betwixt the Emperor and the French King*
Emperor, and the French king on the other, did pass a new confederacy
together, reserving place for the Pope to enter into it, within two months
after, and for the Catholic King, and the King of Hungary within four. The
King promised

But during these treaties in France with the Bishop of Gurcia, the Lord of
Chaumont having recovered Carpi, determined by the soliciting of the
Bentiuoles, on a sudden to assail the city of Bolognia, wherein the Pope and
his whole Court lay, in regard of the fair occasion which was presented, there
being Bentiuoles The French army marches toward Bolognia where the Pope lay.
were with him, it was filled with confusion and tumult. The Cardinals and
Prelates not accustomed to the dangers of war, came to the Pope, complaining
for that he had exposed the sea Apostolic and themselves to so great danger,
beseeching him to use means to appease matters, by the mildest composition he
could. The Ambassadors of the Emperor, the Catholic King, and the King of
England made the like request. Himself alone in so great confusion and
disorder, John Francisco Pico Earl of Mirandola, might safely come unto him
from the Pope. The Lord of Chaumont being assured of the King his Masters
mind, who desired nothing more then to be at peace with the Pope, did freely
condescend to the Earl of Mirandolas coming to him, who being arrived he
gently heard, and sent him back the same day to Bolognia, to signify to the
Pope the conditions, whereon he was contented to make an accord, who soon
returned with an answer. The Pope having, contrary to his custom, patiently
heard the articles propounded by the Lord of Chaumont, together with the
entreaties of the Cardinals The Earl of Mirandole sent from the Pope to the
Lord of Chaumont.
who besought him with incredible affection to compound howsoever, Chiapin
vitelli at Bolognia with six hundred light horse of the Venetians, with a
squadron of Turks whom they kept in pay, did increase his hope.

The Lord of Chaumont came the day following with his whole army and quartered
it at the bridge of Rene, three miles from Bolognia, whether the Ambassadors of
the Emperor, and the Kings of England, and Arragon, came to see him, who
returned diverse times the same day (and with them Albert Pico) toward The Pope
takes courage, at the coming of supplies.
the Pope and the Lord of Chaumont. But the disposition of either of them was
much changed: For the Pope had taken courage, perceiving the people of The Lord
of Chaumont distrusts the victory.
from the Venetians, Fabricio Colonna with two hundred light horse, and
certain Spanish men at Arms. On the contrary, the Lord of Chaumont began to
distrust the getting of the victory, perceauing that the people did not rise in
favor of the Bentiuoles, as they had promised him, and that he began to want
The Lord of Chaumont retireth from Bolognia.
victuals, the which was likely to grow greater every day: The Pope by means
here of beginning again his usual braues, answered, upon new conditions of
peace which were propounded, That there was no means to come to an agreement,
The Pope returns to his former wr^h.
ear to peace, unless Ferrara were first of all yielded to him, whereupon he
levied The Duke of Ferrara assaileth the Uenetians naual Army.
near to Modena, the Duke of Ferrara with the French companies, which were
commanded by the Lord Castillon, encamped on the Po, just opposite to the
Venetian The Popes army takes Sa^suala.
army, commanded by Fabricio Colonna in the absence of the Marquis of Mantua,
did beseege Sassuola the which being beaten with the artillery was taken by
assault and the Castle within a while after. Sassuola being taken, the Pope
would have Montechia, a very strong place, to be beseeged, but Fabricio
Collonna would not do it, saying; that his King had expressly forbidden him to
meddle with any thing that did belong to the Empire.

The Lord of Chaumont, according to the meaning of the King his master, having
placed a strong garrison in Rhegio, went to Parma resolving to temporise till
the spring. The Pope being impatient to see his deseignes not executed,
notwithstanding The Popes proposition to the Captains of his Army.
the sharpness of the season, fent for all his Captains to Bolognia, and
propounded to them the seege of Ferrara, and notwithstanding their general
dislike of the matter (the Venetians excepted) they at last resolved, (to
Concorda taken by the Popes Amy.
for the King. This being determined was likewise executed: for being come
before Concorda, they forthwith took it by force, and the castle by
composition: then they drew near to Mirandola, whether the Pope came in
person, thinking that his soldiers went slowly to work, and that his presence
would advance the business, preferring the fury and heat of his spirit before
all other respects: albeit the Cardinals did earnestly entreat him not to go
thither, and that the Venetians The Cause of the Kings loosing of Mirandola.


Those within Mirandola did bravely defend it (who were commanded by Alexander
Triuuicio seconded by four hundred stranger footmen) upon hope that they
should be relieved, but the contention betwixt the Lord of Chaumont, and John
Iacamo Triuulcio was cause of the loss of the place: for the Lord of Chaumont
preferring his own passion before the Kings proffit, was glad that the
Nephews of Triuulcio might be deprived of Mirandola: and therefore he excused

The Pope on the contrary omitted nothing for the obtaining of the victory*
whereby those within the town being out of hope to be relieved, and fearing
that they should not be able to resist the first assault, in regard of the
great breach Those of Mirandola yield, upon s^fety of their lives and goods.
which the enemies ordnance had made, sent messengers to the Pope, to certefie
him that they would yield, so their lives and goods might be spared: albeit the
Pope would not at first tie himself to save the soldiers lives, yet
nevertheless he did at last agree to it at the earnest entreatie of his
followers and the inhabitants

The French Army being ready to march, the Captains consulted on what place to
make their first attempt: some were of opinion to go directly, to assail the
enemies in their trenches, hoping by force of arms and by the sury of the
artillery, easily to enforce them to retire, and by that means to free Ferrara
from all danger. Others were of a contrary opinion, and the chief of those was
Triuulcio, who was newely come from France, who having declared the danger The
different opinions of the French Captains.
of assailing the enemies army in their fortification, councelled them to march
toward Modena, or Bolognia, hoping if the enemies did remove, for fear of
losing any of those towns, to fight with them, and to obtain the victory: and
if they did not remove, they might then with ease take the one or other of
them.

This was Triuulcio his opinion, but it was not followed, the better thereby
Alfonso of Este, did urge them to follow the former opinion, for fear that if
the French should go far from thence, the enemies might enter into the
Pollesin of Ferrara, a matter which would greatly have augmented the Cities
disease. But the Lord of Chaumont having understood by the way, the great
difficulty which was made to come to Final where the enemies were encamped, by
reason of the waters which ouer-flowed the country near adjoining, he began
greatly to doubt, for the clearing whereof, notwithstanding that Alphonso did
persuade him to the contrary, he assembled the council, where Triuulcio being
entreated openly to deliver what he thought thereof,

I Did yesterday hold my peace, because I have oftentimes known by
experience, Triuulcio his oration in defense of his opinion.
that my council has been lighlty esteemed, the which if it had been
followed at the beginning, we should not at this present be where we are, nor
have lost so many days vainly, which might have been spent with more profit,
and I should now continue in the same opinion to be silent, if I were not
spur'de forward by the impotance of the matter, in regard we now stand on
terms, to commit to the most uncertain hazard of one day, this army, the
state of the Duke of Ferrara, and the Duchy of Milan, which is to great a cast
except we reserve somewhat to play afterward. Besides, that which provoke
me to in the mire, will for a large hours space cause the whole army to make
a stand? And that being pestred with so many incombrances every contrary
accident, will easily disorder us? The enemies are driely lodged, furnished
with victuals and forage; we shall in a manner encampe in the open air, forage
is to be brought after us, and we shall not be able but with great labor, to
bring the one half of that we shall need: We must not refer our selves to
that which ingeners say, and to husbandmen which know the Country, Because
wars are managed by soldiers arms, and by Captains Councels: They are made
by fighting in the field, and not by proiects which those that are ignorant of
wars do figure forth in paper, or describe with their fingers, or with a
stick in the dust. As for my self The great reasons of this wise Captain was
approved by all men, by means whereof the Lord of Chaumont having strongly
manned The French Army marches toward Modena.
Ferrara with soldiers for her safety, held on his way toward Carpy, from
thence to march to Modena.

But the Pope by the king of Arragons council having restored it to the
Emperor, to avoid so many discontents and to quiet his mind which was
displeased for that the Pope had seized on it, it being ever accounted a City
of the jurisdiction the Church, and besought the Pope to give him absolution,
the which he freely granted.

By his death John James Triuulce, governed the Army because he was one of the
four Marshalls of France, unto whom (the General of the Army being dead,)
the government belongs, by the customs of France, until the King has
other-wised disposed thereof.

There happened at the same time a great Earthquake in Venice, whereby A great
earthquake at Venice.
part of the walls of the Ducall palace fell down, with the Marble statues in
Saint Marks Church, which had been set up for the beautifing of the building,
the st^ples of Churches were shaken, and the Bells range of themselves: The
waters

Now Tri^ulcio commanding the Army, returned with all his forces to S^rmidi, to
go to relieve the Bastid Geniuola, which the Popes Army beseeged, The Popes
forces defeated before the Bastid Geniuola.
and whether the Venetian fleet was going. But he went on no farther, having
notice in that place, that the Duke of Ferrara, with the Lord Chastillon,

During these warlike exploits, the deseignes of the Princes were sundry, and
uncertain, especially those of the Emperor, who being by nature variable, and
The EmperorMaximillian inclines to peace.
inconstant, and solicited by the Kings of Arragon, an enemy to the French
name, and jealous of the French Kings greatness, determined to listen to
peace, notwithstanding that he had concluded before with the French King, by
means of the Bishop of Gurcia, to make war withal his might on the
Venetians,

This advice pleased the Pope, upon hope to reconcile the Venetians to him, and
to disunite them from the French King, whereat he cheefely aimed. But the King
The King displeased with this new deter mination.
was not contented with such an unhoped for determination, as well for fear of
the determination of matters concluded with him: as also for the doubt he had,
The practices of the King of Arragons Abassador.
Arragon, and kn^w very well that his Ambassador with the Emperor had labored,
and did openly labor, for the agreement betwixt the Emperor and the Venetians;
and did use diverse other practizes to contradict his deseignes, and among
others, did hotly oppose himself against the convocation of a general
council under color of courtesy, and caused the King his Master to be
earnest with him to make peace with the Pope, making in a manner a silent
protestation to take Arms in the Popes behalf if he did not agree

The French King dissembling all these dealings, because he would give the
Emperor no cause of discontent, resolved to send the Bishop of The King
sends the Bishop of Paris to Mant^.
Paris to Mant^; and in the mean time advertised John James Tri^lce, that his
pleasure was to have him to command the army, but that he should not assail
the Churches state, till the Bishop of Gurcia were arrived. Triuulcio upon this
command turned his forces against the Venetians, and came to Stellata; then
passing on farther, he surprised certain Venetian cauallery, and sent Gaston
of Foix his incursions.
Gaston of Foix son to a sister of the kings, being yet very young, with a
hundred men at arms, four hundred light horse, and five hundred foot to
scour even to the enemies barriers: who did put those that kept them to flight
and made them to retire to a strong place beyond the channel.

In the mean space the Bishop of Gurcia came to Mantua, but later then he was
expected, where within a while after the Bishop of Paris arrived. The Pope

The Bishop of Gurcia arriving at Bolognia, whether the Pope was of purpose The
Popes great entertainment given to the Bishop of Gurcia at Bolognia.
come to receive him, there was so great honor done unto him, as a King could
not be entertained with greater magnificence: the Venetians Ambassador near to
the Pope, went to the city gates to meet him, using signs of very great
submission: but the Bishop turning from him with merueilous pride and disdain
showed

Yet nevertheless they began after to treat of agreement betwixt the
Emperor Speech of agreement betwixt the Emperor and the Venetians.
and the Venetians, where at the first diverse difficulties were made on both
The Pope breaks off the treaty.
Ferrara, and that the Bishop of Gurcia went to the Pope to make an end
thereof, (because without that, the Emperor would conclude nothing) the Pope
did suddenly interrupt him, requesting him to hold on with the Venetians, and
not to talk of the affairs of Ferrara, being in a manner desirous to incite
the Emperor

Triuulcio perceiving the departure of the Bishop of Gurcia and by that means
(...) ^keth Concordia*
all hope of peace being lost, came into the field, and beseeged Concordia
which he took the same day, and then marched toward Bomport a village seated
on the River Panare, that he might be nere the enemies, to the end that by
cutting off their victuals he might enforce them to dislodge, or to fight forth
of their camp. Entering into the country of Modena, he understood that John
Paul Manfron was with three hundred light horse of the Venetians at Massa nere
to Final; he sent Gaston de Foix thither with three hundred foot and five
hundred horse, who found John Paul Manfron at a bridge in order of battle, to
stop his passage, but being John Paul Manfron taken prisoner by Gaston of
Foix.
forsaken by his own soldiers he was taken prisoner by the French, with some
others.

Triuulcio found means to pass the Channel to assail the enemies who durst
not tarry his coming. The Channel being passed, he foorded Panare without,
impediment in a very broad place, and where the water is not deep, and marched
toward Plumacia, three miles off from the enemies army, which was the cause
that Castel-franco yielded to him. He was there in great doubt what to do: for
on the one side he would willingly have assailed Bolognia, if he had been
certain that the people would have taken arms in the Bentiuoles behalf: on
the Triuulcio draws near to Bolognia.
other side he feared, if he should come thither, upon hope only of a popular
commotion, to be enforced forthwith to depart thence as the Lord of Chaumont
had done to his great disgrace. At the last he determined to tempt Fortune, and
to try by drawing near to Bolognia, if the particular intelligences of the
Bentiuoles might stand him in any stead, and came and encamped at the bridge of
Laina, five

The Pope so soon as the Bishop of Gurcia was departed, and that he understood
that Triuulcio marched with his army, left Bolonia, determining to go to his
own army, by his presence to induce the captains to fight, whereunto he could
not dispose them neither by letters nor messages, but being half way on his
journey, he came back again the day following, resolving to go to Rauenna.
Yet nevertheless before his departure, he was desirous to make some small
exhortation to the Bologneses, whom he sent for to come and speak with him:
and The Popes exhortation to the Bolognois.
after he had declared unto them how that by the benefit of the Sea Apostolic,
and by his means they were freed from grievous tirany, he requested them with
greater

To this exhortation they answered: that they were not ignorant how much the
The answer of the Balognois to the Pope.
city was bound unto him in particular for having driven thence the tyrants,
and therefore they were resolved to spend all their goo^s, to hazard the honor
and safety of their wives and children, and to lose their own lives, before
they would quit his party or that of the Sea Apostolic.

The Pope on this assurance departed from Bolognia, leaving the Cardinal of
Pauia there, and went to Rauenna: but so soon as he was on his way and that
Triuulcio was come to the bridge of Laina, the Bolognois were troubled with
Sundry thoughts of the Bolognois.
sundry thoughts: some of them desired the return of the Bentiuoles, others on
the contrary, who showed themselves their enemies, did favor the Churches
signory: so as all the people were in arms, some for one side and some for an
other. The Cardinal being amazed thereat, did attempt for his own assurance
to draw captain Ramassotta into the city with a thousand foot (for in all that
great and populous city there were but two hundred light horse, and two
thousand foot) The flight of the Cardinal of Pauia.
but the people would not suffer it: whereupon the Cardinal in despair
forsook

The Legates flight being known, the whole city begun to rise, which the
faction of the Bentiuoles perceiving, they would not loose so fair an
occasion, but ran forthwith to the gates which were most commodious for the
French The Bentiuolcs with the French, are in Bolognia.
camp, and brake them open, then they sent for the Bentiuoles, who came
forthwith with a troop of French horse. The Duke of Vrbin, General of the
Churches army, having had some inckling of the Legates flight, did in great have
dislodge The flight of the Duke of Vrbin.
with his whole army, which was near him: whereof Triuulcio having notice,
came to follow the run-awaies, and meeting with Raphael de Passi, who for a
while

The Venetians companies with those of Ramassotta being lodged on the mount,
having intelligence of the Duke of Vrbins flight did escape by the way of the
mountains into Romagnia, not without great loss. The French won in this
victory, obtained without fight, fifteen pieces of great ordnance, with diverse
small ones as well of the Popes as of the Venetians, with a great part of the
Churches bagage, and in a manner all that of the Venetians, and more then a
hundred and fifty of their men at arms were stripped. There was not any one
slain in Bolognia, nor no violence offered, diverse only of the Cardinals
followers were taken Injury offered to the opes statue in Bolognia.
in the palace, from whom he had concealed his departure, and the Popes statue
was dragged by the people in great derision through the marketplace. Triuulcio
after the taking of Bolognia came to the Borrough of Saint Peter, to attend
there before he went on any further the French Kings pleasure.

The Senate having notice of this rout sent word to the Prouidator Gritti, who
determined to go and assail Legnaga with his army, to desist from his
enterprise, In what manner the Uenetians provided for their Cities of the firm
land.
seeing their affairs had so bad success at Bolognia, and that he should have
a care to bring the artillery from the banks of the River Po, and to send it
to Padua, and if that the French made preparation to execute any enterprise,
that he should also retire for fear of being surprised.

The officers of Padua and Treuiso were likewise commanded to hasten the
fortifications already begun in their cities. And not satisfied there with,
they chose Cristofero Mora for superintendent of those fortifications, who
speedily went thither and brought with him as many footmen as could be
gathered together in Venice, for fear least the French waxing proud for this
victory should cross the Po, and make incursions on the Paduans confines, to
the end that if they did Donato, their Ambassador with the Pope, what the
Senate had determined, and commanded him to entreat the Pope from them not to
trouble himself for the loss of his army, for the commonwealth would never
fail him, but ran the same fortune which he did. Whereunto the Pope
answering, said, that he did greatly joy to see the Venetians magnanimous
constancy, and that it alone had much more increased his courage against the
French, and had infinitely comforted him.

In this mean time the Cardinal of Pauia arrived at Rauenna, who fled from
Bolognia (as has been said) and having obtained audience of the Pope to purge
The Cardinal of Pauia performs bad offices in the duke of Vrbins be^alse.
himself of accusations made against him, laid the whole blame of the loss of
Bolognia on the Duke of Vrbin, as on a young man insufficient and small
experienced in martial matters. The Duke having notice of the bad offices
which the Cardinal performed in his behalf to the Pope his uncle, was
desirous to come and kiss his feet, and to clear himself of those
imputations. But being come into the Popes presence, he found him so
transported with choler, as he would not suffer him to speak, but sent him
away with sharp and injurious speeches. The Duke perceiving himself to be
disgraced by the Cardinals means, resolved on revenge. And thereupon going
toward his house to speak with him having no great train, he met him in the
street riding on his Mule being attended The Cardinal of Pauia slaiue by the
Duke of Vrbin.
on by the horsemen of his guard, with Guido Vaino his brother in law, riding
to the Popes palace, the Duke drew nere unto him, all men giving him place in
sign of reverence, where with his own hand he slew him with a poinard, which
being done he went to his own lodging, leapt on horseback, and retired
himself to Vrbin.

The Pope upon the brute of the Cardinals death, began extremely to grieve
and lament, as well for that he had lost a Cardinal whom he loved decrely, as
also because so high a dignity had been violated in a manner before his face
and by his own Nephew, whereupon he determined to stay no longer there, but to
return to Rome. Being departed from Rauenna he understood by the way Libels
set up in diverse places against the Pope.
by which notice was given him of the convocation of the General Council in
the city of Pisa, whether he was cited to appear in person, because he was
accounted unfit to govern the Papacy, being Author of all the wars. The Pope
being come to Rome, did forthwith excommunicate the Bolognois, unless they did
return to the obedience of the Sea Apostolic.

Within a while after, there happened a great tempest, with hail of such
unmeasurable bigness, as the like had never been seen at Bolognia, which did
spoil and beat down the fruits of the territory near adjoining, the common
people thought that it was a divine punishment, by reason of the Popes censure.
Now al be-it it was in the French Kings power, after this victory to have taken
The French King^ great desire to be at peace with the Pope.
Rome, the Popes forces being greatly weakened and dispersed, and those of the
Venetians much more, he nevertheless commanded Triuulcio, that leaving
Bolognia to the guard of the Bentiuoles, he should with his army return
speedily into the

But so soon as the Pope perceived the army to be re-called into the Duchy of
Milan, he took courage, and propounded by the Scottish Ambassador whom for
that purpose he had sent to the French King at his departure from Bolognia very
hard and grievous conditions of peace, the which nevertheless the King, for
the great desire he had to be at peace with him, was content to accept of, if
the Pope upon his return to Rome had not changed his mind through the
persuasion of the King of Arragon. For then he made answer that he would have
Bentiuoles likewise, and sent four hundred Lances thither. Then because he
would still continue in his alliance with the Emperor, he commanded that the
number of soldiers granted to the bishop of Gurcia should go from the Duchy
of Milan to the succor of the Emperors lands under the command of the Lord de
la Palisse.

The Emperor had a great desire to make war on the Venetians, but
considering the great preparations which he was to make, especially for the
taking of The Emperors sundry thoughts.
ready to agree with them, so as being tossed up and down by diverse thoughts
he spent the time in vain, without executing any enterprise, promising from
day to day to come in person into Italy, or to send his forces thither.

The Venetians in the mean time finding themselves to weak to take Verona,
and being encamped betwixt Soaua, and Loniga, they burnt in a night a great
part of the Veronois. But having intelligence of the coming of the Lord of La
Palisse with twelve hundred Lances and eight thousand foot, they retired into
a strong place toward Legnaga and Vincenza, from whence likewise they
dislodged, The Venetian army retireth to Padua and Treuiso.
and put themselves into Padua and Treuiso, for the defense of which

The French army tarried diverse days at the bridge of Barbarana, expecting the
Emperors coming or his resolution, who being come betwixt Trent and Rouero,
being irresolute, after his wonted manner, what to do, after he had given
audience to the Venetian Ambassadors, with whom he daily conferred, he
solicited the Lord of La Palisse to go and take the Pace of Castel-nouo which
is beneath Escalla toward the Friul, to make his coming down more easy on
that side. The which the Lord La Palisse did bravely execute, and then retired
to Escalla. But the Emperor having altered his determination in stead of
enuading what the Venetians held on the firm land, and going to beseege Rome,
retired The Emperor changing his mind goes back to Trent.
to Trent, determining to go no more to the army, and commanded the Asmains to
enter into the Friul, where they took Vdina with the whole Province, the^ they
returned to join with the Lord of La Palisse, who lay within five miles of
Treuiso, the which the Emperor would have to be assaulted, but being well
sortified on every side, they found it most expedient speedily to retire the
which they did. Whereupon the Lord of La Palisse did soon after return into
the Duchy of The Kings forces in the Duchy of Milan.
Milan by his Kings command, in regard of the Swisses new stirs and
confederacies which did daily increase. The Venetian Stradio^s did follow him
at the heels, hoping to endamage him at his passage over the Burnt and the
Adissa, but he found means safely to cross them. His departure was cause that
John Paul Baillon, General to the Venetians, by the death of Luke Malueze did
recover all that they had lost the same Summet, as well nere to Vincenza, as in
Friul (Gradisca excepted.)

In these kinds of warlike exploits was that Summer spent, to the Emperors
The Venetians do^ still maintain their (...) and greatness.
the Emperors and the French Kings armies against them for the space of two
years, did in the end still retain their own forces and signories, and
al-be-it that it was directly against the Emperor, it was nevertheless much
more hurtful to the French King. For the Emperor, by reason he wanted aid,
perceiving himself to weak to obtain the desired victory, did willingly
harken to those who persuaded him to be friends with the Venetians, so as
already men began to perceive, that new deseignes were begotten in his mind.

The Pope in the mean time having made show that he would come to an agreement
Confederacy betwixt the Pope, the king of Arragon, and the Venetians.
with the French King, did at last declare himself openly against him,

Don Raymond de Cardona borne in Cattalognia and at that time viceroy of The
number of the confederates army.
Naples was made General of their army, who by their agreement was to have

Gaston of Foix was made viceroy in the Duchy of Milan and in the army, who
Gaston of Foix Lieutenant general for the King in the Duchy of Milan.
having intelligence of the Swisses preparations for their coming down, by
The Swisses defy Gaston of Foix.
They sent a trumpet from Varesa to defy the Kings Lieutenant, who only to
keep victuals from them, was come to Assaron, a place thirteen miles distant
from Gaston of Foix did put himself into Legnana, four miles from Galera. The
Swisses come down into the Duchy of Milan.


Then being increased to the number of sixteen thousand, they came to Busti,
where a hundred French men at arms lay in Garrison, who hardly escaped from
them, loosing their baggage and some of their horses: by means whereof the
French, which still retired as the Swisses advanced, came and quartered
themselves in the suburbs of Milan, within two miles whereof the Swisses were
come* but wondering that they heard no news from the Pope nor from the
Venetian army (as it was known by letters intercepted which they sent to their
Lords) certain The Swisses retu^ne home (...).
days after they retired toward Coma, and from thence returned home into
their country.

Whilst they were retiring two posts arrived from the Pope and the Venetians:
whereupon it was thought of a certain that if they had come sooner, the
Swisses had not returned. But they being gone (as has been said) the
Spaniards

Petro of Navarre, Colonel of the Spanish Infantery, till such time as all
their The Bastide taken by the Spaniards.
companies were come together, came and beseeged the Bastide, and having
battered it with three pieces of ordnance, and given it an assault, he took it
the third day after his arrival, where all the footmen that were in it were
slain with Vest^tello their captain. Pedro of Nauarte leaving two hundred foot
there, returned to the vicerois army: but the Duke of Ferrara going thither
afterward with nine great pieces of ordnance, did so suriously assail it as
he recovered it the very

The confederates army: namely that of the Pope, and the King of Arragon, to
The (...) army marches toward Bolognia.
the number of eighteen hundred men at arms, eight hundred Genets, eight
hundred light horse, and sixteen thousand foot, as well Spaniards as Italians,
abundantly furnished with munition, the most of them being come forth of the
Realm of Naples, determined to encampe before Bolognia. The Venetian army on
the other side being come upon the Marches of Verona, seemed to threaten the
city of Bres^ia.

Now the viceroy, General to the Pope and the Spaniards, caused his army to
march, and came and encamped betwixt the River Adice and Bolognia, where having
given order for matters necessary to beseege it, he drew nere to the walls,
quartering and extending the most part of his army betwixt the hill, and the
high way which goes from Bolognia into Romagnia, in regard of the commodity of
victuals which came from thence, and seized on Saint Michels Monastery which is
very nere to the city, seated on an high place, and which does in a manner
command the town.

Within the city, beside the people which did bear arms and certain
companies The forces that were i^ Bolognia.
of horse and foot, paid by the Bentiuoles, Gaston of Foix had sent thither
Odet of Foix Lord of Lautrect, and ^ues of Alegre, two famous captains, and
with them were the captains Fayete, and Vincent surnamed the great Devil, who
upon the assurance made to them by Gaston of Foix to relieve them, did freely
enter it, in The confederates small progression before Bolognia.
regard of the Cities large circuit. Yet nevertheless they began to be bold,
when they perceived the enemies small progression, who were nine days before
the walls, and enterprized nothing but only made certain idle Coluerine shot
from Saint Michels Monastery into the city: but they suddenly abstained,
perceiving very well that they spent their munition vnproffitably. They were
diverse days determining on what side to batter the city, especially to keep
relief Stephens Gate, by which men go to Florence, and the artillery was
planted within thirty fadom of the walls.

Pedro of Navarre on the other side made a mine, drawing toward the gate of
Chastillon, in a place where within was a little chapel called Baracane. The
Artillery having begun to play, did in four and twenty hours space beat A
breach made at Bolognia.
down an hundred fathom of the wall, with the tower of the gate, the which was
abandoned, by reason it could be no longer defended so as the assault might be
easily given on that side, and in the mean time they c^used bridges of wood to
be made, and filled the dike with fagots to come with more ease to the assault.
The miue being finished they gave fire to it, which with merucilous force did
in such sort blow up the wall and the chapel, as in that space, those without
the town did plainly discern those within the city, with the soldiers who
stood ready for defense, but the whole wall falling down again on a sudden,
did light in the very self same place, from whence the violence of the fire
had forced it, A strange miracle in the mine.
and was in such sort (...) to the self same foundations, as one would have
thought that it had never stirred from thence, which was accounted by all the
people for a strange miracle.

The captains within the town perceiving the enemies preparations, before the
mine was fired, fearing least the people through scare might be won, did
speedily send to demand aid of Gaston of Foix, who the self same day sent
thither Aid sent to the b^seeged.
a thousand foot, and the morrow after, a hundred and four score Lances and
then resolved to go thither in person with the whole army, not-with-standing
that in council all the captains contradicted it. Therefore he came forth of
Final, late in the evening, and the next morning he marched toward Bolognia
Gaston of Foix comes to the aid of Bolognia.
and entered it by Saint Felix gate, having in his company thirteen hundred
Lances, six thousand Lansequenets, and eight thousand foot both French and
Italians.

The enemies had no knowledge of his coming till a day after, that a Stadiot,
of the number of those who were come forth among others to skirmish, was taken,
who being questioned what was done in Bolognia, answered, That he could not say
much, because he came thither but the day before with the French army: whereat
the enemies wondering did more exactly examine him in what manner and what
numbers had entered, and finding him constant in his answers, they believed
him, and resolved to raise their camp, in regard it was dangerous to tarry The
consederates army dislodgeth from before Bolognia.
there, as well in respect of the cold season which did greatly afflict the
soldiers, as also for the neighborhood of the City, so great an army being
within it. Wherefore the next night following which was the nineteenth day of
the seege, after they had with great diligence and stillness, retired their
ordnance, they dislodged early in the morning.

It was thought of a certain that if the French army had sal^ied forth the
next morning after their arrival, as Gaston of Foix had propounded it, they
had surprised the confederats camp, who in no sort doubted that he was come
thither (as has been said) but ^ues of Alegre councelled to let the companies
rest one day, who were weary with their journey and the bad way, thinking that
the enemy

The end of the ninth Book of the fourth Decad.
The Contents of the tenth Book of the


THe City of Bressia taken by the Venetians is rescued by Gaston of Foix, by
means of the Castle which held out still for the French. Bergamo by the
example of Bressia expels the French. The defeat of John Paul Baillon and
Meleager of Furli by Gaston of Foix. The imprisonment of Andrew Gritti and
Antonio Iustiniano. Truce betwixt the Emperor Gaston of Foix. The Battle of
Rauenna wherein the French were victors. The death of Gaston of Foix slain by
the Spaniards, after the battle was won. In what perplexity the Pope was
after the French men's victory. The Swisses come down into the territory of
Verona, with their great hate to King Lewis, and upon what occasion. The
Champaine Country of Milan is forsaken, for to keep the Cities from the
Swisses. Milan, with all the Cities, almost, of the Duchy, is redeliuered to
the confederates. The City Maximillian Sforza is restored to the Duchy of
Milan. The death of Pope Julius the Second. A league concluded betwixt King
Lewis and the Venetians. The Election of Pope Leo the Tenth of the family of
Medicis. King Lewis his great preparations for the war of Italy. The
Venetians take Cremona. The whole Duchy of Milan in trouble and tumult in the
behalf of the French. The French make re-entry into all the state of Milan,
two towns excepted. The Lewis. They come down to Nouara.

The Swisses coming forth of Nouara in the night obtain the victory against
the French. The French are driven forth of the whole Duchy of Milan. And
lastly the taking and dismantling of Legnaga by the Venetians.

The tenth Book of the fourth Decad of the History of Venice.
THe army being dislodged from before Bolognia, Gaston of Foix having left
there three hundred Lances, and four thousand foot for the guard thereof,
came with great speed to the relief Gaston of Foix releeues the Castle of
Bressia.
of the Castle of Bressia, for the Venetians took the City the same day that
he entered into Bolognia. For Count Lodouico Auogare a Bressian Gentleman,
being wearied with the arrogance and indiscretion of the French, having written
to the council of the Ten, That if they would send their army to Bressia, he
would find means Lodowickes offer ought to be entertained or refused. After
diverse and sundry opinions it was concluded to accept it, the matter being
commanded to be kept secret: then they acquainted the Prouidator Gritti
therewith, enioyning him to march speedily with his troops toward Bressia,
and to march at the very hour, and to the gate which Count Lodowick should
send him instructions for.

Gritti upon this commandment crossed the River Adice at Albera, then that of
Mincia, at the mill of La Volta, and coming to Monteclaro with three hundred
men at arms, thirteen hundred light horse; and three thousand foot; he
encamped that night at Castagnetta, five miles from Bressia, from whence he on
a sudden sent his light horse to scour even to the gates. But the enterprise
being discovered by a wife of one of the accomplices, who aduertized the
Gouerthereof, of whom she was enamored; and by that means the town being
carefully guarded, Gritti thought it not fit to pass on any farther, whereupon
Count Lodowicke not being stayed by the French, came with his son forth of
the City. Andre Gritti being returned near to Montagnane, from whence he first
came, Andre Griul re^ireth.
left a sufficient guard for the bridge which he had made over the River Adice,
to the end to assure the passage, if he should happen to return again, as it
afterward fell out. For within a while after being recalled, he crossed the
River with two Cannons and four falconets, and returned to his quarter at
Castagnetta.

Count Lodowick on the other side being accompanied with very great numbers of
the people of the valeys of Eutropia and Sabina, who^ he had caused to rise,
was come within a mile of Bressia. And al-be-it they within the City did not
yet The Venetians returning to the assault of Bressia, enter the City.
make show of favoring the enterprise, yet nevertheless Gritti perceiving,
that he had greater forces then at the former time, he resolved to have it by
force: And being come with all those peasants, he assailed it in three
several places, two of which had good success, namely at the Gate of Piles
where Auogare fought, and at the gate of La Garzulo, where the soldiers entered
at the iron grate, by which the river of the same name enters into the city,
notwithstanding all the attempts and resistance of the French, who perceiving
the enemies

Bressia being taken all the towns along the Lake of La Guard, did drive away
Bergamo expels the Frinch.
the French, and yielded to the Venetians: Bergamo did the like soon after
(the two castles excepted) the one of which stands in the midst of the
city, and the other half a mile off. It was thought that if at Venice (where
the joy was incredible) they had forth*with provided that which Andre Gritti
did suddenly write for, namely to send soldiers, and artillery which he had
need of to win the castle of Bressia, they had made greater progression, or at
least the victory

But during these exploits, Gaston of Foix being aduertized of what had passed
The speed of Gaston of Foix.
at Bressia, did speedily march thither, who having passed the Po at Stellata,
did so one cross the river Mincia at the bridge of Molino, then he came and
lodged at Nogera on the Veronois, and the day following at Pontpesara, and at
Treuilla, where having intelligence that John Paul Baillon was come with three
hundred men at arms, four hundred light horse, and twelve hundred foot to
lodge at the Island of Escalla, he ran speedily thither with three hundred
John Paul Baillon is broken and defcated by Gaston of Foi^.
Lances and seven hundred Archers, the residue of the army, who could

John Paul Baillon having descried him a far off, thinking it to be nothing
else but part of the forces of Verona, did embattaile his soldiers and tarried
for him. Both fides joining, fought valiantly for more then an hours space:
but the Venetians fortune began to decline by the arrival of the residue of
the army which came in file, and notwithstanding that they disordered them,
they nevertheless rallied themselves diverse times, until being no longer able
to resist the greatnumbers, they betook themselves to flight; whereupon John
Paul passed

The morrow after, Gaston of Foix did likewise put Meleager of Furli to rout,
Gaston of Foix defeateth Meleager of Furli.
whom he incountred as he conducted certain Venetian light horse, then he
came and encamped in the suburbs of Bressia, and without any delay at all he
sent to assail the Monastery of Saint Fridiana, which stood half way off from
the hill under which he was lodged, and having assaulted it, he drove thence
those which guarded it, and turned with his army to the other side of the town,
that he might be the nearer to the castle. The next morning by day break,
having chosen Gaston of Foix bauing entered the Castle of Bressia marches to
the res^ue of the (...).
out of the whole army, four hundred men at arms well armed, and six thousand
foot, and going up on that side nere to the Gate of Pises, he entered without in
vain, for having put them to flight, he came down furiously upon the void
place where captain Burlettes palace stood, where the Venetian forces being
close joined together, did attend him with great boldness: and there joining,
they fought furiously on either side for a long time, the one fighting for
their own safety, and the others for glory, and for desire of the spoil and
sack of so rich a City.

The Venetians at the last, having bravely defended themselves were driven The
French after a long fight became masters of the City.
from the place. For the French being victors, did by force drive their enemies
before them in all places, not going to pillage* until they were wholly become
Masters of the city, following the command of Gaston of Foix who had so
enjoined Andre Gritti and Antonio Iustiniano taken prisoners. Count Lodowick
Auogare beheaded.
foot, and some number of men at arms, but more then eight thousand of the
enemies were slain, and great numbers of them taken prisoners, amongst whom
were Andre Gritti and Antonio Iustiniano with many others. Count Lodowicke
Auogare and a son of his being taken among the rest were beheaded in the
public place of execution.

Gaston of Foix preserved the honor of the Nuns, but their goods were
pillaged, and those who had retired into their Couents and other Churches, were
the captains booties. In this manner fell the City of Bressia into extreme
misery, which in dignity and nobility did not give place to any other of
Lombardy, and The loss of Bressia troubles the Venetians.
which did for wealth surpass all the rest, (excepted Milan). It was sacked
seven whole days together. The news of this reprisal being come to Venice did
greatly trouble the whole City, who thought they should be no more able to
enterprise any thing, condemning chiefly the small speed that was made to send
necessary forces and munition to the Prouidator Gritti, the which was cause of
that loss. The Senate forthwith consulted about the repairing of their army,
sent to leauy two thousand foot in Candy, and a great number of Stradiots in
Albania. Two hundred pound weight of gold was sent to the viceroy of Naples, as
had been promised. The foot which were not at Bressia, and the horsemen which
escaped, together with those who were stripped and disarmed came to Vincenza.
Instinian and Gritti were sent prisoners to Milan.

The Pope understanding that the French had recovered Bressia, councelled and
persuaded, even with threats, that they should accord with the Emperor. And
certain commissioners being assembled for that purpose, perceiving the great
difficulties which were made in the treaty of peace, it was propounded to make
truce for a while in the mean time, during which they might with more ease
deliberate on the Articles of peace and other reasonable conditions.

According to this advice, truce was concluded at Rome in the Popes presence
Truce agreed on betwixt the Emperor and the Venetian^
betwixt the commissioners, on condition that the Senate should at two paiments
give four hundred pound of gold to Maximillian, to the which were

Gaston of Foix after the recovery of Bressia, having given order for his
affairs, (for Bergamo which had rebelled, and all the other towns near
adjoining had recalled the French) and refreshed his army which was wearied
with so great and long trauaill, determined to go and encounter with the
confederates army, according to the commandment which he had received from
the King, which did expressly import, that with the greatest speed he could,
he should march against them, whom h^e heard to be very weak, and therefore
he promised himself the victory, and being victorious, he should beseege of
the council of Pisa, which should depute a Legate to go to the army.

Gaston of Foix departed from Bressia, and came to Final, there for to gather
together all the companies which were in Italy (those excepted who remained for
the guard of the Cities) and from thence he went to Saint Georges on the
Bolognois, where there came to him three thousand Gascons, a thousand Pioners,
and a thousand Picards which were newly sent him, being al choice soldiers.
These being arrived, he found that he had with him five thousand Lanfequenets,
five thousand Gascons, and eight thousand, as well Italians as French, with one
thousand The number of Gaston of Foix his army.
six hundred lances. The Duke of Ferrara was to join with him, with a
hundred men at arms, two hundred light horse and a great quantity of excellent

Gaston of Foix marching in this equipage did burn with desire to meet the
Gaston of Foix his great desire to fight.
enemy and to fight with him, as well to satisfy the King as for his own
valor and prowess: his meaning nevertheless was not to assail him rashly,
but only to try if by approaching nere to him he would cheerfully come to the
battle, in any place where the quallity of the sytuation might make them
equal.

The enemies had an other intent, who thought it not safe for them to fight in
an equal place, at least wise before the six thousand Swisses whom they

The two armies did often change places, marching continually nere together in
good order, the artillery going before and their faces turned toward the
enemies, as if every hour they were to begin the fight. Gaston received a
new commandment from the King to hasten the battle. Whereunto his King was
incited so soon as he understood the truce made betwixt the Emperor and the
Venetians. But Gaston perceiving that he did win nothing by coasting the
enemies in this manner, in regard of the commodiousnesse of the Gaston of Foix
beseegeth Rauenna.
wherein Mark Antony Colonna lay for the Pope with fifteen hundred foot, and
five hundred horse, thinking that the enemies would not suffer such a city to
be lost before their faces, and by that means occasion might be offered to
fight with them in an equal place. He came and lodged betwixt Contignola, and
Grana^olla, then at Rassi, having driven them thence who kept it, and from
thence the day following he came and encamped nere to the walls of Rauenna
betwixt the two Rivers; namely, Ronca, and Mo^tona betwixt which the town is
seated. He possessed the space which is betwixt the one and other river.

The next day he caused his ordnance to be planted, and by all means hasted

This was the reason why he resolved to give the assault the same day, al-beit
he knew that there was no reasonable breach made, and that he could not enter
but by ladders: those likewise which were sent thither, being out of hope to
force the City: and perceiving themselves to be greatly hindered by a
Culueryne, having fought for the space of three hours, retired with the loss
of

So soon as the French had discovered them, they arose in arms and placed
themselves under their enseignes, having in great have with drawn their
ordinance from before their walls, the which they turned toward the enemies:
who imagining only by the show of their army, that Ramenna was suffi^iently
relieved, thinking that the French durst not assail it they being so near,
they encamped within three miles of Rauenna, at a place called Moulinachia,
which they forthwith fortified, with as deep a trench as the shortness of
the time would permit them. The French were long in council, to know what was
to be done, either to assaill the City, or the enemies. In the end after
diverse and sundry opinions, they resolved to go and assail the enemy, so
soon as it was day. Which The reso^ue to assail the enemy and not the City.
Gaston of Foix gladly approving, he caused the same night a bridge to be
cast over the Ronca, and to li^ell the causeis on all sides, to make the ways
easy. There by day break, being Easter day, he prepared to march against the
enemies; and having encouraged his soldiors, with a more eloqu^, then Martial
oration he enforced the enemies by the shot of his ordnance, to come forth of
their trenches, The French are victors in the battle of Rauenna.
and to join fight with him, where the con^ederates were so dealt with, for the
space of six (...), that the fight lasted, as not being able to make any more
resistance, they turned their backs, and among others the Viceroy and
Caranagio were the foremost, carrying away with them, a squadron in a manner
whole and unbroken: so as the French remained masters of the field.

But because the Spanish Infantery made a soft retreat, and in god order,
Gaston Goston of Foix is slain by the Spaniards.
of Foix was desirous to break them, and going furiously to assaill them with
a squadron of horse, he was on a sudden environed by the enemies, and being
beaten from his horse, was slain by the push of a pi^e, thrust into his
flank. The Lord of Lau^rec lay by him, in a manner dead, being wounded in
twenty places, but being brought to Ferrara, he was there healed.

The Generals death caused the Spaniards to escape without any empediment, the
residew of their army being dispersed and put to flight, and their bagage,
enseignes and artillery taken. The prisoners were the Popet Legate, Fabricio
Colo^, Pedro of Naua^e, the Marquis of Palu, Bito^o, and (...)* with many ^s of
Alegre, ^ters French Gentlemen and Almaine Captains, to whose valor the
victory was partly ascribed.

The victors being returned to their Camp, those of the City sent word that
they would yield, but whilst they c^pitulated, the Lan^equentes, and Gascons
perceiving the walls to be carelessely kept, did enter it at the breach which
was Rauenna taken and spoiled by the French.
made before the bataile, and ^ade cruel spoil, for despite of the loss
which Mark Antony C^llonna was ^tyled, which he afterward yielded, upon
condition ^o have their goods and lives saved.

The Venetians having news of this loss, sent word to (...) (...) whom they
kept in pay with a thousand foot in Flamin^, to guard, and defend the lands of
the Church. The Vi^y never said till he came to A^coha, where he used means
to renew his army, promis^g to him self, that being joined with the Swisses,
he would easily drive the French forth of ^taly, so as every one would employ
himself in that busienesse. The Venet^ns being advertised of his inten^,
sent to comfort him for his loss and to offer him al Anto^ (...), who brought
him a good sum of money from the Senate, the li^e also did King (...) A^ssador
which lay at Venice.

The French Army being daunted with the death of their General, remained
within 4. miles of Rauenna, attempting nothing, expecting the kings pleasure.
In the mean space news being brought to Rone, of the loss of the battle,
all the Cardinals came forthwith to the Pope, earnestly entreating him to
accept What astonish nent the loss of the bata^le brought to Rome.
of peace with the French King, the which they assured him he might obtain,
on honest conditions, they seeing no other remedy for all these dangers, but
peace only. The Ambassadors of the King of Arragon, and the Signury of Venice
insisted on the contrary, giving him to understand that matters were not so
desperate, nor the army so much decayed, but that it might easily be restored
in short space, without any great expense, with many other very pertinent
reasons, The Popes perplexity.
to induce the Pope to their opinion. But he continewed in very great doubt;
for on the one side, hatred and disdain against the French did possess him,
and on the other, fear, and danger. Whereupon he answered the Cardinals that
he would make peace with the French King, and yet it was not with that
resolution, which might give any certain hope: and last of all when as Julius
of Medicis a Knight of Malta, who was after-wards pope, came to him from the
Cardinal of Medicis, and had fully informed him, how greatly the French were
weakened, by their Generals death, and of diverse other particularities of the
French army, The Pope will by no means have peace with the French.
which did much recomfort him; And bringing him into the Consistory, he caused
him to rehearse the self same things to the Cardinals, who nevertheless

But so soon as he understood that the Lord of La Palisse, who commanded the
French army, after the death of Gaston of Foix, was called into the Duchy of
Milan by the General of Normandy, for fear of the Swisses coming, and that
he was with the army departed out of Ro^gina, he found himself freed of the
doubt and fear which he was in, concerning the affairs of Rome, whereby he
was more then before confirmed in his obstinacy, albeit the Legate of

Now the Pope being greatly confirmed by that which has been already said,
and by the great hopes which the King of Arragon gave him, so soon as be had
intelligence of the loss of the battle of Rauenna, promising to send him
Gonsaluo the great Captain into Italy with new supplies and likewise by the
commission which the King of England had sent to the Cardinal of York, The
Cardinal of Medicis prisoner at Milan.
to enter into the league, he did openly reject peace, and pronounced in open
Consistory a Monitory, against the French King, if he did not release the
Cardinal of Medicis, whom he kept prisoner in Milan, where he was

The Swisses in the mean time, who stood badly affected to the French King,
and did wonderfully hate him, being assembled at Coire, a city of the Grisons
there ancient confederats, marched from thence to Trent, (the Emperor to
color the matter with the King, saying that he could not stop their
passage, in regard of the ancient confederacy which he had with them.)

From Trent they came upon the Verona Territory, where the Venetians army
expected them, who together with the Pope did contribute for their pay, They
were in number more then six thousand, though no more were demanded: For the
hatred which they did hear to the French King was The Swisses ^atred to the
French King.
so great, as contrary to their custom, they did p^tiently endure al
difficulties, and namely, they ca^ from home having received only one florin of
Ryne a piece: whereas in time before they would not march for the Kings service,
unless they had been promised many paies and their Captains presented with
sundry gifts.

La Palisse coming first of all with the Army to Pontoglio to stop their
passage, thinking that they would come that way into Italy, perceiving
afterward their meaning to be otherwise, came and encamped at Chastillon of the
stirrup, not being assured whether they would come down into the Duchy of
Millan or else march toward Ferrara. It was certainly thought that they would
have held on the way toward Ferrara according to the Popes directions, had not
a letter which the Lord of La Palisse sent to the General of Normandy, been
in^ercepted by mishap, the which fell into the hands of the Venetian Stradiots;
by which he sent him word how his affairs stood and that it would be a hard
matter to resist The Suisses take the way toward the Duchy of Milan.
them, if they should turn toward the Duchy of Millan. This letter made them
change their determination, and caused the Cardinal of Syon, the chief motive
of this war, with the Captains, to resolve to enterprise that which their
enemies most feared (as was perceived by that letter). Therefore they came to
Villafranca to join with the Venetian army, under the command of John Paul
Bailon, which was of four hundred men at arms, eight hundred light horse, and
six thousand foot with pieces of Ordnance, as well for battery, as for the
field.

La Palisse, who in all had not above seven thousand foot and a thousand
lances, did with the Captains determine wholly to forsake the field, and to
look La Palisse forsakes the field, and gardeth the towns
to the defense of the towns of most importance, till such time as those great
nombers of Suisses should be wasted, or else some fresh supplies might come to
them from France to make head against them. Whereupon he did put into Bressia
two thousand foot, one hundred and fifty lances and a hundred men at arms of
the Florentines: into Crema fifty lances and a thousand foot, and into
Bergamo, a thousand foot, and a hundred Florentine men at arms; he The
Lancequenets forsake the French King.
brought the residew of the army to Pontuico, which consisted of six hundred
lances, two thousand French foot, and four thousand Lansquenets. But the next
day letters came from the Emperor, who commanded the Lansquenets forthwith to
abandon the French Kings service: they not daring to disobey, departed

La Palisse despayring (by reason of the Lansquenets departure) of being able
any longer to defend the Duchy of Milan, did in great have retire to
Pisquetona. The Venetians in the mean time having already taken Valegia and
Piscara, did still with that Army win the Country as they went along. Those
of Cremona The Venetians great progression in the company of the Suisses.
being wholly forsaken did yield to the Cardinal of Syon and gave him a good
sum of money, to the end that the Suisses should not enter into their City.
The like did Carauagio and Soncino, wherein the Cardinal of Syon placed his
own people in Garrison, in steed of delivering it to the Venetians, as it was
mentioned in the treaty of the League. All other towns near to the river Adda
did La Palisse, had recalled his companies which lay there to join them to the
army.

La Palisse forsook Pisquetona, and went and crossed the River Adda, hoping to
keep the enemies from passing the river if the footmen which they made account
to leauy had arrived* But through want of money to pay them, none were
Triuultio coming to the Army is of opinion to abandon the Duchy of Milan.
raised, whereupon he retired to Saint Angello, and the day following to Pauia,
determining to stay there. But after that Triuulcio came thither to him, and
had showed him the vanity of his opinion, and how that it was impossible to
hold back so great a ruin, seeing there were no footmen in the Army, nor
means to wage new, as well for the shortness of the time, as for that there
was no money

So soon as the French had passed the River Adda, Loda yielded to the
confederates who being come to Pauia, began to batter the Castle. The French
like-wise did soon abandon it, and came to the stone bridge, which is over the
river Thesin, fearing least it should be surprised, having but that place
alone, whereby to escape from Pauia. All the French men, with certain
Lancequenets, who were not departed with the rest, being come forth of Pauia,
the Citt^ promised to pay a great sum of money to avoid the sack thereof,
Milan had already done the like, compounding for a great sum, and all other
towns, (By essia and Coma excepted) did with great desire do the same.

All matters were governed in the name of the holy league (for so all men
called it,) and all the profit fell to the Swisses, which caused many more of
that nation Genoa reuolteth from the King.
this change, Parma and Placentia were given to the Pope. The Swisses ^eazed on
Lucarna and the Grisons on Voltolina and Chiauenna, Iano Fregossa, by the
Venetians aid, in whose army he served, went to Genoa, and so handled the
matter, as the French governor being expelled, it revolted and created him Duke.

In the like manner all the towns and Castles of Romagnia did return to the
Pope. Bolognia like-wise yielded to his officers, after the Bentiuoles being
deprived of all hope, had forsaken it. The Cardinal of Medicis had already
before then escaped, by means of some stir which happened of purpose, as he
entered into a boat at the passage of the Po, whereupon he was taken from the
French John's gate, battering at one time both the town and Castle, whether the
Viceroy came to them with the Spanish army. The Lord of Aubigni who was within
it, perceiving that in the end he could not choose but deliver it, thought it
best to yield it, together with the Castle, rather to the Viceroy then to the
Venetians, compounding with him, that all Legnaga yielded.
the soldiers within should depart with lives and goods. The French that were
at Legnaga followed the same council. Crema did other-wise which was beseeged
by Ranze de la Cere, with a part of the Venetians forces, unto whom, Benedict
Cribario (being corrupted by gifts, and upon promise to be made a gentleman of
Venice) did yield the town by the consent of the Lord De Duras governor of the
Castle, the which he would not do to Octanian Sforza, Bishop of Lodi; for and
in the name of the future Duke Maximilian Sforza, being come thither for that
purpose, with four thousand Swisses In these interims, the Bishop of Gurcia as
Lieutenant to the Emperor went to Rome, who being received with all honor they
began to treat of the establishment of the common business, and how to The
treaty betwixt the Emperor and the Venetians handled.
might resist the French King: and the hardest matter of all this was, the
agreement so often treated of betwixt the Emperor and the Venetians: For the
Bishop of Gurcia demanded to have Verona and Vincenza, to remain to the
Emperor, and the other towns to the Venetians, for which they should presently
pay to Maximilian two hundred thousand florins of the Rhyne, and thirty thou
sand for ever after, yearly, in manner of rent. The Venetians would not pay
rent for those towns, which they had enjoyed for so many years, as belonging
unto Difficulties concerning the agreement.
them, nor consent to give money, and much less to deliver Vincenza, for diverse
reasons by them alleged. The Pope did what he could to atone them, now
inciting with spiritual and temporal arms, and made a league with the
Emperor, to the end that he might allow of the Council of Lateran, and disallow
the Conuenticle of Pisa. The Spanish Ambassador would not enter into that
League, saying; that he had no commission so to do from his King.

The consederacy being contracted, the Bishop of Gurcia at the next Session of
League betwixt the Pope and the Emperor.
the council of Lareran, did in the Emperors name adhere to the Council,
where he affirmed in the presence of all men, that the Emperor had never
consented to the Conuenticle of Pisa, rejecting all those who had used his
name. This being done, the Bishop of Gurcia took his leave, that he might be
with Maximilian Maximillian Sforza in possession of the Duchy of Milan.
Sforza at such time as he should take possession of the Duchy of Millan

The confederacy made at Rome, had not wholly broken off the hope of agreement
between the Emperor and the Venetians, and therefore the Pope sent Iacomo
Stafilea Auditor of the Rote to Venice, to entreat the Senate to agree with
Maximilian, and to enter into the league, saying; That to his great gree^e he
had forsaken them, the which, many taking in bad part, Said that they were
assured that it would cause them to enter into League with the French, and by
that means to recall them a new into Italy; but that he for his part did so
much presume on The death o^ Pope Julius the second.
them, as he knew they would never do it: and in regard of these matters being
troubled with sundry thoughts, he fell sick, and his health daily empairing,
not being able to eat or sleep, he deceassed the two and twentieth day of
February in the year 1513.

Now the Venetians having determined before the Popes death to contract A
motion of agreem^t betwixt the French King and the Uenetians.
League and alliance with the French, according to the motion made by King
Lewis to Andrew Gritti, prisoner at that time in France, they resolved (the
matter having a long time been debated in council) to send one of purpose into
France to treat of this business with the King: and to this end they named
Lodouico Pietro Secretary of the Council of Ten.

He being departed from Venice, and onward on his way, they had news of the
Popes death: but for all that they did not call him back, not knowing who The
league concluded betwixt the King and the Venetians.
should be his successor, and least of all what his affection toward them
might be.

The Secretary being come into France, the King did enlarge Andre Gritti, and
did forthwith conclude the league with him on condition that Cremona and the
country of Giradade should belong to the state of Milan, and that the Venetians
should have Bressia, Bergamo and Crema, (the King making over all his right to
them, which he could pretend to those Cities:) That they should be bound to
aid one another; and to hazard together one self same fortune, until the
King The Articles of the League.
should recover the whole state of Milan: and that likewise the Republicke
should

In the mean time, after the Popes death, the Cardinals entered quietly into
the The election of Pope Leo the tenth.
Conclaue, and did the seventh day following with a general consent choose
for Pope, John, Cardinal of the title of Saint Mary in Dominica, of the most
illustrious family of Medicis, of seven and thirty years of age, which was a
strange matter, and contrary to the custom: He took upon him the name of Leo
the tenth. This election was pleasing to all men, and cheefely to the
Venetians, who did ever greatly affect that family: by reason whereof, the
Senate did hope easily Leo having obtained the Pontifical dignity, found
himself to be assailed with sundry thoughts, reuoluing in his mind diverse
matters, as well belonging to war as to peace.

His ancient habit and manner of life from his youth, did excite him to embrace
peace and quietness, especially now when he saw himself established in the
supreme dignity: so as the n^e of war, in regard of dangers past was
displeasing and odious to him: And on the other side, he found no great safety
in peace, in the midst of arms, and confusion of all things, as also,
because the memory of his predecessor, who by arms had much increased the
de^aines of the Church, did provoke him to war. But by taking arms, he knew
not to which side he The new Pope is t^ssed with sundry thoughts
should rather incline: For the return of the French into Italy did not like
him, in regard of the wrongs and greeuances which he in particular had received
by them, and his predecessor like-wise, and which did still threaten him, in
regard of

Leo then being thus troubled with sundry thoughts, did oftentimes change his
determination. At the beginning of his papacy, he sent a brief to all
Christian Princes, exhorting them to peace, and unity: and the more easily to
induce them there unto, he determined not to show himself more affected to
one side then to another. Yet nevertheless, perceiving at the same-time that
there was no great hope of peace, he began to provoke the Venetians, against
the The Venetians constancy in mai^tayning their* alliance.
French; and also for that considering matters more iudiciously, they perceived
that at the first he promised some apparent liberty: but that dangers did
still increase, and that they went about to throw all Italy headlong into
perpetual bondage.

With these discourses did the Venetians maintain their opinion, soliciting
the French King in the mean time to make the greatest have he could with The
King prepares ^or his return into Italy.
bend his actions to this war, and to cut off all lets that might hinder him
therein, he made truce for one whole year with Fernand, King of Arragon, only
for that which concerned matters forth of Italy.

And as for the English, whom he understood were making great preparations
for their coming into France, he made no great reckoning thereof, hoping in
short space to drive Sforza from the state of Milan, and to return victorious
with his Army into France, time enough to resist their

Now the Rendezuous for all the Kings troops was at Suza, from thence to march
with ease into Italy, under the conduct of the Lord of La Tremouille, albeit
the war was managed by John Iames*Trivulce, a man of great repute, for his
excellent skill in martial discipline. The report The number of the French
Army.
was that there were twenty thousand soldiers in the Kings Army. The Venetians
had for their parts eight thousand footmen, twelve hundred men at arms, and
five hundred light horse, with great store of munition and ordnance: Dominico
Contaren, and Andre Loredan were prouidators of the army The number of the
Ventian Army.
and Bartilmeo Aluiana General in the Count Pettillans sted, who was

He being come to the Army, which lay on the banks of Adice, sent to the
Senate to know if he should pass on farther whilst the enemies were
unprovided of all aid and succor, and their towns without garrisons. The
Senate being assembled thereupon, after ^undry opinions, decreed, that their
Army should not pass the Po, nor Adda, referring the rest to the pleasure and
discretion of their General, according as he should think it fit. For the
Senate had as yet received no certain news, whether the French Army had
passed the Alps, whereupon they thought it not discretion to abandon their
state to the enemies mercy, or to send their Army into any place, from whence,
(if matters should fall out unfortunately) they should not be able to withdraw
it.

But Aluiana being full of courage, and desirous to exploite some gallant
Pandolfo Malateste commanded for the Emperor in one of the Fortes of the
City: He with certain of the Townsmen, had practiced to give him The
enterprise on Uerona discovered.
entrance: But the next day, five hundred Lansquenets entered Verona by the
River Adice, and the matter being discovered, Aluiana perceiving that the
City could not be easily forced, and that it would ask much time to besiege
it, did on a sudden march toward Cremona, and by the way made himself
master of Valegia, and of the Forte of Piscara two strong and commodious The
Venetians take Valegia and P^scara.
places for the Venetians, in respect of their situation.

Upon report of Aluiana his coming, a great tumult was raised in Cremona:
those which were of the contrary faction, forsook the town, and the others
without contradiction did receive Aluiana into the city, who being entered, he
did suddenly disarme Caesar Fieramosca, who lay there in garrison with three
hundred horse, and five hundred foot of the Duke of Milans. He needed not to
spend any The Venetians take Cre^a.
time for the recovery of the castle, by reason it was ever held for the French
King: Whereupon he forth with erected the French Kings banner, saying; That
he did receive the City, for, and in the name of the French King, for whom
Theodore Triuulce his Ambassador was there present in the Venetian Army. He
went afterward to Pisquetona, Sonzino, Lodi, and other places near

But on the Verona and Vincentine territories, the Venetians affairs were
differently managed. For so soon as Aluiana was departed with his Army,
Rocandolphe Captain of the Lansquenets, and Frederick Gonsaluo of Bossola
coming forth of Verona with six hundred horse, and two thousand foot, went
to Saint Boniface, where Aluiana had left under the command of Sigismond
Cauallo, and John Fortino, three hundred light horse, and six hundred foot:
who being scattered here and there, upon news of the enemies coming, fled
to The (...) descate some of the Uenetian ^orces.
Colognia, and were so nearly pursued by the Lansquenets, who entered the
town by force, as they were all taken prisoners, and the town being sacked
and

The enemies for this exploit waxing more proud and insolent, four thousand
foot, and five hundred horse, sallied forth of Verona for to assail Vincenza:
whereof John Paull Manfron, the Cities Governor, having intelligence, he The
Lansque^ets enterprise upon Vincenza broken.
caused great numbers of peasants on a sudden to enter into the City, and did
so carefully provide for the rest, as the enemies hope being frustrate, having
spoiled the country round about, they were enforced to return to Verona.

But during these exploites on the Veronois and Vincentine territories, the All
the Dutch^ of Milan i^ ^proare.
Army, upon the report that was spredde, that the French had passed the Alps:
for albeit that the people of Milan, wearied with the French government; had
desired the return of the Sforzas their ancient Lords: yet neuer^helesse,
having not by their return obtained the liberty and freedom which they hoped
for, but on the contrary all discommodities and charges, they changed their
minds, and desired the return of the French. Many likewise, enemies to the
quiet of other poor banished men, or moved by the diversity of factions, did
favor the French. In regard whereof the Earl of Man^oc, son to John James
Triuulce, riding up and down the Champaine country of the Duchy of Milan, to
stir them up to commotions, found it no hard matter to make them to revolt
and to take arms.

Maximillian Sforza being daunted thereat, not knowing whereon to resolve,
Maximillian Sfoorza retireth to Nouara
perceiving all things to tend to his ruin, thought it most expedient for his
safety and escape, and for the trial of his latest fortune, to retire with
certain horse to Nouara, where he understood some Suisses were arrived,
resolving there to tarry for the rest, who in great numbers were coming down
for the defense of his state.

Those of Milan, seeing themselves to be without garrison, and without a
Captain, that their well fortified Castle held for the French, and that the
Venetians Army did approach, some of them being stirred up with hope o^ better
fortune, others with fear and distrust; thought it fit to yield to the French,
and to that end, to send an Ambassador to the Venetian General; who having
Andre Gritti was in quality of Ambassador for the Signory) entered Italy took
diverse towns and castles, some by assault, and others by a voluntary
redition: so as the state of Milan being enuaded Milan reduced to the French
government
by two mighty armies, French and Venetian, was in short space reduced under
the French government: Two Cities only held out for Maximillian, Nouara, and
Coma.

The Venetians, for these so fortunate attempts, did promise to themselves a
glorious end of this war: for their army had gotten such reputation by the
the taking of Cremona, as Ranze de Cera going with a troop of Soldiers to
recover Br^ssia yielded.
retired into the Castle. There was but one only thing which could cut off the
hope which all men had conceived of the victory, and that was the coming The
Suisses Protectors of of the State of Milan.
down of the Suisses. For the common report was, that the Suisses had with
such affection entertained the protection and safeguard of Duke Maximilians
state, as it was certainly thought that they would omit nothing which might
further the conservation thereof.

This Nation was at the same time very famous for their exact observation of
martial discipline, and they could by no means swallow the contempt and
disgrace The Suisses discontent make war on the French king.
wherein King Lewis held them, at such time as he sent to renew the league
with them (as has been said) having more esteemed a little ouer-plus of
money, then their friendship; as also because the desire of gain did provoke
them thereunto, having seen their fellows to return home from other wars
victors and laden with wealth.

Now these Suisses having assembled their general Council, did all with one
consent resolve to make war on the French, and they proceeded therein with
such earnestness, as the most of them, contrary to their custom, enrolled
themselves for very small pay, diverse also without any pay at all, and in a
short time after, they leuyed a great Army, both of horse and foot,

The news of their coming down, did at the first amaze the French, in regard
of the recent remembrance of matters bravely executed by them: But when they
considered that they brought no cauallery with them, nor victuals, artillery,
nor ought else fit for such an enterprise, they thought it best not to enforce
such enemies, who came rather to steal then to fight, being so unprovided of
all warlike necessaries, as they assured themselves that their Army would
shortly dissolve it self, as it had done at other times, and would return
home again, by reason of the want of all things.

The French therefore contemning them in this manner, having left a strong
garrison in Alexandria, came and encamped before Nouara. Their intent was to
try if they could win those Suisses by money, rather then by force, and to
Maxmillian Sforza into their hands, as the same nation had done by his Father
Lodouico Sforza in the same place. And if this should not fall out, they
thought it no hard matter to take that Town, the winning whereof, as they
thought, would be the ending of the war.

But the wise and well experienced Captains did deride these designs and
vain imaginations, and did blame the French, who instead of assailing the
Spanish Army, and breaking it, which they might easily have done, did busy
themselves in besieging Nouara, and employing all their forces there, which was
directly against Gritti his advise, who did many times put the French Captains
in The French besiege Nouara in vain.
But the French trifling the time vainly before Nouara, brake all these sound
determinations, and found themselves to be entangled with many difficulties:
because the rumor daily increased, that of a certain great aid was coming to
the besieged, the which did make their enterprise more difficult: And as their

But the authority and opinion of Triuulcio did most prevail, who thought it
not fit to hazard the whole, on the uncertain event of a battle, but by
altering The French retire from before Nouara.
and enforce them thereby to yield. The Camp being gone thus far from the
city, certain troops of Suisses entered it without any empediment, where they
were received with great joy: and not loosing one minute of time, Captain
Motir, one of the chief of the bands, called them all into the market place of
Nouara, where after he had encouraged them with most vehement speeches, he The
resolution of the Suisses.
resolved with them by a general consent, to depart about midnight, and on a
sudden, by the favor of the night, to go and assail the French Camp,
whereupon he commanded them to go to rest, and to refresh their bodies, and
to be ready when the drum should call them.

This nation did never make a more bold and brave attempt, being a few against
many, without horse and Artillery, against an Army excellently well provided
of all necessaries. About midnight then they sallied with great fury forth of
Nouara, on the sixth day of June, in the year 1513. They were about ten^
thousand men, who were disposed and ordered in such manner, as seven thousand
The Suisses sa^ly fo^to to fight with the French.
were appointed to assail the ordnance, about which the Lansquenets were
lodged, and the residue should march with their long pikes against the men at
arms.

The French being come into that place, having continued the remainder of the
day, and a part of the night in arms, betook themselves here and there to
sleep (according to the report of the spies at Nouara) not doubting that any
such accident would so soon befall them, having in no sort fortified their
Camp. The The French Camp in fear and confusion at the Suisses (...).
tumult and confusion was very great upon the Sentinels report of the enemies
Triuulcio was lodged in the midst of the battle, because Trimouille sought
in the right wing, and Robert de la March on the left, each of them exhorting
the Soldiers to do well. The men at Arms did readily put themselves in
battle, and the Lansquenets, who were followed by the other footmen, did on a
sudden place themselves in order. The Suisses notwithstanding that many of
their fellows fell down dead round about them, did nevertheless, with
marvelous boldness, march forward upon the ordnance, not ^esteeming present
death, nor were danted at the death of The Suisses great boldness
those that fell down at their feet, until that coming unto the Artillery,
Triuulce and Trimouille being able to prevail with them: being so
affrighted, as they had no courage to charge the enemy, who stood before them,
and the Suisses were well pleased with their standing still, and for that they
came not on to the aid of the footmen.

At the l^st, the great boldness and valor of the Suisses, carried it away,
who The Suisses victory at No^.
having bravely won the ordnance, did turn it upon the French whom they put
to rout, the footmen as well as the men at arms doing nothing worthy of

By this defeat of the French a great alteration followed in Italy, chiefly in
those matters which concerned the Venetians. Gritti who was in the French army
was likewise one that accompanied them in the flight, who being by no reason
able to persuade them to tarry at Alexandria or in Piedmont and not blot their
reputation with so base and shameful a flight, perceiving their Army to be
wholly broken, and knowing that he could in so sort advance the service of the
Commonwealth, went to Sauona, and from thence to Genoa, then to

This victory caused Milan, with other towns which had openly showed
themselves for the French, to send to beg pardon, which was granted The
whole Dut^hy of Millan yields to (...).
them, on condition to pay the Suisses, unto whom by right was due, not only
the profit, but the glory of the victory, purchased by their valor and blood.

The Viceroy, who till then had still kept the Spaniards in their garrisons,
and not showed himself against the French nor Venetians, following the victors
fortune, did on a sudden cross the Po, and marched toward Cremona (where
Aluiana having intelligence and how that in other places the people began to
rise against them and the French, in Maximillians behalf, attempting to cut
off victuals and passage from them, determined to leave those confines, and to
draw his Army in safety from thence; the which the Senate upon the report of
the battles loss, had commanded him to do: but yet nevertheless, to retire
in such manner, as his retreat might not savor of a manifest flight, least it
should discourage his own soldiers, and cause the enemies to become more
audacious.

Aluiana being departed, and Cremona left naked of Soldiers, the Spaniard did
forth*with seize on it, and wholly sacked it, because it had given entrance to
the Cremona taken and sack^ by the Spaniards.
Venetian Army. Then sending aid to Maximillian Sforza to Nouara, and to
Octauian Fregosa at Genoa, against the Adorni, he brought the residue of his
Army toward the Venetians confines, having crossed the river Adda, where
without

Aluiana in the mean time, with all his forces remaining on the Veronois,
being much discontented to see the great deseignes which he had proiected to
be snacht forth of his hands, resolved on a great and difficult enterprise:
for having won the town of Legnaga, he left John Paul Baillon at the siege
of the Castle, with twelve hundred foot, and himself went speedily with the
residue of the Army to assail Verona, to try if he could take it on the
sudden. Baillon having

This place being taken, was not able to beekept without a strong garrison,
Legnaga taken and dismantmantled by the Venetians.
wherefore they resolved to dismantle and forsake it. Aluiana on the other
side, being come before Verona, did assail it on the weakest side near to
Saint Maxims gate, where having planted his ordnance, he did with great fury
batter the Tower of the gate, and the wall thereto adjoining, expecting in the
mean time when any tumult would be raised in the City; and having beaten
down to the The Venetians besiege and (...) Verona.
ground forty fathom of the wall, with the tower which fell down likewise,
he gave it a fierce assault. But three hundred horse, and three thousand
Lansquenets Aluiana perceiving, and that the Veronois did in no sort stir,
contrary to his hope, he did with great speed retire his footmen and artillery
from before the walls, as wholly despairing of the Victory, and returned the
very same day to his quarter, from whence he came in the morning, having in
that assault lost above two hundred of his soldiers.

In this exploit there was nothing worthy of praise, but his great speed,
because Aluiana raising his siege, spoileth the Country.
he had done that in one day, which other Captains were scarce accustomed to
do in three or four. After that, he spoiled the Country, trying whether for

The end of the tenth Book of the fourth Decade.
The Contents of the first Book of the fifth Decade.
THE Spaniards take the Castle of Legnaga. Pope Leo reuiueth the treaty of
peace betwixt the Emperor and the Venetians. Offers made to the French King by
the Venetians. Lewis the French King submits himself to the Pope. The
Venetians lose the town and Castle of Pescara, Padua besieged by the enemies;
they soon quit it. The enemies make great spoil being come within fight of
Venice. Aluiana coming forth of Padua with his Army, opposes himself
against the enemies passage. The enemies are greatly perplexed, by reason they
could not could not come to any place of safety. The enemies do defeat, and
put the Venetians to rout near to Vincenza. The admirable constancy of the
Venetian Senate after the loss of the battle. Prospero Colonna does secretly
favor the Venetians, by diuerting the siege from Treuiso. The Pope in person
makes a Compromise, concerning the strife betwixt the ^mperor and the
Venetians, which takes none effect. Selim King of Turks, his war against
Acchomat his Brother. The difficulties which held back the Pope from procuring
peace betwixt Christian Princes. The Countries of Padua and Friul wholly ruined.
Frangipan takes Maran, by the treachery of a Priest. The Venetians are
defeated before Maran. A great fire in the City of Venice. A new compromise
made in the Popes person, concerning the same differences. Feltre taken and
spoiled by the Almains, is opportunely relieved by the Venetians: The
difficulties which were found a new in the accord betwixt the Emperor and the
Venetians, with the Popes arbitratiue sentence. The Venetians defeat the
Almaines in the Country of Friul. And lastly, the means which the Venetians
used to recover money for the entertainment of their Army.

The First Book of the fifth Decade of the History of Uenice.
Whilst the Venetians spoiled the Country about Verona to enforce the
Veronois to some agreement, the Spanish army came forward, the Viceroy fearing,
least thorough the bad disposition of those of Legnaga, Verona would open her
gates to the Venetians, and therefore he determined without delay to The
Castle of Legnaga taken by the Spaniards.
give aid to the Emperors affairs: which made him to cross the Po at
Stradella, and to encampe before the castle of Legnaga, which was guarded
Aluiana having intelligence of the Spaniards approach, The Venetian Army
retireth to Padua and Treuiso.
retired to Albera, on the farther side of the river Adice, where he used all
the means he could to repair his army, the which he afterward divided for
the guard of Treuiso, and Padua, sending John Paul Baillon, Malatesta Sogliana,
and the Knight de la Volpe to Treuiso, with two hundred men at arms, three
hundred light horse, and two thousand ^oote, and himself went with the residue
of the Army to Padua.

During all these warlike exploits, and different practices, because the
treaties of The Pope reuiueth the agreement betwixt the Emperor and the
Venetians.
the accord betwixt the Emperor and the Venetians were not wholly broken off,
Pope Leo would have them to be revived, thinking it an easy matter to obtain
of either of them that which he pretended. For he supposed that the Emperor,
being invited by his occasions beyond the Mounts, would be content to hearken
thereunto, that he might with more ease recover Burgondie for his sons
son: and the Venetians much more, as well because they were daunted with the
defeat of the French, as for that they knew that the French King (many dangers
threatening his kingdom) could not for that year think on the affairs of
Italy: and besides, he saw the Spanish Army at their doors, with which the
companies that were in Verona went to unite themselves: They were more over
drawn

The Senate nevertheless made a most constant answer, That it would not The
Venetian^ constancy.
hearken to any agreement, unless Vincenza and Verona were yielded to them.
And on the otherside they solicited the French King, by their Ambassador
Dandulo, resident with him, to renew his army, and not to make show of being
danted for one only loss happened at Nouara: not to suffer those mountainer
Suisses to boast for that they had driven so mighty a king from his state, and
robbed him of the fruit of the purchased victory: That he should boldly make
choice of The Venetians offers to the French King.
counsel worthy his greatness, that the Venetians would not fail him in

King Lewis thanked the Venetians for their offers, and with fair words gave
The French Kings an^wer (...) Venetians.
them good hope, manifesting his desire to be revenged on his enemies, and to
continue his friendship and confederacy with them: that the Frenck Kings
custom was not to be chargeable: but to bring all aid, profit, and comfort to
their friends and confederates. But because it was certainly thought, that the
Realm of France, being assailed in sundry places: namely, by the King of
England at Calais, and by the Emperor, and the Suisses in another place; it
would be hard for King Lewis, to intend for that whole year the affairs of
Italy. The Venetians in the mean time did exhort him to free himself from all
those difficulties which The Venetians (...) the French King.
might in time to come hinder him from the conquest, of that which did belong

The King, who desired nothing more then the uniting of his Realm with the
Church, the which was earnestly craved by all his Court and subjects, did
willingly hearken to the Venetians entreaties and remonstrances, and resolved
for the same purpose to send the Bishop of Marseilles his Ambassador to Rome,
and perceiving that he could never hope for any alliance with the Pope in
temporal matters, unless he first of all did compose spiritual dissentions,
he gave his Ambassador in charge to assure the Pope, that he had broken and
revoked the Council which he had caused first to be assembled at Lions, and
afterward at The Kings Submission to the Pope*
Pisa: and that he would not allow of any other Council then that of Lateran,

The Venetians at the same time, sent ten Ambassadors to the Pope; for age and
dignity, the chiefest of the City, for to give him sufficient testimony of the
good will and affection which they did bear to him: and had besides (the
better to please him) enjoined Francisco Foscare their Ambassador resident with
him to be present at every S^ssion of the Council, in the name of the
Republic, so soon as it should be begun at Saint John's of Lateran. But they
found afterward that the Pope did not so greatly affect them as they imagined,
because that being wholly The Popes reproachful speeches of the Venetians.
Italy: and that they who ought to have had most care of the liberty and quiet
of the Province, were those who had stirred up more troubles in it, and had
reduced it under the servitude of Barbarians. And to make them more odious, he
did accuse them to have had a desire, if matters had fallen out prosperously,
to recover the Cities and Towns of Romagnia, which they had enjoyed. The Pope
did often use these reproachful speeches.

The Emperor in the mean time did solicit him to send him the aid promised
Julius his Predecessor, and ratified by himself against the Venetians, in
which demand the Emperor still persisting with great obstinacy; albeit it was
i^ksome unto him (fearing least the French King would be displeased therewith)
he sent unto him, (being not able to delay it any longer), under the conduct
of Troilo Sauello, Achilles Tourella, Mutio Colonna, the number of The Pope
sends forces to the Emperor against the Uenetians.
soldiers which he craved, because he would not (by refusal) give any sign,
that he was not desirous to persevere in the confederacy contracted with the
late Pope, as also because it seemed unto him that he had no correspondence
with the Venetians, who, besides, that their Army had after a sort behaved it
self in hostile man: ner on the Parmesan and Placentine territories, at such
time as Aluiana lay

Nothing did so much astonish the Venetians, as because the Pope had declared
himself their enemy. Yet nevertheless they having in his behalf never
failed in the reverence and affection which they were bound to, (as himself
did confess it) they were persuaded that they might yet be received into his
favor, and make use hereafter of his grace and friendship. Nevertheless, they
did not alter their former determinations, but resolved to resist fortune as
much as they might, and seeing themselves to be our of hope of peace, and that
the number of their enemies increased, they speedily began to provide all
things necessary to resist so many dangers. They made great leuyes of footmen
as well in Romaignia as else where, they armed a great number of vessels,
called home all those Provisions made by the Venetians.
which they had in Candy and other places, and with the same speed, they made
great provisions of victuals, munition and money.

Some of the Senate were of opinion to have their nauall army to sail into
Puglia, to assail the sea towns, or at least to seem to resent the many
wrongs which King Ferdinand without cause had done them. But having maturely
considered how important a matter it was to provoke so mighty a King, they
rejected this proposition, as more courageous then discreet, as well in resp^ct
of his power, as for that he had always made show to council the Emperor to
peace. The Venetian General in the mean time being encamped on the banks of
Adice, The (...) Army on the banks of Adiss^.
his espies advertised him that the Spaniards had taken the way of Vincenza,
determining Cardona, with whom the Popes forces were united, came directly
toward him with all his forces, he then thought fit to cross the River; as
well to free himself from danger, as for to assure the Cities of Padua and
Treuiso, and came and stayed at Montagnane. But so soon as he had crossed the
River with his forces, the Venetians affairs, who by reason of some prosperous
and good success, had begun to be re-established, did a new fall into
decadence: For the Pollesin of Rouigo, did forthwith yield to the enemy, and
the other people of the country did likewise suddenly rise, because those of
the Venetian jurisdiction, perceiving that the enemies did wax strong, and did
greatly molest The (...) of Rance de Cere, (...) (...) of Crema.
them, all men in heaps ran to the enemies. Rance de Cere alone deserved
great commendation, who remaining ever constant in the Venetian service, did at
times sally forth of Crema, where he lay in garrison, and made incursions on
the enemies Country, spoiling and burning whatsoever he met with.

The town of Pescara, after a small resistance, with the Castle likewise,
albeit it was well fortified, fell into the enemies hands, thorough the strife
and discention The (...) loose (...).
of those within it, Lodouico Contaren the Prouidator, and all the Captains
with the most part of the soldiers were taken prisoners, the rest escaped by
flight.

The Bishop of Gurcia, as Lieutenant to the Emperor in Italy, coming to the Of
(...) (...) portance the taking of (...) du^ (...).
win Treuiso only, did not import much for the conclusion of the war, but
by the taking of Padua, they should altogether assure the Cities of the
Emperors obedience, from the dangers of war, and deprive the Venetians of all
hope, of ever being able to recover those places that they had lost. It is
certain, that the Bishop of Gurcia did obstinately maintain this proposition
against the advice of all the Captains, who were of a contrary opinion,
judging it rather an impossible then hard matter to take Padua by force, in
regard of hi^ fortifications almost incredible: It is not known whether the
Bishop of Gurcia propounded it by the Emperors commandment, or else of his own
motion, hoping thereby of greater praise, as for an high and difficult
enterprise.

At the last, notwithstanding all the Viceroyes reasons, and those of the
contrary opinion, the Bishop of Gurcia his will was followed, by means whereof
the Imperial Army approaching near to Padua, went and lodged at Bassanella,
on the right side of the channel, a mile and a half from the city, in which
place being much molested by certain double Canons, planted upon one of the
cities bastions, it crossed the channel, and lodged a little farther of.

Aluiana, who had already sent his Artillery and baggage to Padua, to be the
lighter to take what way should be most expedient, having notice of their
resolution, determined to march toward the city, to keep and defend it
against the The Imperials resolution to (...) Padua.
enemies, Baillon being already in Treuiso (as has been said) with
sufficient forces to defend it, whether the Senate sent Andre, Mari-pietro for
Prouidator. And although that Padua seemed to be well furnished with men, and
all other necessaries, the Senate nevertheless would have certain leuies of
foot companies to be made, as well of Venetians as Histrians, who speedily
marched thither, with all the husbandmen near about, which were come to Venice
for refuge, to the end to use those men for necessary reparations, in steed of
Pioners. Diverse young Venetian Gentlemen likewise went to the defense of the
city: So great was their care and diligence to keep these two cities, as
well for the commodity of their situation, as for the fertillity of the soil,
having made the Padua furnished of all things necessary to sustain a siege.
the farms and houses of pleasure, so as there was nothing within a mile of
the city, which lay not open to the mercy of the Canon.

The enemies encamping round about padua, sent the footmen to S. Anthonies
Church, which is within half a mile of the town where they began, (that
they might approach with less danger) to make trenches near to Saint Antonies
gate. But the work being great, and the want of Pioners greater, it went
foreward slowly and with danger, because the soldiers on the sudden making
many sallies, as well in the day time as by night, did greatly hinder them that
wrought.

On the other side the number of the enemies was to small for such an
enterprise, The number of the enemies before Padua.
sallied forth at other places and did freely scour the whole country,
intercepting whatsoever was brought to the Camp, the like did certai^e armed
boats which the Venetians had placed for that purpose on the River Adice so as
victuals beginning to fail them, they we every day to seek new.

They had worthy Captains in their Camp, but their skill and experience was
to no purpose in that business, in regard of the authority and obstinacy of
the Bishop of Gurcia. That which did most trouble them, was, the bringing of
their ordnance near to the walls, and how to bring the soldiers afterward to
the assault,

The Viceroy acquainting the Bishop of Gurcia with this determination,
councelled the Emperor that it might be so, and given him great hope to be
able The Imperials raise their siege from before Padua.
to take it: and therefore he gave consent, (difficulties still continuing) to
raise the seege, the which was done on the sixteenth day of August, after they
had encamped twenty days before the walls of Padua.

The enemy marched directly to Vincenza, the which being found, for the most
part, empty of inhabitants, and abandoned by the Venetian Magistrates was
forth with seized by them, and made a prey to the enemies, The enemies spoil
and ruin^ Uincenza*
where they committed cruel and foul actions, not spoiling alone citizens
houses, but Churches and sacred places, not for hatred they did bear to that
wretched city, but because their army was altogether maintained by theft and

The Bishop of Gurcia and the Viceroy remained certain days at vincenza with
bad intertainment, as well in regard of the continual molestation of the
stradiots who scoured the country day and night, as scarcity and want of
victuals, in the City. This enforced them to dislodge: The Bishop of Gurcia
with his Almans went toward Verona, and the Viceroy encamped at Albera on the
Adice, where he tarried certain days, as well to give means to the veronois
to gather in their harvest vintage, and to sow their grounds, as for to make a
bridge over the river, having an intent to bring his troops to winter on the
Bressan and Bergamasc territories. But Aluiana perceiving that the viceroy made
no have

The Senate judging otherwise of the matter, said that it was not necessary The
Senates opinion on Aluianas desire to fight with the enemy.
to hazard, on the uncertain event of a battle, that army, wherein consisted
the chief hope of the preservation of their State: thinking it likewise no
discretion to unfurnish, in so dangerous a time, the Cities of Padua and
Treuiso of their garrisons: Neuer-the less, concealing their intents,

But the Viceroy making no great account of these rumors, in regard he saw no
likelihood thereof, propounded to himself greater designs, and changing his
former determination, to place his army in garrison on the Bressail and
Bergamase Country, having no other means to feed his Army, but by
boot-haling, he sent for the Almaines, and went to Montagnane and Este, and to
the village of Bouolente, from whence bringing away great store of Prospero
Colonna) and having The incursions of the Imperial Army.
crossed the River Baquillon, and spoiled Pieua di Sac, which is a great
Burrow, they went to Mestre and Marguera, seated on the salt waters, where the
Viceroy commanded his Artillery to stay, and seeing the City of Venice before
him, he caused ten pieces of great ordnance to be discharged upon it, the
bullets whereof fell on the Monastery of Saint Secundus, and at the same time,
his soldiers robbed and spoiled the whole country, making war most unjustly

Now the Viceroy beginning to perceive his error, and therefore being desirous
to make have to get from thence, could not keep back his soldiers from
pillaging, neither by his authority nor by showing them the danger they were in
if they stayed any longer there, in regard of the overmuch liberty which they
had taken to spoil.

Aluiana being with his army shut up in Padua, was extremely grieved to see
Aluiana his great grie^e that he might not come ^orth
his reputation so soiled, and that before his face the enemies passing along
near to so strong a City, should so unluckily give spoil to so great a
Country. Therefore he advertised the Senate that his intent was to sally forth
of the Cittty with his forces and to come and meet with the enemies, to stop
their passage at their Aluiana his earnestness to the Senate that he might
fight with the enemies.
That certainly their Republicke was fallen into a wretched condition, far
unworthy their ancient glory, the which they could not shake off, but by some
valiant and generous exploite* But the Senate enclining to the contrary,
thought that the same did not proceed from a base and abject mind, but rather
from a generous constancy, carefully to provide for all inconveniences that
might happen, and that it was no great wisdom to hazard all on the event of a
battle, which for the most part is doubtful and uncertain: therefore their
opinion was, that he should assail the enemies with the Cauallery only, and
leave the foote-forces

But Aluiana being carried away with an extreme desire to obtain the victory,
by which oftentimes he was spurd foreward by vain glory, as by a certain
dazeling, so as he did not foresee dangers, and contemned all council how
wise and proffitable soever, did every day make greater instance, that he might
with the Army come forth into the field, the Prouidatory made the same request,
being induced as they said by the great affection which they perceived in the
Captains in the Republics behalf. The Senate permits Aluiana to come forth
with his Army.


The Senate at these entreaties, gave over their former opinion, and referred
all to Aluianas discretion, if he thought that his coming forth of Padua with
the army Aluiana promised to him self to do) who were so rashly gonne forward,
being come betwixt Venice, Treuiso and Padua.

The Viceroy (as has been said) having acknowledged his error made all the
have he could to march away, and being come to Ciuitella, he could not take
it, by reason that it was well mand with soldiers. For Aluiana according to the
Senates permission being with all his forces come forth of Padua leaving a
garrison in Ciuitella, came to Cotincella, where the River Burnt Aluiana (...)
eth himself at the enemies passage.
enter Ciuitella: But perceiving Aluiana to be lodged on the other side with
the Artillery, they durst not pass over: and making show that they would pass
a little beneath, Aluiana turned all his forces thither, whereupon they passed
the night following, without any let, at the passage called the new Cross, The
Imperial Army by night passes the river Burnt.
three miles above Ciuitella, taking afterward with great speed, the way
toward Vincenza.

Aluiana having notice of their passage, resolved to stop them at the River
Baquillon: Andre Gritti, and John Paul Baillon, coming forth of Treuiso,
joined with him, with two hundred and fifty men at arms, and two thousand
Monteseas side, as on that of Barberana, having sent forces thither for that
purpose, and caused the country peasants to posesse all the passages leading
into Germany, and to fortify them with dikes and trenches, Aluiana having left
Theodore (...) in Vincenza, with sufficient garrison, came with the residew of
the Army, and encamped at Olma, which Aluiana encampeth at Olma, determining
their to tarry for the enemy.
is a place two miles distant from Vincenza, on the high way of Verona, which
was so stopped with ditches and trenches, with artillery planted on the ways,
as it was almost impossible to pass. Aluiana chose this place as most safe and
commodious, where he determined to stay for the enemies, (according to the
Senates advise) having in abundance all things necessary for a camp, and the
enemies on the contrary wanted all.

The Viceroy in the mean time holding on his way was come within four miles
of the Venetian Camp, and stayed at a place called by those of the country La
Motta, where he was much troubled in his mind, together with his other
Captains, what way he were best to take, all their opinions were different:
For they could not pass along by the sides of the mountains, by reason of the
marrish country which was full of water, nor yet by the streight-waies of the
mountain, which was guarded by diverse armed men. So as being in a manner
environed on every side by the enemies, in front, on their backs, and in
flank, and continually followed by great multitudes of light horse, they could
not determine on any thing which was not hard and dangerous. Whereupon after
long The Emperialls brave resolution.
dissembling any thing, to let them understand how their (...) stood, and by
some remonstrance to exhort them to do well, and to open their way with their
swords points, putting them in mind, how much he had ever relied on their
valor and prowess, the which alone had made them to enter so far into the
enemies country, hoping that they would altogether strive to free themselves
from danger, if any should be offered, as then was: for having on the one
side,

The soldiers being greatly encouraged by this remonstrance, promised the
General to behave themselves bravely in the fight, and in this resolution they

Aluiana by reason of a thick mist, did not very soon perceive that they were
dislodged, which was done without drums or trumpets: but having notice
thereof, he speedily followed them with his forces: so that their difficulty
in marching, passing through narrow ways, full of ditches, did still increase
their danger, and having gonne about two miles in such way, not without great
travail, Aluiana not being able to contein^ himself, did assail, not
disorderly, but with his army ordered for the fight, and with the artilery the
enemies ^ereward, conducted by Prospero Colonna, who having bravely received
them, sent speedily for the viceroy, who led the battle; and the Spanish
footmen commanded by

The footmen of Romagnia were authors of this flight: the residew of their
army did forthwith follow them, so as none in a manner did fight. Aluiana
himself was so amazed at so sudden a rout, as without fight he left the
victory to the enemies with all his bagage and artillery, the footmen
dispersed themselves in diverse places, and as for the men at arms, part of
them fled toward the hill, and the other saved themselves in Padua and
Treuiso, whether Aluiana and Gritti did like-wise retire: Many Captains were
slain there, and many were taken prisoners, The Prouidator Loredan, slain.
but the Prouidator Loredan made proof of them both, by reason that two
soldiers striving who should have him, the one of the two did most inhumainely
kill him. And in this manner at this battle, as well dead as taken prisoners,
four The constancy of the Venetian Senate.


But notwithstanding that the Senate was aflicted with so many miseries, and
amassed at an accident contrary to their hope, yet nevertheless, the same day
that The tenor of the Senates letters sent to Aluiana.
they received these lamentable news, they determined to write to Aluiana,
That they could not deny, but that they were in some sort troubled at the
report of so strange an accident, but not danred or wholly discouraged,
whereupon they were rather to awake themselves in such aduersiy, then to lose
one jot of their usual constancy, Therefore they did with great affection
entreat him to take courrage, and not to yield to fortune: That they were very
careful of his health, in regard

These letters being written, the Senate made provision of all things needful.
Prince Loredan by a grave remonstrance inciting every one to employ himself
Prince Loredan his remonstrance.
therein, said, That it behooved them*selues to relieve their state, and not to
hope for aid from elsewhere, and that each man ought to aid the commonwealth
with what he knew was in his ability. As for himself he was determined to
spare nothing that he knew might serve the Republike* and how for that purpose
he resolved to send his two Sons, Lodouico and Bernardo; the one to Treuiso,
and the other to Padua, for to expose them to all dangers which should happen,
consecrating them to his country.

The Princes speech did greatly move; but his example much more, by which
diverse young Gentlemen of the cheifest families of the City, and of great hope
Di^ers Venetian young gentlmen are sent to Padua and Treuiso.
being incited did like-wise depart for the guard of those towns; diverse of the
Prospero (...) by deferring from day to day, the resolution of that business
hindered the execution thereof.

He, as it was after-wards known, did sufficiently favor the Venetians
affairs, for the conservation and defense of the common liberty of Italy: so
as after many and sundry determinations, he caused the council at last to
condescend to defer the matter till the Bishop of Gurcias coming, saying
That The seege of Treuiso is deferd till another time by Prospero (...).
there was nothing which did so much wrong their reputation, as to attempt an
(...), and then to be enforced to give over, without effecting it, as they had
Prospero concluded together to leave part of the Army at Vincenza, and to lead
the residew to Verona, staying for the Bishop of Gurcia: where having delayed
the time twenty days, Colonna took upon him the place of Captain General of
Maximilian Sforzas army, and forsook the Spaniards.

The Viceroy being desirous to renew his Army: sent for all the Captains with
their Companies which lay on the Bressan and Bergamask, assuring them that
upon their arrival, he would forthwith go and beseege Treuiso: Gritti was
within it, with the Knight La Volpe, Hug^ de Pepoli, John Paul Manfrou, with
diverse other worthy Captains, great numbers of horse and foot, and store of
victual. The Viceroy being aduertized thereof, and it being winter, he
deferred the matter till some other time, and sent his army to winter on the
Paduan territory, some to Este, and the rest to Montagnane and Moncelesia.

In the mean time matters were changed from Arms to consultations of peace,
which were treated of in the Popes Court, whether the Bishop of Gurcia
Compromise made by the Pope.
was gone; at whose coming a compromise was made by him and the Venetian
Ambassadors in the Popes person, concerning all the strife which was betwixt
the Emperor and their commonwealth: but it was a compromise in name and show
rather then in effect and substance: the Pope likewise left the matter
imperfect, albeit he had declared by a Brief, that there should be a
surcease of arms on both sides: for this was not well observed, neither by the
Viceroy, whose soldiers since the victory did nothing but rob and spoil
every where, nor by the Germans, who by means of a Priest did by stealth
take Maran which is a Sea town in the Country of Friul, then they took
Montfalcon;

At the same time as these affairs were thus managed in Italy, there were
great stirrs in Asia. Selim son to Baziazet, his father yet living, did
usurp the Ottoman Troubles in Asia.
Empire, and having in sundry battles vanquished Achomat his brother, who
likewise laid claim thereunto, had enforced him for relief, to have recourse
to his neighbor Kings, and cheefely to Hismaell Sophi, King of Persia. And
albeit Selims cruelty
that Selim in his victories gave sufficient testimony of his vile and cruel
nature, and the desire he had, (being freed from this war) to assail the
Christians; The Venetians nevertheless being else where molested, and having
no means to A (...) Ambassador sent to Selim^
time. Therefore they were of opinion to send an Ambassador to him, and they
appointed for this purpose Antonio Iustiniano, in the Republics name to
congratulate his coming to the Empire, and to rejoice with him, and to
confirm a new the ancient friendship and alliance which they had with the
Ottoman family.

This Ambassador was honorably received by Selim in the city of Andrinopolis,
where he then was with his army, who gave him great entertainment, knowing very
well that without peace he could not assure his affairs of Europe, then when
he was to pass with a great Army into Asia against his brother Achomat,
Sophies forces, had already recovered certain places in Cappadocia, and
approached to assail him, whilst he as yet was not strong enough to resist
him; whereupon Selim (perceiving that which he had cheefely wished for to be
freely offered) did willingly embrace the Venetians friendship, promising for
ever to observe it inuiolably: And in this manner the alliance was renewed
betwixt them on the same conditions as they had been before treated of with
Baziazet.

This treaty being concluded and effected, Justinian returned to Venice, with
whom Selim sent Alimbei his Ambassador, to cause the Prince and Senate to
ratefie the present treaty, unto whom he likewise wrote, exhorting them to
entertain Loredan, swore and ratefied, as well in his own name as in the
Common wealths, all that which Justinian, their Ambassador, had agreed to, and
signed. Selim by this means being out of fear of the wars on Europes side,
having likewise renewed the truce with the Kings of Poland, and Hungary, he
marched courrageously against Achomat, whom having broken and defeated, he
commanded to be slain, to the end that by his death he might without
contradiction Achomat brother to ^elim vanqu sh^d and slain.
become absolute Lord of Asia the less, thereby promising to himself, that
nothing should be able to resist him: whereby he became so proud as he
thought he was able to conquer the whole world, and cheefely Italy, on which
he began to fix his thoughts, imagining that he could with ease subiugate it,
being weak and molested by the forepassed wars.

He was moreover incited thereunto by the Emperor Maximilian, who thought The
Emperor Maximilian pro^oketh Selim against the Venetians.
on nothing more then how to ruinate the Venetians. It is certain that he sent
an Ambassador to Constantinople to advertise Selim of the great opportunity
then offered, to enuade the sea coasts of the Venetians state, whilst he with
his army would assaille them by land: but it was not certainly known, on what
place he meant first to attempt

Selim being thus solicited, caused that winter diverse Vessels to be armed,
and new to be made, and to new build those that were broken. But at the spring
Amurath Son to Achomat in arms against Selim.
news was brought to Constantinople, how that Amurath, Son to his brother
Achomat, (who being not at the battle where his Father fought, with such bad
success, had escaped into Persia) had on a sudden entered Cappadocia with

Selim being greatly daunted at these news, and considering that the Sophi
alone Selim march^th (...) Asi^ with the army which he had prepared for Europe.
was cause, as well of those present troubles, as of those which Achomat his
brother had in time before raised, resolved to take revenge: and to this end
determined to send all that great army, as well by land as sea into Asia, the
which was levied for Europe. This Asian war fell out opportunely for the
Christian Princes, whom this most mighty and cruel enemy would have wholly
ruined, and afterward would have gone on in dispite of all their resistance.

This being considered by Pope Leo, with the great good which this war of The
(...) on peace.
Persia had done, thought it his duty to meditate a firm peace among Christian
Princes, to the end that being united together, they might with more ease
oppose them selves against that Barbarous enemy. The Cardinals solicited him
thereunto, in setting on foot the treaty of peace, and not to leave till it had
taken effect according to their desire. But albeit the Pope did very well know
that this The difficulty which held back the Pope from procuring a general
peace.
was more then reasonable, yet never: the-lesse he reuolued in his mind,
which was troubled with diverse matters, that as the success of that wholesome
council, did promise a very great and certain commendations, even so the
diverse respects of war and peace, and the difficulties which he met with in
this treaty did affright him and wholly draw him back from that enterprise.
For his fear least Lewis, by nature, was altogether an enemy to quiet, and
that so soon as he had made peace with the English, he would turn his
thoughts upon Italy, for the recovery of the Duchy of Milan, in regard he had
ever rejected all motions of peace wherein was propounded that he should quit
his claim to the state of Milan.

The Venetians affairs were almost at the same stay, the Pope being not
desirous to have them recover their former greatness, no^ yet to be to much
dejected the war did still continue, notwithstanding the sharpness of the
Winter, for Prospero Collonna with the Duke of Millans forces marching to
Crema, joined himself to the Spannish army, the which did re-enforce the
Cities seege, The Paduan territory with the Frioul (...) ruined by the enemies
incursions.
and the Paduan territory was daily scoured and spoiled by the enemies
incursions, the like was done in the Country of Friul, where there was no town
or castle so strong, either by art or nature, which was not enforced to obey
that party who was strongest in the field; so as the inhabitants of that poor
country, were wholly stripped of all.

And for to dispatch them at once, Bernardino Frangipan having forsaken the
Frangipan takes Maran by treachery.
Venetians, did by treachery seize on the Fort of Maran (as has been said) by
Bartholomeo, who being a familiar friend to Alessandro Marcello Prouidator of
the place, got leave of him on a morning, before day, to have the Castle gates
opened for him, under co^ller that he went forth to hunt, so as Frangipan,
according as it was concluded betwixt himself and the Priest, did on a sudden
seize on the gate, with certain Almaine foot, and some horse, until his
troops were arrived, whereby he became master of the place. But the traitor
within a while after was paid his desert; for being taken by Nicolo Pisare The
traitor punished.
who commanded in Gruare, he was sent to Venice, where being hung up by one
foot, he was by the people stoned to death.

This place being very commodious for the Venetians, the Senate was of opinion
Frangipan had taken in the same manner, and held it in the Emperors name. The
land Army marched thither under the conduct of Balthazar Scipione of Luca, and
the nauall army, commanded by Bartholomeo de Must a man well experienced in
marine matters. These two Armies being come before Maran, an Herrald was sent
to the inhabitants of the town, and to the Almaines that were within it, to
The Venetians bese^ged Maran.
summon them in the name of the common wealth to yield up that place to the
Venetians, aduising them not to delay till it were taken by force.

Those within it made shows wholly contrary to the summons, and used many

The towne-walls next to the Haven were in some sort lower then other places,
where the small towers likewise had been beaten down by the Canon; the
Venetians The assault resolved on Maran in diverse places at once.
on a sudden there fell such a shower ofrayne, as those on the land side were
enforced to retire, not only from the walls, but a great way from the town,
the whole plain being covered with water, by reason of the Marshes near
adjoining, by means where-of the beseeged being assured on that side, turned
all their forces toward the Haven, from whence with ease they drove the
assaylants, who already began to mount the walls.

At the same time as this happened, the soldiers whom Scipio had sent to guard
Those that guarded the mountains, forsak^ the passages.
the passages of the mountains, to stop all aid from the beseeged sent
intelligence to the Camp, that Frangipan approached with great nombers of
soldiers, requesting to have supplies sent unto them, otherwise they should be
enforced to abandon those places, being to weak to resist them, Sauorgnane
who was in the army, being out of hope to take the town, upon these news
turned his forces toward the Mounts, but he had not marched a mile, ere he met
with those that sent for more aid, who being afrighted at the great numbers of
those who were said to be coming, to relieve the town, had not the courage to
attend them, and Sauorgnane uniting them with his forces, went to the horsemens
quarter, who were lodged on a little rising hill, not far from the camp, and
did earnestly entreat them (having acquainted them how their affairs stood)
to approach near to Maran, to join themselves with the residew of the army,
and to keep back the aid, that was coming to the town: they were not
ashamed The Camp before Maran disband^th.
of the enemies great numbers, did in a manner all disband, under color that
they had not their pay.

Frangipan in the mean time, being come with his succors, did without any
Frangipan enters Maran with his succor^.
difficulty enter the town, finding no where any resistance, where he took
without delay part of the Almaines, who lay there in garrison, and joining them
with his soldiers they made a good troop, with which he went on a sudden,
and assailed the remnant of the Venetians camp, who little expected it, so as
with ease he did put them to rout, who thinking on nothing but how to escape,
forsook their camp and their ordnance, whereby the greatest part of them were
The Venetians (...) defeated before Maran.
either taken or cut in pieces.

Francisco Tron Captain of a Gally, did win that day great reputation; who
remembering the Venetian glory, did never forsake the place which he had seized
on with a few soldiers, until he saw the most part of them slain, or
grievously hurt. Frangipan following the course of his victory, went on a
sudden to Strasoda Strasoda and Montfalcon taken by Frangipan.
and Montfalcone, towns of the Friul, which he finding unfurnished of
garrisons, did easily take, and committed most lamentable spoil.

During this unfortunate success of the Venetians war, and the small hope
they had that the French King would that year send an army into Italy a
grievous A great fire in Venice.
run on, as no diligence or human labor could for a long time quench it:
it burned the most inhabited and welthiest part of the City.

The Pope at the same time, being desirous to atone the Emperor and the
Venetians, did in his own person cause a new compromise to be made, with
ample and unlimited power, whereupon by a brief he commanded both parties to
surcease A n^w compromise in the Popes person concerning the strise betwixt the
Emperor and the Venetians.
their arms, which was not very well observed by the Spaniards and Almans,
because the Spaniards in the mean time did spoil the whole country near to
Este, and the Viceroy sent to take Vincenza, because he would be found to be
Frangipan on the otherside, having done great harm in the Friull (as has
been said) began to scour the whole country, the like did the Almans under
the command of the Captains Rissan, and Calepine: who seperating themselves,
Calapine came afterward to Feltre, which he took by assault, where staying
three days, he was expulsed by John Brandolino, who marching to the recovery
thereof by the commandment The Almans take Feltre.
of Ieromino Pisare the prouidator, with strong troops gathered together from
Valmarino, and with his light cauallery, enforced the enemies, who were daunted
at his sudden arrival, to abandon the C^tty, and to seek means to escape by
flight.

Calepine with the greatest part of his soldiers retired to Bassan, where not
standing on his grade he was assailed a new by Francio Duoda, Governor of the
country for the Venetians, having called to his aid Bernardino Antignole with
his light horse, and Calepine being surprised in that place was taken prisoner,
and three hundred of his foot were slain. But (...) with eight hundred foot
and three hundred horse, having taken the way of Goritia, met with Frangipan as
he returned, and having united their forces together, and by that means being
to the number of five thousand foot, and a thousand horse, they resolved to
assail Vdina. The Senate having intelligence thereof, sent Malateste Sogliane
and John (...) thither, the one to command the army, and the other to be
Prouidator, with six hundred horse and two thousand foot: Ieronimo Sauorgnane
was there already with two thousand men of the country, where after long
consultation, whether it were best to tarry there for the enemy, or by crossing
the River Liuensa to go unto some safer place: at the last it was concluded
upon the advice of the inhabitants concerning the commodities and
discommodities of that place, to quit The (...) ^dina abandoned to the (...).
and abandon it, and to retire else*where beyond the River: the which was
speedily done, for fear least the enemies preventing them, their passage might
be stopped: Sauorgnane retired to Osof, a place of his own, to keep and defend
it from the enemies.

Vdina being thus abandoned did yield at the enemies first summons their lives
and goods being saved, on condition to pay a thousand crowns to the army to
avoid the sack of their City: The like did Ciuid^le Port Gruera, and some
others. But the enemy finding no victuals in that Province whe^ewith to feed
the army, after they had wasted and spoiled it, were desirous to march toward
Treuiso, to join with the Spanish Infantery, which lay on the Paduan and
Vincentyne Frangipan to do so, was the hope he had to take it, as he had done
the castle of Chiuse, strong by sytuation, the which the soldiers that kept
it, had yielded upon the only sight of the enemies, without fear of reproach,
so as Osof being taken, there was nothing that could stop their victuals or
relief from Germany, or hinder them from conquering the whole country of
Friul.

But Sauorgnane trusting to the sytuation of the place, and to the valor and
courage of his soldiers, al-be-it he had but an hundred foot, and four score
crosbowes on horseback, with some few peasants, did hope to keep and defend
it in despite of all the enemies attempts. Osof beseeged by the Almain^


The Almains then coming to encampe before Osof, seated on the top of a steep
mountain, did batter it with their ordnance, and gave diverse assaults to it in
vain, which made them resolve to win it by a long seege, having intelligence
that they within it wanted water; but God provided for them, for at the
sametime there fell great store of rain, wherewith they were abundantly
relieved. In regard whereof the enemies renewed the assault, but all in vain,
so as The enemies discamp^ from before Osof.


Whilst these things were done in the Friull, the Venetians affairs, although
they were not very peaceable in Lombardy, did nevertheless su^ceed more
prosperously, where Rance de Cera commanding Crema for the Venetians, did
perform sundry notable exploits, notwithstanding that the Spaniards Rance de
Cer^ his bra^e exploits.
and Sforzas forces were encamped before the town. These things did greatly
displease the Pope, who as a deputed arbitrator sought to bring them to accord,
but he could find no means of agreement, which might content both parties, by
reason that by the frequent alteration of matters, hopes changing according to
the success thereof, it happened that when the Emperor had given his consent
Difficulties in the agreement b^twixt the Emperor and the Venetian^*
to quit Vincenza, reserving Verona for himself, the Venetians refused it,
unless they might be repossessed of Verona: and then when the Venetians being
dejected, were satisfied only with Vincenza, the Emperor would have both or
none.

The Pope being wearied with these difficulties, al-be-it he doubted that his
declaration would not be accepted, was desirous nevertheless (to show that it
was not his fault) to pronounce his sentence, after this manner: That the
Emperor should commit Vincenza into his hands in deposito, and all that which
the Spaniards The Popes arbitratiue s^ntence.
and himself did possess on the Paduan and Treuisan territories: That the
Venetians should do the like by Crema. That as for other matters, each party
should hold those possessions they enjoyed, till the declaration which he
pretended to make within a year, of the conditions of the peace, but that in
the mean time, arms should be laid down on both sides: That each of them
within a month should ratify that sentence, and that the Venetians in
ratifying it, should

After this manner he gave judgment, because he would not discontent any of the
The Venetians refuse to ratify it.
parties: but this sentence came to nothing, by reason that the Venetians would
not ratify it: for their desire was to have had the conditions of peace
pronounced at the same time. Therefore they returned to arms, and determined
to recover the Friull, whereupon they sent Aluiana thither for that purpose,
with two hundred men at arms, foure*hundred light*horse, and seven hundred
foot, who marching on the high way of Portonone, where part of the Almains lay,
his Rissan, the Almain, without the town (of whom we have heretofore spoken)
with two hundred men at arms and three hundred light horse, and coming to
handy-stroakes with them, The A^mains defeated by the Venetians.
they had been repulsed, had not Aluiana arrived with the rest of his forces,
whereupon began a furious fight, the issue whereof was at the beginning
doubtful, until that captain Rissan being hurt in the face, was taken by
Malateste Sogliane: for then his forces being broken, escaped into Portonone,
and despayring of being able to hold it, did speedily forsake it, and betook
themselves to flight, whereby the City was wholly spoiled, and diverse people of
the country were slain.

Aluiana at his departure thence, took the way of Osof, which Frangipan had
again beseeged with the other part of the Almaines, who having intelligence of
Aluianas approach, did soon dislodge, having raced the fortes which he had
built there abouts, taking his journey toward Germany, but the Venetian light
horse charging him on the tail, he lost his baggage and artillery: By means
whereof the whole country in a manner returning to the Venetians obedience,
Aluiana having attempted in vain to take Goritia, returned forthwith to Padua
with his forces.

Frangipan said that the same disorder was no fault of his, but that being ill
disposed of his person, by reason of a blow on the head with a stone which he
had Frangipan is taken by the Venetians.
neighbor mountains to stir up new troubles, and to leauy new forces, he
fell into an Ambuscado, laid for him by John Vitturi, where he was taken and
brought to Venice: A man indeed very haughty and cruel, and a great enemy to
the Venetians, and who by his ordinary incursions had for a long time greatly
molested the country of Friull. In regard of this fortunate success, wherein
The Senate recompenceth Sauorgnane.
Sauorgnanes aid did greatly prevail, his fame and reputation was much
increased, whereupon the Senate for his deserts, created him Earl of Belgrado
and Osof, for himself and his heirs, to the end that the memory of his valor
might

Now to return to Aluiana, the number of the Almains being increased by his
departure, they took again Cremona and Montfalcon, and enforced the Venetians
to remove their seege from before Ma^an, for the Venetians having intelligence
that supplies arrived, dislodged thence and retired in great have. Such
alterations often happened in the country of F^iull, in regard of the Almains
neighbour*hood, who after they had robbed and spoiled, so soon as they had any
notice of the coming on of the Venetians forces (with whom diverse of the
country joined) they forth with retired home, and then returned, as occasion
was offered.

The Venetians in the mean time, perceiving that all hope of agreement was The
means which the Senate used to get money.
taken from them, and that the wa^re was to be continued, began to think on
means how to get money, their treasure being wholly exhausted. All the
magistrates were assembled to this end, to consult in what manner they might
raise

The end of the first Book of the fifth Decade.
The Contents of the second Book of the
THe Venetians beseege Maran, and forthwith raise their camp. The defeat and
taking of Vitturi the Prouidator. Rance de Cera, and soon recovered by the
Spaniards. The Venetians take Frangipan. The Venetians recover Vincenza. The
victory of Selim against Ismael. Soliman enters Hungary. The Croisado
published in Hungary against the Turks* Pope Leo his means to join the
Venetians with the Emperor and the Spaniards, and to disunite them from
France. The Venetians send Ambassadors to the French King, and to the King of
England. The death of King Lewis the twelfth. Francis the first, Duke of
Angoulesme, Aluiana brought thither. The Swisses great guard at the foot of the
Alps against the French. The French pass into Piedmont by the hill of
Argentire. Prospero Colonna is taken by the French. Agreement betwixt the

The Second Book of the fifth Decade of the History of Uenice.
ALVIAN A being returned from Friul (as has been said) the Venetians were of
opinion by the soliciting of Sauorgnano, to renew their enterprise upon Maran,
the whole charge thereof was committed unto him. He according to his commission
having leauied two thousand men of the country, and four hundred of the best
soldiers from Vdina, went with his forces and John Vitturi General of the
light horse, and John Paul M^nfron captain of the men at arms, did by the
Senates appointment meet The Venetians beseege Maran.
him there with their Cauallery, to the end that the enterprise might be
executed with more assurance and reputation. Sauorgnane at his arrival seized
on a strong place not far from the walls of the City, and there encamped,
causing great trenches to be made, to the end the soldiers being the better
defended, might in more safety march to the walls. And because the sytuation
of the place was not commodious for them, by reason the ground was very low*
and boggy, he by his industry and diligence overcame the discommodity of the
place, by making plat forms and bulwarks of sundry substances* for two
purposes, the one

All things being in a readiness for the assault, and some soldiers being
already marched thither, certain captains, who at the first were not of
opinion to give an assault made a stand, by reason of some encomberance of
water which they found somewhat high, which caused them for that time to
defer that which had been determined: In the mean time letters came from
the Senate to Sauorgnane and to the chief of the army, which imported, that
the Senates The Senates intent is not to give an assault*
meaning was, to have them use means to take that town rather by a long
seege,

But whilst they spent the time thus vnproffitably, they gave the enemy
leisure them, they resolved presently to raise their seege, and to retire to
Vdina and Ciuitella.

The enemies so soon as the Venetians had raised their camp, did supply Maran
with victuals and soldiers: by means whereof those within it being grown
stronger and more audacious scoured the country round about. The Senate being
much discontented with these incu^sions, and fearing if it were not speedily
remedied some greater harm might ensue thereby, commanded the Knight La Volpe,
General of the light horsemen, to go with two hundred horse into Friul to
restrain the enemies courses: Petro Marcello was commanded to do the like who
had been sent Prouidator to the camp: But before they could arrive there,

Vitturi the Prouidator retiring with a hundred Albanese horsemen to a place
of weak defense, was assailed by the enemies, where after he had valiantly
defended Vitturi the Prouidator is defeated and taken.
himself, being hurt, and his soldiers forsaking him, he was taken prisoner,
all his soldiers were either taken or cut in pieces. At the same time Rance de
Cera, who lay in Crema, dispayring almost of being able to keep the town, in
regard of the great want of victuals in it, and of the terrible plague, as also
for Rance de Cera (...) Si^uio (...) to r^ut.
that the souldier^ wanted diverse months pay, did (unlooked for) assail
Siluio Sauella, as he came from Milan, who had with him two hundred men at
arms, a hundred light horse, and fifteen hundred foot, whom he did
forthwith put to Sauello fled to Lodi with fifty men at arms only; whereupon,
the Venetians did re-victual Crema the second time, and Count Nicolo Scoto
manned it with fifteen hundred foot.

Rance being encouraged by these supplies, did within a while after enter into
Bergamo taken and soon lo^t.
Bergamo, whither those of the City had sent for him, and the Spaniards that
lay there fled to La Chappella. The viceroy and Prospero Colonna being awakened
with the loss of Bergamo, assembled the Spanish companies, with those of the
Duke of Milan, and went to encampe before it with five thousand foot joined to
the Spanish and the Duke of Milans forces, where having planted the artillery
against Saint Catherins gate, and made a breach, Rance who was in the city
perceiving

Whilst these things were done at Crema and Bergamo, Aluiana having much
importuned the Senate, that he might come forth of Padua with his forces, was
permitted to do so, to the end he might restrain the Spaniards, who although
peace was treated of, did not cease to waste and spoil every where: whereupon
at his coming forth, he made a very notable enterprise, full of wonderful
speed and industry upon the City of Rouigo, where lay above two hundred Spanish
men at arms, who thought themselves safe there, because the River Adi^e
Aluiana tak^th (...).
men at arms prisoners whom he found there.

This exploit caused all the other Spaniards that were lodged in the Pollessin,
to abandon it, and Legnaga likewise and to retire to Ferrara. Aluiana after the
taking of Rouigo being come to Oppian near to Legnaga, meaning to have gone to
Verona, having intelligence that the Spanish army had recovered Bergamo, (...)
(...) to (...).
avoid the great wet and mire, and not without fear of being assailed by the
enemies, who were kept back by the waters which were risen very high; then
coming on shore he speedily went into Padua whether the men at arms were
come two days before. The Senate upon the report of this brave exploite upon
Rouigo, did receive great contentation, hoping still for better fortune
hereafter, and wrote letters to Aluiana full of congratulation, saying that he
had truly manifested his valor and martial experience, together with the good
will which he did bear to the Republike.

The same year, the country of Friul was in more quiet then of a long time The
country * Friul at quiet by means of the taking of Frangipan.
before, by reason of the taking of captain Frangipan, who had molested it
mo^e then any other: whereupon, the Venetians knowing how much it did import
John Paul Baillon. At the same time likewise Rance de Cera being returned to
Crema, and finding there great want of all things, did of his own authority
without communicating it to the Senate, make truce with the enemy for six
months: then, leaving Giouan Antonio Visin in the City, with five hundred
foot, and as many horse for the guard thereof, he went with the residue of his
forces to Padua, and from thence himself went to Venice, to give them an
account of what had past at Bergamo and Crema, and also to consult with them of
what was needful to be done. The Uenetians give great e^tertaiment to Rance
de Cera.
He was honorably entertained: and because he had in former time re^used the
place of General of their army, no greater honor being at that present

The viceroy and Prospero Colonno being crossed in their deseignes, by reason
of Aluiana his retreat to Padua, having sent their forces into Garrison in the
Pollesin of Rouigo, they went to Ispruch, to consult with the Emperor what was
to be done.

Whilst fortune showed her self so variable and inconstant to the Venetians,
the City of Vincenza, which was reduced under their government, was kept with a
small garrison, notwithstanding that diverse of the enemies troops lay round
about it: for it continued still in the fidelity and devotion of the
commonwealth, Nicolo Pascalic the Cities Magistrate, resolving in regard of
the small number of defendants which was in it at the beginning, to abandon it,
did take new courage, and did so well exhort all the inhabitants to the defense
thereof, as the enemies durst never come again to beseege it.

In these petty exploits of war, and with an uncertain hope of peace, the
Summer of that year was spent for the affairs of Italy. But Asia produced
greater enterprises; for *Selim marching into Persia (as has been said) and
meeting Selims victory against Ismael.
with Ismaels army, fought with him, of whom he gate a glorious victory,
chiefly by means of his artillery, the use whereof was then unknown to the
Persians. In regard whereof the great dangers were plainly discerned which
threatened other Realms and Provinces, by reason of Selims fierce and haughty
courage, who for this fortunate success was become more proud and insolent.
And that which did most manifest it, was, that at the same time that he made
war in Persia, Soliman his son entering Hungary, did spoil the country with
great Soliman enters Hungary.
numbers of horse, and had already taken diverse towns.

The Pope was desirous to remedy it, and caused great leauies of soldiers to
be made in Hungary, who took for their badge a red cross, calling themselves
A Croizado i^ Hungary against the Turks.
relieved the King of Hungary, did in a manner ruin him: for, weapons being
put into the hands of the peasants of that country, who are deadly enemies to
the The great harm with the Croizade did to Hungary.
Nobility, they committed infinite riots, and threw the Realm headlong into
greater dangers: wherewith the Pope being troubled, turned all his thoughts to
the peace of Italy, and for that purpose, he sent to Venice Petro Bembo, his
Secretary, a Venetian Gentleman, who being come thither, spoke to the Senate
in this manner.

That Pope Leo his affection toward the Republike had ever been sound: The
Oration of the Popes Nunci^ to the Senate
That he was still grieved by their losses and afflictions, as the care which
he has had of them, might largely witness: Besides there was nothing more
sure, then that his whole deseignes and aim did ever tend to peace, and if he
had at any Lewis his great desire to recover the Duchy of Milan, was only
afterward to make himself Master of all Italy. For, having once overcome
Maximillian Sforza, and wholly expulsed him from his fathers state, he believed
that the way would be easily opened to him for the attayning thereunto, and
for abusing, by means of other Italians, the Venetians liberty: whereas they
had in time past made alliance with the French, enforced thereunto by great
necessity, they had done well, in respect of those times: But now to be allied
with them was most dangerous, in regard, that thinking to assure themselves, it
was to and men to witness, that he has in no sort been wanting to the common
good of Christendom, and to the particular proffit of the Venetian
commonwealth. That they were besides to believe, that he could ere then have
embraced those parties which do now presently offer themselves to his
advantage, and perhaps he would accept them, by allying himself with the
Emperor and Spaniards, to their hinderance, of whom so often he has had great
care, and yet to no purpose. They had no need to crave any greater assurance of
him; for the interest of the Sea Apostolic, and that of their Republike was
all one, so as both of them ran one self same fortune, being in a manner,
both the one and other subject to like Lewis Sforza, they threw themselves
headlong into manifest danger, by associating for their fellow in arms, a
foreign King, most mighty, who was to be a neighbor to their state, in stead
of a weak Prince, and their countryman. Therefore they should do well to
advise themselves how to reap some fruit by the Popes favor and good will, the
which til then they had with great care sought to entertain.

With these or such like speeches Bembo executed the tenor of his commission:
but the Senate, (the matter having been determined) thought it neither easy
The Senates resolution on Bembo his demand.
nor safe to allie themselves with the Emperor and Spaniards; whereupon

That his Ambassador was greatly pleasing to the Senate as well in respect of
The Prince his answer to the Popes Nunch.
himself, whose virtue and particular affection toward their country was
suffitienly known to all men, as likewise in regard of the Prince that sent
him, seeing they had ever borne great honor and reverence to the sovereign
Bishops of Rome, and were particularly inclined to Pope Leo. That the Senate
had ever highly esteemed his good and wholesome council: but the mischief
was, that by how much, they, above all others, had desired his friendship and
alliance, in that uncertainty of all things, by so much more were they
continually kept from

This speech being pronounced by Prince Lauretan, they made private
remonstrance to Bembo, how the Senate did greatly suspect, that under that The
Senates suspicion privately declared to Bembo.
treaty of peace some deceit might lurk, in regard it was practiced by the
Emperor and by Ferdinand, being assured that under color of agreement, they
would, as at diverse other times, practice some dangerous war on the Venetians:
because that at the same time as the Spanish Ambassador dealt with the French
King concerning the affairs of Italy, Ferdinand had revived this treaty of
peace, to none other end but to cause the French King to suspect the Venetians
friendship, and thereby to separate himself from them, the better afterward
to enforce them to agree with him, to his own great advantage: and that the
same coming to To what intent the Spaniard spoke to the Venetians of peace.
pass, the Venetians being so divided from the French, what should hinder
Ferdinand to make himself master, and quiet possessor of all Italy, as long
time before then, he had aspired thereunto.

Bembo being returned to Rome, reported all this to the Pope: but before he
left Venice, he assured the Venetians, that the Pope would never suffer any man
to attempt against their State, knowing very well that on them depended the
liberty of Italy, and that he was to rely on them for the greatness and
maintenance Medicis. The Venetians made declarations that they did not greatly
care for that agreement, for thereby they should be deprived of the richest and
goodliest city belonging to their state, which was Verona: and The Venetians
hope on the French King.
that which maintained them therein was, the hope which they had that the
French King would shortly come into Italy. For King Lewis being provoked with a
desire to recover the Duchy of Milan, had made peace with Henry King of
England, and made preparations to repasse the mounts, and to come into Lombardy
with a mighty army, whereunto the Venetians being joined, they hoped with ease
to chase their enemies from their bounds and confines.

This hope caused them to send Ambassadors to the French King, and to the The
Venetians send Ambassadors to the French King and the King of England.
King of England their friends, for to continue them still in their affection
toward them, and to this end were appointed Francisco Donato, and Petro
Paschalic, but in Donato his stead, who fell sick, Sebastian Justinian was
sent thither.

Their chief commission was to congratulate both of them for the peace and
alliance contracted betwixt them (King Lewis having married King Henry's
sister) and to thank them, for that in the treaty of agreement made betwixt
them, they had therein comprehended the Venetians, by name, as their friends
and confederates.

That they should moreover assure the French King that the Senate did bear the
same loue-towards him as it had done in times past, determining to prefer
Lewis, died: for as he over ardently took his pleasure on the excellent
beauty of his new wife, who was not above eighteen The death of Lewis the 12.
French King.
years old, not remembering his age nor the weakness of his complexion, he
was taken with a fever, beside which, being troubled with a continual flixe,
he soon departed out of this present life, and made the first day of the
year 1515. famous by his death. It was thought that his death would have bread
great alterations. Yet for all that they did not call back the Ambassadors,
but commanding Lewis was a lust Prince, and well-beloved of his subjects; who
neither before that he was King, nor afterward did ever find either bad or
good fortune firm and constant to him.

The joy which they had of King Lewis his death, who desired not the return
Francis Duke of Angoulesme French King.
of the French into Italy, lasted not long. For Francis Duke of Angoulesme
succeeded Lewis the twelfth, as the next in ligne Masculine of the Royal blood,
and of the very race of the Dukes of Orleance, whose virtues and magnanimity
was admired of all men, who with the title of French King did likewise take
that for the present, seeking first of all to practice the friendship of other
Princes, diverse of whose Ambassadors came forthwith to him, whom he
graciously received, and among others, those of the Venetians having had new
commissions sent unto them to Lions where they stayed: with whom he confirmed
the league in the same form as it had been made with his predecessor, and he
caused the Bishop of Ast to do the like in his name, who being sent to Venice
by King Lewis, tarried still there.

The Venetians, who already did make great account of the friendship of the
King Francis confirms the league with the Venetians.
French, and had enjoined Marco Dandulo their Ambassador to sound what the
Prospero Colonna with new forces would come again to beseege it. They should
likewise assure him, that the Senate would never fail of their duty, having
already made new provision of soldiers for the land army, of armor and
munition, and given order to arm certain Galleys

The Venetian Ambassadors having executed their commission with the King The
Venetian Ambassadors in England.
in the City of Paris, went into England to finish the remainder of their
Embassage, where being courteously enterteined, they declared at their first
audience the great sorrow and grief that the Venetians had for the death of
King Lewis his brother in law, a very mighty Prince and a great friend to the
Republike, then they gave him many thanks for the great correspondence betwixt
them, for that The Ambassadors request to the King of England.
in the conclusions of peace, as well with King Lewis, as since then with King
Francis, he was ever desirous that their commonwealth, as his good friend,
should be

After both the Ambassadors had in this sort accomplished their charge,
Justinian remained in England with King Henry, and Paschalic returned into
France (...) sent to the Archduke.
to do the like there, who being come to Paris received letters from the
Senate, whereby he was commanded to go with speed into the Low countries to
the Archduke to congratulate him for his marriage and for the peace, whereof
the commonwealth was very glad, which they would have to be signified to him
by their Ambassador.

After this manner did the Venetians strive to entertain the friendship and
alliance of fortaine Princes, fitting themselves to the time. But their
greatest The Venetians d^firous to draw the Pope to their party.
care was how to find means to draw the Pope to their side, and to join him
with the French, whereof they had some hope by reason that Iuliano de Medicis
the Popes brother, who could do much with his Holiness, had married
Philiberta sister to the Duke of Sauoy, and a very near kinsewoman to the
French King, by which they supposed that he would favor the French: and that
the Pope in time to come, would more incline to them then he had hither unto
done, perceiving that the Realm of France being strengthened both by kindred
and confederacy with England, and the Archduke, nothing was able to hinder
King Francis from growing great in Italy, and from being feared there. Yet for
all that the Pope being tossed to and fro with his accustomed doubts and
difficulties, had no firm or certain resolution, for now he took part with
one, and anon with an other: sometimes being vanquished with fear he inclined
to the friendship of the French, but he did oftener and more willingly discourse
with the Ambassadors of the Emperor and King Fernand, and made answer to the
Venetians, who spoke to him about it, that they might draw some thing from him,
that he would be a looker on, and see what the issue of the war would be,
intending to join with the Conqueror. But he did not imagine in his heart
that the French King would ever pass into Italy, so as if King Francis had
already passed

The Venetians being acquainted with his humor, sent Marin Georgio their
Ambassador to Rome, with express commission to tell him, That he was of
necessity The Venetians send an Ambassador to the Pope.
to show himself otherwise then hitherunto he had done, and to do his best
to alter his former opinion, and to that end he should make the French Kings
forces to be very great, and give him to understand how that seeing his Realm
was out of danger of foreign wars, he might without contradiction and on a
sudden turn toward Italy, whereunto he was much inclined in regard of his
desire to conquer the State of Milan, that there was nothing so hard The
Ambassadors remonstran ^e to the Pope.
or difficult that was able to divert him from this deseigne: That the
Venetians Maximilian Sforza, and lay down their arms which they had taken
against the French, so as the confederates being deprived of that aid, should
be enforced to change their minds: the Emperor would no more think on the
affairs of Italy, and Fernand would satisfy himself with his kingdom of
Naples; whereupon, others might recover what belonged unto them, namely the
French, the State of Milan, and the Venetians those Cities which had been
wrongfully taken from them, and thereby a firm and sure peace might be
established.

All these goodly discourses could smally prevail with the Pope to make him
The Popes determination against the Venetians
alter his opinion: but on the contrary, continuing firm in his first
determination, he thought in himself that he might easily induce the Venetians
to do what he pleased. But perceiving that to deal with them by fair and
gentle means, he should never obtain his desire, he resolved to use
severity and rigor. He caused to be published over all the Churches
territories, that no subjects or Vassals belonging to the holy sea, should upon
pain of most grievous censures, bear arms under the Venetians pay; commanding
al Captains as well of foot as The Popes publication against the Uenetians.
horse, to come with all speed to the Spanish camp, with their soldiors and
horses, going about by that means in such sort to diminish the Venetians
forces and reputations, as being encompassed with so many mischeefes they
should be at last enforced to have recourse unto him, and to do his pleasure:
but the Venetians on the contrary continued firm, and constant in their
alliance, hoping by that means of the French, to be able to maintain and
defend their own state.

King Francis in the mean time began very carefully to gather together very
great sums of money, and to increase the ordenance of his men at arms, King
Francis his dissimulation.
to the number of four thousand, publishing abroad that his meaning was not to
make war on any one, for that year, but only to make head against the
Swisses, who threatened to assaill Burgondy or Daulphine, if so be he should
refuse to fulfill the conuentions made at Dijon in the name of the late King.

Many believed it, inregard of the example of some late kings, who would never
incomber them selves with new wars the first year of their reigns: But the
Emperor Lewis had left behind; whereupon because they would not be taken
unprovided, they made means to confederate themselves with the Pope and the
Swisses.

The Pope delayed it as much as he could: The Swisses on the contrary, whose
heat against the French did not only continue still, but daily more and more
League betwixt the Emperor, the king of Arragon, the Duke of Milan and the
Swisses.
increase, did ally themselves with the Emperor, the King of Arragon, and the
Duke of Milan for the defense of Italy, reserving place for the Pope to enter;
wherein was concluded that the Swisses should enuade, either Burgondy or
Dauphine, and the Catholic King with a mighty army should come in by Fontaraby

The French Kings intent was for a time kept close, until the greatness of
his The French Kings great preparation.
preparations could by no means be any longer concealed, in regard of his
huge provisions of money, with which he waged very great numbers of
Lancequenets; he caused store of Artillery to be carried toward Lions, and
had a while before sent Pedro of Navarre, who was newly come to his service
into Guyen to leuy ten thousand foot on the marches of Navarre.

It being then apparent to all men, that war was prepared for the Duchy of
Iuliano his brother who was (as has been already said) allied to the King, as
by his Ambassadors, to the end to be assured of his intent.

But the King soon began to be out of hope, as well because the Pope had
granted to the King of Arragon the Croizads of Spain for two years, whereby
it was thought that he would raise above a Million of gold, as by the fair
and goodly promises, which he made to those who pleaded for him, and yet
without any resolution at all; besides it was wholly in vain, for he had
already What shifts the Pope used to declare himself openly against the king
before made a very secret conuention with the others for the defense of the
requests, and notwithstanding all this he made diverse doubtful and irresolute
answers.

The King not tarying any longer for his replies, being come to Lions,
accompanied with all the French nobillity, made Charles of Burbon Constable of
(...) of Burbon Constable of France.
France his Liuetenant General to command in the war, if himself went not
thither in person, whereof he yet doubted, promising to himself the
certainety of the victory by reason of his great forces, for he had in his
Army two thousand Lancequenets, conducted by the Duke of Guelders, ten thousand
Basques or Gascons, eight thousand French, and three thousand Castadours. For
of all The number of the Kings army.
the enemies army there was none to be feared but the Swisses, who continually

This determination of the Swisses did greatly trouble the Kings mind, because
The Swisses determination in the streights of the mountains.
it was an hard matter, in regard of the valor of that nation, to drive them
from those strong and narrow passages. The rest of the confederates having left
sufficient garrison for the defense of those towns which they had snatched from
the Venetians, were not able to leuy the one half of a strong Army.

Whilst France made these preparations, upon the report of the Kings The
Viceroy his enterprise on Vincenza.
means to pay his army. But Aluiana being aduertized of this deseigne, left
Padua, where he then lay, and passing speedily on the Vincentine Territory,
leading along with him sufficient troops to guard the City, and to break the
enemies enterprise, whereby the inhabitants had leisure to gather their silks,
and to transport them to a place of safety. Alu^ana releeueth Vincenza.


That done, Aluiana, retired toward Padua, (the Spanish forces daily
increasing,) and encamped with Rance de Cera at Brentelles, two miles distant
from Padua, where he tarried many days, because the Senate had willed him not
to stir from thence with the army before he were certain of the enemies
purpose, to the end not to go into any place, where he might be enforced to
come to handy strokes, and to tempt fortune, fearing if he should receive any
loss, it might happen to keep back King Francis, who affirmed that the
chief hope of his designs depended on the Venetians, and therefore
discoursing with their Ambassador resident with him, he did council him that
his countrymen should not hazard ought, before his arrival in Italy it being
indiscretion to hazard the The Venetians incursion on the enemies.
be great, being united together, Yet notwithstanding, the Venetian soldiors
made often incursions, cheefely the light horse, under the command of the
Captains Mercurio Buono, and Giouan de Nalda, who did greatly molest the
enemies, taking great Booties from them, as well from Rouigo, as on the
Veronois.

In this sort did the two Armies, Venetian and Spanish, behave themselves for
a certain time, without any other attempts, still expecting news of the
French army, who leaving the realm freed from the fear of war, were ready
The passages of Suza, Pegner^lles, and Sal^sles guarded by the Swisses.
to pass the mounts.

For neither the Spaniards nor Swisses, did ever go according to their treaty
of Confederacy, the one to enuade Burgondy, and the other the confines near to
Spain, but the Swisses went and encamped at Suze, Pigneroll and Salusses, to
stop the entry of the French into Piedmont, and the Spaniards kept himself in
Lombardy with the Popes troops, of whom Iuliano de medicis, his brother, was
General.

The French then marched forewards on the fifteenth day of July toward the
Alps, and being come to Grenoble they were enforced to make some stay there to
resolve upon their way they were to hold, for all the ways were so difficult,
as well in regard of the nature of the places, as for the guard in them, that it
was impossible to possible to pass without danger if they would go the
ordinary high way which leads into Italy by Piedmont, the Suisses keeping the
narrow passages of the mountains, but there was another way betwixt the sea
and Coctian Alps, descending toward the Marquisate of Salusses, by which they
might carry their ordnance

The King resolving wholly to pass on howsoever, would needs go directly over
the Alps, whereby the French in three days came to the hill of Argentire, The
French pass into Pied mont by Argentire.
where taking the way on the left hand, and ouercomming all the bad ways, they
came on the fourth day upon the confines of the Marquisate of Salusses, without
any stop at all, because no man would ever have thought that it had been
possible to bring the Artillery over such steep and sharp mountains, and the
Suisses being lodged at Suza were ready to guard the ways by which they must
pass which comes down by mount Senis, or mont Geneura, or the hills near
The Suisses r^tire to Nouara.
great bloodshed to conquer the State of Milan, knowing that the Suisses are by
nature lightheaded, seditious, mutenous, and desirous of nouelty, and above
all things, very covetous to get money: by which means the King thought
suddenly to win them.

Great promises of sommes of money were made to diverse of the cheifest of them
if they would prefer the certain offer that was made them before their first
heat of war, and not hazard the uncertainty of a Battle.

The French in the mean time having passed the mounts, the Lord La Palisse
came speedily with four Cornets of light horse, being lead by people of the
Prospero Colonna with his company was lodged, not doubting any thing, by reason
of the great distance of the enemies,) from whence some said, that he would
Prospero Colona taken prisoner by the lord La Palisse.
depart the same day, to join with the Suisses. It is nevertheless certain
that he sat at meat, and dined at such time as La Palisse his soldiers
arrived, who were not descryed by any before they came near the house, because
those of the town, with whom La Palisse had intelligence, concerning that
great booty, had already secretly agreed to keep themselves very quiet, and
had seized on the scoutes and Sentinels. Prospero Colonna that famous Captain
was thus taken prisoner, and Petro Margare the Roman with him, others at the
first noyce saved themselves and escaped by flight.

The passage of the French, and the taking of Prospero Colonna, did change all
The Pope amazed at the Kings passage and the taking of Prospero Colonna.
men's minds, and altogether the whole state of the affairs, causing new
alteration in the minds of the Pope, the viceroy of Naples and the Suisses.
For the Pope perceiving that the King had passed contrary to his hope, and that
Prospero Colonna was taken prisoner, in whom he cheefely trusted, he
commanded his Nephew Lorenzo, General to the Florentines in sted of his
brother Julian, who lay sick at Florence, to proceed slowly: then he secretly
dispatched Cintio his familliar friend to the French King, to excuse him for
what had passed, and to begin to treat with him, if so be it should fall out
badly for the Duchy of Milan.

The Viceroy of Naples likewise carried himself other-wise then he had done.
For remaining still at Verona, expecting means to cause his soldiers to
march, and new companies promised by the Emperor to leave in Verona and
Bressia, he with these excuses began to defer his departure, because he would
first see what would become of the Duchy of Milan.

The Swisses in like manner being amazed at the Kings passage came on a
sudden to Pignarol and from thence to Nouara (as has been said) where they
began to treat of agreement with the King. In the mean time all the French
The Swisses begin to treat of agreement with the King.
troops being reunited at Thurin, the King went to Verceill, where he stayed
many days, expecting what would become of the treaty with the Swisses, who
showed themselves full of variety and confusion. For they began to mutine in
Nouara, where they lay, because they had not yet received the money which the
King of Arragon had promised them, and they did perforce take the money from the
commissaries which the Pope had sent them. And in this fury they departed from
Nouara to return home into their country, the which many of them did greatly
Agreement contracted with the Swisses, and broken the same day.
them and home: by means whereof the King being desirous to join with
Aluiana, departed from Bufalore, and being come with his army to Biagrassa,
whilst he stayed there the Duke of Sauoy, with the other commissioners, whom
the King had left at Verceill, had made peace with the Swisses in the Kings
name. But this peace was almost in one day concluded and broken, by the
arrival of new Swisses, who being proud for their forepassed victories, hoping
to carry home with them as great wealth, as they saw their fellows laden with,
they would not hear tell of peace, refusing to yield up the valleis mentioned
in the agreement: so as by this breach of peace, matters returned to their
former difficulties, and to Lorenzo de Medicis who approached Milan. Aluiana in
the mean time sent word to the French King, that he would so amuse the Spanish
army, as it should have no means to hurt him: and therefore so soon as he
understood that the The number of the Venetian army conducted by Aluiana.
Viceroy was gone from Verona, he left the Pollesin of Rouigo, and having
crossed the Adice, he speedily came along the river Po, with nine hundred men
at arms, fourteen hundred light horse, and nine thousand foot, with great
store of artillery near to the walls of Cremona. The King according to
Aluianas letters, came to Marignan, to give him more easy means to join with
the royal army, and to stop the companies of the Church, and Spaniards, from
doing the like with the The King com^th to Marignan.
enemies. For it did greatly import the king to have the enemies force divided
in sundry places.

The King being come to Marignan stayed there, and wrote to the Venetian Senate,
giving them notice of his arrival in Italy, and of the fortunate success of
his affairs till then, together with the hope he had that his deseignes would
prosper, in regard that both their affairs were managed by one selfsame
Union and concord.

But in these interims, Rance de Cera who had well demeaned himself against
the enemies, being moved with iealozy against Aluiana, for that he would not
be enforced to obey him as General if the armies should come to join
together, Rance de Cera leauet the Venetian party.
craved leave of the Venetians to depart, who being not able to make them
friends, did freely grant it. He was a brave Captain, and could not abide
any superior, and Aluiana could not endure an equal, by means whereof they
could

Mark Antonio Colonna in the mean time, who remained for the guard of Verona,
Mark Antonio Colonna gardeth Verona.
made a sudden sally with three thousand footmen and about seven hundred
horse of all sorts, and went and scoured the Vincentine Territory, spoiling and
wasting what-so-euer he met with. Albeit this did trouble the Venetians, yet
could it not divert them from their former determination, which was that
Aluiana should join with the French army, knowing well that if the French
Kings affairs did prosper, this could not do amiss. Four armies at one time
in ^vly.


Four armies were at one time in one country, very near to one another. The
The number of Swisses.
to be forty thousand men who at the pursuit and persuasion of the Cardinal
of Syon, kept the City of Milan, which was well furnished with all necessaries.

This Cardinal returning from Placentia, whither he was fled, wondering that
his countrymen practiced with the French king, relying on great numbers of
soldiers newly come, which did favor his party, he came among them who were al
in a manner divided, some of them not enduring to hear tell of war, and others
not of peace. And causing them al to come together on a day, he began with a
very The Cardinal of Syons oration to the Swisses.
vehement and affectionate speech to incite them, without any more delay to go
forth the same day and assaill the French King, and not to set so much before
their

The Swisses being incited by these or such like speeches did furiously on a
sudden put on their arms, and going forth of the City did put themselves How
greatly the Swisses were incited by this speech.
in order of battle, and albeit it was near night, they marched toward the
French Army with such courage, as if they had already obtained the victory,
notwithstanding that diverse of their Captains thought it great rashness and
a very dangerous matter to assail the enemy in his camp, who was The Cardinal
makes use of false rumors.
resolved for battle. But the Cardinal of Sion fearing least delay might
produce something contrary to his deseignes, and that as the desire of fight had
easily enflamed their courages, it might as easily be quenched by the
remonstrance of their Captains of the contrary part, he gave forth a false
rumor among them that the French gathered together their baggage and prepared
for their departure, and that their vantgard was already forth of their Camp,
to go and join with the Venetian army, to retire afterward to beseege Milan,
whereupon he

Now the French being aduertized of the Suisses coming toward them, albeit
they were at the first greatly amazed, (as it happens in matters not
foreseen nor premeditated) they did nevertheless forthwith put on their
Armor, made ready their horses and all other things needful for a battle,
then having taken courage, they placed themselves under their enseignes and
opened themselves

The Duke of Bourbon lead the Vant-gard, accompanied by the Lord of Talamont,
The order of the French army in battle.
son to Trimouille, John Iacomo Triuulcio, Pedro of Navarre, and other famous
Captains, with all the Almaines, Gascons, and French. In the battle was the
King, about whom were the greatest part of the men at arms, and a choice
troop of Almaine soldiers, with the Dukes of Lorraine and Albany, the Lord
Trimouille, Francis of Bourbon Count of Saint Paul, Odet of Foix, Lord of
Lautrech, and diverse others. The Duke of Alancon conducted the rere-ward, with
the Lords La Palisse, and Aubigni, and the residue of the Cauallery.

The Suisses in the mean time having left certain companies of Soldiers upon
Fight betwixt the French and Suisses.
the rere-ward, had made of their whole Army but one body, which was very
strong, and being well closed together, they went on furiously (that they
might the better seize on the Artillery) and gave in upon the Lansqnenets, who
were at the front of the French Army. These men suspecting that the French,
according to the common report, were agreed with the Suisses, and that they
came only The Lancequenets open their ranks.
to assail them, in regard of the deadly hatred betwixt these two Nations,
opened themselves, and suffered the first charge of the Suisses, who came
furioufly upon them to pass on, whereupon, they went directly toward the
Artillery, which being perceived by Pedro of Navarre, he on a sudden called

The Cauallery on the other side, and the King himself who was environed with
a valiant troop of Gentlemen, coming against them, their great fury was in
The battle continues till four hours within night.
some sort cooled, and a very cruel battle began, the which with diverse
events continewed till four hours within night, certain French Captains
being already slain, and the King himself stricken with diverse pushes of
Pikes: at the last both sides being so weary as they were able to do no more
did separate themselves and retired forth of the throng, without any
commandment or sound of drum or trompet. The Suisses lodged in the very same
place expecting How the King ordai^eth his Army that night.


The King in the mean time did not spend the remainder of the night
vnproffitably, but assembled his council to determine what was to be done the
day following, he caused the Artillery to be drawn back, and planted in more
commodious places, he did reordaine the battaillons of the Lancequenets, who
promised The bataillis r^neued by break of day.
to amend their former days fault, and to give sufficient proof of their
faith and loyalty: and sent word to Aluiana, speedily to come and bring his
forces to the battaill. So soon as it was day the Swisses went and assailed
the French with the self same fury of the day before, who valliantly receuied
them, but with more discretion and better order, where upon the Swisses were
beaten, partly Aluiana comes opportunly to the battle
with the artillery, and partly with the Gascon Crosbowes, and by the horsemen,
so as they were beaten in Front and in Flank, at such time as Aluiana who was
sent for (as has been said) arrived with his light horse and with part of

He arrived at such time as the battle was most closed and most fierce, and
when matters were in greatest hazard and danger. He gave in with great fury
upon the Swisses backs, who neuer-the-lesse did still fight valliantly.

But at last dispairing of the victory, as well in regard of the great
resistance made against them, as by the arrival of the Venetian army, they
sounded The Swisses retire with soft pace toward Milan.
the retreat, and retired with a soft pace toward Milan, keeping still their
usual order, with such an amazement to the French army, as there was neither
horse nor foote-troupes that had the courage to follow them, by reason

The end of the second Book of the fifth Decade.
The Contents of the third Book of the
COntention among the Swisses, being retired to Milan after the battaill.
Milan, and the whole Duchy is reduced under the French obedience. The French
Kings entry into Milan. Aluiana his enterprise on the City of Bressia, with
the Venetian army alone. The death of Aluiana, and the establishment John James
Triuulce in his place. The Venetians take Pescara. The French are present at
the seege of Bressia. The Pope makes motion of peace. Parma and Placencia are
by the Pope yielded up to the French King. The enteruiew of the Pope and the
French King at Bolognia. The Camp dislodgeth from before Bressia. Triuulcio
gives over his charge. The Duke of Bourbon Viceroy in the Duchy of Milan. The
Lord of Lautrec with the Venetian army comes again before Bressia. The Popes
practices to break the seege of Bressia. The Emperor, the King of England and
the Pope band themselves Manfron and de Bue are defeated by the Imperialls. The
Lancequenets are defeated by Fregosa at the Castle of Ansa. The Emperor comes
with great forces into Italy, and beseegeth Asola. The French and Venetian
armies retire to Milan. The arrival of the Swisses at Milan for the King. The
Emperors shameful retreat into Almaine, and the abandoning of his army. King
Francis his complaints against the Pope. The Lord of Lautrec Governor of the
Duchy of Milan beseegeth Bressia the third time. Bressiayeeldeth upon
composition, Verona after diverse determinations



The Contents of the third Book of the
THE Swisses after the bataill being retired to Mylan, a very Dissension among
the Swiss^s in Mila^ after the Battaill.
great contention arose amongst them, some of them being desirous to make an
agreement with the French King, and others to continue still for the defense of
Milan. Those who demanded the acord, making another pretense, craved money of
Maximilian Sforza, the which they very well knew he had no means to pay; but
it was only by that refusal to take an occasion to leave him, the which they
did by persuasion of Roast their Colonel, leaving fifteen hundred of their
countrymen, with five hundred Italians, for the ga^d of the Castle, promising
Maximillian nevertheless to return to the aid of their fellows, whom they
left behind. Upon which promise Maximillian Sforza, accompanied by John of
Gonzaga, Ieronimo Morone, and by other Gentlemen of Milan, shut himself up in
the Castle.

The French after the Victory remaining masters of the field, did with ease
reduce under their power all the towns of the Duchy of Milan. The Viceroy of
Naples who all this while had not stird forth of the Placentyne Territory,
being The Viceroy retireth to Naples.
out of hope to be able any longer to guard and defend the state of Milan, and
fearing besides that the Pope had abandoned the league, he retired into
Romagnia, and from thence soon after brought back his army into the realm of
Naples. The Cardinal of Syon perceiving himself to be disgraced among his
countrymen, for the bad success of the battaill, went to the Emperor Francis
Duke of Barri brother to Maximillian Sforza.

The City of Milan being thus abandoned, gave itself to the French King;
Milan ye^ldeth to the French King.
with entreaties that he would forget what was past, promising to be ever
after more loyal and obedient, granting to pay unto him a very great sum of
money. The King refused to enter into it so long as the enemies held the Castle:
but the Duke of Burbon came thither to receive the City, in the Kings name,
and gave speedy charge to Pedro of Navarre to attempt the taking of the Castle,
who promised, contrary to the opinion of all-men, to win it within a month,
whereupon he began to batter it with the Canon certain days together;
then according to the usual manner, he made mines, whereby Upon what Articl^s
Sforza yeelde^d the Castle of Milan.
he blew up the walls and towers which were of a wonderful height.

Sforza being daunted when he saw a Case-mate and a part of the wall flying
Castle Antonio Bratan Doctor of the laws, to make a draught of the agreement
and redition of that place, which he was resolved to yield up to the French
King, which imported, that Maximilian Sforza should presently consigne to the
French King, the Castles of Milan and Cremona. That he should give over unto
him all his claim to that state, and should receive of the King a certain
sum of money for the payment of his debts; and that he should go into France
where the King should give him a yearly pension of thirty thousand Ducats, or
else should cause him to be made a Cardinal with the like reuenew. There were
besides, diverse Suisses that were in the Castle, who were all of them well
satisfied and pleased.

These Articles being accomplished, the King entered in great magnificence into
The French Kings entry into Milan.
the City of Milan, environed with the greatest part of his cauallery. Four
Ambassadors of the chiefest Senators of Venice came thither to him, namely
Vntonio Gr^mani, Dominico Treuisan, George Cornare, and Andrew Gritti, as well
to congratulate him for his victory, as to entreat him, as he was tied by the
capitulations of the confederacy, to help them to recover their Cities.

The King after that he had graciously received and entertained them, commanded
speedily the bastard of Sauoy and Theodore Triuulcio to aid them with The King
promises and to the Venetians.
six dundred lances and seven thousand Lancequenets: But because they delayed
Aluiana (whom the Venetians would not suffer to follow the viceroy) Aluiana his
enterprise upon Bressia.
marched with his army toward Bressia, to try if he could take it by force,
according to the Senates direction, who desired (that all matters being laid
aside) he should seek to recover Bressia and Verona: in regard whereof Aluiana
having passed over the river Adda, marched directly to Bressia, the City of
Bergamo being yielded unto him presently after the rout of the Suisses.

Now in the Venetians Camp there was diversity of opinions among the The Seege
of Bressia resolved on.
would not so fall out by the taking of Bressia. The Senate at first was of
this opinion, but because they would not spend the time vainly in that
determination, they referred that business to Aluiana his discretion, who
because Bressia was nearer to the French Camp, he marched thither, hoping to
take it with ease; for he thought that Bressia had not so strong a garrison as
Verona.

But Icaro the Spanish Captain being wise and subtle, who commanded Aluiana
his deseigne, had speedily caused a New succors enter into Bressia unknown to
Aluiana.
thousand footmen to come thither from Verona, with store of victuals and
other necessaries to sustain a seege; and had handled it so cunningly, as
Aluiana had no knowledge thereof, who made account so soon as he should
approach the walls to give an assault in diverse and sundry places: But by the
sudden and unexpected arrival of the new aid, he found more resistance
there then he looked for, and having greatly labored in his approaches,
Aluianas death.
a grievous feeuer seized on him, which enforced him to leave the Camp, and to
retire to Gueda, in the Bressan Country, where he departed out of this world
about the beginning of October, in the year of our Lord, Army, carrying it
with them when they marched in very great solemnity, then it was brought to
Venice, where by a public decree, it was very honorably buried in Saint
Steeuens Church, where at this day his toombe is to be seen: And because he
had ever made more esteem of honor and reputation then of wealth, having left
his wife and children poor, the Senate in acknowledgement The Senates
recompense to the widow and children of aluiana.
of his good service, decreed, that every month three score Ducats should be
paid to his widow, and as much to a son of his forth of the public
treasury so long as they should live, having given them a goodly house in the
City, with exemption from all taxes, and impositions, and that to every of his
three daughters should be given the sum of three thousand Ducats for their
Dowry when John James Triuulce General of the Venetian army.


After Aluiana his death, George Eme the prouidator did for a while command the
army. The Venetians in the mean time entreated the King to give them John
James Triuulce to be General of their forces, as well in regard of his
experience, as for his renown in martial discipline, as also because for the
common inclination toward the Guelphe faction, there had ever been good will
and friendship betwixt them and the same Republic. Whilst he prepared for his
going to Pescara taken by the Venetians.
the army, the Venetian companies took Pescara having not*long before defeated
certain troops of horse and three hundred Spanish footmen that went to
relieve it; then they recovered Asola and Lona which the Marquis of Mantua
Asola and Lona taken by the Venetians.
had abandoned.

Triuulce being arrived at the Venetian Army received letters from the Senate
full of congratulations and entreaties that he would carry himself in that
place, so as he had ever done in all employments: he did likewise receive the
army at the hands of George Eme the Prouidator, where he began to bear
himself with great wisdom, and discretion and according to the Senates desire
he beseeged Bressia, albeit it seemed very hard unto him to take it without the
French Bressia beseeged by the Venetians.
army, by reason that the City was strong, and that there were within it two
thousand foot as well Lancequenets as Spaniards, as also because winter
aproached, and the weather was much disposed to rain, as the event did not
deceive his Those of Bress^make a sally on the Venetians Camp.
judgment. For as they battered it with the Artillery which was planted upon
the very brinke of the dike, those within made a sally with fifteen hundred as
well Spaniards as Laucequenets, who giving in upon the guard of the Artilery
which were a hundred men at arms and six hundred foot, they easily put them to
rout. albeit that John Paul Manfron did in some sort stay their fury with
thirty men at arms.

They slew about two hundred foot, burnt the pouders and drew ten pieces of
ordinance into Bressia; so as the Venetians were like that day to have received
a far greater loss, had not Triuulce come speedily thither with certain foot
companies and Cauallery, who enforced the enemies to retire, and recovered

This disorder caused Triuulce to withdraw his army, and to lodge it more at
The retreat of the Venetian army.
large, even as far at Coccai, ten miles distant from Bressia, expecting the
coming of the French, at whose arrival, so soon as Triuulce had made new
provisions of artillery and munition, he returned again, and encamped before
it: The French supplies being conducted by the Bastard of Sauoy, which
consisted of five thousand Lansquenets, eight hundred men at arms, and
certain Bressia again beseeged by the French.
pieces of ordnance, with all manner of provision in abundance, being joined
with the Venetians, the City was by a general consent beseeged,

Yet nevertheless it fell out otherwise then they thought, for the Lanquenets
refused to march against the cities of the Emperors obedience, whereupon
being dismissed the Venetians craved Pedro of Nauar of the King, who came The
Eancequenets refusal.
thither in their sted, with five thousand Gascons and French: These being
encamped on the one side of the town, and Triuulce on the other with the
Venetian soldiers, the battery began in diverse places, the chief command of
all matters, remaining in a manner to Triuulce, by reason that the bastard of
Sauoy being sick, was gone from the army.

After a long battery, no assault was given, because those within had made
diverse rampires, and very carefully provided for all things necessary for
defense, so as Pedro of Navarre had recourse to his ordinary remedies, whereof
he had Pedro of Navarre makes use of the mine at the seege of Bressia.
then to mine and sap the walls, but those within the town suspecting the
matter, because those of the Camp had given over their battery, having
dilligently searched all over the City, if they could hear any noice of the
miners, at last it was discovered, whereupon they made a counter-mine, which
being filled with powder and fired, they overthrew all that Pedro of Navarre
had done, and slew his people that wrought in it, so as in a moment all that
was lost which had been set forward in many days. Pedro of Nauar his mine
blo^ne up.


The Venetians neuer-the-lesse did not despair of taking the City, but by
straightly shutting them up to stop alsuccors from coming to them, they hoped
to win it, having had intelligence of the great want of all necessaries
wherewith the beseeged were aflicted, which at last would enforce them to
yield, especially the Almaines, who are impatient of long suffering: as also
for that they had not Great dearth in Bressia.
received any pay of a long time from the Emperor, by means whereof they
refused all military observation, and prepared themselves to mutiny and
rebellion. This being reported to Triuulce, he supposed that a fair occasion
was offered to conquer the city, whereupon he resolved not to stir from
thenoe, notwithstanding the sharpness of the winter, the deep snowes, and the
long time

He began then straightly to shut it up on every side, to the end that no
victuals might enter it, nor no soldier of the town might come forth, and for
this purpose he still entertained them with light skirmishes. And because
those of Verona did in the mean space scour the Bressan Territory, and molest
the Venetian Army, he placed strong Garrisons in Pescara and Valegia to stop
their incursions, and to shut them more straightly up.

At the same time that Bressia was beseeged, there was some motion of peace,
The Pope motioneth a peace
to be better able to conclude peace with the French. But the Venetians being
so often beaten with hope of those matters, without giving any trust to the
Popes words, did not assure their State on many, but only on the friendship
and alliance with the French, and to the end that their intent might be known
to all men, they refused all conditions propounded to them, whereof they were
desirous to aduertize the French Ambassador resident at Venice, and that in
like case, their Ambassadors which were at the court, should acquaint his
Majesty with the whole business, that he might see how they accounted only
of his friendship, as the King did the like by their^ The which he

As concerning the Pope, the King had sundry thoughts. For all be-it his
Holiness had forsaken him, at such time as he thought him one of his greatest
The King desirous of the Popes friendsh^p.
friends, he nevertheless did greatly desire his friendship, the which he had
not left but by constraint. Therefore the Pope having sent his Nuntio to the
King, unknown to the other confederates, he was courteously entertained by him,
the King manifesting his hearty desire to enter into his Holiness favor: Yet
nevertheless The Pope yielded Parma and Placentia to the King.
resolving not to buy that at a dear rate which was offered, the Nuntio could
obtain nothing of his Majesty, till the Pope had quitted and yielded unto him
Parma and Placentia which he held.

The Pope could hardly be induced to quit those two Cities. At last, fearing

The Pope likewise sent a brief to the Venetians, exhorting them unto peace.
Enteruiew betwixt the Pope and French King at Bolognia.
The Pope and the King being come to Bolognia, they couenanted together, That
the King should take upon him the protection of the Popes person, and the
Churches State, of Iuliano and Lorenzo de Medicis, and the State of Florence.
That the Pope should cause his forces to leave Verona, and countermand those
companies sent to the Emperors aid against the Venetians. Diverse other
Articles The Articles concluded betwixt the Pope and King.
were concluded, concerning only the proffit of either of them: In the which
treaty having continued six days together, both of them departed from
Bolognia: the King thinking that he had done a great matter, to have drawn the
Pope to his side, and to have disioyned him from his enemies.

The King being come to Milan, began to think on his return to France, The
composition of those of Biessia.
which they had concluded with the Venetians General. But the Almain succors
came and entered the town before the time agreed upon was expired.

The report of the coming of this aid had caused sundry opinions in the army,
some of the being of opinion to continue the seege; others, to lead the army
elsewhere, but the report of the number of the Almaines being greater then the
effect, and for that they had notice by their spies that Mark Antonio Colonna,
who was The arrival of succors to Bressia, causes the Venetians to raise
their camp.
come forth of Verona, and entered the Mantua^ territory, made preparations to
come and assail them, caused the Venetian captains, who feared that by
staying there, the enemies might come and enclose them, to determine wholly to
dislodge, and to bring the artillery to Crema and Cremona, and the rest of the
army to Castlenedulla six miles off from Bressia.

These news being brought to Venice did greatly amaze the whole City, because
The raising of the camp amazeth the City of Venice.
strong Garrison at all passages, as it was impossible that any aid could
enter into it, which might keep them back from observing the agreement which
they had made, and that which caused them most to believe it, was that the
French supplies which were to come to the camp, being three thousand Almains
and 400* horse, were departed from Milan and were on their way toward their
camp.

This did much blemish Triuulcio his reputation, whereof he having notice,
Triuulce leaves his charge.
craved leave of the Signory, That he might depart, saying that the affairs of
his own house called him thence, and that he could tarry no longer in their
army. But the Senate knowing that this man's experience was much important for
their affairs, used means to appease him by letters, and did entreat the
King to cause him to take that charge upon him, but he would by no means
consent thereunto, but returned to Milan. Theodore Triuulcio took charge of
the Venetian army, John James Triuulcio had done, al-be-it he had not the name
nor degree of captain General.

The King in the mean time having given order for his return into France,
left the Duke of Burbon for viceroy in the Duchy of Milan, and before his
departure The Duke of Bourbon viceroy in the Duchy of Milan.
he commanded Odet of Foix Lord of Lautrec, to carry speedily greater aid to
the Venetians, and generally to do all matters for them, as if it were for his
own service, showing thereby his great affection to the Republike, as in all
other his speeches and discourses, not letting to say, that if the Venetians
were not wholly restored to their Cities he would return into Italy with
greater forces The Kings affection toward the Venetians.
then before.

The King being gonne forth of Italy, and the Duke of Bourbon tarrying there to
command the Duchy of Milan, the Venetians still kept an Ambassador nere to
him, to solicit whatsoever was needful for their affairs, Andrew Treuisan
was sent thither, who being come to Milan, Andre Gritti who had remained there
after the Kings departure to hasten the supplies, went to the army to be
Prouidator The Lord of Lautrec comes to the Uenetian army before Bressia.
there, in stead of Dominico Contaren, that fell sick, and was brought home to
Venice. At the very same time, the Lord of Lautrec came to the army with great
forces which did much increase it, so as it seemed that there was no doubt but
that Bressia would be taken.

Now the Pope supposing that this success did greatly cross his deseignes,
sought all means to hinder it. He propounded truce to draw the matter forth at
length, hoping to cause the Venetians to condescend to some agreement, though
it were to their disadvantage, by reason of the difficulty to take that City.
The Popes practices to break the seege.
And because he knew that himself could do no good in that business, for the
small credit which the Venetians did give to his words, he determined to make
use of the King of Polands authority, whose Ambassador (having intelligences
likewise at Venice) he persuaded to revive the treaty of peace, and to propound
to the Venetians, that if they would disioyne themselves from the French, and
allie themselves to the Emperor, they might add two goodly Cities to their
State, Lodi,

Besides this proposition the Pope, hoping that by the Generals absence the
seege of Bressia might be prolonged, wrote to King Francis that it might please
him to command the Lord of Lautrec to go to Rome, being desirous to confer
with such a man about diverse matters concerning the affairs of Naples, to
which he knew the King inclined, whereupon he exhorted him to make have to
begin Charles Duke of Burgondy having taken upon him the name of Prince of
Castile, made himself terrible to all those who held any States in Italy, and
chiefly to himself.

But the Popes cunning being already known of a long time, caused no great
regard to be given to his speech. The Venetians thus continuing the seege of
The Venetians resolve to continue the seege.
Bressia without harkening to any truce resolved not to stir from thence till
it was either yielded up, or taken by force. The Emperor, who had made war
but slowly the year before by his Lieutenants, determined to go thither in
person, sought all means to make new stirs in Italy, assembled diverse Diets,
craved aid, made great leauies of soulders, and above all, provoked the
Swisses to take arms to revenge the death of so many brave men their
companions, offering to be their captain and not to abandon them in any
travail or danger whatsoever. The King of England made the same request, being
jealous of the glory The practices of the Emperor, king of England, and the
Pope against the French.
him the protection of the King of Scots. The Pope did no less, but in more
secret manner. And all three of them promised good pay to those Swisses that
would come, showing them moreover that the profit which would redound to them
by that war of Italy and by their alliance, would be much greater then their
hire.

The Venetian captains in the mean time, after the arrival of the Lord of
Sundry opinions in the Venetians camp.
Lautrec, did often sit in council, where their opinions were very different,
saying, That there was no great garrison within the town, and that it was
besides destitute of all provision, making but small doubt of the seege. But
this opinion was Mark Antonio Colonna, was the man, who being lodged at
Verona, used all means to cut off victuals from the army, and to that end kept
great numbers of Spaniards and horsemen at Legnaga, which they then possessed,
so as by little and little, the enemies waxed so bold, as they came and scoured
as far as the Venetians camp whilst they were busied at their seege.

The General and the Prouidatori, thinking if they should endure that
indignity, it would greatly blemish their reputation, sent John Paul Manfron
and Mark Manfron, and de Bue, are defeated by the Imperials.
Antonio Bue with four hundred men at arms, and four hundred light horse to
surprise them, but the design succeeded badly: for Colonna being by his spies
aduertized of their coming, came forth of Verona with six hundred horse and
five Iulio, son to John Paul Manfron his horse being slain under him in the
fight was taken, and his father fled to Gueda. A more prosperous issue had the
enterprise of Iano Fregosa, and John The Lansequenets defeated at Ante by
Fregosa.
Corardo Visin, marching with certain companies as well of the one as other
army to the castle of Anse to stop the passage of 3000. Lansequenets: for
they slew 800. of them, and the residew escaped with the money which they
carried into Lodron. All these exploits were great; but not of any great
consequence in comrison of the total of the war, and of that which happened
on report of the Emperors coming into Italy which daily increased, whereby
both the assallants The Emperors coming into Italy.
and the beseeged were shaken with diverse hopes and fear. The Emperor having
assembled diverse foot and horse companies, and provoked great numbers of
Swisses leaving strong garrison in both those Cities, to pass on into the
Duchy of Milan to expel the French.

The Pope having notice of the Emperors entry into Italy, the better to honor
him, and to acquaint him particularly with his love toward him, created
Bernardo de Bibiena Cardinal of Saint Mary in Porticu, Legate, and sent him to
The Pope sends the Cardinal Bibiena Legate to the Emperor.
him, for that he was ever wont to show himself on the Popes behalf against
the French, and to hinder their proceedings. But the Venetians, believing
verily that the Emperor would come into Italy, exhorted the French King to
provide for their common affairs, and not to suffer the Emperor and the
Swisses, who The Venetians exhort the French King.
enuyed his glory and greatness, to enjoy the fruit of his labor and
travail; and

The King knowing that what they said was most true, took great care, not only
for the danger wherein he saw the Duchy of Milan, but because he should be
enforced to put off his enterprise of Naples till some other time, whereunto he
greatly inclined. Resolving nevertheless first of all to defend his own
Estates and those of his allies, he propounded to the Venetians to wage, at
their common charge eight thousand Swisses: because that he having at the same
time

The Venetians soon agreed to give pay to two thousand foot of that Nation,
The Venetians offer to the King.
and readily to furnish money necessary for other expenses of war. And
notwithstanding that the public treasury was much exhausted, and the whole
City greatly afflicted with so long a war, Yet nevertheless there was no
want seen in any provision for the army, nor in ought else that concerned the
continuance of the war. They made a leauy of four thousand Italian foot,
they did increase their garrisons in the Cities, and created two Prouidatori,
Paul Gradonico Lodouico Barbaro. In the Venetians camp were four thousand
Gascons The number of the French and Italian forces.
and five hundred men at arms, commanded by French captains: but amongst
those soldiers, who were particularly under the command of Triuulce, were
seven thousand foot, and about five and twenty hundred horse, as well men at
arms as light horsemen, and there stayed with the Duke of Bourbon after the
Kings departure four thousand Gascon and Italian footmen, and seven hundred
men at arms.

Now all these forces being united together, with the Swisses who were already
said to be arrived at Iuree to the number of six thousand, seemed to be
sufficient to defend the State of Milan, and to make all the Emperors attempts
vain and The number of the Imperial ^rmy.
had been leauied forth of his countries in have, and his Cauallery was well
worse, so as his best forces were Swisses, whom the Emperor did well not to
trust over much, as well in regard of the Nature of that Nation, which is
variable and inconstant, as for the small love they bear to the house of
Austria: so as the Emperors forces being such, the common opinion was to march
against them as they approached, nevertheless they resolved on the contrary,
and the whole army The Swisses nature.
departing from the Bressan Territory, came upon that of Cremona, whither the
Duke of Bourbon a while before was come with all his Cauallery and foot,
intending

The Emperor being come by Trent to Verona, went and encamped before Asola,
which was guarded by an hundred men at arms, and four hundred Venetian
footmen, where having spent diverse days to no purpose, he was enforced to
depart thence and crossed the River Oglio at Orcinouo, whereupon the French and
Venetians determined to raise their camp, and having left three hundred
Lances and three thousand footmen in Cremona, they retired on the farther
side of the River Adice, resolving to stop his passage. But the French and The
whole country betwixt Oglio, Po and Adda yield to the Emperor.
Venetians were scarce gonne from thence, but the whole country, which lies
betwixt the Rivers, Oglio, Po, and Adda, were at the Emperors devotion
(Cremona and Crema excepted) the one guarded by French, and the other by
Venetians.

After that the Emperor had crossed Oglio, he drew nere to the river Adda to
The French and Uenetian army retire to Milan.
in many places, they marched away the next day to Milan, whereby the Lord of
Lautrec purchaced small honor, who had published and written to the King, that
he would with ease stop the Emperors passage over that River.

Maximillian being moved at this retreat crossed the Adda, then he pursued his
journey, and being come within six miles nere to Milan, he sent an Herald to
summon those of the City, threatening the Milanois, that if within three days,
they The Emperor summoneth the City of Milan.
did not chase thence the French army, he would handle them in worse manner,
Frederike Barbarossa his predecessor had done, saying that he was come into
Italy, to receive, according to the custom of his Ancestors, one of the marks
of the Empire in the City of Milan, and to drive thence, and forth of all the
confines of that State, the French, as unjust and unlawful possessors thereof.
They answered the Herald according to the pleasure of the French. That the
State of Milan being in times past a member of the Empire, was by the consent
of Emperors cut off from it, for a sum of money given unto them; in regard
whereof Emperors, could no more lay any claim to it, the which was lawfully
possessed by Francis the French King, as well for that it was his own
inheritance, as being likewise won by right of arms: and therefore that the
Milanois would keep

Notwithstanding this brave answer the whole City was filled with great
amazement, and their determinations were different. Some were of opinion to The
diversity of opinions in the City.
abandon the City, despayring of being able to resist the enemies, others on
the contrary rejecting that council as too base, would not depart, but
persuaded to tarry still and defend the City, and the better to do it, they
resolved to retain all the footmen in Milan, with eight hundred Lances, and
to distribute the residue for the guard of the neighbor towns.

Nevertheless the first council had been followed, had not Andre Gritti and
Andre Treuisan, the Prouidators, dissuaded it, who by means of their authority
Albert Peter would be at Milan, The arrival of the Swisses at Milan for the
Kings service.
with ten thousand Swisses and Grisons. These news did encourage the Citizens
and soldiers. The Emperor in the mean time came and encamped at Lambre two
miles from Milan, whether he was no sooner come but the Swisses arrived at the
City. This coming gave spirit to the French, but greater terror to the
Emperor. For, seeing the City to be strengthened with such a garrison, he
doubted not but that the seege would be long and painful: whereunto he
himself had no means to tarry there long, for want of money, victuals, and
all other The Emperor distrusteth the Swisses.
necessaries for a seege: as also, for that he did greatly suspect the fidelity
of Lodouico Sforza at Nouara, there having been Swisses in his army, and in
that of the French his enemies, he feared least they should play him the self
same trick as they had don to Sforza, because he could not pay them. The
Emperor being troubled with these and other such like cogitations, fear
having mightily possessed him, determined to leave his army, and to return
into Germany, having caused it to be given forth that his departure was only to
provide money to pay his soldiers, and that he would soon return again. And
in this resolution, he went on his way with two hundred horse only.

Now the soldiers of the camp, perceiving themselves to be forsaken of their
captain, began to take a new party, as their particular profit urged them.
The Swisses went to Lodi, which had yielded to the Emperor when he crossed
the Mark Setio their captain went to guard Verona, the like did Mark Antonio
Colonna with his cauallery, and Spanish and Almaine foot.

Soon after the Emperors departure the Marquis of Brandenbourg came to The
Marquis of Brandenbourg comes to the Emperors army.
the camp with certain sums of money, who although he used all means to

Amidest these troubles, the small love and affection betwixt the Pope and the
French King, began to show it self, the which till then lay hidden. The King
complained for that the Pope being moved with a bad intent, had made so long
delay The French Kings complaints against the Pope.
to send that aid to the camp which he was tied to by their agreement; That
he had secretly stirred up the Swisses against him, and had in diverse other
matters manifested his small affection toward him. The Pope on the other side
alleged diverse causes which had moved him to suspect the Kings friendship.
The Venetians

Whilst this agreement was handled by Ambassadors, all the enemies deseignes
turned into smoke. For besides the Swisses, who were gonne home into The
Emperors deseignes come to nothing.
their country (as has been said) three thousand Spanish and Almain foot,
came to the French and Venetian camps, who having crossed the River Adda, had
for certain days mightily molested the enemies, by diverse and sundry
accidents, the French now having the worse, and anon the enemies.

The Duke of Burbon being at the same time departed forth of Italy, the Lord
Lautrec beseegeth Bressia.
held out so long as they had any hope of aid, which they expected out of the
country of Tirol, it being promised them, but it came to nothing, by reason
that the Venetians did shut up the castle of Anse and other passages, so as the
townsmen being not willing to endure an assault, because of the great breach
that was made, couenanted to leave the city and castle (their gods and lives
being saved) if they were not relieved within three days, on condition that
the soldiers might Bressia yields on composition.
go any whether saving to Verona. Icaro, the Cities captain, came forth of
the town, and the Lord Lautrec with the Venetian Prouidators entered it at the
same time, where they were joyfully received by all the inhabitants, who by
their cries and salutations did manifest their great content, for that the City
was reduced under the power of the commonwealth. Lautrec at his entry, took
possession of the town, and afterward redeliuered it to the Venetian
Prouidators, who Lautrec being (...) of (...) does (...) (...) it to the
Venetians.
soon erected the Republikes standard. In this manner did this famous City,
after many thwarts and accidents of fortune, return to the obedience of her
lawful Lords.

The news of the reddition of Bressia being brought to Venice, did greatly
rejoice the whole City, all men hoping that this happy success would be
followed with more fortunate events which would give end to the wars. The
Senate did particularly thank the French King, for that by means of his aid

Lautrec being moved by these words resolved suddenly to discampe, and
Laut^ec marches to beseege Uero^a.
with Triuulcio to march toward Verona. But being come to Pescara he had
intelligence that those five Cantons of Swisses with whom the King was not in
league made preparations to come and assail the Duchy of Milan, He then told
the Prouidators that in regard of his Kings service he could not be absent so
far from the State of Milan.

This business being debated in council, all men were of opinion to remain
in the same place where they were, and there to expect more certain news of
those stirs, the report whereof was yet uncertain. But the rumor of the
Swisses coming, still increasing, Lautrec was desirous to bring back his army
Sundry opinons in Lautrecs camp.
into the Duchy of Milan, notwithstanding that all the other captains were of
a contrary opinion, showing how the sytuation of the place was very strong and
most commodious, where they might resolve on whatsoever should be needful,
and provide for all things necessary to stop the enemies passage, of whose
coming they were yet uncertain. He on the contrary remaining firm in his
resolution to discampe, propounded that he would go and encampe

Besides, he made use of other excuses, namely, how that the Venetians had
Excuses aleadged by Lautrec, tha^ be might discampe.
conferred with the King of Polands Ambassador who spoke to them of peace, and
that the money promised to pay the Almaines, was not yet sent to the camp.
Gritti the Prouidator opposing himself to what Lautrec had spoken, said, That
he knew of a certain, that there was great scarcity of all things in Verona,
and Gritti the Prouidator, his answer to Lautrec.
then good to the city, that they ought not to give them time to make
provision, least that afterward the enterprise would prove more difficult:
That he had intelligence by the soldiers that were come to their camp, that
the townsmen and soldiers were at dissension among themselves* that all
things were in confusion, by means whereof the affairs of war was managed
more slowly, and with great suspicion: so as if the army were but before it,
the people being partly provoked by their own interest, and partly likewise
by their love which they did bear to the Venetians, might raise some tumult,
and give them means for to enter the City: As for the Ambassassador the
Almaines, the money was ready long before, and should be brought to the camp
so soon as any safe means of sending it should be presented. But when I
consider that you mean to depart hence, to go and encampe on the Bressan
country, I am greatly troubled thereat, as are all those of our city, because
the people of that country, who are very loving and loyal to our Republike,
and by war have endured infinite miseries, should be again tormented by the
arrival of the army, now when they began to recover themselves and to
breath, so as by this means, we shall charge and oppress our friends, to ease
our enemies.

Gritti having uttered this speech, added, that if Lautrec would not follow
them, The Venetians resolution.
he was resolved to pass with the Venetian army upon the Verona territory,
where unto the General and all the Venetian captains gave their consent. But
having afterward, maturely considered the mischief which that dividing of the
army might procure to the Commonwealth, they did solicit and entreat Lautrec,
to pass on, but he would by no means harken thereunto, and all that they
could obtain of him, was, that he would a while longer stay in that place, and
expect (as he said) money from France, and that the Venetians in the mean time
should make greater provisions of money, artillery and munition; but the chief
The cause which moo^ad Lautrec to stay still where he was.
cause of his abode there was, to hear what end the treaty of Noyon would come
to betwixt his King, and the King of Spain: employing in the mean Lautrec
having made a bridge at the village of Monzarban, was ready to reap down all
the corn of the Veronois, and to waste the champian country by his light
horse, having to these ends sent part of his army to lodge on the Mantuan
territory, where it grievously spoiled and wasted that country.

The Lord of Lautrec being afterward moved by the Venetians great com
plaints, crossed the Adice, at Gothalonga, where after that his soldiers had
taken great booties, he drew near to Verona, but it was after that the
Venetians had protested not to give him the money which was come to the camp
for to pay the Almaines, unless he would march to Verona. Lautrec with his
army

The Venetians army, with the French aid, consisted of eight thousand Italian
The number of the Venetians army.
foot and of six thousand Almaines paid by King Francis, of a thousand men at
arms, and two thousand light horse, with diverse great captains well
experienced in the art military. These forces being come before Verona, they

The French coming to execute what had been determined, the Lansequenets The
Lansquenets refuse to beseege a City belonging to the Emperor.
although they had received three months pay of the Venetian Prouidators,
either of their own proper motion, or else being suborned by the Emperor,
protested that they would not come to the seege of a City which was belonging
to the Emperors possessions, to which the French King had no particular
claim, and so by no means would pass on any further: whereupon Lautrec
repassing the Adice, lay a mile off from the walls of Verona, and the The army
dislodgeth by reason of the Lansquenets refusal.
Venetian army where the Lansquenets remained (five hundred men at arms, five
hundred light horse and four thousand foot being gonne away) not thinking it
a safe matter to remain beyond the River, went and joined with him.

In the mean time the Cities forces did daily decrease, by reason that diverse
Almaine companies returned home into their country, and others went to the
Venetians camp, where they resolved to entertain no more of them, by reason
that they did somewhat distrust them. We must think that the number of those
who at the beginning were in Verona, was very great, for albeit many of them
were gone from thence, it was neuer-the-lesse sufficiently well mand with
soldiers: in regard whereof the Lord Lautrec, meaning not to hazard any thing,
but upon a certain hope of good success, demanded greater aid of the
Venetians, if they would have the army to march before Verona. The Venetians
albeit they found it very difficult, in respect of the quality of the matter
and the time, yet nevertheless because they would not foreslow an enterprise,
which did The Uenetians send supplies to the army.
out of their own state, they sent them to the camp, with great store of
artillery, powder, and victuals, by the river Adice, to the end that the camp
should want nothing.

Within Verona, which was strong by sytuation and art, and well furnished with
What forces were in Uerona.
all kinds of artillery, were, besides the cauallery, six thousand foot, as
well Spaniards and Almans, as Suisses, commanded by Mark Antonio Colonna their
General, who was no more in the Popes pay but in the Emperors, a man
excellently experienced in martial matters.

This man had diligently provided for whatsoener was necessary for the Cities

Lautrec approaching the walls, divided his army into two parts, He went and
encamped with his infantery and cauallery on that side which looks toward
Mantua: And Triuulcio having crossed the Adice with the Venetian forces, seated
his camp against the walls toward Vincenza. The battery began at one time in
both those places, but with sundry intents, because that Lautrec did batter it
furiously Verona beseeged in two several places.
in one only place, to open away into the City, and to take from the enemies
the means to repair it: But Triuulcio being encamped more at large did batter
a great space of the wall, hoping that it being beaten to the ground, he might
with more advantage come to the assault.

Lautrec having espied a place near to the gate Calcina, which was not very
Assault given to Verona.
strong being rampierd only with a weak old tower, he planted his ordnance
against it, which being thrown down, he commanded the soldiers to go to the
assault, who upon hope of the sack of that rich City, went to it valliantly,
and came without fear of the ordnance or Harquebuze shot upon the breach;
fighting with the enemies hand to hand, where the French did bravely behave
themselves: The assailants re^ire with loss.
but the enemies having brought certain pieces of ordnance to play in flank
upon the breach, the French were enforced with great loss of their people to
retire to the camp. But Triuulce notwithstanding that the breach was very
great, did nevertheless delay to give the assault, knowing very well that the
Lautrec, entreated him to send him more aid, that he might the safelier go to
the assault.

Now al-be-it Lautrec had means to do it, for the commodiousnesse of going
from one army to an other, upon a very strong bridge over the Adice, and that
he Lautrec deli^eth.
did often promise to do it, did nevertheless delay the matter. And the camp
had already lain fifteen days before the town, the enemies were reduced to
extremity, the cannon had beaten down a great space of the wall, the soldiers
within

News in the mean time came to the camp, how that great numbers of Almaine
footmen were coming to relieve the beseeged. These news did amaze Lautrec
more then there was cause, and distasted him of continuing the seege, so as he
thought on nothing more then how to retire his army into some place of safety.
The Venetian Prouidators being aduertized of this sudden resolution, The
Venetians remonstrance to Lautrec.
came unto him, where after diverse remonstrances of the great blemish he should
do to his honor and reputation to raise his camp, they infinitely entreated
him with great earnestness to temporize for a while longer, and not to depart
till the enemies were arrived, that they might see what they were: But all
their entreaties could not divert him from his first resolution. Whereupon he
commanded on a sudden to discampe, so as all his troops went to Albareda,
Paul The Venetians stay to guard the bridge.
Gradonic the Prouidator, and John Paul Manfron remained for the guard of the

In the mean time Rocandolf Colonel of the Almaine foot (the French and
Venetian Rocandof the Alma^n victual th Verona.
army being retired) entered Verona without any empediment, and having relieved
it with victuals and new soldiers in their stead that were hurt, returned into
Germany* whereupon the Prouidators, did again solicit the Lord of Lautrecto
return to the seege of Verona, and not to spend time so unprofitably. But
Lautrec comforting them used diverse excuses for his slownesse, assuring them
that

The Prouidator having seriously ruminated these words in his mind, began to
doubt of some treaty which did not appear; and namely because that at the same
time as the camp dislodged from before Verona, the report was that a messenger
came from France to Lautrec, who had secret conference with him, and entreated
him to keep close his coming. Therefore the Prouidators did earnestly entreat
Lautrec to discover unto them what he knew thereof, to the end The Prouidators
and Venetian Senate in great care.
they might be no longer enforced to entertain so great an army, which charged
the Republike with a merueilous expense: the Senate likewise being aduertized
by the Prouidators of what had past, had the same thoughts, at such time as
they Francis being desirous that the Venetians For what cause the French king
would have the Venetians to be aduertized of the treaty.
should have time to consult of their affairs, would forthwith have them to be
acquainted with the treaty of Noyon betwixt him and the Archduke Charles, to
the end that the Commissioners of both Princes coming to Brussels, should find
all difficulties to be taken away and resolved on.

The sum of the treaty concluded at Noyon, was thus: That there should The
sum of the treaty of Noyon.
be a perpetual peace betwixt the French King and the King of Spain, and a
confederacy for the defense of their States against all men, in the which were
comprehended all other Princes, friends or allies, of either of them. That King
Francis Rene, daughter to the late King Lewis, in marriage to the King of
Spain. That the said King should within a certain time re-deliuer the
Kingdom of Navarre to her ancient King. That the Emperor might within two
months enter into that peace, and though he should enter into the league, the
French King might help the Venetians to recover Verona: the which if the
Emperor would within six weeks commit to the King of Spain, with power to
give it freely to the French King, to dispose thereof as he should think fit,
the King should pay unto him a hundred thousand crowns, and the Venetians an
other hundred thousand, part whereof should be paid at the consignation
thereof, and the rest within six months after, and that he should likewise be
acquitted Lewis whilst they were confederates.

The Venetians doubting whether the Emperor would accept of peace on these
conditions, did not cease to solicit the Lord of Lautrec to beseege Verona;
and also in regard of the sum of money they were to pay, which they desired
rather to recover by arms. But peace was more agreeable to the French King
then force, being desirous of accord with the Emperor: yet nevertheless
Lautrec not knowing how to excuse himself to the Venetians, who had made what
provisions soever he craved, as also because the Lansequenets did no more
refuse to Verona again beseeged.
go to the seege, he condescended to their request and went again and
encamped before Verona.

Now whilst the French on the one side, and the Venetians on the other were
busied in the battery, nine thousand Lansquenets arrived, who were sent by the
The Emperor wholly enclineth peace.
Villa-franca.

The matter then was concluded at Bruxels as well with the King of Spain as
with the Emperor, in the manner above said, the which going slowly on, was
hastened Francis, on condition that there should be truce with the Venetians.
The whole business being thus ended, the Bishop of Trent was sent to the Lord
of Lautrec, to consigne the City of Verona, in the King of Spaines name, to the
French King within the space of six weeks, according to the contents of the
Capitulation, the which was done on the fifteenth day of January 1517. after
the Venetians had paid the first fifty thousand crowns, and fifteen thousand
to Uerona consigned to the Lord Lautrec for the French King, is presently
delivered to the Venetians.
the footmen that were in the City: whereupon at the very instant the Lord of
Lautrec, in the name of the said King, gave it to the Senate of Venice, and for
the said Senate, to Andre Gritti and John Paul Gradonic the Prouidators, to the
great contentment of the Nobility, and the whole people of Venice, who did
highly rejoice,

But if they rejoiced in Venice, they did no less in Verona, and in all the
towns The great joy of the Veronoi^ for that they were reduced under the
subjection of the Venetians.
round about, hoping that by means of that peace they should be freed from all
those troubles and miseries which they had so long a time endured. After all
these demonstrations of joy, the Senate acknowledging the Lord of Lautrec for a
wise and valliant captain, after they had presented him with great gifts,
they commanded the Prouidator Gritti, to accompany him to Milan. But being come
The Senates acknowledgement to the Lord Lautrec.
as far as Lodi, he found John James Triuulce there, who came to meet and to
bring him from the King the order of Saint Michel. Gritti having orderly
performed

The end of the third Book of the fifth Decade.
The Contents of the fourth Book of the
THe Impositions and taxes laid upon the people during the war, are in time
of peace revoked. The university Selim Emperor of Turks. The great victories
obtained by Selim. He grants the Venetians demands. The Venetians send an
Ambassade to Charles King of Spain concerning traffic. Truce prolonged
betwixt the Emperor Maximillian and the Venetians, The Emperonr Maximillians
death. The French and Spanish Kings aspire to the Empire. Charles King of
Spain is chosen Emperor. Soliman, by the death of Selim, his father,
obteineth the Empire of the Turks. Lewis King of Hungary has recourse to the
Princes of Christendom. The Venetians in league with Soliman. The French King
distrusteth the new chosen Emperor. The Emperor elect seeks the friendship of
the Venetians. The coming of Soliman into the Realm of Hungary enforces King
Lewis to implore the Venetians aid, who lend him thirty thousand Ducats. The
Turk takes Belgrade, the chief City of Hungary. The King of England is
chosen vmpire and mediator for the strife betwixt the Emperor and the French
King. The French King and The Swisses forsake the French for want of pay.
Prospero by the aduerticement of a Traitor marches directly to Milan. The
suburbs of Milan and the Roman gate taken by the league. The Lord of Lautrec
with his Cauallery retireth to Coma. Milan is taken and sacked. The Imperialls
take Coma, with diverse other towns. The sudden death of Pope Leo. Lastly the
resolution and preparations of the Lord of Lautrec and the Venetians to beseege
Milan.

The Fourth Book of the fifth Decade of the History of Uenice.
Arms being laid a side by the means above said betwixt the Emperor and the
Venetians, the Republike was three years at peace, which began at the entering
of the year, 1517. Whereupon all the cities of the firm land, which were by
the last agreement reduced under the Venetians government, sent their deputies
to Venice to rejoice

The Senates chief care was to discharge the city of Venice and all other
towns and Villages of the firm land from diverse taxes and The Senate
disburdeneth the commonwealth in time of peace.
impositions laid upon them during the war, by reason of the small means of
the public treasury: to the end that particular men, increasing their means
by peace, if afterward any need should be, they might be more ready to relieve
the public with their wealth. It was decreed like-wise that all those who
served the common wealth in any place whatsoever, should ever after be wholly
paid their

They did like-wise re-establish the University of Padua, which had been
unfrequented for the space of eight years. Then because they would no more
fall into The University of Padua reestablished by th. Senate.
those inconveniences, as they had done for want of providing fortifications
necessary for their Cities, they began to fortify them, and cheefely the two
famous cities, Padua and Verona, the two cheifest of their state on the firm
land: and for that purpose Andre Gritte, and George Cornare were appointed, who
going to those places should resolve by the advice and council of Triuulcio,
and the other experienced Captains of the Venetian army, on that which was to
be done, By which means, diverse places being ruined in time of war, were by
them re-established, and many others newly built. The Venetians send two
Ambassadors t^ the great Turk^.


But because the friendship of the Ottomans was very necessary for them, as
well Selim Emperor of Turks: Lodouico Monce^igo, and Bartholomeo Contaren were
chosen for that purpose to go and congratulate him in the name of the
Republike, for all the goodly victories that he had obtained. For Selim in an
encounter having vanquished his brother Achomat, and put him publicly to
death, did like-wise overcome the Adulians, who are a very valiant people of
Selims victories.
the mountains: then going into Persia against the Sophi, he defeated him in
set battaille, and took the city of Tauris, the chief seat of that Empire,
with the greatest part of Persia, the which he was enforced to abandon, for
want of victuallls, because that year had been very scarce. Returning
aftetwards to Constantinople, having refreshed and re-enforced his army, he
turned his forces upon the Sultan of Suria and Egypt, who was a Prince always
highly esteemed by The Mamal^kes vanquished by Selim*
of 300. years. Selim then being come with his army against this kind of
people, defeated them soundry times in field, so as the Sultan was slain, and
an other Sultan his successor was taken in battaill, whom ignominiously he put
to death openly: he made beside, a great slaughter of those Mamaluks, and
thereby in a manner did wholly root out their name: he took Cairo, which is a
populous Selim takes (...) Cairo.
city, and the Soldans ordinary residence, and in a short-time seized on all
Suria Soldans of Aegipt in times before. Now the Venetian Ambassadors being
embarked at Venice, did first touch at Cyprus, and from thence they went to
Damasco, where Selim returning Selim grants the Venetians demands.
from his victories had wintered with all his army. The Senate had expressly
enjoined them to procure, that the Venetian merchants who dwelt at Tripoli,
Alexandria, Barath, Damasco, and other merchant places of those Provinces,
might be maintained there in the self same privileges, which they were wont
to enjoy in Selim aiming at other ends did easily grant it, as well for the
desire he had to entertain the Venetians friendship, as to restore trafick to
his new conquered Provinces, The Venetians send Ambassadors to Charles King of
Spain concerning tra^fick.
whereby great profit and commodity might redound to him. At the same time for
the same purpose an Ambassador was appointed to go to Charles King of Spain,
to the end that it might be lawful for the Venetians to traffic through all
the lands and signories newly fallen to him, as they were wont to do in the
life Fernand in Spain, because that his officers did seem to make some
difficulty in it, in regard of the trade with Afric, whereof it shall not not
be impertinent to say some thing by the way. The ancient founders of the city
had special care, that the citizens of their new city should exercize
themselves in voyages and sea-traffick, to be able by their virtuous industry
to increase their domesticke means and faculties, and make themselves known
to foreign nations. The situation of their city invited them thereunto
because the Inhabitants had not they any inherita^ces whereon to busy
themselves. Whereupon they decreed diverse ships should traficke into sundry
places of Christendom, and of the Infidells, in which they sent diverse
gentlemen, to learn them navigations, and other matters belonging to the sea:
some of whom remained for a time among those foreign

Now the places whether these vessels, (which were commonly called ships of
traffic) used to go at their departure from Venice, was first into Sicily to
the The usual trade of the Venetian vessels.
City of Saragossa, from thence to Tripoli in Barbary, and having coasted the
Island of Gerbes, they passed on to Tunis: from thence they directed their
course to the realm of Tremisen, staying cheefely at Tusen and at Mega, two
excellent Merchant towns, called at this day Ona and Orana. Then they went to
diverse places of the Kingdom of Marocco, and touching at all the havens of
Barbery, which were anciently comprised under the Provinces of Mauritania and
Numidia, they sailed into Spain.

But their traffic was very different, for at their departure from Venice,
they

But to return to our discourse, the Venetians perceiving that a great part of
the time of truce betwixt the Emperor and them was spent, they thought it
necessary to come to some new agreement with him; the which the Pope desired,
Truce ^ed betwixt the Emperor and the Venetians.
coming thither, and concluding no peace the truce by the Kings means was
prolonged betwixt them for five years, on condition that for every of the five
years they should pay twenty thousand crowns to the Emperor. The occasion of
this truce, was, because that the Pope being moved by the Turks fortunate
success, began to think on other milder matters; he sent Breefs to all The
Pope exhorts christian Princes to take arms against the Turks.
Christian Princes putting them in mind of the danger which threatened them,
requesting them that all discords and contentions being laid aside, they would
Selims Empire, and his great desire of rule and sovereignty, which would
provoke him at last to oppress all other Princes, as he had done by the
Souldan of Egypt and the Mamalucks.

These things being by the Pope represented to the Venetians as well as to
other Christian Princes, were cause that the Venetians consented to the truce
(as has been said) made by the French King betwixt the Emperor and them,
seeing that peace could be hardly concluded on: to the end they would not seem
The Venetians answer ^o the Popes exhortation.
for the popes proposition, made particularly unto them to take Arms against
Selim, they answered that when they should see matters set foreward, and
ernestly pursued, the Venetian Senate would be more ready for that enterprise
then any else, and would never fail of their duty, knowing very well how much
it did import them, not only in regard of the common interest of all
Christendom, and for the Popes entreaties and exhortation, as because their
Sea-state did border upon that mighty enemy, the which he would in a moment
assail, and molest with all outrages, before the Confederates Army would be
ready to enter into his Country.

Soon after this treaty of truce the Emperor Maximilian fell sick and dyed
The Emperor Maximilian* death.
at Lynx in the be^inning of the year. 1519. which is a town seated on the
marches of Austria, his death being known to the soldiers that lay in Garrison
at Gradisca and Maran, they sallied forth upon the lands belonging to the
Commonwealth, robbing and spoiling the Venetians subjects, executing diverse
other hostile actions. The Senate wrote to the Lieutenants of the Empire,
saying That for their parts they would keep, and observe the truce, and not
make any innovation because of the Emperors death: but that they like-wise
should do well, to contain, their soldiers in peaceable manner, and keep
them from making any more incursions upon their Territories: The Lieutenants
thinking this to be just and reasonable, the truce was inuiolably observed
every where.

In the mean time, preparation was made for the election of a new Emperor: The
French King and the King of Spain, two great and excellent Princes, began
openly to aspire thereunto: And albeit the practice was of great importance
betwixt The French and Spanish King aspire to the Emperor.
two such mighty Princes, yet neuer*the-lesse they handled the matter on both
sides very modestly, without any injurious speeches or warlik menaces, each of
them seeking by his own authority, and means, to draw the Electors on his
side: But the Italians did stand in awe of either of their powers, fearing that
which of them two should attain that dignity, would by the aid of the Almains
enuade all Italy, and join it to the Empire, as it had been in times before:
so that either of their elections could not but be very much distasteful, and
grievous to the Italians: and yet for all that they inclined more to the French
King, then to the Catholic Majesty, for diverse causes, and cheefely because the
French, as a stranger should not bear such authority in Germany as the King of
Spain, who was

Now besides these Ambassadors the French King sent the Lord of Teligni to
Venice, as well for this purpose as for diverse and sundry other negotiations,
and The French Kings request to the Venetians.
among others to entreat them to lend him some good store of money, to supply
his great expense he was to make, if he should be chosen Emperor, and also
that they would send forces into Germany, to assist the Electors, to the end
Charles should enter with an army into Italy, to enforce the Pope to free him
from the oath made to Pope Julius the second, concerning the inuestiture of the
Realm of Naples.

The Senate made answer to the Ambassadors demands, That in regard of their
great obligation to the French King, albeit their treasour was much exhausted
The Venetians answer to the French King.
by the late wars, they would neuer-the-lesse strive to aid him with an
hundred thousand Ducats: But for to send forces into Germany, it would smalely
avayle the King, and greatly hurt them, Besides, the Almains would never suffer
their soldiers to pass, the passages being very straight and well guarded.
Charles his passage, if without being provoked there unto he would enter armed
into Italy against the most Holy Father of Rome, that the Venetians would no
less show themselves defenders, and protectors of the liberty and dignity
Ecclesiastical, then their Ancestors had done, preferring the greatness
thereof before that of the Empire.

During these treaties of King Francis by his Ambassadors, Charles King of
Spain, being more apt to leuy solders with money, then to give it to the
Electors, sent an army into the field, under color of keeping the election
from being forced, the which drawing near to Franckfort, did encourrage those
Electors that favored his cause, and made those which wandered to incline to
him, so as Charles of Austria, King of Spain, was chosen Emperor the eight and
twentieth Charles king of Spain chosen Emperor.
day of June, which was at the very self same time that Soliman the son of
Selim did peaceably obtain, without any contradiction, the O^taman Empire by
the death of his father Selim: There was but one only Captain named Agazzell
Governor of Suria, that did oppose it and make himself master of the
Provinces of his government, who taking arms for that purpose, his rebellion
was soon appeased, and all the other Provinces reduced under Solymans
obedience, remained peaceable.

He was noted to be of a haughty courage, and fit for high enterprises, and a
great enemy to Christendom: yet notwithstanding Christian Princes, not
considering the perils and dangers which followed them at the heels, suffered
this young Prince, their natural enemy, to grow great, whilst they had time to
abate his power, by busying him in the defense of his own lands and
Seignories, and Lewis King of Hungary prepar^th for defense against the Turk.
means to keep him from enuading those of their neighbors.

Lewis King of Hungary alone, levied soldiers, and made great preparations of
war, employing all men's aid and succor, as one that feared this barbarous
enemy, by reason that Solomon would not renew the truce which this King had
made with his father Selim, whereupon he sent his Ambassadors to the Christian
Princes, and cheefely to Rome and Venice, entreating, exhorting, and
admonishing them of other men's ruin and loss by the example of his own near
at hand.

The Venetians answered him that the power and greatness of the Ottomans The
alliance is renewed betwixt Soliman and the Venetians.
their own forces could do no great matter. Not long after, they sent Marco
Minio their Ambassador to Constantinople, who with their usual presents was to
procure the articles of peace to be confirmed in the same manner as some few
years before Antonio Instiniano had done with Selim, and with the same
authority, immunity and franchize.

Soliman showed himself very ready to grant their demands, as being desirous
of their friendship and aliance, and for a demonstration of his good will
toward them, at the same time as Minio departed from Venice, Acmat Ferrat set
foreward from the Port of the great Turk toward Venice, to give them notice
from him of his succession in the Oriental Empires, and to renew their
alliance begun with his father Selim. Besides he was desirous, (for that the
Venetians traffic into his Contries might be more free and safe,) with his
own forces to chase the Pirates that scoured the Leuant Seas, entreating the
Venetians for their part to do the like, to the end the navigations might be
assured.

This renewing of their league with the Turk, did greatly proffit them, in
regard their state in Italy was not very firm, and by reason that the alarmes
and The Uenetians arm against the Pirates.
suspicions which they had conceived at the beginning of the year, because it
was reported that the Turk armed, was by that means cleared: so as one part
of the nauall Army that they had prepared upon that rumor, sailed into Barbary
against the Pirates, of whom, many being taken, the passages were freed from
danger. In this manner did the Venetians temporise with the Turk, using all
means to keep his friendship, despayring of being able to hurt him, so long as
the Christian Princes careless of the common danger, were at strife among
themselves.

Now the most Christian King being som-what troubled with this election, and
Why the French King did distrust the Elect Emperor.
fearing least Charles of Austria, would turn his deseignes upon Italy to
expulse league together, against those that would attempt to invade any of
their states, and specially to oppose themselves against the Emperors passage
coming in arms to go to Rome (as he said) to receive the Imperial Crown,
because he could not enter in that manner but to the great danger of all those
who possessed After what manner (...) Pope would consent to ^he King^
preposition.
any states in Italy-

The Venetians soon consented to the French Kings proposition for the safety
of their states. But the Pope being resolved what to do, and ruminating sundry
matters fed the King and the Venetians with fair hope: but when it came to the
conclusion, he would not consent to have any thing set down in writing,
saying, That in such a case the only words of Princes did suffice, with their
true meaning The Venetians suspect the French King.


The Venetians had some suspicion, that the King did seacretly treat with the
Emperor, and that the same might be the canse why the Pope doutbed, and
prolonged the affairs that were concluded on. And that which did increase
their suspicion, was, for that they had certain notice, that Artur Gouffiar
Lord of Boyssy, great master of France, and the Lord de Cheures, met at
Montpellier; the one from the elect Emperor, and the other from the King, to
consult of a final peace betwixt both their Majesty's, and to decide all
controversies betwixt them and their allies. The Venetians neuer-the-lesse
still continuing their former resolution The Emperor seeks the Venetians
friendship.
sufficiently advertised of their suspicion;) but held it for certain, that if
the King were desirous of agreement with the Emperor, they especially should be
named and comprised therein, and all their contention with the Emperor should be
wholly composed. Charles so soon as he was chosen Emperor having turned his
deseignes upon Italy, knowing how much it did import him to have the Venetians
friendship, did show himself desirous to compose all the differences, which
had been betwixt the Emperor Maximilian his predecessor and them: and to
effect Maximillians life time, with ample power and authority, to conclude The
com^ssoners of the Emperor and the Venetians me^t at Verona
and decide, not only the business of the truce for five years, but
like-wise to end all other matters, which were yet undecided two years before
betwixt them. Francisco P^sare a long time before chosen by the Senate, for
that purpose went to Verona, whither for the Emperors part came four of the
chief of the council of Inspruch, who had ample power to negociate that
busin^sse. John Pin, the French Ambassador, came thither in his Kings name, who
at the last truce was chosen Vmpier and Judge of all their controversies. The
dem^ds of the Venetian commissioners.


The Venetians craved possession of all the places taken from them in the last

Yet nevertheless the Venetians having at the same time their Ambassadors in
the Emperors Court, they were put in hope of a prosperous end of that
business, The assembly is broken of without any conclusion, and the Uenetians
are put in hope of ^ prosper^s ^d.
and that the Emperor would speedily appoint Commissioners to intend it,
being very desirous by means of a sure peace to become their good neighbor
and perpetual friend, his officers thereby showing how much he desired the
Venetians friendship, who for their parts did in like manner declare, how they
desired nothing more then peace: but that they could not (their faith kept
inuiolate) do any thing contrary to their alliance with the French King.

After this manner did these two Princes at one time pursue the Venetians
friendship and alliance, but by different ways, each of them seeking to make
use of them in their enterprise of Italy: so as in these practizes and
negotiations all that year passed on without any certain resolution. The
year following which An. 1520.
was 1520. Italy did still continue peaceable, but Christendom was threatened
by Soliman, who perceauing his Empire to be at quiet, and all things to fall
out as he wished, would not be idle, but following rather the generousnesse
of his Soliman resolves to enuade the Realm of Hungary*
Ancestors, he determined to take arms, and to war upon the Christians.

This was a long time before foreseen of many, but remedied by none. Following
then this determination he resolved to enuade the realm of Hungary; An. 1521.
mighty army, and marched into Hungary.

King Jews being amazed at the coming of so mighty an army, and distrusting
his own forces, did again send new Ambassadors, to solicit and entreat
Christian Princes to aid him, it being the common cause of all Christendom,
Philippo Moro Bishop of Agria was sent to the Venetians, who being brought into
the Senate, spoke in this manner. My King, (most excellent Prince, and ye The
oration of the Hungarian Ambassador.
most noble Lords) has such confidence in yourselues, in your fidelity,
curtezie, Ottamans greatness, because that as well in regard of your power at
sea, as for your near neighborhood to them, ye have excellent means to
molest that enemy, and to hinder him from growing great at other men's costs.
Therefore, my Lords, ye shall purchase great glory, and shall establish a
greater safety, to your state, if ye will be Authors to move other Princes to
protect and defend the realm of Hungary, against this new furious enemy to
Christians. Consider, my Lords, to what greatness the ^ttaman family has in
short space attained, and wholly (if I may so say) by the carelesenesse of
Christian Princes, that have not opposed themselves against Constantine, had
been heard, when the warlike and cruel Mahomet did assail Constantinople the
Greeks Empire should not now be ruyned, not that of the Mamalukes be wholly
extinct. For both the one and other gave such counterpoyse to the Turkish
forces, as if they now wear in force, they might with ease assure* not only
the Kingdom of Hungary, but like-wise all the residue of Christendom.
Who-soeuer shall consider the progression of the ancient Monarchies, will find
that their difficulty was not great to attain to a sovereign degree, when
there was none of power sufficient to oppose their greatness, and to
counterpoise Therefore it is certain that by how much we shall delay to cut
off the greatness of this cruel enemy, by so much more will dangers increase,
and remedies become more difficult. I will not say that to take arms for the
defense of the Kingdom of Hungary, is a matter only honorable for Christian
Princes, as well in respect of the duty of their religion, as for their
profession, nor also that it is profitable for them, for any particular
interest, but I will say, that of a certain it is most necessary for the
conservation of their states. For that Kingdom being lost, which has already
of a long time opposed it self against the Turks attempts, and has
interrupted the course of their victories: who is it that is able to hinder
him, from entering into Austria, from molesting Germany, and from making

The Ambassador was heard with great attention, and as they were before already
What the Senate concluded after the Ambassadors oration.
well disposed to this business, he like-wise left a very great impression in
Lewis supposing that to free Belgrade from the seege, which was a very strong
City, and of great impotance, and which had ever been the Rampire of the
whole Kingdom, that he must fight with the Turk, did after that send John
Statilius his Ambassador to Venice, to obtain of Another Ambassador from the
King of Hungary at Ve^ice.
the Senate certain sums of money, thereby to increase his forces, to the end

The Republike had often in times past aided with money, and other means the
Kings of Hungary against the power of the Turks, but it thought it self at
that time more bound then ever before to do it, as well in respect of the
strict aliance and friendship with King Lewis, as for their fear of the
Ottaman greatness, The Venetians send the King of Hungary thirty thousand
Duca^s
who daily grew more potent and redoubted, by reason whereof the Venetians sent
the King thirty thousand Ducats, with promise of greater offers, and for a
testimony of their friendship to King Lewis, they sent word to Lorenzo Doria,
their Ambassador resident with his Majesty, that he should ordinarily follow the
Kings army.

But the Kings deseigns and enterprises had a disastrous success, for Belgrade
Belgrade taken (...) the Turks.
was lost, all the other Cities of the Kingdom continuing still fearful of
the force and violence of the Turks, who after the taking of this town,
returned to

About the same time, Prince Loretan deceased, to the great grief of the whole
City, who with singular wisdom had fortunately governed the Republike the
space of twenty years, having still retained to the very last gasp his usual
quickness of wit, wherewith he was adorned, he was buried in the Church of
the Twi^s.

ANTONIO GRIMANI the 76. Duke.







ANtonio Grimani, Father to Cardinal Dominico, was chosen in his sted, a man
very famous, as well for his great wealth, as for the noble offices which he
had borne in the Commonwealth, having often times tasted prosperous and
adverse fortune, and who not long before was called home from a tedious
banishment to which he was condemned, because he being General of the
Galleis had let slip the occasion of fighting with and vanquishing the
Turkish army near to Lepanto.

He then entering into the government of the Common wealth, found it in peace
(as has been said) but in so many different rumors of discontent betwixt
Princes, as it was to be feared that the Republic would thereby be drawn into
new troubles, and into a necessity of taking arms, because that the Emperor,
(who being already come into Germany, had received his first Imperial
Coronation at Aix La Chappelle) had a great desire to come into Italy, in
regard whereof, he sought by all good offices and fair promises to draw the
Venetians to his side, thinking that their friendship might much avail him for
the execution of his deseignes: whereupon, among other matters he promised to
give them in authentical The Emperors promises to the Venetians.
manner the inuestiture of all the Cities and places which they then possessed

These offers were the cause that the Senate delayed to send (according to
their usual manner) to congratulate the Emperor for his new dignity: For
having determined to send Francesco Contaren to succeed Gasparo Contaren their
ordinary Ambassador resident with his Imperial Majesty, whose time of stay
there, appointed by the Laws, was already expired, they did put off his
dispatch from day to day because they would give the French noe occasion to
suspect that they intended to enter into any league or treaty with the new
Emperor.

Charles by this means being out of hope to draw the Venetians from the
Philliberto What moo^d the Emperor to send his Ambassador to the French King.
his Ambassador to the French King, as well for that he would have men think
that he was desirous to treat with him about the affairs of Italy, without
mentioning the Venetians, as for to induce them to have recourse to himself,
for fear of some agreement betwixt their two Majesty's, wherein they should
not be comprehended, they having already made proof of very many mischeefes
which the The King of England, is chosen Vmpier and mediator betwixt mighty
Princes.
alliance of such like Princes had procured to their common wealth: he did
beside write to his Ambassador, resident with the King of England, to complain
unto that King, (whose authority at that time was so great, as he was chosen
for Vmpier and mediator of all the important strife betwixt the Emperor and the
French King) of the Venetians, who not being contented to accomplish the
agreement Maximilian and them, did moreover refuse his alliance and friendship
(being thereunto invited) but there was no great regard given to his
complaints, because that the Emperor making show to be desirous of Peace,
intelligence was given, that he prepared all things fit for war. These
policies being known to King Francis, after that he had freely communicated
to the Senate all the Emperors practices and deseignes, would not give ear to
the offers of his Ambassador, The French King and the King of England talk
together
and standing upon his guard, he sought by all means to entertain his friends
and Confederates, and to that purpose he had mutual conference with the King
of England near to Ardres in Picardy, who for that end came to Calais, that he
might more amply confirm the peace and friendship sworn betwixt them,

About this time, a daughter being borne to the French King, he entreated The
Uenetian common wealth, do ^sten a d^ghter of the French Kings.
the Republic of Venice to witness for it at the Font, showing thereby that he
was desi^ous in all things to gi^e them content, in regard of his special
love tow^ (...).

^ Why the King delayed to conclude the league.


^ The Popes new (...) (...) the (...) of the (...).


Upon these new propositions of the (...) and the French King, the Vene^ The
(...) (...) (...) the (...) (...) (...)*
likewise were desirous to look to themselves, and they grew ^ore (...) (...)
the conclusion of the league, no^ breaking the five yea^ tr^ce alre^dy (...) by
the Elect Emperor, nor would they likewise displease the King of England, who

Whilst the upon these occasions ^he treaty of the league remained doubtful*
they had intelligence of that which they never expected* how that the Pope had
The Pope and the E^peror make (...) (...) against the French King.
secretly agreed with the Emperor to en^ade, at their common cost, the Duchy
of Milan; This did wonderfully amaze al ^en, and especially the Venetian^,
because the Pope by driving the ^rench, forth of Italy with his forces and
(...) (...), was desirous to in^hronize and increase the Emperors power there,
whom (...) long before, himself did grea^ly ^pect, and held dangerous for the
Churches state

The Popes deseigne was accompanied with diverse and ^ondry practices of What
the Popes and Emperos deseignes were.
the Imperialls, (the Bande^i of Milan who were in great number and the (...)
of the City being joined to them) to the end that by their (...) (...) on^
(...) same time some sudden (...) might be raised in the City, and (...)
(...) (...) places of the Duchy, to expel the French who dremp^ on (...) (...)
(...), and whose number was already much decreased by reason of the Lord (...)
absence, who not long before was gone into France.

But the Lord of Le^cut, his brother and his Lie^tenant General in (...) (...),
having discovered this (...) before it was executed, did forth^ith (...) (...)
The Lord of (...) (...) (...) ^prise of the ^andetti of Mi^an.
nombers of Soldiers, as he made himself assured (...) of all (...) (...), and
frustrated their practices (...) deseignes, driving all the (...) (...) of the
Duchy, where they had by degrees (...) themselves, whom he (...) even to the
gates of Rhegio, whither they escaped by means of him that (...) (...) For the
Pope, who (as has been said) was a Partaker of their deseigne. Hereupon the
Pope took matter of discontent, for that without any respect to his dignity
and power, or to the friendship and alliance betwext him and the most Christian
King, the French had come and used violence in his towns and Castles, The Pope
is is (...) with the Lord L'^scut his pursuit.
making his complaints to the Venetians; whereas indeed, the King had most
cause to complain, because that by the agreement made betwixt them, it was
expressly mentioned, that the Pope should not receive the bande^i of the Duchy
of Milan into his Territories, nor the king those of the Dominion of the Church
into his. The Venetians being desirous, as much as in them lay, to appease this
discontent, (for the Popes resolution and the treaty made, and sworn by him
The Venetians seek to appease the Popes indignation against the French.
Popes mind the suspicion which he seemed to have, by remembering him of the
good offices which the King had ever performed to the Sea Apostolic, earnestly
entreating him, not for a trifle to break the holy alliance, so long time
sworn betwixt them, seeing that by the breach thereof nothing but mischief
could ensue. But all these remonstrances and entreaties were bootelesse with
the Pope, who had already contracted with the Emperor, on condition, that the
French being expelled forth of the Duchy of Milan, Parma, and Placentia,
should be joined to the Churches Patrimony, and all the residew of the state
should be The conditions of the agreement betwixt the Pope and the Emperor.
restored to Francis Sforza; and that the Pope in the mean time should
dispense Charles for the oath which he had taken in the inuestiture of the
Kingdom of Naples, to the end he might with more just title still retain the
Empire.

The Venetians, being wholly hope-lesse of making any atonement betwixt the
Pope and the French King, resolved not to fail in their duty wherein they were
tied to the King, for the conservation of the Duchy of Milan. The report was
that diverse soldiers were already levied by the Pope and the Emperors command,
The Popes and ^emperors for^s need^ to march, if their secret intelligences
should fail.
and if their secret practizes could not prevail, they would on a sudden fall
to open war; for which cause, the Pope, (albeit it was under an other
color) had levied six thousand Swisses, and Prospero Colonna being declared
chief of the enterprise coming to Bolognia, did from all parts leuy soldiers,
Theodore Triuulcio their General, commanding him to encampe on the banks of
the river Adda, that he might speedily pass over, if the affairs of the
French should require it. They commanded moreover Paulo Nany, Governor at that
time of Bergamo, to follow the Army with the General in quallity of Prouidator.

In the mean time upon the rumor that was spread abroad in France of these The
Venetian army ready to march.
stirs in Lombardy, the King forthwith sent the Lord Lautrec to Milan, and
being comme thither, perceiving that his forces were not sufficient to defend
that state, if it should be enuaded with a mighty army, he thought it fit to
keep back the new aid which the enemies expected from coming to join with
them, who already had a thousand men at arms and about eight thousand foot.
The Pope had but three thousand Swisses, for of six thousand that he had
leauied, there remained with him but the one half. And at the same time,
Fernand the Emperors brother being come to villac, to assemble six thousand
footmen, to pass afterward with them into Italy, to the relief of the
imperial army; for which The Emperor (...) passage for his soldiers
forces the Emperor having craved passage of the Venetians, they answered that
Almaines passage, the matter being found to be difficult, they left it by the
consent of the Lord of Lautree to the inhabitants of the country, and sent all
their forces on the Cremonois, there for to join them with the French,
according to Lautrecs direction, who being desirous to have near him some
Venetian Gentlemen of authority and experience, to confer withal on the
affairs of the war, and about the defense of the State of Milan, the Senate
sent Andre Gritti to him, Paulo N^i notwithstanding remaining still in the
camp as Prouidator.

They choose likewise Ieronimo Pesare for Prouidator General, who was
carefully Ieronimo Pesare Prouidator of all the forts on the firm land.
to provide for all their fortes on the firm land, wherein were placed two
thousand footmen newly leauied, and certain companies of men at arms, who
Lautrecs perswasition to have other three thousand foot; namely fifteen
hundred Gascons, and as many Valesians, and likewise to contribute to the
expense of certain horse and foot companies with whom the Duke of Ferrara
promised to come into the field in the behalf of the French, to the end that
In what manner the Venetians did relieve the Start of Milan.
the King and all men else should know, that they had in no ^ort failed for the
speedy relief of the State of Milan, according to the covenants made betwixt
them.

The French in the mean time were readier to solicit the Venetians to do
that whereunto they were obliged by the treaty of confederacy, then they were
of The Lord of Lautrec hops for aid.
undoubtedly is a very dangerous matter in war: and al-be-it the Lord of
Lautrec did warrant, that the Lord of Saint Vallier should speedily pass the
mounts with six thousand French, and that ten thousand Swisses, leauied for
the King, should forthwith march: yet for all that none ca^e: and on the other
side the enemies being grown strong and mighty, by being joined with the
Almain foot having safely passed through the Mantuan, and from thence through the
State of Milan, knowing how greatly speed might import them in that enterprise,
were The Imperials beseege Parma.
come to beseege Parma, supposing that the taking of that City would purchase
them great safety and reputation.

Now the Lord Lautrec having intelligence of their march, suspecting their
deseigne, sent his brother the Lord of Escut with a strong garrison for the
guard of that city: yet nevertheless that did not stay their enterprise, hoping
easily to achiue it, as well for that the place was not very strong, as because
their army was The Lord of Lautrec succoreth Parmai Prospero Colonna raises
his camp from before Parma.
great and well stored with all necessaries, as in deed it would have come to
pass, if Lautrec, who had received new supplies of Swisses, had not approached
the enemies, by whose coming, and likewise for that the Duke of Ferrara with
great numbers of footmen marched to assail Modena, and Regio, Prospero
Colonna was enforced (as he afterward said) to discampe from before Parma, to
the great grief and discontent of the Pope, who by his confederacy with the
Emperor did

The event of this first enterprise having such bad success was cause that the
The Pope suspecteth the Imperials.
Pope complaining of the Emperors captains entered into sum suspicion of
them, as if they had drawn forth the seege of Parma at length, until that
necessity had enforced them to discampe, perceiving that his great desire to
obtain that City made him freely to contribute to all the charges and expenses
of the wars.

The Emperor on the other side having discovered the Popes suspicion, feared,
The Emperor (...) destasted with the Popes suspicion.
that if he should obtain that which he pretended to have by the treaty of
agreement betwixt them, he would then give over the remainder of the enterprise
Alp^so Saus to Venice to remain there as Ambassador for the Imp^ Majesty, and
whom he caused with great cunning and vehemence to (...) again to the Senate,
The Emperor by his Ambassador seeks to draw the Venetians to his side.
that to join with him and the Pope was the true means to obtain peace no
less by him desired then by themselves, and for a testimony of his speech he
aleadged, That although the Emperor might obtain the Duchy of Milan, by just
title, yet nevertheless he would inuest Francis Sforza Duke of Ba^ therein,
thereby to reduce the affairs of Italy to a quiet and peace able State.

^

At the last Prospero Colonna began to march first, bending toward the River
The army of the league marches directly to Milan.
Adda to pass i^, and afterward to march directly to Milan, which was the
whole aim of the war. Lautrec being aduertized hereof did soon dislodge
The enemies pass over the river Adda without any impediment.
by their speedy coming thither before the French, did cross it betwixt Riua
and Cassan: and then went on their way toward Milan*

Lautrec being prevented of his hope did in great have follow the (...), being
desirous, if occasion served, to offer them battle. But Prospero Colonna, not
meaning to hazard any thing, proceeded in such manner as he look away all
means of coming to a battle, which Lautrec perceiving, did at last retire
with The Swisses leave the French camp for want of pay.
his army, which did daily decrease, especially the Swisses, who went their
(...) without leave under color that they wanted their pay, and came to
Milan, leaving Triuulcio, having followed Lautrec had entered with him into
Milan.

Now Lautrec being come to Milan perceiving his own army to be diminished,
Leutrec fortifieth Milan.
and that of the enemies to be mightily increased, he caused the Bastions and
rampires to be razed, which the Duke of Bourbon had before then caused to be
made, resolving not to stir from thence, and there to expect aid from
France. Prospero having crossed the Adda, and having intelligence that Lautrec
was retired to Milan, fortifying it in all have, determined to follow him, and
came Prospero Colonna is within four miles of Milan.
and lodged in an Abbey with in four miles off Milan, called Cherauall, where
being uncertain what he were best to do, in regard of the great numbers of
men The traitors in milan give aduertizement to Prospero Colonna.
that he was sent by some of the Imperial faction that were within the City
to Ieronimo Moron, to let them know that if they would march directly to Milan,
they were certain that he might enter it, but if they should delay the matter
and give the French men leisure to fortify themselves it would not then be in
their power to expel them. Upon this advertisement it was concluded by the
chief captains that the Marquis of Pescara with the Spanish bands, whom he
then commanded, should march directly to the Roman gate, to be there at sun
set. Theodore Triuulcio, General of the Venetian army, had the guard of The
enemies being come to Milan win the Roman Gate ^d the suburb.
hundred men for that service he gave directly in upon a bastion that was new
begun, and not yet defensible, whereupon those of the guard were so amazed as
without fight they were put to rout, forsaking their guard and fortifications.

Theodore Triuu^ Commander of those troops being sick in his bead, did on a
sudden arise and marched against the enemies with such few soldiers as he
could gather together, to sustain that attempt, thinking that they would
follow him, but Night not blushing, and being unaccompanied, he was beaten
down Triuulcio taken prisoner by the Imperials.
and taken prisoner with Iulio of Saint Seuerin, the Marquis of Vigeua,
Mercurio Buono, captain of the Venetian light horse, Lodouico Marin Secretary
to the commonwealth, with diverse others.

Lautrec having notice that the Venetian army being surprised had abandoned the
suburbs without any fight, came with the residue of the army before the place
of the castle. But perceiving that there was no means to keep the City the
said Lautrec vetireth with his Cauallery to Coma.
suburb being lost, determined to retire, and took the direct way toward
Coma, with all his men at arms to be nere the Swisses, expecting the succor
that was to come from France, having before his departure left captain
Masearon a Gascon to command the castle with fifty men at arms and six hundred
French foot. Moscaron captain of the castle of Milan.


The enemies being masters of the city, made an inestimable spoil there,
without any exception of persons, for the sack lasted ten whole days, no
commandment being of force to cause the soldiers to give over. The Venetian
horsemen Milan is sack^ ten whole days together.
departed from Laud and were coming toward Milan, but having intelligence by
the way of the Cities loss and Lautrecs retreat, they escaped to Bergamo.

Lautrec being come to Coma, the four thousand Swisses that remained in the
French camp, did the morrow after retire home toward their country, their
captains The Swisses retire home into their country.
not being able to hold them back. Lautrec departing afterward from Coma with
the residue of his troops, went to Lec, where having crossed the River, he
placed all his men at arms in garrison in the Venetian country, but so soon
as he was gonne from Coma, the enemies came thither, who having battered Coma
taken.
it ten or twelve days, took it by composition.

Upon report of these conquests of the enemies, Lauda, Pauia, Parma and
Placentia yielded unto them without any difficulty, Cremona within a while
after did the like, but Lautrec coming thither on a sudden with his forces
did forthwith

In this sort did the French lose, without being defeated or fighting any one
Battle, that goodly and rich State, which they had purchased at so high a
price, and with so much effusion of blood. Prospero Colonna in the mean time,
to make use of his good fortune, pursued Lautrec, seeking wholly to defeat him,
who (as has been said) departing from Coma and being come to the Giradade,
had passed the Bressan territory, and from thence was come to Cremona, which
having recovered, he remained there three or four days, and then returned
into the Venetians Country. Now in this mean time Prospero Colonna having
intelligence that Alexandria was left to the Guard of the Citizens, he went
thither Lautrec to winter in their territories, whereof the Emperors
Ambassador, resident at Venice, complaining to the Senate, they answered that
in so great a disaster enemies were to be relieved, and that it was against
reason to refuse their friends and confederates, and that in regard of the
conuentions and treaties passed betwixt them, common ciuility did tie them to
relieve the French in their adversity, and to give them all help and aid, as
well for the desense as recovery of the State of Milan: yet nevertheless
somewhat to content him, it was decreed that the French and Venetians should
remain quiet whilst the French should continue in the Venetians territories,
least that the enemies being enforced to defend themselves, should make any
incursions upon their State.

But Bartlemew of Villa-claro having transgressed that decree, and crossing the
The Imperials break the Decree.
Adda, making incursio^s on the Bergamask, the Prouidator Gritti permitted al
me^ to defend themselves against the Imperials, whereupon certain companies of
light horse with certain gentlemen banished from Milan going forth of Cremona,
and having crossed the Adda did on a sudden assail certain numbers of the
enemies men at arms, and having disarmed them, brought them away as prisoners.

Lautrec in the mean time was desirous to march into the field with these
forces Lautrecs determination.
that he had, and to go to Cremona, determining to make a bridge over the Po
at Pontuico, nere to Casalmajor, to become master of the country on this side
and beyond the River, that he might freely join with the Duke of Ferrara, who
was in the field with great forces to try if he could take Modena and Reggio.
As also because that place was thought to be very commodious for the assailing
of the Mantuan territory, and especially Viadana, a rich place and abounding
with all things, from whence they might draw great quantity of victuals for the
nourishment of the army, and enforce the Marquis of Mantua (who Gonfaloniero,
or captain General of the Church, was in the army of the league) to come and
defend his own country. But the Venetians not being The Venetians dissuade
Lautrec from his resolution.
of opinion to enterprise any thing till their forces were strong and well
confirmed, nor in time of adversity to purchase new enemies, dissuaded Lautrec
from that determination.

The affairs of Lumbardy standing at this stay, Pope Leo, upon the news that
the French had lost the City of Milan, received such high content, and was so
ouerioyed Pope Leo his sudden death.
as a Catharre and a continual fever killed him in three days space. His
death did greatly prejudice the army of the league, as well in regard of the
Swisses, who no sooner understood it but they departed suddenly from the camp
The Cardinal of Medicis after the Popes death retireth to Rome.
also for the departure of the Cardinal of Medicis, Legate in the Churches
army, who upon the report of the Pope his cosins death, having discharged the
army retired himself to Rome.

A new occasion did then present it self for the recovery of the State of
Milan as easily as it was lost, the towns not being furnished with sufficient
garrisons, nor the army of the league strong enough in the field for to relieve
them. Beside, there was great confusion and disorder in Milan, the people
being incensed against the Imperialls, for the losses which they had sustained
by the Spanish

For these causes the Venetians began to leauy forces from all parts, and The
Venetians leauy forces to march into the Duchy of Milan.
commanded the greatest part of their garrisons which were dispersed here and
there to march into the field: and that which did most of all confirm them,
was, that the Swisses having published a general assembly at Lucerna, they
there decreed with a general consent, to take upon them the protection of the
French, and to help them to recover the Duchy of Milan, whereupon, they
speedily sent to the Venetians, wishing them still to continue their alliance
with the French, Lautrec, and al-be-it it was in the depth of winter, he
nevertheless determined to march into the field, and to enter the State of
Milan.

Prospero Colonna in the mean time did his best to fortify the City of Milan,
Colonna fortifieth Milan.
having strenthened the Spanish garrison there with certain number of Lanse
quenets whom he sent for thither, and made all preparations for the susteyning
of a long seege if need should be.

The French on the other side and the Venetians sitting in council to
determine what they should first attempt, after diverse and sundry opinions,
they resolved Frederico Bozole should cross the Po, with a good troop of
choice soldiers, and should go to the confines of Parma, to listen what was
done there, not carrying any artillery with him, to the end that if his design
prospered not he might freely and without danger make his retreat, and that
the residue of the army, as well French as Venetians should meet on the
Cremonois. But Bozole being The French and Venetian army on the Cremonois.
come near to Parma and Placentia, not daring to attempt any thing, returned
to Lautrecs camp at Cremona, as wise as he went, and no other enterprise was
made in this year 1527. These two great Princes nevertheless, the Emperor
Charles and the French King continuing much incensed the one against the other,
whereby it was foreseen, that Italy and diverse other Provinces were to endure
grievous wars, as it came to pass the years ensuing.



The end of the fourth Book of the fifth Decade.
The Contents of the fifth Book of the
THe French and Venetian camp lie before Maran. Francis comes to Pauia with
six thousand Lansequenets. Nouara is taken by the French. Sforza comes to
Milan with his troops. Lautrec beseegeth Pauia and forthwith raises his
camp. The battle of Bicoq. The Swisses retire into their country. Lauda and
Cremona yielded to the enemies. The Emperor seeks the Venetians friendship.
The Emperor and the King of England confer together, Soliman. The creation of
Pope Adrian the sixth. League betwixt the Pope, the Emperor, the Venetians,
the Duke of Milan and the Florentines. Alliance made betwixt the Emperor and
the Venetians against the French King. The Duke of Vrbin General to the
Venetians. The Duke of Bourbon leaves the French Kings party. The French army
in Italy under the Admiral Boniuet. Nouara and Vigeua are taken by the French.
The French come before Milan, and soon dislodge thence. Monce taken Adrian.
The creation of Pope Clement the seventh. The French retire in disorder. The
cause of the Kings discontent with the Emperor and the Venetians. The King
comes into Italy and takes the City of Milan. The Duke of Albany is
appointed to go and enuade the Kingdom of Naples. The King beseegeth Pauia.
The Venetians are sought to by both parties. A secret league made betwixt the
Pope, the King, and the Venetians. The Marquis of Pescara keeps the viceroy
of Naples from army is put to rout. The Popes resolution after the defeat of
the French. The Venetians resolving to defend Italy, are diuerted from it by
the Pope. And lastly the words and gesture of the Emperor at the news of the
victory.



The Fifth Book of the fifth Decade of the History of Uenice.


THe French army being much increased in the beginning of the Great numbers of
Swisses in the French camp.
year 1522. by the arrival of the Swisses, who in great numbers came to their
camp, and by the Venetians forces joined to them, which were six thousand
foot, six hundred men at arms, and eight hundred light horse. Lautrec by the advice of all the captains resolved to march directly toward Milan, which was
the principal motive and aim of the war. According to this resolution they
passed the Adda on the first day of march, and the camp was lodged within two
The French camp before Milan.
miles of the castle. The third day after the French were encamped, they
marched Lautrecs meaning, or else for that in What hindered the Lord of Lautrec
from assailing Milan.
regard of the great numbers of soldiers that were within it, the disposition
of the people, and the readiness which was seen in the defendants, he was
diuerted from it, for the manifest difficulty of such an enterprise.

It is certain that the Lord of Lautrec had no hope to take Milan by assault,
but thought to effect it by length of time, because that by reason of the
multitude of his horse and great number of the bandetti which followed him who
scoured the whole country, he did cut off all victuals from it: as also
because he had broken down all the mils, and turned away the waters forth of
their Channels, which

But the Citizens of Milans hatred toward the French was wonderful, and their
With what seruensie the people of Milan endured the discommodity of the seege.
desire merueilous to have Francis Sforza their new Duke again, in regard
whereof, enduring patiently all discommodities, they did not only, not change
their minds for all those miseries, but the young men of the City did put on
arms, and made captains in every parrish: in such sort as the gardes which
speedily ran to the remotest places of the army, did greatly relieve the
soldiers; providing beside, in stead of the mils that were broken down, hand
mils; for all their

The Duke of Milan in the mean space, who had a long time remained at Trent,
expecting some fit occasion to pass forward, went on his way with six thousand
Lansequenets, and seized on the Fort of Croare which did belong to the
Venetians, to the end to open his passage. From thence he came through the
Veronois and Mantuan territories with ease to Casal-major, because that The
Duke of Milan comes to Pauia with six thousand Lansequenets.
the Venetian army was joined with the Lord Lautrec, and there crossing the Po,
he came to Placentia, being afterward aided by the Marquis of Mantua he
marched to Pauia, where he remained waiting for some fit occasion to go to
Milan, where his arrival was extremely wished for.

So soon as the Lord of Lautrec, had intelligence of his coming to Placentia,
he raised his camp, and went and lodged at Cassin five miles from Milan on the
high way toward Pauia, and the Venetians at Binasca which lies on the same
road way, to hinder his coming to Milan, where in the mean time he Frederico
de Bozzole, with four hundred Lances and seven thousand foot, Swisses and
Italians, against whom the Marquis of Mantua going forth of Pauia, came back
thither on a sudden, standing in fear of them, by reason they were more in
number then had been reported unto him. Bozzole having joined his forces with
the Lord of Escut, both of them together took the way toward Nouara, and
coming to the castle, which held out yet for them, they took the ordnance
that was within it, and battered the City, the which they took by The French
take Nouara.
force at the third assault, sacking it wholly and putting all those within it
to the sword, Count Philip Tournielo the Governor excepted, and some few others
with him who were made prisoners; from thence they went to Vigeua, which they
likewise took, opening the way by the taking of those towns to the supplies
which they expected from France.

But in the mean time, Francis Sforza departing secretly in a night from
Pauia, went through by-waies, and joined himself with Prospero Colonna near to
Landriana, a few soldiers remaining in Pauia with the Marquis of Mantua, who
would not pass on any farther, because he would not be far off from the
Churches territories.

By reason whereof the Lord of Lautrec supposing his stay at Cassin to be to
no purpose, seeing that Francis Sforza was escaped, as also because it had
been no discretion for them to encampe before Milan, they determined for to
turn the army toward Pauia, hoping to take it; whereupon so Sforza arriueth
at Milan.
soon as he had re-assembled his army, he went and encamped there, where at
his arrival a furious battery was made in two several places, as well by the
French, as the Venetians, so that the breach was judged reasonable for an
assault: Pauia beseeged by Lautrec.
And yet the beseeged resolved valiantly to defend themselves, and to hinder
the enemies from taking it, not sparing their lives and means.

Prospero in the mean time perceiving the manifest danger wherein the City
Pedro of Nauarres mine had played, which was made under a great Bastion, to the
end that the ruins thereof might help the soldiers in their going to the

And in this sort the arrival of new supplies at Pauia, and their hope in the
The camp dislodgeth from before Pauia.
mine, were the causes that the assault was delayed and the camp raised. For
Prospero Colonna perceiving himself to be re-enforced with six thousand
Lansequenets and others which Francis Sforza had brought, did with his whole
army come into the field, that he might be near to Pauia, and he went and
encamped at the Chartreux within three miles off the French and Venetians, to
hinder them from giving an assault to the City, for it had been against reason
to have suffered it to be don, so great a power as his being so nere the
enemies. Then was the Lord of Lautrec out of hope to take Pauia, whereupon he
dislodged and retired his camp to Ladriana, and from thence to Monce, that he
might be relieved with victuals as well from Laudesan and from the territory of
Cremona as from the Venetians country, receiving in his discamping no other
discommodity then a

The Imperials perceiving the French army to march toward Monce, thinking The
Emperors camp lodges at Bicoca.
that they would have gonne to Milan, went and lodged at Bicoca three miles off
from Milan, on the high way to Laud, which is a very spacious house belonging
to a Gentleman, environed with goodly gardens and enclosed with deep ditches,
the fields round about being full of fountains and streams brought by
conduit-pipes, according to the manner of Lombardy, to water the meddowes:
being come to that place, they did speedily raise all the dikes, and flanked
them with great plat-formes well stored with ordnance.

The Swisses being, according to their manner, impatient, sent their captains
Lautrec sends to discover the enemies camp.


Now according to this resolution, the Lord of Lautrec did by the Swisses
consent send the Lord of Pontdormy to discover the enemies camp, who marched
thither with four hundred men at arms and six thousand Swisses, who having
discovered it they found small likelihood of being able to assail it, yet
nevertheless In what order the French did assail the enemies.
the Swisses with the artillery to go and assail the front of their camp and
the enemies artillery, which was guarded by the Lansequenets: That the Lord of
Escut with three hundred Lances, and a squadron of French and Italian foot
should march on the left hand upon the way that leads to Milan, and should
go to the bridge by which they might enter into the enemies camp: As for
himself he would use means to enter it with a squadron of horsemen, Policy
of the Lord of Lautrec.
hoping rather to prevail by cunning then by open force; for the better to
deceive them, he commanded that all his soldiers should wear red crosses on
their cazakes, which was the badge of the Imperial army, in stead of a white
cross Francisco Maria Duke of Vrbin, with the army of the Signory of Venice
lead the rereward.

Now the Swisses being come nere to the enemies cample, al-be-it that in regard
of the depth of the trenches, which were deeper the^ they imagined, they could
not according to their first hope assail the ordnance, their courage
nevertheless not diminishing, they assailed the trench, striving with great
boldness to get over it, but in the mean time the ordnance and the enemies
small shot, wherewith the The Swisses boldness in ass^yling their enemies.
rampire was stuffed, did greatly hurt them, so as the greatest part of the
captains and chief soldiers died there. For as soon as Prospero Colonna had
notice of their coming, he embattailed his troops, then he appointed every
man his place, accounting the victory for his own, in regard of the strength
of the place, so as the Lord of Escut being gonne on the other side, as he was
commanded, directly to the bridge, finding, contrary to his expectation, a
strong guard there, was enforced The battle of Bicoca.
to retire, so that the whole burden of the battle fell upon the Swisses*,
who, as

The Lord of Lautrec, with the other Lords of the army, perceiving all things
in disorder, would have persuaded the Swisses to encampe upon the same place,
offering them the next day to set the greatest part of the men at arms on foot
to march in the forefront, but it was impossible to cause them to condescend
thereunto, The Swisses retire to Monce.
so as they would needs return to Monce, whether marching in good order with
the French and the artillery, they received no hurt in their retreat, al be-it
Prospero to follow them, but he would not do it, believing, as it was very
likely, that the French army made their retreat in good order, the men at arms
remaining on the tail of the army to repulse the enemies if they should follow
them.

The army being come to Monce, the Lord of Lautrec used all means to detain
the Swisses, and to that end did give great presents to their captains, and
among others to Albert Peter, a man of great authority amongst them, who having
declared unto them in an open assembly the wrong which they did to their
reputation, if they should depart, then when they were in greater hope then
ever to vanquish the enemies by reason of the French Kings coming, who was The
Swisses return home into their country.
Adda at Tressa, and there the two armies being parted the Lord Lautrec went to
Cremona, to give order for the defense of the City, and afterward for his
going into France (which he did) leaving his brother the Lord of Escut for the
guard of Cremona, with the companies of men at arms, and the Lord of Boneuall
in Laud and Frederick of Bozole with six companies of men at arms, and a

The Venetian army retired to the Bressan territory, having left a sufficient
garrison The enemies surprise Lauda.
for the guard of Tressa. But forthwith after the Lord of Lautrecs departure,
the town of Lauda was surprised and sacked by the Marquis of Pescara, and
soon after the Lord of Escut yielded Cremona on composition to Prospero, in
Cremona is yielded to the enemies.
regard he had no other hope to be able to hold out the seege, but by such
succors as he expected from France, of which he heard no news.

The fortune of the French being in this sort altered, and their reputation
greatly diminished, by being in so short a time driven forth of the Duchy of
Milan, by forces no greater then their own, it was thought that the Venetians
(who had already casiered their army, dismissed the greatest part of their
Cauallery, and given Andrew Gritti their Prouidator in the army to go home to
his own house, having well acquitted themselves (though to small purpose) of
whatsoever their confederacy and alliance with the French King had bound them
to) would at last follow the prosperous fortune of the Emperor Charles, who
made show (as he had often times before then done) to desire their The Emperor
sicketh the friendship and alliance of the Uenetians.
friendship, and much more then, then before, in regard of the great hope which
he had conceived in his mind, that the route of the French would incite them
so to do, promising to himself thereby to disioyne them, and so to draw them
to his party, for the opinion he had that this new confederacy and aid of the
Venetians would chiefly avail him for the conservation of the State of Milan,
and for the obtaining of a prosperous issue of the war.

The Emperor then, resolving to do it, and not being satisfied with opening
the way to Gaspar Contaren, Ambassador to the Seignory in his Court, and to
have told him how much it did import their Republic, to make the same alliance
The Emperor and the King of England talk together.
with him, as they had done before with the French King, did likewise
communicate the same to the King of England, having talked with him at his
return from Spain, the capitulations whereof being drawn by the Chancellor
of the Empire, were given to Contaren, who finding them too rough, promise was
made to him, that they should in such sort be moderated as the Senate should
find them reasonable. But because by the distance of places, the matter was
drawn forth A league betwixt the Emperor and the King of England.
at length, there was in the mean time a league and confederacy concluded
betwixt the Emperor Charles and Henry the eight King of England, reserving
place for the Venetians to enter into it within three months, which time was
given them to advise thereon. This being communicated to the Senate, there was
nothing

But the report daily increasing of the French Kings great preparations of
war for his passage into Italy, which held the Venetians from making any
certain resolution, the Emperor and the King of England, fearing that the
Venetians would still continue in their friendship and alliance with the
French, determined, the better to have the conclusion of the new league, to
send Ambassadors to Venice.

The King of Englands Ambassador came first to Venice, and being brought The
Ambassadors of the Emperor and the King of England come to Venice.
into the Senate house, he entreated the Senators to deal plainly, and to
declare what they intended to do, if the French King should return with his
Army into Italy, to seize on the Duchy of Milan. The same request did the
Emperors Ambassador make, who came thither presently after him, who going on
farther, entreated, that if the most Christian King should pass the mounts,
that the Republic would take arms and join it self with the Imperial
forces to resist him. The Venetians in this treaty dealt very considerately,
well weighing the inconveniences that might happen on either side, resolving
nevertheless not to enter The Venetians great discretion in their resolution.
into any new alliance but upon necessity, meaning not altogether to separate
themselves from the friendship of the French, nor yet wholly to reject that of
the

About the end of the year 1522. Soliman Ottoman, to the great infamy of An.
1522.
Christian Princes, took the Isle of Rhodes, defended by the Knights of Rhodes
taken by Soliman.
Rhodes, who before then were called, the Knights of Saint John of Jerusalem,
whither the great Turk came in person, who having reduced those of the Island
and Town to the extremest point of necessity, enforced them to capitulate,
namely, that the great Master should deliver him the town: that as well
himself as all the Knights of that order should depart in saftie, and carry
away with them as much wealth as they could, and for to have some assurance
thereof, the Turk Englands pursutes to the Venetians, for the conclusion of
the above mentioned league, the Venetian Ambassadors resident with those
Princes, were often dealt with; but, the better to hasten the business, and to
prevent the delays caused by reason of the far distance of places, Ieronimo
Adorni Councellor and ordinary Chamberlain to the Emperor, came to Venice,
being sent by his Master to treat of and conclude that business: who being
brought into the Senate, went about to persuade them to forsake the French
Kings alliance, and to embrace that of the Emperor and the King of England. But
the Senate being moved by sundry reasons, did still answer as they were
wont, not breaking either with the one or other.

In the mean time, after Pope Leos death, Pope Adrian, Cardinal, Bishop of
The Creation of Pope Adrian the sixth.
Bertheusa, and a Dutchman by Nation, who had been Schoole-maister to the
Emperor Charles, and by his means made a Cardinal by Pope Leo, was at the
time of his Election in Spain, and having received news thereof (would be
called Adrian the sixth, taking none other name upon him then his own) did
embarke himself, and came to Nice: and from thence went to Rome, whither all
the Prelates speedily came, and all Princes sent their Ambassadors to present
their accustomed obedience: wherein, because the Venetians among others would
not fail, they deputed six of the chief of the City: namely, Marco Dandulo,
Lodouico Mocenigo, Vincentio Capel, Antonio Iustiniano, Petro Pesare, and Marco
Foscare: who being come to Bolognia, and understanding that the plague The
Venetians Embassage to the Pope.
was very great in Rome, they remained there for certain days: but being
aduertized that the Pope was enforced to leave the City, and to retire
elsewhere, they returned to Venice.

The new Pope was noted to be of a generous disposition, and very much
addicted to quiet, being very zealous for the common good of Christendom. For
so soon as he was installed in the supreme dignity, his greatest care was,
to use means to unite all Christian Princes together, and to end all their
controversies, writing briefs to them all for that purpose, with great
affection, causing his The Pope is zealous of an universal peace.
Nuncios to present Monitories to those Princes with whom they resided,
threatening League betwixt the Pope, the Emperor, the Venetians, the Duke of
Milan, and the Florentines.
the greatness of the Ottoman Empire. But perceiving the execution of this
enterprise to be very difficult, he was desirous in the mean time to
conclude a league betwixt himself, the Emperor, the Venetians, the Duke of
Milan, and the Florentines, for the defense and quiet of Italy. The Senate did
at the first entertain his proposition with great affection, esteeming it to
be very good and profitable,

The treaty of agreement in the mean time with the Emperor was not
interrupted, for all these goings and commings, the Senate having appointed
three of their number, namely, Ledouico Mocenigo, Georgio Cornare, and
Marc-Antonio Veniere to confer with Ieronimo Adorni the Emperors
Commissioner, that they might determine of it afterward, upon their report, in
the Council of the Pregays, and make some resolution thereupon.

This conference being ended, and the whole business being sent back to
Different opinions in the Senate concerning their alliance with the Emperor.
the Council to be debated, their opinions were very different, some saying
that it was best to continue their alliance with the French King, and others to
make a new one with the Emperor; the two chief of these contrary opinions,
were Andre Gritti, and Georgio Cornare. The first, being highly esteemed for
the great offices which he had borne, and for his great authority in the
commonwealth, spoke first, with great vehemency in the behalf of the French
King: The other being of like authority, and accounted as wise a man as any in
the Council, spoke to the contrary, and said, that the Duchy of Milan did by
right appertain Francis Sforza, and that therefore by consequent they were to
make alliance with the Emperor.

Both of them by their great and apparent reasons, did rather possess the
Senators minds with doubts then with any certain resolution, so that the
Senate delayed the determination thereof as much as they could, their usual
manner inducing them thereunto, which was not to do any thing rashly, the
importance of the matter, and their desire to see more preparations of the
French Kings, who providing for war had sent the Bishop of Bayeux, to
entreat them to put off their determination for a month longer, assuring them
that before that time were expired, he would come

But because the King did daily send new messengers to the Senate with very The
protestation of the Emperor and King of Englands Ambassadors in Senate.
great offers, and for that they were aduertized that Anna of Montmorency and
Frederick de Bozzolo were coming to Venice for the same cause; The Emperor and
the King of Englands Ambassadors, who did very much suspect those delays, did
protest in open Senate, that within three days next they would depart thence,
leaving all matters imperfected. In regard whereof, the Senate being enforced
to end that business, and the trust which they reposed in the French Kings
promises beginning to fail, by reason that he had for diverse

That there should be a perpetual peace and confederacy betwixt the Emperor
The articles of the alliance made betwixt the Emperor, Francis Sforza and the
Venetians.
Ferdinand Archduke of Austria, and Francis Sforza Duke of Milan, on the one
side; and the Senate of Venice on the other. That the Senate should send, when
need should be, for the defense of the Duchy of Milan, six hundred men at
arms, six hundred light horse, and six thousand foot. That it should do the
like for the defense of the kingdom of Naples, if any Christians should enuade
it (the Venetians being unwilling to oblige themselves against the Soliman
against them): That the Emperor should be bound to defend against all men,
with like number of Soldiers, whatsoever the Venetians possessed in Italy.

That the Venetians should in eight years pay to the Archduke, the sum of
two hundred thousand Ducats, in regard of their ancient strifes, and for the
agreement made at Worms. That the Venetians should possess their Cities,
towns and places of their demaines, with the same pre-eminence and
jurisdiction as they then enjoyed them: That all those who had been bannished
by the Senate, and their goods confiscate for taking the Emperors part, should
return into their own Country, be restored again to

These things being thus concluded, the Kings of Poland, Hungary and
Portugal, as friends to both parties, the Duke of Sauoy likewise, the
Florentines, the family of Medicis, Antonio Adorni Duke of Genoa, and the
Marquis of Montferrat were joined in this league; as for the Pope and the King
of England they were named Gardians and conseruers of this conuention.

This accord being thus established and confirmed, the Senate elected two The
Venetians send Ambassadors to the Emperor to rejoice with him for the new
league.
Ambassadors to send to the Emperor, namely, Lorenzo Prieuli, and Andre
Nouagiero: and to the Archduke his brother Carlo Contaren, to rejoice with them
for the new league, and for to give them ample testimony of their affection
toward the house of Austria. And because that Triuulcio, General for the
Venetians, did greatly affect the French, the Senate in that regard, did
honorably dismiss him, Francisco Maria Duke of Vrbin General of their forces,
with the same conditions, taking upon them the protection of his State against
all men. The Duke of Vrbin General to the Venetians.


In Italy all men thought, that seeing the Venetians were contrary to the
French King, who in time before had favored him, that he would forbear to
come into Italy to enuade the Duchy of Milan, but when they understood how
that he did not only continue his preparations, but that his army began
already to The Duke of Bourbon forsakes the French Kings party.
the Duke of Bourbons practices with the Emperor, the which being discovered,
he forsook the Realm, and retired himself to the said Emperor, according to
Nouara and Uigeua yield to the French.
marched directly toward Nouara, the which being not well fortified, neither
with Soldiers nor Rampires, did soon yield, (the Castle excepted) the like did
Vigeua and all the rest of the Country on the hither side of the river Thesin.

Prospero Colonna (who could not be persuaded that the French King would What
Prospero Colonna did, upon report of the arrival of the French.
persevere in his determination to assail the Duchy of Milan for that year,
as well because that the Venetians were confederated against him, as for the
Duke of Bourbons rebellion, had not so soon as need required assembled his
soldiers who were lodged in sundry places, nor made necessary provisions for so
great a motion) solicited all men to unite themselves together, to hinder the
French from passing over the Thesin.

The Venetians on the other side being advertised of the Frenchmens arrival,
did suddenly command all their men at arms to meet upon the banks of the
River Olio, determining at the same time to make a leuy of six thousand The
Venetians preparations against the French.
the Confederacy for the defense of the Duchy of Milan, and three thousand
other footmen to lie in garrison in their Cities and strong Towns: they made
Leonardo Eme their Prouid ator general, and sent a speedy messenger to the
Duke of Vrbin, to will him to march forthwith into Lombardy, for the execution
of his charge there. And having notice of the Lord of Boniuets progression,
they commanded their Prouidator to lead their forces into the Country of
Giradade, to assure the Cities of Bergamo and Crema, and like-wise to relieve
speedily the City of Milan, whither the French did bend all their deseignes.

The French being come to Vigeua, finding the waters of the river to be
shallower then Prospero supposed, part of them began to pass over at a ford,
and others The French pass the Thesin without any let.
for the artillery at a place where they found no guard, nor resistance: whereof
Prospero being aduertized, did speedily send a hundred men at arms, and three
thousand foot for the guard of Pauia; and himself with the residue of the army
went into Milan, where by the advice of all the Captains, he began to
repair the bastions and rampires of the suburbs, which had been neglected
since the last war: so as if the French had directly come to Milan, the
Imperialls would The error of the French.
have forsaken the City, and would have gone either to Pauia or Coma, for it
was so resolved in their Council; but having stayed longer then they should
near to the river Thefin, to unite themselves together, they came afterward
Christophers within a mile of Milan, and then coming betwixt the gate of
Thesin, and the Roman, they planted their ordnance in the vantgard, making show
as if they would asalt the City: but after they had encamped there certain
The French lying before M^ lan do ^on a sodoine raise their Camp.
days, without assailing it at all, in regard of the great forces that were
within it, they went to Monce, which they took with ease: from thence Captain
Bayard, and Frederic of Bossola, marched toward Lauda, on which, (being
altogether abandoned,) they likewise seized. Then determining to relieve the
Castle They take Monce.
of Cremona, they marched on the Cremonois, and being without any difficulty
come near to the Castle, they did refresh it with victuals, and other
necessaries, and resolved to assail the City.

The Ambassadors of the Emperor and the Duke of Milan, which lay at Venice,
being moved by these dangers, did solicit the Senate to send their forces over
the river Oglio, to the end that they might go and encampe in some strong,
and safe place on the Cremonois, to divert the French from the seege of
Cremona, albeit their whole enterprises, were only for the taking of Milan,
for which part of their forces were at Carauagia, and at Monce, to stop the
Venetian army from passing on any farther.

The Imperialls perceiving the enemies intent did solicit the Venetians to
join with them, not considering the perils and difficulties that did present
themselves: by means whereof the Senate knowing that the same business did
depend

In the mean time other succors came from elsewhere, into the Duchy of Milan,
as well of Lancequenets by the way of Trent, as from the Vicery of Naples; and
besides, they daily expected the Duke of Bourbon, who was coming into Italy as
Lieutenant general to the Emperor.

Now in the midest of all these arms, the motion of peace betwixt the Emperor
in respect of an universal quiet like was like-wise very pleasing to the
Venetians, not without suspicion neuer-the-lesse, that it would come to pass
as it had at other times happened, that those Princes should afterward agree
together to ouerrunne The Uenetians suspect the motion of peace betwixt the
Emperor and the ^rench King.
them: yet not-with-standing, they would not without some other greater
occasion fail in ought whereunto they were tied by their last confederacy:
and therefore they sent to their Prouidator, (upon the report that the
Imperialls would march into the field) willing him to cross the Adda, and to
join with the Viceroy of Naples, leaving strong garrisons in their frontier
towns, and to take care to lodge ever in safe and strong places, and
especially to avoid, as much as he could, from being enforced to enter into
Milan.

The Duke of Vrbin neuer-the-lesse made some difficulty to execute that
commandment, and to pass the Adda, thinking no safety to be therein till the
Lancequenets were first of all come into the field with the Marquis of Mantuas
The Duke of Vrbins difficulty to execute the Senates command.
forces; as also for that he had intelligence, that great numbers of Swisses
were come to the French Camp, who were thought to be ten thousand: in regard
whereof, being entreated by the Imperialls, to join with them at Beauregard,
he refused to do so, because that Quarter was but four miles off from the
French camp, whereby it was to be feared, that approaching so near the
enemies, they might be enforced against their will and to their disadvantage to
come to a battle: as also for that two thousand Swisses were lately come to
Laud, and it was

But the Imperialls still soliciting the Duke of Vrbin to join with them, the
Senate, to take away all suspicion of bad dealing, commanded their General to
The Venetians make new leuies of horse and ^oot.
do it, having in the mean time levied three thousand Italian foot, and four
hundred light horse which were stradiots, for the guard and defense of their
towns; the command of whom was given to John Mora, who was elected governor of
Petro Pesare was sent Prouidator to the army insted of Heme who fell sick, and
was retired to Venice.

The Venetian Army being come to Tressa, and the Marquis of Mantua being gone
to Pauia, the French army was in great want of victuals, all passages being
stopped whereby they were wont to be brought to them, wherein the Venetian army
purchaced great praise, especially the Venetian Stradiots, so as the Admiral
fearing himself to fall into the same want of victuals whereunto he thought
to have reduced the City of Milan, resolved to discampe, and to retire some
twelve miles from the City.

At this stay stood their affairs, when Pope Adrian dyed on the foureteenth
day of September, to the great loss and discommodity of the confederates, to
Pope Adrian his death.
whom by his death the Pontifical authority was not only wanting, but
likewise the pecuniary contribution, whereunto he was tied by the
Capitulations of the confederacy. So soon in a manner as the Admiral was
departed from before Milan, the Cardinals, who had already been fifty days
in the conclaue, created The creation of Pope Clement the se^enth.
a new Pope, which was, Julius of Medicis, who took upon him the name of
Clement the seventh.

This election certainly was very pleasing to all men, for the great opinion
that the whole world had conceived of him, because he was a man of great
authority and worth, and reputed to be grave and constant in his
determinations. The Venetians send Ambassadors to the new Pope.
him, appointed eight Ambassadors to go and congratulate him for his new
promotion: and to present him with their usual obedience: the Ambassadors were
Marco Dandulo, Ieronimo Pesaure, Dominico Veniero, Vincentio Capel, Thomaso
Contaren, Lorenzo Bragadino, Nicolo Tepula, and Lodouico Bono.

Within a while after Prince Grimani dyed, after he had governed one year and
ten months, he was with great pomp carried to Saint Anthonies Church.

ANDRE GRITTI the 77. Duke.





ANDRE GRITTI, Procurator of Saint Mark, a man very famous for his rare and
singular virtues, was chosen in his place, who had already in time before
managed

After this manner was the year 1523. ended. At An. 1523.
the beginning of the next following, the French men's difficulties, did inuit
the Emperors Captains to think on means how to finish the wars: for this
purpose They sent for the Duke of Vrbin to Milan, with Petro The Imperials
determine to (...) the (...).
Pesare the Prouidator of the Army, to consult how they should proceed in the
wars, where all men were of opinion, that so sone as the six thousand
Lancequenets, which the Viceroy had sent to leuy, should be arrived at Milan,
perceiving, did still by little and little retire forth of the State of Milan.
This retreat of the French caused the Venetian army to advance foreward, the
which being come to Binasca, did join with the Viceroy and the Marquis of
Mantua, who having left a sufficient garrison in Milan, were come into the
field, and finding themselves to be strong, they came within five miles of the
French Camp, thereby keeping them not only from scouring the Country, but from
victuals which were wont to come unto them. And the Imperials and the Venetians
The Imperials pursued the French.
growing afterward more bold, did cross the Thesin near to Pauia, to make
themselves masters of the country, and to take from the enemies those
commodities which they used to receive from thence.

The French wondering at the enemies boldness were likewise enforced to pass
the same river to oppose themselves against their deseignes, the Duke of Vrbin
having passed Thesin began to scour the Country, and having on every side
beaten the plains, he went and encamped before Garlas, a town strongly fenced
with dikes and Rampires, wherein were four hundred Italian footmen, to which
after he had made a breach, he gave an assault the very same day, and took it
by The Imperials take Garlas.
force, with great slaughter of those that were within it. The taking of this
town caused diverse others to yield unto him.

The Admirals hope being grounded upon two points, both of them failed him:
The one was that Rante de Cera coming down with eight thousand Grisons Why
the Grisons would not leave their houses.
tarried there still, being not able to pass it by reason of the great
increase of the waters: whereupon the Admiral being pressed by the Enemies and
the number of his forces daily decreasing, being desirous to join with them,
commanded a bridge to be made over that river, and the day following he caused
all his soldiers

Now the Imperialls perceiving in what disorder the French were retired, who
left diverse pieces of Ordnance, with other munition behind them, entreated the
Duke of Vrbin to pursue them in their company, whereunto the Duke of Vrbin
seemed to consent: But the Prouidator refusing so to do, the Venetians would
not pass over the river, thinking that they had already passed farther then
they were tied to by the bonds of the Confederacy, by which they were bound to
nothing elce but for the defense of the Duchy of Milan, and they had entered
into the lands of the Duke of Sauoy: for which refusal the Duke of Vrbin was
greatly

Now whilst the Venetians were busied in this war, sundry cares and dangers
troubled them from elsewhere, for they had intelligence that Soliman practiced
some high attempt, and was desirous to execute it, by reason that he made great
preparations of Soldiers and armor, the which did much amaze them, and caused
them The Venetians stand in fear of Soliman.
to keep strong garrisons in all their sea towns, and chiefly in the I Will of
Ciprus, whereunto they knew the Turk aspired; and to furnish that expense,
imposed a loan, as well on their particular cit^izens, as on al their cities
and subjects, which

In this mean time the French King, notwithstanding the bad success of his
army, had neither lost his courage, nor his desire to return into Italy, being
the more provoked thereunto by the disdain which he had conceived of the
Emperor, who not being satisfied with taking upon him the defense of the state
Cause of the French King^ discontent with the Emperor.
of Milan did moreover trouble him in his own Realm, by stirring, up the King
of England against him whereupon, he made great warlike preparations to return
himself in person into Italy the which he hoped to do with more ease and
speed, because his Army was safely returned into France.

These news did greatly trouble the Senators, not only in regard of the huge
expense they were to be at, by reason of their alliance with the Emperor for
the defense of the state of Milan, but likewise for the fear they were in of
their own Why the French King was displeased with the Venetians.
state, the French King being mightily incensed against them, not so much for
that which they had done in their last encounters, as for that they being since
then solicited to return to his alliance and to quit the Emperors, they had
wholly

The Venetians being then advertised that the French army passed the mounts,
did cause all their forces, which lay in sundry places in Garrison, to meet on
the Verona territory, whether they sent word to the Duke of Vrbin to come, and
willed Pessare their Prouidator to go thither with all speed, to wait what
should be commanded him. The Pope in the mean time being shaken with fear,
and sundry suspicions, told the Venetians, that it was well done to be united
with himself and the Emperor and to proceed matu^ely in all matters, for the
liberty of Italy, and The Popes remonstrances to the Venetians
for the defense of the stare of Milan that they possibly could: but if they
should not Marco Eoscare their Ambassador at Rome, to treat of that which the
French had already offered them.

Though the Pope propounded all this by way of Council, yet nevertheless
Whereunto the Pope ^ded.
it was perceived thereby, that his meaning tended to a new confederacy with
the The French come to (...).
the French making great have, were sooner in the Duchy of Milan then they
were looked for, and from (...) (...) directly to the City, they came to the
sub^ of the gate of Thesin, before it could be sufficiently rampierd and
provided (...) (...) hereupon all the Captains were of opinion to forsake it:
therefore the Duke (...) (...), the Viceroy and Sforza retired to Soncina with
all the The Imperial retire to Soncina and Lauda.
troops (...) within it; and the Marquis of Pescara to Lauda; but they gave
(...) order, that (...) might be well fortefied and stored with soldiers and
all other necessary provisions, into the which A^tonia de (...) entered with
should sack it. At the same time John Stuard Duke of Albanie, appointed by the
The Duke of (...) enuades Naples.
King to go and enuade the Realm of Naples, with two hundred Lances, seven
hundred light horse, and four thousand Suisses, craved passage of the Pope
through the Churches territories, and through Tuscany, to march to that
enterprise, which was resolved on to draw the Imperial forces thither, to the
end that the defense of the state of Milan might be weakened, where daily
sundry towns yielded without any great difficulty.

All the chief exploits of war were near unto Pauia, whither the King Pauia
besieged by the French King.
with his whole army was come to besiege it, resolving not to stir from
thence till he had taken it, thinking that it would greatly diminish his
reputation, if

The Imperials on the other side placed their chief hope in the conservation
of that City, and therefore all men were desirous to see, what the event of
that siege would be, especially the Pope and the Venetians, fearing on the one
side, the French Kings arms who was displeased with them, if he should prove
the The Venetians fear.
victor, and on the other, those of the Imperialls, if chasing thence the
French, they should become masters of Italy.

Amidst these sundry thoughts, they showed themselves in a manner newters,
neither sending their forces to the aid of the Imperialls, nor agreeing in any
sort with the French, expecting with good devotion the success of Pauia, which
being reduced to a siege, did seem would be very long. The Pope
nevertheless thinking it to be a part of his duty, to procure peace betwixt
these Princes, sent The Pope (...) a mediator betwixt the Emperor and the
French. King.
his Datarie to the Kings Camp to treat of an agreement, whereunto the King
seemed to condescend, the Viceroy was soon advertised thereof by his
Holiness, to the end he might testify that his desire was conformable to the
duty Soliman, who was already in the field with a mighty Army.

The conditions of the treaty of peace propounded by the Pope, were, That
Conditions of peace propounded by the Pope
the Emperor should enjoy the kingdom of Naples, and the French king the Duchy
of Milan, with particular promise not to pass on any farther into Italy,
without the Popes knowledge and consent. This treaty having continued for
certain days, no effect thereof succeeded, but only iealousies betwixt the
French The Venetians sought to, by both sides
and Spaniards: whereupon the Venetians were again solicited by both parties
Charles of Arragon thither, to require them to send those forces which they
were bound to by the capitulations of the league: They answered the French
Ambassador in general terms, how that they had referred all that business to
the Pope: but to him the Viceroy sent, albeit they did not refuse his demand,
yet nevertheless they answered coldely, as those who knew very well how to fit
their councels to the event of things, and this irresolution of theirs
continued till such time as the Pope had very secretly concluded with the
French king, both for himself would prove victorious, in regard of the great
forces that he had ready in What moved the Senate toally themselves with the
French.
Italy, against enemies that were wholly unready and very ill provided of all
necessaries: which caused them rather to incline to the French, then to the
Imperials.

According then to this resolution, a peace, and league betwixt the Pope, the
King, and the Venetians was determined and concluded at Rome with the
Ambassadors, An. 1525.
in the beginning of January, the year 1525. and confirmed afterward by the
Senate at Venice. This treaty being handled very secretly, the Senate being
most importunately urged by the Emperors Ambassadors, to join their troops
with the Imperial Army, after sundry excuses, answered that

The league being thus concluded, the French King sent the Bailiffe of (...)
to Venice, to congratulate them, and to assure them of his love to the
Commonwealth, from which he promised never to divide himself. He did
afterward require that the same accord, which was secretly concluded, might be
published abroad, whereunto the Venetians did freely condescend: thinking it to
be the The Senates answer to the Imperialls.
best, thereby to cause the Imperials, who expected their aid, to hope no
longer for it, and that they being destitute of their help, dispairing of
being able to keep the State of Milan, might retire some-where else, or
incline to peace.

The Pope was of a contrary opinion, saying, That the treaty ought not to be
Sundry opinions on the publication of the league.
published, the better to reduce the Imperials to greater necessity and danger,
which would happen so soon as the French should pass the Po, which they said
they would do, promising to repasse it at the Popes pleasure: but time and
necessity pressing him to discover himself, in regard he was to grant passage
to the Duke of Albany through the Churches territories, for his journey into the
Realm of Naples: the Pope made show, as if the Duke of Albany would pass The
Pope protests against the Emperor and the King, if they agree not.
Princes, and admonishing them both to throw down Arms, to come to an
agreement, and to lay in deposito in the hand of a third person not suspected,
whatsoever did yet hold out in the Duchy of Milan, for the Emperor, and Duke:
He gave notice thereof to the Viceroy by Paul Vettori, Captain of his
Galleys, as also how he could not stop the Duke of Albanies passage, but that
it behooued him to be assured of him by new conuentions, he likewise sent him
diverse other articles, which he hoped to insert in the peace.

These propositions caused the Imperialls to suspect that the Pope had agreed
The Imperialls suspect the Pope.
with the French King, (as in effect he had done) for perceiving themselves
enforced at one time, with great want of money to maintain the war in
Lombardie, and to have an eye to the kingdom of Naples, they could never be
aided either by the Pope or the Florentines, and were besides very well assured
that the Venetians would forsake them, who entertaining the Imperial Captains
with hope that they would observe the league, did defer the execution thereof
with sundry excuses, so as the Viceroy was even at the point to return with
his Army into the Realm of Naples for the safety thereof.

But in the Council held for that purpose, the opinion of the Marquis of
Pescara The (...) of Pescara causes the Imperial arm^ to tarry in Lumbardy.
did wholly pr^uaile, who showing himself no less courageous then discreet,
said, That it was most necessary to continue the war of Lumbardy, and that on
the victory thereof, all other matters did depend.

The Emperor at the same time according to his alliance made with the King of
England, did so handle the matter, that the said king should the year
following come to Calais with a mighty army to make war on France, who to that
end sent a Knight to the Emperors Camp, which caused the Imperials to hold out
more boldly, as being assured that the Christian King assailed in his own
Realm, would be enforced to raise his camp, and to have thither for the
defense thereof, the agreement made betwixt the Pope, himself, and the
Venetians, being not as yet diuulged.

The news then of the King of Englands great warlike preparations for his
coming down into France, being blazed abroad, caused the Venetians not to
hasten the publication of the agreement, fearing least the King, upon that
report, might be enforced to lead his forces else where. But the success of
the The Pope and the Venetians fear least the King should come to hatsaile.
stay, should persuade the King to go and charge the enemies, and by that
means commit to the hazard of fortune, not oney his Army, but likewise their
states, and the liberty of Italy, which (having none other means to withstand
the Imperialls, if they should become victorious) would prove their prey.

In the mean time the siege of Pauia still continued, notwithstanding that for
want of munition, the battery did in some sort cease, which was forthwith
remedied What caused the Imperials to come into the field.
field, as also that the King had diuiden his Army (namely those whom the Duke
of Albany led, and five thousand men that the Marquis of Saluces had with him
at Sauona, and the places neerc (...), besides great numbers of others, who
remained as well at Milan as in other places, for the safety of Victuals)
determined, till the Duke of Bourbon with the Lansquenets should arrive, to
march into The King would by (...) (...) discamp from before Pauia.
dissolve it self, or to be scartered up and down here and there about the
country: He would not for all that give over the fiege of Pauia, thinking
that it would highly shame and disgrace him, if that Army wherein he was in
person, should see me to be afraid, and give place at the enemies coming.

The Imperialls then having made two squadrons of horse, and four of foot,
they came through she Park wall, of which they had beaten down three score The
Imperials assail the kings Camp.
^athom, some of them directly to Mirabel, and the residue to the kings camp,
where after ^ so (...) fight o^ ^ither side, the king being with great numbers
of me^ at arms in the midst of the battle, fighting valiant^y, his horse was
slain under him, and The King is taken by the (...), and the ^rmy is (...)
(...).
falling to the ground, being (...) in the face and in the hand, was taken by
five soldiore (...) knew him not: but the Viceroy (...), he made himself
known to him, who with great reverence kissed his hands, and received him
prisoner for the Emperor. All the French Army was forthwith put to rout, and
the greatest part of the (...) were disarmed, the rereward of (...) excepted,
conducted by the duke of Alancon. This so great and famous a victory obtained
by the Imperials over the French; did greatly afflict the Venetians with care,
foreseeing the great burden they were to undergo, the counterpoize of the
French forces failing them, and all the other Princes of Italy being too weak
to make resistance: and were The Venetians discourse on the Kings taking.
greatly affrighted with that success, they alone being to defend the liberty
of Italy, against such a mighty enemy, grown great in strength and reputation:
being yet doubtful whether he would contain himself within the limits of
the Duchy of Milan, or else being puffed up with that fortunate success,
pass on farther and follow the course of his victory.

Their whole forces were but a thousand men at arms, six hundred light horse,
and ten thousand foot, and resolving to leuy more, they exhorted all The
Popes resolution after the defeat of the French.
that might be offered him: and he had already begun to treat with

The Viceroy gave a willing ear to the agreement which the Pope craved,
knowing of what importance it was for the confirmation of the victory, and for
the drawing of himself and the Army forth of many necessities wherewith they
were oppressed, supposing likewise that by his example all the other Princes of
Italy doing the like, it was no more to be feared that the French would ever
afterward come and raise any tumults in Italy.

The Venetians having discovered this treaty, and knowing how many
inconveniences the Popes safety would bring upon them, they not being able to
divert The Venetians seek to alter the Popes opinion.
(because they would not be found unfurnished, if the accord which he sought
to make show of, have no good success,) to leuy ten thousand Suisses, and at
the same instant to dispatch a Nuncio to the King of England, to entreat him
to succor Italy in such an urgent necessity: that they likewise would send an
Ambassador to the same King, to make the like request, whereby they hoped to
obtain some speedy aid of him: such great enuies and distrusts had that
victory procured unto Charles.

But the Venetians perceiving that the Popes intent did wholly tend to an
agreement with the Imperialls, they likewise resolved to follow him therein,
seeing they could not do otherwise. Therefore the Viceroy having sent John
Sarmiento to Venice, to advertise them of the victory, they courteously
enterteined him, with great demonstration of love toward the Emperor: and The
Uenetians send Ambassadors to the Emperor.
they sent word to Lorenzo Prieuli and Andre Nouagero, (who being already gone
in Embassage toward Charles, did tarry at Genoa) that they should prosecute
their journey into Spain, to rejoice with him in the Senates behalf for his
gotten victory, and to excuse their delay for not sending their Forces to the
Imperial Camp.

Now the Emperor being advertised of this fortunate success, (albeit in his
The Emperors speech and gesture upon the news of the victory.
heart he was pricked forward with a desire of glory and greatness, which
made him very joyful, yet nevertheless showing by his speech and outward
gesture, a wonderful modesty, he assured all men that he would use it, as
it beseemed that special favor which God had done him, and for the good and
quiet of all Christendom: Whereupon he forthwith sent the Duke of Sessa to
the Pope to offer him peace, and to assure him that he was wholly disposed The
Emperor sends an Ambassador to the Pope.
to the peace and quiet of all Italy. He caused the same speech to he
delivered to the Venetian Senate by Alonzo Sanchez his Ambassador, and by the
Prothonotarie Carracciola, who remained at that time in Venice.

But by how much the Imperialls seemed to desire peace and alliance with the
Potentates of Italy, at such time when as they should rather have been sought
to, then have solicited others, by so much more they gave suspicion, that they

The end of the fifth Book of the fifth
The Contents of the sixth Book of the
THE sorrow which did afflict all France for Sforza. Accord betwixt the Pope
and the Venetians. The curtezie which the King of England used toward Francis
Sforza. The King of England is entreated to enter into the league, with his
answer. Lauda is taken by the Confederates. The Duke of Bourbon comes to
Milan. The Army of the league retireth from before Milan. The offer of the
Pope and the Venetians to the King, concerning the enterprise of the kingdom
of Naples. Genoa is besieged by the Confederats. Francis delivers the Castle
of Milan to the Emperor. The City of Cremona is delivered to the Confederates.
Rome is surprised by the Colonnesi, and the Pope makes an agreement with them.
The King of England gives a great sum of money to the Pope. The Emperors
preparations both by land and Sea. The Confederates provisions to resist the
Emperor. The great leuy of Lanfquenets made by George Frondsperg in the
Emperors behalf. The Marquis of Saluffes crosses the Po with his forces.
Foscare exhorts the Florentines to continue firm in their league. The
Spanish Nauall Army flies Burrow of Sea. The Confederates summon the City of
Naples to yield. Great disorder in the Army of the league for want of pay. The
Duke of Bourbon comes into the field to beseege Rome. Accord betwixt the Pope
and the Viceroy. Cottignola is taken by Bourbon. Great troubles in Florence.
Bourbon being come near to Rome craves passage of the Pope to go into
Naples. The Duke of Bourbon assaileth Rome. His death. Rome is taken by the
Imperialls. And lastly, the great cruelties which they there committed.



The Sixth Book of the fifth Decade of the History of Uenice.
THe news of the battles loss, with the Kings taking, being The sorrow of
all France for the Kings captivity and the Councels resolution.
brought into France, the sorrow and grief which afflicted the Lady Regent his
mother, and all the subjects cannot be imagined: yet nevertheless like a
discreet and virtuous Lady, she determined by all means possible to redress
it, and for that purpose having sent for all the Princes and Lords which were
in France, to come speedily to Lions, where she then lay, to determine and
provide for matters concerning the Kings liberty, and the Realms safety; It
was there resolved to send to foreign Princes to use means for the Kings
delivery, and among others to the Venetians, and Gaspar Sorman being to that
end sent to Venice from the Lady Regent, he declared unto them in her name,
that albeit the Realm of France did not fear the enuasions of any, but was
strong and mighty enough to defend it self, and willing to employ all her
power for her Kings delivery; yet nevertheless she entreated the Signory to
assist her in so just a cause, and so profitable for them and all Italy, by
joining themselves with the Lords of France, to inform the Emperor Charles to
set the King her son at liberty, upon honorable conditions.

The Senate, upon these entreaties, did manifest their great grief for the
Kings The Senates (...) to the French Commissioner.
disastrous fortune, with that of the kingdom, declaring the great affection
which it did bear to the crown of France, and for that present made none
other answer but this, That because the business was of great importance, it
deserved to have the Council assembled to determine thereof. But during these
practices, Accord betwixt the Pope and (...)*
the Pope, who had sent the Archbishop of Capua into Spain to make an
agreement with the Emperor, did ra^ifie the accord, concluded and determined
before with the Viceroy, by which the Venetians were excluded from it, if
within twenty days after the signifying thereof, they did not ratify it, by
means whereof the Senate was enforced to renew their treaties with the
Emperors Ambassadors, and to send, (in regard of the difficulties of
importance which were offered) Petro Pesare to Milan, to treat with the
Viceroy.

The French in the mean time did not give over their former pursutes, being
not yet out of hope to join the Venetians to themselves, (albeit the Popes
authority might then have drawn them to a contrary resolution): whereupon
French Agents sent to Venice to treat o^ an agreement.
the Bishop of Bayeux, and Ambrose of Florence came to Venice, to make in the
name of the said Lady Regent, and in that of the whole Kingdom, more certain
and resolute propositions then at the former time, concerning the league and
the Kings freedom. For this cause, as also for that apparent

The Marquis of Pescara at the same time entering Milan with three thousand
foot, two hundred men at arms, and with great numbers of light horse,
required the Duke to deliver into his hands the Castle of Milan, with that of
Cremona, speaking plainly, That he was come to take possession of The Marquis
of Pescara his audations demand to Duke (...) (...)
into the hands of Duke Francis Sforza, all his pursutes were in vain, for,
delaying the matter from day to day, he made now one excuse, and then an
other, imputing to the Duke diverse faults committed by him, and among others,
That he had treated with the Venetians, to deliver the Castle of Milan unto
them; a matter which was never thought of by either of them.

These things with diverse others, did greatly withdraw the Venetians Accord
betwixt the Pope and the Venetians.
affection from the Emperor, and caused them to give no more credit to all his
promises; nor the Pope likewise, who speedily to prevent those perils, which
threatened them daily, resolved to join in league, in regard there was some
difficulty, and more trouble and ^ediousnesse to call the French into it.

The Pope then renouncing the accord formerly made with the Emperor,
contracted a new one, as well in his own name as in the Florentines, for The
articles of the agreement.
the which he strengthened himself with the Duke and Senate of Venice, in
which agreement it was mentioned, that they should join together, to prevent
those dangers which the experience of things past had taught them concluded and
sworn to, the Pope the better to begin for his part to prepare that which was
concluded on, commanded the Marquis of Mantua to visit the Parmesan with his
men at arms, taking order besides to hasten the Grisons and Suisse footmen,
where they had begun to leuy, but very slowly. The Venetians on the other side
determined to increase their Army to the number of ten thousand foot, to make
a leuy in Greece of other three hundred light horse, and generally to provide
for all matters belonging to their safety* And that which did greatly incite
them thereunto, was, the curtezie which the King of England used toward the
French, who being jealous of the Emperors power and greatness, fearing that
if he should grow too mighty, he might afterward chance to tread The king of
Englands courtezie toward the French King.
him under foot, converted his ill will toward the King into friendship; so
as he treated with the Lady Regent, and the Council of France, promising them
all aid and succor possible, as well of men as money to set the King at
liberty, and to free Italy from all oppression.

This treaty being passed betwixt the Pope and the Venetians, gave hope that
they should be united with the Realm of France, but they proceeded therein
after an unusual manner, because that the Pope, supposing that by the
confederacy which he had already made, he had time enough to prevent
dangers, and to be able in the mean time to obtain more reasonable
conditions of the Emperor, he proceeded very slowly in his agreement with the
French, and Francis Sforza unto the Duchy of Milan, being found innocent of
those crimes imposed upon him, or if he were guilty, to inuest his brother
Maximillian in it. But the Venetians not relying on his promises, made earnest
suit to agree with the French, meaning not to trust to his offers, which only
tended to break the league, and to delay the provisions of war, they
likewise fearing The Venetians (...).
least the French should enter into league with the Emperor, as they were
desirous to do for the recovery of their King, and all their practices should
by that means prove vain.

That happened which they had foreseen, in the beginning of the year 1526. An.
1526.
when the news yet unhoped for arrived at Venice, of the atonement betwixt
the Emperor and the most Christian King, by which the King was not only set at
liberty, but likewise a firm peace established betwixt them, by means of the
Kings marriage with the Lady Eleonor the Emperors sister, and that of the
Emperor Agreement betwixt the Emperor and the (...).
with the sister to the King of Portugal: and that the Duke of Bourbon should
have the Duchy of Milan, and should marry the Lady Rene, sister in law to the
King.

This was that which they had ever most feared, but this doubt was for that
time cleared, the Lady Regent having sent ample power and commission to Albert
de Carpi her Ambassador at Rome, to conclude the league, the which did trouble
the Pope and the Venetians: But it lasted not long, by reason of a common rumor
that was spread abroad, that King Francis would never perform to the Emperor,
that which he had been enforced to consent to, and that which made it
credible, was, for that it was reported, that after his departure from Spain,
he was much discontented with his entertainment in the time of his
imprisonment, and especially because that to free himself from thence, he had
signed a very disaduantageous contract by the which he quitted the Duchy of
Bourgondy to the Emperor.

Now that they might truly know what his intent was, the Senate determined,
(albeit they had decreed to send two of the chief of the City in Embassage to
him, to condole with him for his fortunes past, and also to rejoice for his
delivery and manage) not to spend so much time as an Embassage would require,
but they so^nly sent into France Andre Ressi Secretary to the Preguays, where
with more speed and less suspicion, might negociate a business of so great
importance: and the Pope following their example, sent Paulo Vettori thither
for the same purpose.

These men needed not greatly to labor to be assured of his meaning. For
after he had lovingly enterteined them, in the first discourse that he held
with either of them apart, he did greatly complain of the Emperors inhumanity
toward him whilst he was prisoner, not using him as beseemed so great a
Prince as he The King complains of the Emperor.
was: assuring them that he was no less free then ready to moderate the
Emperors insolency, whereupon, the Kings conclusion was, that if the Pope and
Venetians would send Commissioners, the league should be presently made, the
which they said was best to be done in France, to the end the King of

He said likewise that he would ratify whatsoever had been begun, and for
the most part concluded on by the Lady Regent his Mother, and the Council of
the Kingdom; they were then only to bring ample authority from their Princes
to contract, because that then he would show them how conformable his
affection and good will was toward the common safety:

That he did hope to find in the King of England, the same intent and The
King intends to take Arms against the Emperor.


That he would out of hand send his Ambassadors to him, and that if the
Italian Princes would do the like, it would greatly help and further the
cause;

That with the forces of so many Potentates joined together, they might more
easily resist the deseignes of the Imperialls.

So soon as the Venetians understood this answer, so conformable to their
desire, they sent instructions and ample Commission to Rossi to conclude the
league: the Articles whereof being before determined, were easily passed, some
few things being altered.

Gasparo Spineli the Secretary was likewise commanded, (who at the same time,
The Venetians make means to draw the King of England into the league.
was Agent for the Signory, with the King of England) to use means to induce
that King to enter into that league, by declaring unto him the great opinion
which all men had conceived of him, and the great account which was made of his
authority, and that they only craved him to be Protector of that accord, and
defender of the liberty of Italy.

But the Pope proceeded very slowly therein, so as they were enforced
oftentimes to urge him to it, whereupon the Ambassador of the Commonwealth The
Venetian Ambassadors remonstrance to the Pope.
resident at Rome, showed him daily the goodly occasion which presented it
self, for the procuring of their common safety, in that the French King was
desirous

The Pope being moved by these remonstrances, resolved to send Caponi into
France, in whom he reposed great trust, with instructions and special power
to conclude that league, albeit that at the same time Don Hugo de Moncado,
coming to Rome from the Emperor, did treat to the contrary: and had in the
same manner almost negociated by letters with the Senate

But the Pope and Venetians answered all his requests in one form, That when
soever the Emperor should seem desirous of peace, he should find them
disposed thereunto, but that he was to show it in deeds, to which they would
give The Pope and Venetians answer^ Don Hugo, negociating for the Emperor.
more credit then to words: that he should do well to raise his siege from
before the Castle of Milan, to restore Francis Sforza to his state, and to
accomplish whatsoever he was tied unto by the Articles of the Confederacy,
and that then it would be a fit time to talk of laying down arms, and of
settling peace and quiet in Italy: but his answer hereunto was in general tei
mes: whereby they plainly perceived, that this speech of peace tended to none
other end but to delay with vain hope the provisions for war, and by those
cunnings to estrange the

They had almost obtained their desire, the French being not so greatly
affectionate to the league as they were at the beginning, either because the
King was not well assured of the Pope and Venetians minds, by reason of their
practices with Don Hugo de Moncado (albeit they were communicated to him) or,
(as some The children of France are given in ^stage for the King their Father.
thought) that he would but make use of the name of the league, only to make
the agreement more easy, and to redeem his children whom he had given in
hostage to the Emperor; and that instead of Bourgondy, he should take some
other recompense: namely, for that the Bishop of Bayeux his Ambassador at
Venice, sent thither for that purpose was a whole month without receiving any
An. 1526. The league concluded at Coignac.
concluded at Coignac* betwixt those of the Council, and the Kings Procurators
on the one si^e and the Agents of the Pope and the Venetians on the other. The
chief points of which, were, That betwixt the Pope, the French King, the
Venetians, and the Duke of Milan, (for whom the Pope and the Venetians Francis
Sforza might freely enjoy the D^tehy of Mi^an, and the children of France be
set at liberty, by receiving an honorable ransom, which the King of England
should appoint, with other particular obligations concerning the preparations
of the war concluded with the Council of the Realm before the Kings
delivery.

In this manner then was the league concluded, but it was not presently
published, because they tarried for the King of Englands resolution, whom they
desired should be named one of the chief Contractants. Therefore the
Confederate Princes resolved to send an expres^e message into England, to
solicit John Baptista Sangua, a man of singular wisdom went thither from the
The Confederates send Commissioners to the King of England.
Pope, John l^q i^ from the French King, and Marc Antonio Veniero for the
Venetians. But the King of England albeit he seemed to be de^ous to listen to
that agreement, as being distasted of the Emperor* resolved ne^ helesse not to
make any public demonstration thereof, until he had first of all requested
The King of Englands answer.
the Emperor Charles to gratify the Confederates so much, as to set the
children of the most Christian King at liberty, and render the state of Milan
to Francis Sforza, and for want of so doing, to protest against him, and to
denounce

Now because it would have been too long to have proceeded after this manner,
by reason of the difficulties which might have been made, such as it was, it
was published with great ^olemnity, they thinking themselves strong enough to
abate the Imperial pride.

There was at the same time in the Venetians army, ten thousand foot, nine
hundred men at arms, and eight hundred light horse, and they daily expected
great nombers of Suisses, paid partly by the Pope and the Venetians, and partly
by the French King, at whose arrival they resolved to march to the relief of
the The number of the Army of the League.
Castle of Milan and to try if they could take the City. The Marquis of
Salusses on the other side with the French men at arms, and ten thousand
foot, waged at the common charge of the league, was ^o enter the Duchy of
Milan, and to assail N^ara and Alexandria, whilst in an other place order
should be taken for anauall Army.

The Venetians commanded their General, and Petro Pesare their Prouidator
Francisco Guicciardin came upon the Parmesan, to the end they might join
together Lauda is taken ly the Confedeates.
and then ma^h whether it should be thought fittest for the service of the
league. In the mean time Malateste Baillone with a band of the Venetian
troops marched to Lauda, where he had intelligence with Lodouico Visturlin a
gentleman of the same City; and albeit there lay within it fifteen hundred
footmen in Garrison, he did nevertheless with ease seize on it and became
master thereof, and kept it in the name of Francis Sforza. The two Armies being
ioyded together much to Milan.


After the taking hereof the whole Venetian army passed the Po, and within
Lodouico, Earl of Belgie, requested the Duke of Vrbin to give him two thousand
footmen, with whom he offered to relieve the Castle of Milan.

Now the Confederates Army being come very near to the City was lodged The
Duke of Bourbon comes to Milan
those of the league. But the night before the day that the Army should set
forward, the Duke of Bourbon who not long before was come to Genoa with six
Galleys and bills of Exchange for an hundred thousand Ducats, entered Milan with
eight hundred Spanish foot that he had brought with him: He was very much
solicited thereunto by the Marquis of Guasto, and Antonio de Leua. The The
army of the league retireth from before Milan.
Duke of Vrbin at these news dispayring to take the City by assault, and
fearing some greater disorder, if he should tarry any longer there, raised his
camp,

The Senate, who had conceived great hope by reason of the armies approach
near Milan, that the Castle would be relieved, which was reduced to extreme
want, did greatly wonder, and was sorry, when it understood by the Prouidators
letters that they had raised their camp, so that the Duke of Vrbin sent
Lodouico Gonsaga to Venice to insti^ his actions, who being brought into the
Senate yielded a particular account of what had passed, and of the occasions
which moved him to proceed in that manner, wherewith the Senate was well
satisfied; but the Pope was nor so easily appeased, complaining very much not
only of this retreat The Pope is discontented.
not vouchsafe in any ^ort to communicate the affairs of greatest importance
to his Lie^enants, the which had greatly moved him; so as for to please him,
the Senate commanded the Duke of Vrbin ever after to communicate with
Guiccardin all matters of importance, which should be handled in the army.

On the other side, they prepared the nauall army, to assail the sea-townes
belonging to the Emperor, and to those ends the Venetians having appointed
Lodouico Armiero for their Prouidator, sent him to Corfou, where John Mora the
other Prouidator, was with the army, of which, Armiero had commandent to take
12. Galleys, and with them to sail toward Rome, to join with those of the
Pope and the most Christian King, that all of them together might direct there
course according as they should judge it to be necessary and proffitable for
the confederates. Germans above seven thousand foot, and great numbers of
horse, had made themselves fearful to the Pope: but the French King and the
Venetians thought the enterprise of Genoa to be much more proffitable for the
Confederates, as well for the Commodiousnesse of the same city and for diverse
other enterprises, as for the great good hap of that exploit, which falling
out fortunately would much increase the reputation of the League: Pedro of
Pedro of (...) general of the naual army
Navarre was declaired General of the Confederates Nauall army, a man

But the Churches Galleys, and those of the Venetians being ready, they were a
long time tarrying for those of the French King and the General, a matter
which did greatly weary the Pope and Senate, and gave them just cause of
discontent, and to suspect that the French King had changed his mind, by
thinking on his own particular interest, and not caring for that of the
league: adding The endfedrats suspect the King.
to this suspicion other presumptions: That small store of money had been sent
to the Swisses, in comparrison of the forty thousand Ducats which he was

The King alleged for his excuses, that before he was to renew that war, it
behooved him to denounce it to the Emperor, although there was no such mention
made in the articles of the confederacy: And as concerning the delay of The
French Kings excuses.
his army, and payment of the Swisses, he laid all the fault upon the
Captains and Officers, as the Lord of Langi gave them to understand at large.
For, the most Christian King, fearing least the Confederates being distasted
of him, should disioyntly agree with the Emperor, he dispatched the said Lord
of Langi

The Lord of Langi being come to Venice, made the above mentioned excuses,
assuring the Senators that the King was much disposed to wars, and that
besides the Galleys he prepared great ships of war in Brettaine, to saill
with The Lord of Langi comes to Venice and Rome from the King.
a mighty army, to ouer-throw at sea all the enemies attempts and deseignes.
From thence he went to Rome where he executed the same commission: and as for
the Swisses, he said that they had promised to hold a general assembly, where
all things should be resolved on in the Kings behalf; and above all things
John Baptista Sa^ga the Roman* whom the Pope had sent, (as has been said) to
the King of England: who by the way remained certain days for the same
purpose in the French court-

The Senate making show that his arrival was most pleasing to them, and that
they did wholly give credit to his saying, answered, that it had never doubted
of The Senats answer to the Lord of Langi.
the Kings good will and affection toward the league, and perticularly toward
their commonwealth, and therefore it promised, that not only in that
business, which concerned the common good, but likewise in all other, and at
all times, their love and forces should be inseperably joined to his: but as
concerning peace, they had never refused it; that on the contrary, they had
never taken arms but with an intent to procure a firm and assured peace: and
therefore if they The offer of the Pope and Venetians to the King.
King to a greater willingness to war: whereupon the Pope and the Venetians
gave him to understand, that if they should conquer the Kingdom of Naples, it
should be for one of his children: the Common wealth retaining only such a
portion as should be thought sufficient for the recompense of their costs,
labor and travel.

Upon this hope, the King promised three hundred lances more, with a surplusage
of twenty thousand Ducats every month, for the service of the league, Armiero
the Prouidator being departed from Corfou with thirteen Galleis came to
Terracina, where finding Andrew Doria with eleven of the Popes Galleys they
went altogether to Ciuitauechia, then from thence to Liuorne, where they met
with Pedro of Navarre with four Gallions and sixteen light Galleys of the
French King.

It being then there determined to beseege Genoa and to reduce it to the Kings
devotion, for the great profit and commodity of the confederates, the Army went
first to Protouenere, which soon yielded, with Spetia, and all the other towns
upon the river even to Monega Then the army being divided, Doria and the
Venetian Navarre with the French Army sailed toward Sauona, which forthwith
yeeleed to him: The first and chief deseigne of the Captains of the league
was, to stop victuals from entering by Sea into Genoa, whereof they knew it
was badly provided, and The Confederates nauall army not farr^ from Genoa.
that by keeping it short, they hoped quickly to reduce it under their
obedience: and for that purpose they placed six Galleys in Guard, two of every
prince, which took certain ships with other smaller vessels laden with
victuals that were going to the City: so that it soon felt great want and
discommodity. But the beseeged were secretly relieved by those of the river,
who furnished them with part of the victuals, which upon sundry pretenses were
suffered to be Doria, who either for some secret envy that he bare to Navarre,
for that Doria is suspected to relieve Genoa
under his authority and command his country should be vanquished and taken, or
for any other deseigne of his own, was suspected not to have carried himself
faithfully as he ought to have done, nor after such a manner as was requisite
for the speedy ending of that business.

The Genouois for the assurance of their City, had with great speed placed at
The fortifications of Genoa.
the mo^th of the haven certain great ships laden with Artillery, besides
which were six light Galleys, commanded by Gobba Justinian, who coming forth
at times to skirmish with the enemy, would not go farther then within
Cannonsho^te Venetians, having entrenched themselves, to be freed from the
enemies incursions and surprises, if they should happen to come forth, as also
by reason of a tempest at sea, which would not suffer them to draw the army
forth of Portefin where it remained.

But the Genowais perceiving themselves daily to be more shut in, determined
to make a sally, and to assaill and beat down the enemies fortifications: the
Captains of the army having notice of the enemies deseigne, landed Phillippin
Doria and John Baptista Grimani, with eight hundred footmen, and two pieces
The Genowais are bravely repulsed in their sally.
of ordnance, and turned the poopes of the Galleys toward the land, so as the
soldiers of the City coming to execute their attempts, were not only
courageously

The Duke of Vrbin at the same time being solicited by the Venetians, and being
pricked forward by a desire to recover that reputation, which he had lost in
their retreat from before Milan, so soon as one part of the Swisses were come
to the army, to the number of five thousand determined to return toward
Milan, to the relief of the Castle, in which Sforza still remained: and being
come within a mile of the City with the army, he sent two thousand foote-men
to take Monce, and the mount of Brianca, two places very commodious for
victuals which might be brought forth of those quarters to the Camp. The
residew of the army being logded there, and the Captains being assembled in
council Francis S^orza yields the Castle of Milan to the Imperi^lls.
of the enemies ordnance, they were aduertized that Sforza, wholly dispayring of
relief, had yielded himself, and had quitted the Castle to the Imperialls, on
this composition: That without prejudice to his titles he should give the
Castle of Milan to the Duke of Bourbon, who received it in the Emperors name,
suffering him to come forth in safety, with all those that were with him. That
it should be lawful for him to remain at Coma, which should be given to him
for his abode, with the government and revenue of the same City, till such
time as the Emperors determination might be known concerning his affairs.
That a Francis Sforza ratifieth the league.
whilst he stayed in the Camp, ratify the league made in his name by the
Pope and the Venetians.

The loss of the Castle of Milan, albeit that it was irke-some to them and of
great importance for their enterprise, did not for all that drown their hope
of taking the City, the which they knew to be badly provided of all things,
and that there was not within it suffitient number of men for that it would
shortly be reduced under the power of the Confederates either by force or by a
seege.

Whilst they expected these supplies the Duke of Vrbin had resolved to send
part of his forces to Cremona, to attempt the taking of the City, which was an
enterprise very pleasing to the confederats, and cheefely to the Pope. But they
were to delay the execution of that deseigne, for fear lest the Imperialls
making a salley, as it was reported they would do, should come and assail the
Camp. Neuer-the-lesse at the last Malatesta Baillone went thither, but with
less forces then was at the first determined, by reason of the before said
fear, who being come before Cremona, found the City to be fortified with a
Malatesta Baillone before* Cremona for the league.
double trench, and well furnished with defendants, he neuer-the-lesse
assailed it diverse times, but in vain: whereof the Duke of Vrbin being
aduertized knowing that it was an hard matter to take it with so few forces,
and on the other side how greatly it would diminish the reputation of the
league, if they should give over that enterprise, it was resolved to send
thither the Prouidator Pesare, Camillo Vrsino, and Antonio Castello, with store
of foote-men, and within a while after, The Duke of Vrbin brings supplis to
the seege of Cremona.
new supplies of a thousand Italian foot men were sent thither with a thousand
Swisses. But for all that the business going never the more forward, the Duke
of Vrbin resolved to go thither in person, albeit it was greatly to the
prejudice of The Capitulation of the City of Cremona.
at the last, those within it being reduced to such extremes, as a trompet
being sent to summon the City to yield, there came forth two Captains, the
one Guido Vaina who capitulated: That if they were not relieved by the months
end, they would come forth of Cremona the which they did, the time prefixed
being expired: Whereof the Duke of Vrbin did forthwith aduertize the Senate,
and the City was delivered to Francis Sforza.

These news were very pleasing to the Senate, who understanding that Sforza
made account to reside there, sent thither the Secretary Lodouico Sabadino, to
The Colonesie enter Rome violent^y.
remain there with him in the name of the Signory.

But in the mean time their happened a great disorder at Rome to the cofederates
great prejudice, who after the conquest of Cremona hoped to prevail Peter,
without any respect to the Majesty of Relligion, esteeming sacred matters less
then Turks would have done, so as the Pope could hardly retire, with some
Cardinals and others whom he most trusted into the Castle Saint Angelo, the
Colonnesi having determined to take him prisoner; Colonna having first of all
attempted in vain to cause the people to rise in his behalf* They carried
away with them in gould, and silver, and other commodities more then three
hundred thousand crowns.

The tumult being appeased which lasted not much above three hours: D. Hugo
after that he had taken assurance of the Pope went to the Castle to talk with
him, where using terms beseeming a Conqueror, he enforced him to grant a
truce betwixt them, as well in his name as in that of the confederates and the
Emperors for four months, by means whereof the Pope promised speedily to
cause his The Popes agreement with the Colonesi.
Army to repasse the Po, to call home his Galleis into the Churches
territories, and to pardon the Colonessi, and all others that had any hand in
that assault and tumult. That the Imperials and Colonesi with their Companies
should depart from Rome, and forth of the Churches state; and should retire
themselves into the Kingdom of Naples.

This truce was for the time present willingly embraced by both sides: by the
Hugo (the Colonesi nevertheless making instance to the contrary) because it
seemed unto him that he had done much for the Emperor, and because that all
those, in a manner, with whom he had entered Rome being laden with spoil were
slipped away into diverse places. The truce did interrupt all the deseignes of
Lombardy, and the whole fruit of the victory of Cremona. But the Pope thinking
afterward more considerately, and with a settled judgment, upon the agreement
which he had made, and foreseeing into how many dangers he had thrown himself
in time to come, the better to free himself from those perrils whereunto he
was subject if he should observe the Articles of the truce, wrote to his
Nuncios to enquire of the Hugo, or wholly to reject it, and within a while
after he sent the Lord of Liege into France for the same purpose; who at the
same time was come to Rome.

The Pope knew very well that to observe the truce, was nothing else but to The
Popes doubt concerning the agreement.
give the Emperor means and time to begin afterward a greater and fiercer
war, and to overcome by that delay those difficulties wherewith he was
pressed, assuring to himself in the end his states in Italy, to the great
danger and hazard of the liberties of all the rest. But his immeasurable fear
diuerted him from all The Senate upon this proposition assuted him that it had never desired war,
The Venetians answer to the Pope inuiting them to an agreement with the Emperor.
but had on the contrary by war procured an assured peace, so that it might
be treated and concluded by the most Christian King, because that doing
otherwise they should for ever alienate him from the affairs of Italy, and
should lose George Fr^ndsperg, who at his own charges had brought him an army,
the which being not able to hold out long, would of necessity be shortly
broken.

That the Garrison of Milan, being not paid, refused to obey her commanders
and would be gone. On the contrary how that they expected Rance de Cera from
France with a great sum of money, and that there was great hope that the King
himself, who was come as far as Lions, would in person come into Italy: That
the enterprise of Genoa was set forward with good success: in a word, that all
things promised an happy issue.

The Pope being urged by these remonstrances, and most of all (perhaps) by the
wrongs which he had newly received, resolved to hold in suspense the practizes
of that new truce, and to treat only of an universal peace, by the advice and
consent of the most Christian King. The arrival of the Lord Russell did much
avail the resolution, who being sent by the King of England to offer thirty
thousand The King of England offers the Pope a great summ^ of money.
crowns to the Pope for the expense of the war, came at the same time to Rome,
who did greatly solicit and exhort him to continue stead-fast in the league,
or Nouagiero their Ambassador with the Emperor, that he should enterpose that
treaty of peace, it being decreed that the agreement should be treated and
concluded in France, and should afterward, for the Emperors honor and
dignity, be ratified and confirmed by him in Spain.

The chief points of the treaty were, That the children of the most Christian
The chief articles of the treaty.
King should be set at liberty: that Lombardy should be left peaceable, and
Francis Sforza restored to his State, and that the Emperor should pay the King
of England that which he pretended to be due unto him: but difficulties daily
arising Colonesi had usurped upon the Churches State.

The Emperor on the other side hastened the provisions of the sea-army, The
Emperors preparations by sea and land.
which was reported to be of forty ships, and six thousand foot that were
paid, who met at the port of Cartagena to go to the relief of the city of
Genoa: he solicited his brother the Archduke to leauy the greatest forces he
could in his own country, and to send them into Italy: and had besides given
charge to the Prince of Orange to go through the Duke of Sauoys country with
greater numbers of Lansequenets into the Duchy of Milan.

The confederates resolving to stop the passage of these new supplies, made
great provisions both by sea and land. Diverse vessels were arrived for the most
Christian King in Brettaine and at Marseilles, with diverse others elsewhere
which had been taken near to Genoa; to resist the passage of the Spanish army
they labored to induce the Duke of Sauoy not to suffer the Imperials to pass
through George Frondsperg leauieth great numbers of Lansequenets in the Emperors
behalf.
his territories: But that which they most feared was the Almaines who were
reported to be leauied by George Frondsperg, an old captain, and much affected
to the house of Austria, who assembled great numbers of soldiers, inciting
them to enrole themselves in hope of booty; so that having received the
garrison which was at Cremona, he had in all with him more then ten thousand
foot. The confederates pro^ide to resist the Emperor.


The confederates, to stop these Lansequenets passage did first of all gain
the captain of the castle of Mus by five thousand Ducats which were given him,
the one half by the Pope and the other by the Venetians, as well to set at
liberty the Ambassadors of the Signory, whom he had surprised in their journey
toward France, as also to draw him to their party, whereupon beside, they gave
him the command of four hundred foot well paid, with a good pension for the
guard of the Lake of Coma. The Venetians did likewise send for the same purpose
Nicolao Sangotino their Secretary to the Marquis of Mantua to entreat him if
the Almaines should pass the mounts, that he would not suffer them to pass
through his State. But being aduertized that these Almaines had made provision
of artillery and munition at Trent, thinking that they would pass through the
Veronois, Augustine de Mulla for Prouidator General beyond the River Mence,
providing all matters to repulse them.

Now these Almaines took their way by the vale of Sabia very near to
Pioltella. (...) (...) come into Italy.
By these means the Venetian captains that were on the Veronois, did speedily
send Camillo Vrsin to Sales, with the light horse and certain companies of the
ablest footmen, the rest that stayed behind were commanded to follow them by
crossing the Lake, which they being not able to do, soon enough, by reason of
a tempest that arose, was the cause that Vrsin came to late to meet with the
enemies, who were already passed onwards on their way; yet nevertheless h^uing
seized on the Pace of Corona, which is a very narrow place and strong by
sytuation, he enforced the Almaines, who were already on their journey, going
thither to take an other way through the tops of the mountains, which

They resolved to follow them and still to hold them in allarmes, the Marquis
of Saluces, on the one side with great numbers of Swisses and Grisons, and the
Duke of Vrbin on the other marching toward Soncina, skirmishing continually
with the enemies rereward, to the great commendation of the captains, and
especially John de Medicis a great captain.
of John de Medicis, who notwithstanding that all the Popes captains were
departed, did nevertheless continue in the Kings pay, and retained a company
of

George Frondsperg having passed the Po without any let, and being irresolute
The Popes fear.
what way to take, did hold the confederates in doubt, and especially the Pope,
who fearing least the enemies might turn toward Bolognia and from thence into
Tuscany, did earnestly entreat the Venetians to command their army to pass
speedily over the Po, for to assure the Churches territories and those of the
Florentines: but their own State being not free from the same scare; The
Senate, in some sort to satisfy him, and yet not meaning to much to disfurnish
Lodouico Pisani, who was in the Marquis of Salusses army, to gather together
certain foote-forces, to send them speedily for the guard of the Churches
State: and Guicciardin making the same request, Baboni di Nal^i was sent
thither with a thousand foot: they did beside send word to their General,
that when he should perceive the dangers of the confederates to increase, and
those of the Venetians to lessen, not to make any difficulty to relieve them,
either with the whole body of the army, or with part thereof, as himself
should judge to be most necessary.

At the last it was concluded, for the present that the Marquis of Salusses
alone The Marquis of Salusses wi^h ^is forces pass^th the Po.
should pass the Po with his own troops and three hundred light horse of the

The Senate in the mean time, being wholly desirous to satisfy the Pope,
commanded the Prouidator to draw a galla^t troop of the best soldiers forth of
the army, and to send them over the Po, to join with the Marquis of Salusses:
whereupon the Prouidator Vitturi, did suddenly depart with five thousand foot
and certain

This marching of the enemies toward Florence, caused the co^federats to
fear, least the Florentines, being troubled with the danger that threatened
them, should come to an agreement with the Imperials, to the great hinderance
and prejudice Foscare his exhortation to the Florentin^s.
of the league: Upon this doubt the Venetians did speedly send Marco Foscare
their Ambassador to Florence, to exhort them in the name of the Republike not
to separate themselves (by reason of that accident) from them, setting before
them the great want of all necessaries that was in the Almaines camp, the
weakness and distress of the Imperials: and on the contrary the great forces
of the confederates, and their desire to employ them all for them, and with
them to run one self same fortune: and then, the hope of the happy success of
that war, by reason of the aid which they daily expected from France, and
finally the great

The Florentines declared how pleasing his coming and remonstrance had The
Florentines answer and resolution.
been unto them, and sent Alessandro de Pacis their Ambassador to Venice to
give thanks to the Senate, promising to continue steadfast to the league, and
in particular to have sound intelligence and corespondence with the Republike,
persuading them to leauy six thousand foot more at their common charge, that
they might with them resist the Duke of Bourbon with more assurance, who was
reported to have drawn forces from Milan, and with them to march into Tuscany.

In the mean time the confederates nauall army did still continue near to
Genoa, which being reduced to all extremity, diverse means were propounded to
Nauar his courageous proposition.
hinder the Spanish nauall army to the number of forty ships prepared at
Carthagena, from coming to the relief thereof; and among others Navarre was
of opinion, to sail unto the frontiers of Spain, and to assail the Emperors
army which lay in an open haven, and to burn it. This opinion was allowed by
the Venetian Prouidator, but Doria (al-be-it he likewise approved it) did
nevertheless consider that the quallity of that country was very contrary to
that proposition, and the dangers of the sea much greater, where they should
not find any place of retreat to shield themselves from tempests and storms:
and setting down

Whilst they dwelt on these resolute preparations, they discovered the
Imperial fleet fifteen miles off from land, consisting of six and thirty
vessels of all sorts, sailing with a fair wind directly toward Genoa, which
was de^arted from Spain sooner then was expected, wherein were Don Charles of
Lanoy Alarcon, and Don Ferrant of Gonzaga. So soon as the Venetian Prouidator
that lay at Porto-uennere to cause the vessels to be armed, had notice of the
enemies coming, he put to sea with sixteen galleys that he had ready, and
gave chase to the enemies vessels, but being o^ertaken with a contrary wind he
was enforced to return from whence he came, and the Spanish army in the mean
time pursuing their journey, drew still nearer to land, determining to enter
into the haven of Genoa, but at such time as it passed by Saint Florenzos
Mount, it was descried by Navarre, who lay at the foot of the hill with
seventeen galleys, who coming with them forthwith to sea, did with great
courage give in athwart the Imperial army, and falling foul one of an other,
they fought from morning till two hours within night, where the Imperials were
The Imperial fleet in beaten by the confeder^tes.
so roughly handled by those of the league, and their whole fleet so torn by
the artillery, as had not a tempest arose, which separated them, it was
certainly thought, that it would have been wholly defeated.

The confederates fleet retired to Portofin, staying the same night for the
other galleys that lay at Portouennere: and whether they did come or not their
resolution was by day break to seek the enemy. But so soon as it was day,
albeit that they followed them as far as Liuorne, yet they could not overtake
them, by reason that they were already to far. The viceroy went on his way,
but so beaten by the tempest, that his vessels were scattered, part of which
wherein Don Ferrant of Ganzaga was, were carried into Sicily, and afterward
came to Gayetta, where they landed the Lansequenets: and as for himself he
arrived with the rest in the haven of Saint Stephen, which belongs to the
Sienois: if The Imperial fleet scattered by tempest.
Armiero the Prouidator who lay at Portouennere could have come to the aid of
Augustine de Mulla in his stead, who was Prouidator in Friul.

But Armiero having cleared himself of al those imputations was wholly quitted,
and then they knew that the fault, why Genoa was not taken, did proceed from
the not sending of suffitient troops from the camp in Lombardy, which should
nearly have shut the City in by land: which the captains of the galleys had
oftentimes

Now the Pope, more then any else, was most troubled with the viceroys coming
The Pope m^ke ^th means to the viceroy for an agreement.
into Italy, fearing least the aid which he had brought with him would ioyn it
self with George Frondsperg: and therefore he sent the Archbishop of Capua
unto him to treat of agreement, and to propound in the mean time a suspention
of arms: but the viceroy being desirous to treat on very hard conditions, the
whole matter was broken off without any conclusion, the Pope having taken
courage, for that his army was increased in reputation and strength by the
arriual of Rance de Cera, who being sent by the French King into Italy was
come to Sauona The French King se^eth Rance de Cera into Italy.
with the nauall army, and from thence went to join with the Church-army
Colonnesi.

The viceroy on the other side sought to enter into the Churches territories,
to defend those of the Colonnesi, and to enforce the Pope to disioyne himself
from the league, and to give him a certain sum of money for the payment of
his army: whereupon he set foreward and came with twelve thousand men before
Frossolona, where he encamped, which is a town very weak, and seated in the
Champaine count^y, the houses of particular persons serving in stead of walls,
within which nevertheless the captains of the Church had left a strong
Garrison to keep him from any sure footing in that country. At his first
coming Frossolana is beseeged by the Vicer^y.
he began to batter the town, not giving any assault to it afterward. But
the Rance de Cera and Alessandr^ Vitelli with the Churches forces, which were
much increased by the Popes diligence, who had augmented his camp, with great
numbers of footmen paid and commanded for the relief of that place, was the
cause that after certain skirmishes on either side, the viceroy raised his
camp two hours before day, and set fire to certain munitions which were
left, leaving there behind him some bullets for great ordnance, and retired to
Cesenna, and from thence to Cepparane.

This fortunate success encouraged the Pope, and at the entreaty of the
confederates Ambassadors, whom he could not otherwise satisfy, he resolved to
execute the enterprise of the Kingdom of Naples, notwithstanding that it was
in the midst of winter, being the month of January in the year 1527. The
Venetians for this purpose commanded Augustine de Mulla their Prouidator in the
nauall army to bring it to Ciuitauecchia, and joining there with the Popes
galleys, to Horatio Baillon, who was freed by the Pope from his imprisonment
wherein Pope Leo had confined him.

At the same time the Earl of Vaudemont came from France to make one in The
Count Vaudemont comes to the army.
the enterprise of Naples, which they resolved to enuade by sea and land, who
determining to imbarke himself in the Venetian galleys, they re-enforced their
army with two thousand foot.

Rance de Cera in an other place, against the Popes will, entered into Abruzzo
Aquila taken b^ Rance de Cera.
with six thousand men, where by the means of the Earl of Montorias
children, Ascanio Colonna fled from thence so soon as he had intelligence of
their arrival. Doria likewise sailed before with his galleys and went and
assailed Pozzola, a place very important for the confederates, in regard of the
commodiousnesse of the haven of Baja: but being at his first arrival repulsed
by the artillery, he dislodged The consederates take the Burr^w of t sea.
from thence without assailing it; afterward other galleys of the league
arriving, they resolved to assail the sea Burrow of Stabia, where Diomede
Caraffa lay with five hundred footmen, the which was taken by assault on the
third day toward the side of the hill, and the day after the castle yielded.
The confederates take diverse places on the sea coast.


The tenth day the soldiers took the Greek tower and Surrenta by force,

Now the army of the league finding no resistance at sea it came so near to
the Peer of Naples, as the castle and the galleys played upon it with their
shot. It was The consederates consult about the s^ege of Naples.
then consulted on, whether it were necessary to beseege the city, some saying,
that by the taking thereof, the war would be ended, they having taken from
the enemies all means to come by money for the entertainment of their army:
as also, because their greatest hope of being able to keep that State,
consisted in the conservation of that city, the which being lost they would
forthwith leave the Kingdom, and retire to some other place. Diverse reasons
might incite them

Others who wear of a contrary opinion, thought it best to ^arry for Rance de
Cera, the better to shut in that city with greater forces, on which they knew
the whole end and success of the war depended, to the end to proceed therein
rising, which would open a more easy passage to their victory: and that
therefore it behooved them in waiting for such an occasion to sail toward
Salerno, to seize on that city and others near adjoining, whereby Naples it
self would at last be brought under their obedience.

But these reasons being not much approved nor thought worthy to be equaled An
Herald is sent to summon Naples.
with the profit which was to be hoped for by the then taking of that City,
they resolved to send an Herald to summon those within it to yield the city to
the consederates with the promises and threatenings determined in the council.

Don Hugo of Moncada, who commanded there, and held the people in awe, Hugo de
Moncada sallieth forth upon the conf^derates.
league was within four miles of the City took two thousand five hundred
foot, as well of the Garrison as of the people, and three hundred horse, and
with them marched forth of the City, to show that he wanted no courage to
frustrate the enemies deseignes.

Those of the league ^ad already landed diverse soldiers under the command of
the Earl of Va^demont and Horatio Baillone, who marching toward the City to
make discovery, met with Don Hugo his troops, and skirmishing together, they
did put them to flight in such disorder as they left certain field-peeces
behind them, which Moncada, having made a stand with his Spaniards, recovered,
Baillone who followed him at the heels having no great numbers of soldiers
with him, and considering that if he should enter he could not keep them from
the spoil, which would cause them all to be cut in pieces, he retired to the
galleys which were with in a mile off the City.

This exploit did so affright the Neapolitains, as they presently sent to
entreat the captains of the army not to batter the city, nor to spoil the
country near Hugo having intelligence of the small number of the army, showed
himself resolute to defend the City: so as the army for want of men remained
idle, waiting for supplies out of France which were very slow in coming, and
by their delay did snatch the victory forth of The great disorder of the army
of the league.
their hands: so as in the mean time of this expectation infinite disorders
arose in the Churches army, for money and victuals failing, therewithal
martial discipline was no more observed, the soldiers did no more obey their
captains, every one disbanded, they contemned the commandments of the Legate
Apostolic, What hindered the taking of Naples.
and all the interest of the league and the Pope: in such sort as diverse of the

For these causes the Pope continuing resolute in his former determination of
agreement, sought all means to obtain it, saying, That since he must needs
serve, he had rather to do it to the Emperor, then still to depend on the
unruly wills of captains, and namely of the basest soldiers.

Now in this mean time, the Duke of Bourbons determination to march into the
field, and to come and join with the Lansequenets of George Frondsperg, The
Duke of Bourbon ^archeth to the field in dis^ight of all difficulties.
did greatly trouble the Pope, and altered the confederates deseignes: for
albe-it he found himself to be without money, munition, pioners, and
unfurnished of all means to get victuals, he resolved nevertheless to pass
on, through Bourbon then being thus resolved, having drawn away the Garrison
from Milan, and from other places, went with his troops and crossed the
Trebia, uniting himself with the Lansequenets that were newly arrived, who
tarried for him on the farther side of the River, uncertain as yet what course
to take, al-be-it the common report was, that at his departure from Milan, he
had promised to his soldiers the sack of Rome and of the greatest part of
Italy, the like also did captain George to his Lansequenets, who upon that
hope had endured very many miseries since their departure from Germany, for
they had received but one only Ducat for a man, and afterward two or three
Ducats for the whole time they had been in Italy.

The Pope, in regard hereof, being greatly moved, as well in particular for
him self as for the Florentines, did renew his practizes of agreement with the
viceroy, What moved the Pope to s^ke an agreement with the viceroy.
al be-it he had promised before not to conclude any thing without the consent
of the French King and the Venetians. That which moved him thereunto was his
own fear, and the continual exhortations of the General of the Friars, of
whom he made great account, who being newly returned from the Emperors
Court, assured the Pope of the Emperors affection toward his Holiness, and
of his great inclination to peace; whereupon, using this General in that
treaty with the viceroy, he continued in such sort as he seemed wholly to be
confirmed by that agreement, not making any warlike provisions for The Pope
trusts to much to the viceroy
the safety of his own person, saying, That as the universal Father and
Pastor, knowing the Emperor to be greatly desirous of peace, he ought not

Bourbon in the mean time being come into the Bolognia territory, spoiled all
places round about, to the end that the Florentines, fearing the like damage,
should compound with him, and contribute a certain sum of money for the
payment of his army, and thereby to avoid the ruin of their palaces and
goodly houses, which lie near to their city.

These considerations did in such sort move the Pope, as the Lord of Langi
Caesar Fieramosca, The Pope accords with the viceroy.
sent by the viceroy, had told him that his Master was satisfied with the truce
for eight months, propounded by his Holiness, he on a sudden without any
regard to the promises and aid of the French King, made an accord with the
viceroy, saying, That time might make his condition worse, if the Viceroy
should but know what disorder was in the army of the league: and that the
danger of the Realm of Naples was nothing in comparison of that of Tuscany
and Rome.

Therefore passing on farther, for the better assurance of That treaty, he
procured that the Viceroy should come in person to Rome, whilst the Cardinal
Triuulcio, who was Legate in the Churches army should go to Naples to assure
the Viceroy from him; who coming afterward to Rome was honorably entertained
there, and ra^ified the suspention of arms for eight months, according as it
had been agreed upon by Fieramosca, promising to cause Bourbon to withdraw
his army forth of the Churches and Florentines State.

The Pope being to credulous, thought his affairs by this means to be well
assured, having promised by the agreement to give threescore thousand Ducats
for the payment of the army, and to pardon the Colonnesi, and particularly
Cardinal Pompe^, restoring him to the Cardinalship whereof he had deprived
him. But the greatest error he committed was, for that through badde The Popes
^rror in disarm^ng himself.
council he had on a sudden with-drawne his whole army from forth the
confines of the Realm of Naples, and his nauall army to Ciuitauecchia, and had
wholly disarmed himself, retayning for the guard and safety of his own person
but an hundred light horse, and certain companies of black bands which had
belonged to the deceased John de Medicis, notwithstanding that the Colonnesi
were in arms, and committed soundry insolences.

The Venetian Senate being aduertized of this agreement, would not fail to
advise the Pope not to trust overmuch to the viceroy: for al-be-it that he had
proceeded sincerely therein, it was nevertheless to be feared that Bourbon,
who had the like authority from the Emperor as had the viceroy, being
displeased that the accord was made without his consent, would not ra^ifie it:
Then they declared unto him what inconvenience and disorder his so soon
disarming did Siennois and Colonnesi, with whom he had not yet fully ended,
were still in arms.

But the Pope contemning all these reasons and remaining obstinate in his
resolution did verify the common saying, That good and whole some council
given by an interressed and suspected person, causes rather a precipitate
downfall. For the Pope thinking that the Venetians spoke for their own
particular interest, because he had forsaken them, would not harcken unto
them: whereupon, Bourbon within a while after writing to Rome, that he could
no longer hold back the soldiers for want of pay from coming to beseege it,
he then perceiving that to be very true which they had told him: al-be-it that
at the

Also he was wont to say afterward, that though he should have feared any
sinister accident, yet nevertheless he would not have changed his opinion,
because he would not have the world to know that he had been deceived by
trusting to any one. Now he imagining that the same would not come to pass
which did happen, had already appointed Matheo Guilberto his Datary to go as
Legate into Spain, to treat particularly there on the conditions

The Venetians being aduertized of the Popes resolution did write to the Duke
of Vrbin that he should assemble his troops, and join them with those of the
Marquis of Salusses that were on the Bolognois: They afterward sent to
Sebastian Iustinia^ their Ambassador with the Christian King, willing him The
Venetians assurance to the King.
to assure his Majesty, that al*be-it the Pope had forsaken them that they
would never depart from his friendship, and that if he thought good to accept
of the truce, they would likewise accept of it, and not otherwise. The Pope in
the treaty of the accord which the Viceroy had reserved place for the Venetians
to enter into it, because they had not showed themselves much contrary to the

But concerning his proposition to them to renew the war in the Realm The
Venetians answer to the King concerning the renewing of the wars of Naples.
of Naples, they did very much commend the reprizall of arms but not to go
into that Kingdom, saying, That they had there lost the good will of the
people, and their reputation, by yielding up, through the Popes separating
himself from them, all the towns which they had there taken: but that the
surest and proffitablest way for the present, was to prepare for the defense

Now the Imperial army notwithstanding the agreement conceived at Rome betwixt
the Pope and the viceroy, went still forward, although that Caesar Fieramosca
had signified unto them the agreement to cause them to return back, For the
Duke of Bourbon at the same time, either because he would not obey, or else it
being not in his power to do it, caused his army to march toward Cottignola
taken by the Duke of Bourbon.
Romagnia, where he beseeged Cottignola, the which he took by composition,
then marching toward Furli, he came and lodged at Villafranca five miles off,
and taking the way of Meldola, he showed that his meaning was to pass Tuscany
by the Val di bagna: whereunto he was much solicited by the Sienois who offered
him great store of victuals, and pioners.

The Venetians having notice of the enemies determination sent word to the Duke
of Vrbin, that leaving strong Garrisons in the territories belonging to their
State, he should pass on with the resid^e of the army to assure the lands of
the Church and the Florentines, and to oppose himself against the Imperials
deseignes. The Duke of Vrbi^ according to this direction being come with part
of the army near to Bolognia, and the Marquis of Salusses likewise, being
lodged in sundry places, he passed on toward Imola, and encamped betwixt
Rauenna, and Faenza, at the same time as the enemy departed from Cottignola: It
was there a long time debated amongst the captains of the league what The
consederates army does still sollow the Imp^rials.
course to observe in that war: and in the end it was concluded to have two
several camps, the better and with more ease to cut off all victuals from the
enemies, to what place soever they should march. The Pope taxing this council
did nevertheless make use of it, under color of his rash agreement, saying,
That the slow proceeding of those of the league for the preservation of that
which beelonged unto him had enforced him for to take an other course for his
safety.

Now the Pope, who contrary to all men's opinions had still thought himself The
Pope a^knowledgeth his error and imploreth* the consederates ^ide.
safe enough, being then strangely daunted, by this new aduertizement, called
before him all the Ambassadors of the Confederate Princes which were in his
Court, and after he had declared to them on the one side, how that the zeal
to Dominico Veniero Ambassador at Rome for the Signory of Venice, that he
would so deal with the Senate, as that they should command the Duke of Vrbin
to pass the Appenine hills with his army, promising to renew the league and
sincerely to observe it.

The Senate upon this proposition, al-be-it they judged it to be a very
dangerous Lodouico Pisani, who was come to the army as new Prouidator to pass
the mountes if need should require: whereupon so soon as the Imperial The
two armies at one time in any.
army had passed the mounts, that of the Confederates followed it: so as almost
at one time the two armies were in Tuscany, the Duke of Bourbon being then
lodged near to Arezzo, and the Confederates army at Barberina, the City of
Florence remaining in a manner in the midst betwixt these two

This was the cause of great troubles in the City, some craving a popular
government, and others would have that of a few private persons, whereupon the
greatness of those of Medicis came to controversy, and the popular faction
would a^ least have prevailed, those of Medicis being driven from the public
government; and Hippolito and Alessandro of Medicis the Popes Nephews being
declared enemies to their country, when as the Duke of Vrbin arrived
opportunely at Florence during these stirs, who so soon as he perceived the
Duke of Bourbon to direct his course toward Tuscany, taking with him
fourscore gentlemen forth of the army, with the Prouidator Pisani and
Frederic^ Bozzola, went speedily to Florence to continue the Florentines in
their fidelity toward the league.

He by his arrival did frustrate the deseignes of the contrary faction which
was affrighted to see the army so near, having no assurance of any relief
from elsewhere,

Whilst these things were done in Florence, the other confederates renewed the
league at Rome, by which they promised the Venetians to contribute toward the
expense of their army, provided that it did not depart fo^th of Tuscany or the
Churches State without the Popes permission, and that it would be one of the
first in the enterprise of Naples. These conditions seeming to hard to the
Senate, Dominico Veni^ro their Ambassador, for being to forward in his offers
was called home to Venice, and as one guilty for going beyond his commission
Dominico Veniero put to his trial.
was delivered over into the hands of the Auogario to have his process made,
and Francisco Pesare was sent Ambassador in his stead.

The Duke of Bourbon either for that he despaired of being able to make any
attempt upon Florence, by reason that all the confederates forces were not
far from thence, or for that he was ever d^sirous to go to Rome, determined
to What caused the Duke of Bourbon to to march to Rome.
march thither, being partly provoked, by the negligence and small care that
they had in Rome to provide for the dangers which threatened it: because that
the Pope relying in vain on the people, and on a great number of husbandmen
that Philippin Doria to leauy three thousand footmen, he having raised one
thousand and brought them to Ciuitauecchia, his Holiness did not vouchsafe to
send for them to come to Rome for the guard of the City: and caused his Datary
to write to Count Guy of Rangon, who lay at Ottriccoli with great numbers of
foot not to come to Rome, unless he should be expressly commanded by him so
to do, notwithstanding that the Earl was aduertized from the Duke of Vrbin,
that the Duke of Bourbon marched thitherwards, and that he might have come
thither in time: but he durst not

The Duke of Bourbon then, departing forth of the country of Arezzo without The
Duke of Bourbons great speed in his march to Rome.
artillery or baggage, and marching with incredible speed, not being hindered by
the rain which at that season was very great, nor yet by want of victuals, he
came near to Rome before such time as the Pope had scarcely any aduertizement
of his coming, and he found no resistance neither at Viterbo, whether the
Pope had not sent forces in time, nor yet in any other place, yet
nevertheless, before he would come nere to the walls, he sent to the Pope
to demand martial arrogance, to have some color for that which he had in
his mind determined to do.

The Pope would not regard his demands, nor yet hear them, as well because he
knew already the inward policies of the enemy, as for the great trust which he
reposed in the people of Rome, and in the leagues nauall army of six and
twenty galleys that lay at Ciuitauecchia with certain companies of footmen:
As also for that Rance de Cera (unto whom the Pope gave the chief defense of
the City of Rome) had rampired the suburbs, in the defense whereof he so much
trusted, that al-be-it they were in all men's judgments very weak, he would
not permit the bridges upon Tiber to be cut for the safety of Rome, if the

The defendants did not descry the enemies till it was almost to late, by
reason The Duke of Bourbon g^ueth an assault to the subu^bs of Rome.
of a thick mist which suddenly arose, wherewith the enemies army was covered,
until it came to the very place where they gave the assault, where Antonio de
Mo^tfalcone was in guard with an hundred soldiers, unto whose rescue diverse of
the armed people came running, who for a certain space sustained the enemies
attempts. But the Imperials continuing the assault very fiercely, these new
unexperienced soldiers perceiving danger hourly to increase forsook

The Duke of Bourbon at the beginning of their assault marching foremost, went
before all the companies, where being shot into the body by an Harquebuze, The
death of the Duke of Bourbon.
he fell down dead to the ground. The Prince of Orange, being very near him
when he fell, caused him forthwith to be covered with a cloak, to the end the
soldiers might not be daunted by the death of their General, and then he did
hotly purfue the victory.

The Pope, who in the palace of the Vatican attended what would be the event
The Pope with diverse Cardinals retiret^ to the Castle Saint Angelo.
thereof, hearing that the enemies had entered, did forthwith fly with diverse
Cardinals and other Prelates to the castle Saint Angelo. The Lords Rance de Cera
and Langey, having labored in vain to move the people to take arms for
their own defense, and had sought valiantly with those few forces they could
gather together and with them a long time kept the castle bridge, were at last
enforced to retire. The City being thus abandoned, and all the people in
confusion and flight, the enemies on all sides entered it, and became Masters
thereof without any difficulty. Philippin Doria and Count Guy, so soon as they
perceived the Duke of Bourbon to march toward Rome, did on a sudden without
waiting for any other commandment set forwards to rescue the Pope with the
forces of Ciuitauecchia and Oruietta: but the Duke of Bourbon by his speed
having prevented them, and shut up all the

Now the Duke of Vrbin having set forward to follow the enemies, but very
slowly, by reason of the hindrances of his camp, did at last with the whole
army come as far as Viterbo, who finding all the country to be spoiled by the
enemies, he was enforced by want of victuals to tarry there, his army being
by sundry accidents much diminished, having in all but seven thousand men, in
stead of thirty thousand appointed by the confederates. The army, lodging in
that place, the light horse and footmen did oftentimes scour the whole
Country, where meeting with the Imperial soldiers, that were

Besides that, at the taking of the City all manner of cruelty was used:
faction would at least have prevailed, those of Medicis being driven from the
public government, and Hippolito and Alessandro of Medicis the Popes Nephews
being declared enemies to their country, when as the Duke of Vrbin arrived
opportunely at Florence during these stirs, who so soon as he perceived the
Duke of Bourbon to direct his course toward Tuscany, taking with him
fourscore gentlemen forth of the army, with the Prouidator Pisani and
Frederic^ Bozzola, went speedily to Florence to continue the Florentines in
their fidelity toward the league.

He by his arrival did srustrate the deseignes of the contrary faction which
was affrighted to see the army so near, having no assurance of any relief
from elsewhere,

Whilst these things were done in Florence, the other confederates renewed the
league at Rome, by which they promised the Venetians to contribute toward the
expense of their army, provided that it did not depart forth of Tuscany or the
Churches State without the Popes permission, and that it would be one of the
first in the enterprise of Naples. These conditions seeming to hard to the
Senate, Dominico Veniero their Ambassador, for being to forward in his offers
was called home to Venice, and as one guilty for going beyond his commission
Dominico Veniero put to his trial.
was delivered over into the hands of the Auogario to have his process made,
and Francisco Pesare was sent Ambassador in his stead.

The Duke of Bourbon either for that he despaired of being able to make any
attempt upon Florence, by reason that all the confederates forces were not
far from thence, or for that he was ever d^sirous to go to Rome, determined
to What caused the Duke of Bourbon to to march to Rome.
march thither, being partly provoked, by the negligence and small care that
they had in Rome to provide for the dangers which threatened it: because that
the Pope relying in vain on the people, and on a great number of husbandmen
that Philippin Doria to leauy three thousand footmen, he having raised one
thousand and brought them to Ciuitauecchia, his Holiness did not vouchsafe to
send for them to come to Rome for the guard of the City: and caused his Datary
to write to Count Guy of Rangon, who lay at Ottriccoli with great numbers of
foot not to come to Rome, unless he should be expressly commanded by him so
to do, notwithstanding that the Earl was aduertized from the Duke of Vrbin,
that the Duke of Bourbon marched thitherwards, and that he might have come
thither in time: but he durst not

The Duke of Bourbon then, departing forth of the country of Arezzo without The
Duke of Bourbons great speed in his march to Rome.
artillery or baggage, and marching with incredible speed, not being hindered by
the rain which at that season was very great, no^ yet by want of victuals, he
came near to Rome before such time as the Pope had scarcely any aduertizement
of his coming, and he found no resistance neither at Viterbo, whether the
Pope had not sent forces in time, nor yet in any other place, yet
nevertheless, before he would come nere to the walls, he sent to the Pope
to demand martial arrogance, to have some color for that which he had in
his mind determined to do.

The Pope would not regard his demands, nor yet hear them, as well because he
knew already the inward policies of the enemy, as for the great trust which he
reposed in the people of Rome, and in the leagues nauall army of six and
twenty galleys that lay at Ciuitauecchia with certain companies of footmen:
As also for that Rance de Cera (unto whom the Pope gave the chief defense of
the City of Rome) had rampired the suburbs, in the defense whereof he so much
trusted, that al-be-it they were in all men's judgments very weak, he would
not permit the bridges upon Tiber to be cut for the safety of Rome, if the

The defendants did not descry the enemies till it was almost to late, by
reason The Duke of Bourbongiueth an assault to the suburbs of Rome.
of a thick mist which suddenly arose, wherewith the enemies army was covered,
until it came to the very place where they gave the assault, where Antonio de
Montfalcone was in guard with an hundred soldiers, unto whose rescue diverse of
the armed people came running, who for a certain space sustained the enemies
attempts. But the Imperials continuing the assault very fiercely, these new
unexperienced soldiers perceiving danger hourly to increase forsook

The Duke of Bourbon at the beginning of their assault marching foremost, went
before all the companies, where being shot into the body by an Harquebuze, The
death of the Duke of Bourbon.
he fell down dead to the ground. The Prince of Orange, being very near him
when he fell, caused him forthwith to be covered with a cloak, to the end the
soldiers might not be daunted by the death of their General, and then he did
hotly pursue the victory.

The Pope, who in the palace of the Vatican attended what would be the event
The Pope with diverse Cardinals retireth to the Castle Saint Angelo.
thereof, hearing that the enemies had entered, did forthwith fly with diverse
Cardinals and other Prelates to the castle Saint Angelo. The Lords Rance de Cera
and Langey, having labored in vain to move the people to take arms for
their own defense, and had sought valiantly with those few forces they could
gather together and with them a long time kept the castle bridge, were at last
enforced to retire. The City being thus abandoned, and all the people in
confusion and flight, the enemies on all sides entredit, and became Masters
thereof without any difficulty. Philippin Doria and Count Guy, so soon as they
perceived the Duke of Bourbon to march toward Rome, did on a sudden without
waiting for any other commandment set forwards to rescue the Pope with the
forces of Ciuitauecchia and Oruietta: but the Duke of Bourbon by his speed
having prevented them, and shut up all the

Now the Duke of Vrbin having set forward to follow the enemies, but very
slowly, by reason of the hindrances of his camp, did at last with the whole
army come as far as Viterbo, who finding all the country to be spoiled by the
enemies, he was enforced by want of victuals to tarry there, his army being
by sundry accidents much diminished, having in all but seven thousand men, in
stead of thirty thousand appointed by the confederates. The army, lodging in
that place, the light horse and footmen did oftentimes scour the whole
Country, where meeting with the Imperial soldiers, that were

Besides that, at the taking of the City all manner of cruelty was used: every
where infinite complaints were heard of those who were inhumanely tormented,
partly to enforce them to pay their ransom, and partly to bewray the wealth
that they had hidden. The cries and pitiful lamentations were heard of Roman
dames, and Nuns, who the soldiers lead away in troops to satisfy The
Imprials great cruelty in Rome.
their Luxury. All holy things, the Sacraments and Relikes of Saints,
wherewith the Churches were stored, being despoiled of their ornaments, were
every where trodden under foot; whereunto were added infinite vilanies of the
barbarous Lansequenets. The sack and pillage lasted many months, which
according to the common report, as well in ready money, gold, silver, and
jewels, amounted to more then a Million of Ducats, and the ransomes

The end of the sixth Book of the fifth Decade.
The Contents of the seventh Book of the
THE Venetians sorrow and grief for the Andre Doria in the service of the
French King. The army of the Confederats remains on the Confines of the
Siennois. The Popes agreement to come forth of prison. The Venetians resolution
upon that agreement. The Lord of Lautrec comes into the state of Milan with
great forces. Bosco and Alexandria taken by him. Pauia is taken and sacked by
the French. Genoa is reduced under the French Kings obedience. The Turk being
assailed Marcello, had soon after his revenge. The Lord Lautrec marches
toward Rome. The demands propounded by the French King in the motion of peace.
The Agreement, whereby the Duke of Ferrara and the Marquis of Mantua enter into
the league. The entire enlargement of the Popes person. The Venetians send an
Ambassad to the Pope, inuiting him to enter into the league. The like Ambassade
of the most Christian King to the same effect. The Popes excuses not to enter
into any new confederacy. The Lord Lautrecs iourny into the Kingdom of Naples.
The Popes demand to the Brunswich. He returns into Germany. The Imperialls
are put to rout at Sea. The arrival of the General of the Venetian Army
before Naples with the discommodities which it there endured. Andre Doria
reuolteth from the Kings service. The Pope resolves to remain neuter. The
great wants of the Army before Naples. And lastly the Lord Lautrecs Death.



The Seventh Book of the fifth Decade of the History of Uenice.
THE accident at Rome being known at Venice, together with the Popes
imprisonment, did greatly afflict the Senate with grief and compassion, and
with a disdain for the wrong offered to the person of the holy Father,
whereupon The Senate after the taking of Rome, determine to oppose themselves
against the Emperor.
they not intending to suffer any longer the Emperors fortune Pisani and
Vitturi the Prouidators, to lay by all other deseignes and attempt only, if it
were possible, to free the Pope from his imprisonment: and the better to effect
it to come near to the Castle wherein he was shut up, to seek by all
means to draw him thence; and because no other matter might hinder this
enterprise, they forthwith made a new leuy of foot, to increase their forces
to the number of ten thousand foot, which lay on the confines of Crema and
Lauda, to resist Antonio de Leua, who being come forth into

These two Kings were very earnest in this business, whereupon the Cardinal
The King of France and England resolve to free the Pope.
of York, who could do more then all men with the King of England, came for
the Popes freedom from imprisonment, and to assure the State Ecclesiastical:
and the better to provide for it with more speed, he advised those Cardinals
that The Cardinals meet at Bolognia to treat of the Popes delivery.
were at liberty, to meet at Anignon, where, as in a safe and commodious place,
they might with ease treat thereof, and from thence send their resolutions into
Spain, The Cardinals approouing this Council of uniting themselves together
did for sundry respects make choice of the City of Bolognia for their meeting
place.

The Emperor in the mean time being aduertized of the Popes taking, by his
chief Chancellor that was going into Italy, did by his speech manifest that he
The Emperors dissimulation concerning the Popes taking.
was highly displeased therewith, alleging diverse goodly matters for his
justification.

The French King having before sent to make a leuy of ten thousand Suisses

The Venetians on the other side did not cease by all good offices to maintain
and increase that good desire in the King propounding unto him how necessary it
was hotly to pursue that war with great forces, Religion and State agreeing
in one, not to suffer the dignity of the Sea Apostolic, and the liberty of
Italy to be trodden under foot: and for to incite him no less by deeds then
words, they determined to renew their nauall army, which was much weakened by
the bad air The Venetians preparations by Sea and land
and other discommodities at Ciuitauechia, where it had for a time remained,
and to arm besides it, four Basterd Galleis, of which they appointed Antonio
Marcello Captain, thereby to strengben the army that it might assail the
Seacoasts of Puglia. They did moreover propound to the King to leuy, besides
the Suisses at their common charge, other ten thousand foot, drawing in the
mean time to their pay all the best experienced Captains in martial affairs
that they could find: among whom were the Count of Gaiazzo and the Marquis
Palauicin. And to encourage Francis Sforza, of whose freindship and readiness
they made great account, they lent him ten thousand Ducats, with which he
promised to increase his forces, which were already more then two thousand
foot, and to come The Venetians place a Garrison in Rauenna for the behoof of
the Sea of Rome.
Senate being greatly provoked thereunto, fent a good surome of money to the
Governor of Rauenna to leuy foot forces for the garrison of the City,
encouraging him to defend it, with promise of greater aid if need should be, as
within a while after they did, by sending him three hundred foot and an hundred
light horse under the command of John de Nalde, inioyning him to keep that
City for the Sea Apostolic and the league.

But strife arising in that City betwixt the Inhabitants and the soldiers, the
Venetians were entreated by them of the City to send thither one from Venice
to Bartholomeo Contrren by the Senates consent went thither to supply that
place. Those of Ceruia within a while after did the like where the Guelphes,
having ch^sed away those of the Gibelline faction, did receive garrison and a
Magistrate of the Venetians, the Legate ernestly requiring it, for the quiet and
conservation of the same City.

Whilst these things were done, the Duke of Vrbin having received the Senates
The Duke of Vrbin takes Perusa.
commandment, and disposing himself for the execution thereof, did first of
all make himself sure of the City of Perusa, wherein Gentil Baillone
commanded, who was suspected to hold with the enemies part, whom with
threatenings he enforced to depart thence, and having left a strong garrison,
there, he marched with the army to Todi, and from thence to Oruietto where he
joined himself with the French, and Ecclesiastical troops, as he had
formerly concluded to do. And having there assembled all the chief Captains,
to resolve on what they should afterward do, he caused the Senates letter to
be The Duke of Vrbins preposition.
openly read, and then assured them, for the obeying of their command, that he
intended to march directly to Rome, to free by all means possible the Pope
from imprisonment, resolving if the enemies should show themselves, to fight
with them, and with others to run one selfsame fortune.

This proposition being allowed by the Prouidator Pisani, was entertained with
the General consent of all the rest, (the Prouidator Vitturi excepted) who
being of a contrary opinion opposed himself against it both in word and deed,
protesting by writing and detesting such an enterprise as most pernicious, and
of Vittury is contrary to the Duke of Vrbin
doubtful issue, saying that their soldiers were far inferior both in
number and valor to the Imperialls, who were very many, and for the most part
good soldiers Frederick of Bozzola to march toward Rome with one company of
men at arms, a certain number of light horse, and some companies of
harquebuziers on horseback, hoping that his sudden and unlooked for arrival,
might offer some Frederics horse falling upon him, he was therewith sore
hurt, so that he could go on no farther, but was enforced to return.

But the army in the mean time continuing their approches, they were
aduertized by certain spies, that the trenches which the Imperialls had made
near to the Castle, were very great, and hard to be forced: whereby the
difficulties of the enterprise were increased: and moreover that they at Rome
expected the Spanish Infantery which was at Naples, and that Captain Alarcon
was already arrived; whereupon the Duke was of opinion to pass on nofarther
with the army, the What great forces they were to have to free the Pope from
prison.
which was allowed almost by all the other Captains: and therefore he did
speely aduertize the Senate, saying that for to relieve the Castle, it behooued
him to have greater forces then he then had, and in particularizing them, he
did affirm that to draw the Pope from thence, there ought to be in the army
the number of sixteen thousand Swisses, levied by a decree of the Cantons, not
accounting those that were already there, and besides the Swisses ten
thousand Italian Harqueguziers, three thousand Pioners, and forty pieces of
ordnance.

These news did greatly displease the Venetians in regard of the delaying of
matters, and of the Popes troubles and wearysomenesse, which was much increased
Guicciardyne, who sent it to the Senate; by the which he entreated, solicited,
and coniured the confederates, by all means to procure his deliverance. The
Senate therefore having heard of the opposition and hinderance made by the
Vitturi called to account for being contrary to the Popes delivery.
Prouidator Vitturi, concerning the approach of the army near to Rome,
discharged him of his office, and being called home to Venice he was committed
to the Auogario there to yield an account of his actions*

The Senate in the mean time insisting more earnestly in the same resolution,
to relieve the Pope, and to draw him from thence, wrote to the General, and to
the Prouidators, to use all means possible for that purpose to approach near
to the Castle, the which the General refusing, chose rather to give over his
place, which the Senators took in bad part, but after that the one and the
other of

The French on the other side greatly detesting the Popes imprisonment, and The
kings great preparations to send into Italy.
envying the Spaniards fortunate success, made great preparations of war,
the King making account to come to Lions to take order for the affairs of war,
having first commanded fifteen thousand Swisses to be levied, and ten
thousand Italian foot. And that he might like-wise have a nauall army for
that purpose, he took Andre Doria to his pay with eight Galleys, and promised
to give him a yearly entertaynement of six and thirty thousand crowns, and
appointed the Andre Doria in the Kings service.
Lord of Lautrec Captain General of all the troops by land; wherewith the
Venetians being highly pleased, did the more to honor him, appoint Petro
Pesare Mark, their Ambassador, who should meet him at his coming into Italy
and wait upon him wheresoever he went.

The Imperialls in the mean time that were in Rome, albeit that their number
was much increased by the arrival of the Spaniards that came from Naples,
finding themselves to be four and twenty thousand foot, took their
leisure, enjoying with ease the wealthy spoils that they had gotten at the
sack of the City, their Captains being not able, neither to cause them to
come fourth of the town, nor yet to restrain their unbridled license: two
companies alone of Lancequenets, leaving the City went and spoiled Terni and
Narni, going on no farther, not-with-standing that the Confederates army was
far

The Venetian forces did at that time consist of six thousand Italian
footmen, two thousand Lancequenets, thirteen hundred light horse, and two
thousand men at arms, and the French Infantery was not above seven thousand
The number of the Venetians army.
foote-men, albeit the King paid a greater number. But the great dearth of
victual and the sharp diseases which did daily decrease the army, did hinder
them from enterprizing any matter. By reason whereof the enemies forces being
increased and those of the league diminished, the Pope having lost all hope of
speedy releef, did wholly incline to practizes of agreement The Pope inclines
to agreement.
and hoping to have a better composition of the Viceroy, who was at Sienna, he
sent for him, and by the same means entreated the Duke of Vrbin to suffer him

The Viceroy went willingly and in great have to the army, not so much for the
Popes profit, as for the hope he had to be made General thereof. But being
arrived at Rome, whither he came by a safe conduct of the Captains of the
league, he had notice that the Lancequenets and Spaniards wished him no good,
who after the Duke of Bourbons death had chosen the Prince of Orange for their
General, so as he had not the courage to speak of any agreement with the
Pope, but much less to tarry there: for being not gracious in the eyes of the
army, he had no more authority, neither in the affairs of war, nor in the
treaty of agreement with the Pope, who at the last being banckrout of all hope,
did on the sixth day of June make an agreement with the Imperialls, on the same
conditions, in a manner, as he might before then have decreed upon with them.

That the Pope should pay unto the army four hundred thousand Ducats: Articles
of agreement betwixt the Pope and Emperor.
should deliver to the Emperor to keep so long as he should think good the

This manner of proceeding did greatly displease the Venetians: but the Pope,
How the Venetians behaved themselves upon this agreement.
fearing his own life, because of the Colonesi and the Lancequenets, was
enforced

Now the Castle of Saint Angelo was by this accord foorth-with yielded to
Captain Alarcon, who entered it with three companies of Spanish footmen, and
Chastelane was guarded by the Confederates, and Aadrew Doria refused to deliver
up that of Ciuitauechia, unless he were first paid fourteen thousand Ducats,
which he said was due unto him for his entertainment: Parma and Placentia on
the other-side, abhorring the Spanish government, refused to receive them, and
those of Modena were reduced under the obedience of the Duke of Ferrara, who
making use of the Popes calamity, threatening the Modenois to spoil their
corn, which was almost ripe, did enforce them to deliver up the city into his
hands.

The Confederates army remained quiet without attempting any thing. expecting
the arrival of the Lord of Lautrec, who was said to be already in Piedmont,
with great forces, both of horse and foot, albeit the Captains in the mean*
time were of sundry opinions, some thinking that being united with the French,
it would be best for them to march directly to Rome, where they should find the
Imperial army in such disorder as they might easily set the Pope at li berty,
by reason that it was much diminished, as well by the contagious sickness
Sundry opinions in the Confederats army about the Popes deliueryl
which was in the City, as by the overmuch license which the Soldiers had
taken for certain months space, living without al order, and without any
martial discipline, some of them being lodged in the City, and others here
and there abroad, and that diverse of them being disbanded went their ways
daily without

Those of the contrary opinion thought, that for the effecting of that deseigne
it were better to scour the state of Milan, being near thereunto, to enforce
the Imperials to leave Rome, and to come to the defense thereof, which might
prove either to slow or insufficient to stop the current of the victory,
whereby they might at one time execute diverse fortunate exploits, and perhaps
give an end to the war. Lautrec ente reth the Duchy of M ^lanwith great for
ces.


This being allowed by all men, and propounded to the Lord of Lautrec at his
arrival, he entered into the state of Milan with eight thousand Suisses, three
thousand Gascons, and ten thousand footmen conducted by Pedro of Navarre, and
went and encamped before the town of Bosco, on the marches of Alexandria,
Bosco and Alexandria are taken by Lautrec.
where was a Garrison of a thousand footmen, the most of whom were
Lancequenets, who after they had for the space of ten days sustained the

This conquest was followed by that of Alexandria, whither the Lord Lautrec
came afterward and encamped, wherein lay fifteen hundred footmen, who being
molested at one time, both by the Artillery and the mines, were enforced to
yield; their lives and goods being saved.

But the taking of Alexandria was cause of the beginning of some contention
Strise betwixt the confederats concerning the taking of Alexandria.
betwixt the confederates. For the Lord of Lautrec being desirous to leave
fifteen hundred footmen in Garrison there, to the end that at al events his
own companies might have one place of retreat, and those which should Lautrec
agreed (not without indignation) to leave it freely to the Duke of Milan: a
matter which did afterward greatly prejudice the leagne.

Now Lautrec, after the conquest of Alexandria propounded that he would march
to Rome to free the Pope from imprisonment, who, although he had agreed (as
has been said) with the Almaines and Spaniards, did nevertheless still
remain a prisoner under their guard, until that he had accomplished the
articles of the The Venetians oppose themselves against the Lord Lautrecs
proposition to go to Rome and to leave the State of Milan.


But the Venetians did wholly dislike of Lautrecs proposition; not that they
stood less affected to the Popes enlargement then did the King, but because
they thought the enterprise of Rome less profitable for the common cause then
that of Milan, as it had been debated before his coming, and afterward
confirmed by himself, that there was at the same time great hope of being
able to conquer Antonio de Leua, who by his diligence and skill, more then by
force, did govern that State, lay grievously sick, and was unable to provide
remedies: that losing this opportunity the affairs of the league would ever
afterward decline, in regard of the huge number of Lancequenets that were
ready to come down from the County of Tiroll, into Lombardy, But by taking
Milan from them, which was their only retreat, and having neither cauallery nor
victuals, they would be enforced to change their minds, and to tarry at home
in their houses: that in the mean space it would give time and leisure to
ten thousand Almaines, paid by the King of England, to come to the camp of
the league, and afterward they

The Lord of Lautrec inclining to their request, determined to march Pauia is
taken by Lautrec.
toward Pauia, before which with great speed he went and encamped (the relief
which Antonio de Leua sent, not being able to enter it) the which being
battered for the space of four days, and a great part of the wall beaten
down, the soldiors making there approches, did enter it by the breach. The
City was sacked, and the French for eight days together used all sorts of
cruelty upon the inhabitants, who had vanted that they had been the
vanquishers of the French King, because that King Francis was taken prisoner
lying at the seege of the same City.

The Genowais at the same time being afflicted with sundry losses and
calamities, Antonio Adorni, retired himself into the Castellet, and the
tumult being appeased by Phillip Doria, who was prisoner there, the City
returned under the Kings obedience, who appointed Theodario Triuulcio governor
thereof: and the Venetians, because they would Genoa reduced under the Kings
obedieence.
not leave their Captains unrecompensed, who had valiantly behaved themselves
in the reduction of Genoa, they increased to Caesar Fregosa the conductof other
thirty men at arms, and doubled his pay; they did like-wise acknowledge the
valor and prowess of Guy Nalda, Augustine Clusone, Haniball Fregosa, Caesar
Martinenga, and diverse others whose valor did greatly apeare in that

The business of Genoa being ended, and John Mora, the Prouidator of the
Venetians nauall army being come with sixteen Galleis to Liuorne, where he
found Doria who tarried for him, with sixteen Galleys, they resolved together
to give in upon the Isle of Sardinia, hoping easily to win it, and that it
would be very commodious for them, for the conquest of Sicily; but this
enterprise The French and Uenetian fleet are scatered by tempest.
proved unfortunate, for the fleet being come near to the Island, and having
taken certain Sea towns, it happened, as it went from one place to another,
that it was assailed by a furious tempest, which did scatter it into sundry
places, certain Venetian Galleys being a long time beaten in it, did at last
John Mora retired with his Galleys to Corfou: Petro Land was at the same time
General of the Venetians nauall army, who was commanded to scour the Seas
near to the Islands, and places of their dominions, to assure and comfort
their subjects, and that sailing into Sicily he should take all the ships that
were fould to be laden with corn, and send them to Venice where was great
scarcity of victuals.

But the General having for the assurance of the Seas sent Augustine de Mulla
the Prouidator with two light Galleys, to scour on the one side, and Antonio
Marcello with four Bastard Galleys whereof he was Captain on the other, it
fell out that Marcello being come to Candy into the Haven of La Suda, had
intelligence that a Turkish Gally was to pass near unto the Island; he
suposing that it was Cortugoll, a famous Pirate, who not long before in the
same Seas, had taken and spoiled a Venetian ship, and then burnt it, killing
all the Mariners and passengers that were in it, did speedily come forth of
the Haven, and being desirous to revenge that injury came on a sudden to
assail it, the which he took, and then retired with his own and this Gally
did which he had taken) Marcello remaining firm in that place, without any
fear at all was amazed when he saw himself assailed on the sudden by the
Barbarian, The Turk be ing assailed by Marcello had his speedy revenge.
who having re-assembled his own, did furiously assault him, whereupon
Marcello was enforced to escape by flight; the like did his fellows, who not
departing so soon as he, but one alone escaped, the other two being taken were
carried to Alexandria.

The Venetian Captain being to yield an account for this deed, the A^ogares
of the Republic were commanded to take notice thereof, and for this purpose he
Marcello dies by the way for grief.
was sent for from the army as a prisoner; but grief by the way killed him.
Soliman being aduertized of the indiscretion of the Captain, and of the
Senates good Solimans liberality to the Venetians
sent back their Galleies which were taken, being laden with salt-peeter, which
they greatly needed, and bestowed them upon the Venetians as his gift. For
this cause and for diverse other signs of friendship, the Senate thought good
to send an express Ambassade to him to give him thanks in the commonwealths
name for all his courtesies and demonstrations of Friendship toward it, and to
continue and increase that good will in him.

Thomas Contaren was chosen for this purpose, unto whom were given diverse rich
garments and other presents of great value to present to the Baschas of the
Port, and cheefely to Ibraim, who for the friendship and affection which the

Whilst these things were done in the Leuant, the Lord of Lautrec returning
Lautrec leueth Milan and marches toward Rome.
to his former deseignes, at such time as all men expected, that following the
course of his victory he would have marched toward Milan to beseege it, he
turned another way, and having with his army passed the Po, he marched toward
Placentia, intending, (as he said) to lay by all other enterprises, and to
think on nothing, but how to set the Pope at liberty. All men wondered at
this sudden change, seeing the fair occasion which was offered, if he had
continued to give an end unto the war of Lombardy by taking the City of

It was not known whether Lautrec was moved thereunto, rather by some What
moved the Lord Lautrec to change his determination.
particular affection, or for some interest of his King, then for any care he
had of the Popes liberty. It is certain that in his heart he did bear a
secret grudge to the Venetians, and Francis Sforza, for their oppositions
concerning the matter of Alexandria. These suspicions were confirmed by his
manner of proceeding, who speedily departing, with such ill provision as he
had, forth of the state of the Duchy of Milan, did afterward pursue his
journey very slowly, and for that after he had joined himself with the
Almaine foote-men, upon the expecting of whom he had at the firstexcused his
delay, he remained at Parma without doing

The Army of the league, had no better success, who being lodged near to
Montefiascone did spend the time unprofitably, notwithstanding that the
weakness of the enemies army did sufficiently afford them means to execute
sum enterprise. This gave occasion to the Venetians to suspect, that the Duke
of The Venetians do suspect the Duke of Vrbin
Vrbin, for his own particular interest, did not proceed with such fidelity as
he ought, therefore they placed guardes over his wife and children who lay at
that time at M^rana. The Duke of Vrbin having intelligence that the Venetians
did distrust him, sent Horacio Florida, oue of his Gentlemen to Venice, to
procure leave for him to come thither, that he might justify himself and
yield an account

The Senate, either for that they were better informed, or else being very
desirous to fit themselves unto time and necessity, would not permit him to
depart from the army, but having removed the guards from his wife and children
made a show that they were well satisfied and contented with his service to the
Republike.

And perceauing after-wards that they could not alter the Lord of Lautrecs
resolution, they placed their forces which they had in Lombardy, which were
fifteen thousand foot in garrison in sundry places, for the guard of those
towns which they had recovered in the state of Milan, and gave to the said
Lord Lautrec fifteen hundred light horse for the enterprise of Rome.

All the care and means to keep the conquered towns in the Duchy of Milan,
fell upon the signory, Francis Sforza being not able to do it, who of himself
could not entertain the ordinary Garrisons, not-with-standing that he was What
moved the Venetians to eat the chardge of the wavve in Lombardy.
obliged by the treaty of agreement, to send forces into the field to resist
the attempts of Antonio de Leua: besides this, the Venetians fear to lose
their own, did incite them thereunto, who stood in doubt like-wise that the
war would light on their own state, having intelligence of the great forces
which were levied in Tiroll, and in other places near adjoining, with the
great preparations of victuals and other munitions which was made at Trent to
send into Italy. By mean whereof, the Senate imagining that it behooued them
to increase their army, to the number of twenty thousand foot, and to make a
very great provision to maintain, in a manner, an other very difficult and
dangerous war, ^ent to entreat the King of England, that in so great a
necessity he would

But the King of England, continuing that which he had at other times spoken,
that he would begin to make war on the Emperor in Flanders, and A
cotorable excuse of the King of England to the Venetians request.
by that means enforcing him to divert his forces elsewhere, he might free
Italy from that danger, made a show, that for the common good of them all, he
himself was to make great preparations, and necessary provisions for such a
deseigne.

Among all these stirs and great warlike preparations, the treaty of peace
was not altogether broken of, the Emperor making show to desire it, both with
the French King and the Venetians: whereupon sundry practizes were set on The
French king and Venetians demands
foot to that end. The Demands of the most Christian King, and the Venetians,
were in efect these, that the Emperor should restore to the French King his
children; That he should set the Pope at liberty, give over all that which he
held from the Church, re-establish Francis Sforza in the state of Milan, and

The Emperor did not altogether reject these demands, neither yet would wholly
accept of them, but in seeking, not without difficulty, to make some certain
resolution, he demanded of the Venetians a great sum of money, holding What
was the Emperors meaning concerning peace.
by that means the treaty in suspense, being desirous to make use of time, and
to behave himself according to the event of the affairs of Italy, and the
new stirs which his brothers preparations would procure: hoping in the mean
time still to be able, with better advantage, to conclude an agreement with
the French King alone, determining to exclude all the other Confederates, and to
appropriat unto himself the Duchy of Milan.

This was easily discerned by his own words, persisting ever in all motions of
agreement, that he would have Francis Sforzas cause debated and censured by
Judges thereunto appointed, and that in the mean time the City of Milan, and
the whole state should be kept and guarded in his name, and by his own
Garrisons, his chief aim tending wholly to become absolute master thereof,
having first broken all the forces of the Confederates. Where upon all these
motions of peace being laid aside, war was again denounced to him by the
Confederates: who hoping therein to make good use of the Duke of Ferrara, An
accord in de with the Duke of Ferrara.
and the Marquis of Mantua, in regard of the near neighborhood of their
states, both the one and the other were sounded, and it was at last concluded
with the Duke of Ferrara, that he should be received into the league, on
condition to send to the Confederates army, two hundred men at arms, paid by
himself, and monthly to contribute, for the space of six months, ten
thousand Ducats

As concerning the agreement with the Marquis, there was greater difficulty The
marquis of Mantua, ioyne^ to the league.
in the conclusion thereof, because he craved to be made General of the
League in the absence of the Lord of Lautrec: whereunto the Venetians would not
consent, for the respect they did bear to the Duke of Vrbin. But in the end,
Ieronimo Zene, Governor of Verona, being sent by the Senates commandment unto
Mantua, to end that business, he did conclude it without the aboue-mentioned

Now the Emperor perceiving that he was to deal with so many enemies,
determined first of all to publish the justice of his cause, and by that means
to draw away the King of England from them, and for this purpose he resolved
to The Emperor commaedeth that the Pope should be enlarged.
set the Pope at liberty, for which he sent an ample commission to the
Viceroy, and to D. Hugo de Moncada, (who being newly deceassed,) the Viceroy
did exexecute it, the Pope making over to the Emperor, according to the
agreement, Ostia, Ciuitauecchia, and C^uito Castellane, and paying likewise,
(but more commodiously) the sum of money promised, and promising in special,
not to have

The Confederates resolving to make war both by sea and land, in the beginning
of the year 1528. prepared great forces for to pass into the Kingdom of
Naples, as it had been determined according to the desire and intention of the
French King, not-with-standing that they were well assured, that the Imperial
army, at their departure from Rome, would take their journey into Naples. But
the Confederates thinking it a matter of great importance, to draw the Pope
into the Confederacy, were in great hope thereof, because that his Holiness
having The Pope complains of the imperialls dealings.
aduertized the French King and the Venetians of the passed agreement, and his
own liberty, entreated them to excuse him, if necessity had enforced him so to
do, confessing that he was greatly bound to the Princes of the League, and to

So soon as the Venetians understood that the Pope was set at liberty, and
that he was newly gonne to Oruietta, they speedily sent Lodouico Pisani the
Prouidator The Venetians Ambassad to the Pope.
to his Holiness, to lament with him, in the Commonwealths name, for his
passed fortunes, and to acquaint him with the great grief that the Signory had
conceived thereat, and with what care they had labored his enlargement, whereof
they were now wonderful joyful, to see that to be effected which they had so
much desired. That the Republike had willingly employed all her forces and
means, been at great charge and expense to entertain an army in Tuscany, at
the same time as it behooued it to have an other in Lombardy: had not that the
Kings of France and England, the Florentines, the Duke of Milan and the
Venetians were of the same mind, not to leave such an Insolency unpunished: how
that cursed nation had incurred the wrath of God and men, that they did not
doubt but that Justice and Innocence would prevail, and that his Holiness
being restored to his former state, all matters would redound to his honor and
glory. And that therefore all the Confederats did greatly desire and likewise
hope that his Holiness to relieve their sinceere and entire intention with his
authority, would confirm the Confederacy as Chief thereof, by newly
ratifieing, that which before had been agreed upon by them, seeing that the
first agreement ought to be of more force, then the latter, as being concluded
by himself in The French Kings Ambassador to the Pope.
quallity of Pope, and with his pure and freewill, and this latter being
extorted by force and violence, as from a prisoner that was desirous of his
liberty.

The French King caused the same congratulation to be made to him by the Lord
of Longueuall his Ambassador whom he sent to Rome, to testify the great desire
he ever had to constrain the Emperor by force to do that which at last he had
done, and that the practizes of peace betwixt the Emperor and him, had been to
none other end but to amuze him and make him cold in the preparations for
war, and not with an intention to conclude any thing with him, helping
himself with the same cunning, wherewith he had sundry times practiced in his
behalf.

These Ambassadors were very pleasing to the Pope, and by him attentively
heard, whereupon, he gave thanks to the King and the Venetians, with
demonstration of great love toward them, saying, that for his deliverance, he
felt himself The Popes excuse because he would not enter into any new
consedera cy.
no less bound to the French King and the Venetians then if he had been freed
by their arms: but yet nevertheless all this was without any resolution, for
upon their entreaty that he would confederate him self with the rest, he
began to make them sundry answers: at one time putting them in hope presently
to do it, at another, excusing himself, that having nether men, money, nor
authority, it would not greatly profit them if he should declare himself, and
yet nevertheless it might hurt him, because it would give an occasion to the
Imperialls to molest

It may be that being carried away by the Emperors fair promises, (who with
his own hand wrote a gentle and courteous letter to him, how that he would
hence foreward follow his council and commit unto him the whole negotiation of
the peace) he might speak thus, or else that which is most likely and which
was

His intent then was with sundry excuses to cover this desire of his: for being
What the Popes Intention was.
discovered, it would have bred such a distrust in the Lord of Lautrec, as it
would easily have caused him to alter his purpose from passing on any farther
in the enterprise of Naples which was a thing the Pope desired, to the end that
the Lancequenets might be enforced to depart from Rome, who mutening
oftentimes among themselves would not get them thence, demanding new paiments
of money.

The Lord of Lautrec being ignorant of the Popes deseigne, and upon the
assurance of his aid and favor, did in the mean time pursue the enterprise of
Naples, albeit it was against the opinion and consent of the Venetians who by
reason of that new leauy of Lansequenets for the enemies, could have wished
that he might not go so far off, to the end they might the better and with
more conueniency be relieved.

Lautrec then, being resolute in his opinion, took his way through Romagnia
Lautrec marches toward Naples.
and La Marca, thinking it to be best and most convenient for the commodity of
victuals, and for the carriage of the ordnance, determining to enter into the
Realm of Naples by the way of Otronte, which divides the Churches State from
the Kingdom of Naples, through which at one time were gonne before, the
Venetian troops, divided into two bands, in the first were Valerio Vrsino and
the Pisani: and in the other, followed Camillo Vrsino and Petro Pesare. These
being gonne before, seized on Ciuitella, and afterward on Sulmona, and on
diverse others in Abruzzo, which yielded voluntarily. But the whole troops did
afterward meet altogether near to Saint Fermo, to the number of thirty
thousand foot, and great numbers of Cauallery, as well men at arms as
lighthorse, a preparation without all doubt suffitient for any enterprise
whatsoever, the Lord Lautrec having taken the longest way into Puglia by the
sea side, in regard of the difficulty to carry the ordnance, if in those
mountainous places he should have met with any encombrance of the enemies.

The Prince of Orange and the Marquis of Guasto being greatly moved for The
number of the Imperial army.
some pay to the Lansequenets, who more then the rest seemed most loath to
depart. But the number of their whole army did not amount to above fourteen
thousand, and yet so sore weakened, as well by the contagious sickness which
was in Rome, as for that many soldiers were disbanded and gonne home to their
country laden with spoil.

But the Pope by this means being freed of that which did most press him, and
Sipontyne The Popes demands to the Venetians.
to Venice, to demand of the Senate that it should forthwith render unto him
the Cities of Ceruia and Rauenna: and on the other side he dispatched the
Bishop of Pistoya into France to excuse him to the King (whom till then he had
The Popes excuses to the French King.
entertained with sundry hopes that he would declare himself for the league)
for that he could not according to his desire make a new consederacy, because
that wanting both money and forces, his declaration would nothing profit the
Confederates; that all he could do was to treat of peace, and for that purpose
he had given commission to the said Bishop to go to the Emperor, to exhort
him with

The Popes demand was much displeasing to the Senate, not so much for the
matter in question, as because it was made in an unseasonable time, perceiving
very well that the Pope sought only some occasion to break off from them, as
also for that it was a matter unreasonable rashly to yield up these towns, in
so disodered a time, and in which the Imperials did still hold many towns of
the Churches State: yet nevertheless sundry were of opinion that it was not
good to break with the Pope for any occasion whatsoever, but that they ought
by all means to gratify him, and for the rest to depend on his promise and
good will,

This business being debated in the Senate* Dominito Treuisan, Procurator of
Saint Mark, a man of great reputation for his long experience and knowledge in
affairs of importance, declared by sound and pregnant reasons: how that it was
best to observe the Pope, and to render those Cities which he demanded: On the
contrary, Lodouico Mocenigo Knight, one of the chief Senators, and who had
been of opinion to send back the Nuncio with a refusal of his demand, rose
up, and having propounded the inconveniences which might redound to the
Signory, Sundry opinions of the Senate concerning the Popes demand.
by surren^ing, in so miserable a season, those Cities which the Pope craved,
the Senators grew to be divided, some of them inclyning to one side and some to
an other. But at last they resolved to answer the Pope, That the Senate had
ever been very desirous of peace, which might be for the good and safety of
the Commonwealth, and particularly to the glory and advancement of the The
Senates answer to the Pope.
Church, and that therefore it would willingly embrace any kind of agreement,
Sipontine, and of all other matters, to let him know their sincere and entire
love toward him.

According to this answer, they on a sudden appointed Gasparo Contaren their
Ambassador for Rome: but the Pope being displeased therewith, showed himself
more sharp and earnest in his demand; whereupon the Lord Lautrec having sent
to his Holiness the Count Guydo Rangone, and the Knight Casall, to use all
means they could to appease him, they did not only loose their labor, but

During all these practizes, the Imperial captains, who were already passed
in^o the Kingdom of Naples, began to be of different opinions: For the
Lautrec lay with his army, to try if they could draw him to the fight, this he
did for diverse occasions which moved him to hazard the whole, on the
uncertain event of a battle.

F^st, because that the Confederates were divided amongst themselves (their
Sundry opinions of the Imperial captains.
infantery being greater then Lautrecs) for that the people of the Kingdom did
daily rise in the behalf of the French, the difficulty of receiving any money
from the Emperor, and the mutines which upon that occasion the Almaine foot*
men made, in regard whereof it being to be feared that the entire loss of
that State would ensue, he thought it much more proffitable to hazard all on

Others maintained the contrary, saying, That the safest way for them was to
lodge in some place strong by sytuation, and commodious for victuals, from
whence the enemies could not easily drive them, where they might observe and
narrowly mark the behauior of the army of the league, and according thereunto
to order their own enterprises: and if that they should perceive the enemies
to increase in prosperous success, then to take upon them the defense of the
City of Naples, because that upon the conservation or loss of the same did
wholly Fabricio Mara^ani were onwards on their way, with great forces for their
relief, and that their army being therewith strengthened, they needed no more
to fear the enemies attempts, but should be able to break all their
deseignes. That it was the part of him that had charge to defend a State
enuaded by a mighty army, to temporize, because that time does very often bring
with it great and unlooked for commodities: that without all doubt there were
disorders in the enemies army, and by so much the greater, by how much the
interests of the Confederates were different: that there was nothing which
could less be governed by discretion and good council, then the success of
battles: that there was none so safe and ready a way to victory, nor any
thing more worthy the reputation of a great captain, then to entertain the
enemy with sundry cunnings, and consume him by little and little, with time
and discommodity, the which undoubtedly might happen to the French camp: That
they

This opinion being accompanied with the authory of Alarcon who did constantly
The Imperials embrace the opinion of Alarcon.
maintain it, was received for the best, whereupon they resolved to pass
forward, with an easy march, ever lodging in strong and safe places, and in
this manner to enter into the ^erra di Lauor, to come near to the City of
Naples. But the Imperials being retired into Troy to make provision of
victuals and to enquire after the enemy, Lautrec (as the French are more hardy
and resolute) embraced that deseigne which the enemy had quited, and determined
to seek Lautrec resolves to fight with the enemy.
for fear least his army should on a sudden dissolve it self and deprive him
of the fruit of other fortunate successes till then obtained, for want of pay.

For, payment being to come from France, he perceived that the King did openly
show himself to be weary of so great expenses, and his officers to be
negligent in appointing necessary provisions: he had besides great hope to
win the victory, the Marquis of Sal^ss es being joined with him, and daily
expecting the Venetian and Florentine troops, consisting of very choice
footmen.

On the contrary, notwithstanding that the number of soldiers in the Imperial
camp was not inferior to the French, their valor nevertheless was much
Lautrec was much stronger then the enemy in cauallery and provision of
ordnance, whereby it seems that he did not without cause persuade himself to
obtain the victory, and to conquer that whole State.

The Imperial army having intelligence that Lautrec approached, came forth of
Troy, and having possessed a little hill which rised toward the plain, did
their Lautrec being come near thereunto, placed his soldiers in order of
battle, determining (notwithstanding that the Venetian Lautrec defi^th and
provoke the Imperial army to battle.
and Florentine troops were not arrived) to fight with them and to offer
battle, defying and provoking them by his ordnance which played upon their
camp. But the Imperials receiving small hurt by the shot, in regard of the
sytuation of the place wherein they were, and resolving not to fight, keeping
themselves within their rampires and fortifications, sent forth only some
light horse and a few Harguebuziers to skirmish with the French, who marching
still forward came and lodged hard by the enemies camp, which they did
endanger by their artillery, those that were come forth to skirmish not being
able to hinder Lautrec from coming forwards, whereupon the enemies determined
to dislodge, and to go and encampe on the farther side of Troy toward Nocera:
where having within a while after intelligence that Horacio Baillone with the
Florentine troops was come to the camp of the league, and that Camillo Vrsino
and the Prouidator Pisani, would arrive there the morrow after; they resolved
to The Imperials retire toward Naples.
depart forth of Abruzzo, and to march directly toward Naples, according to
their first deseigne; chiefly to defend that City as the principal of the
whole State.

The Lord Lautrec being out of hope to enforce the enemies to fight, who had
already so openly refused it, converted all his deseignes to make himself
Master of the country, and not to leave any enemy town behind him, before
that he would march to Naples. Whereupon having intelligence that the Prince of
The confederates take Melfi.
Melfi, had entered Melfi with great numbers of soldiers, he sent Pedro of
Navarre thither with his Gascon companies, and Baillone with the black bands
and two

At the same time the Prouidator Pisan^ with two thousand Venetian footmen
Ascoli, Barletta, Trani, and diverse ^ther tow^es, yield to the confederates.
took the town of Ascoli, and then he came and joined with Lautrec, unto whom
were yielded Barletta, Trany and diverse others towns near adjoining, some of
them being moved thereunto by the fear of the disaster of Melfi, and others
by a particular affection which they did bear to the French, being weary of
the Spanish government, so as there was no other town in all Puglia that held
for the Emperor but only Mansredonia. Whereupon Lautrec having left for the
beseeging of that City and for the guard of those that he had conquered, the
Venetian troops, which were in all two thousand footmen, an hundred

Being come to Caforia, three miles from Naples upon the high way to Auersa,
Lautrec marches with his army toward Naples.
he determined to encampe there, as the only means to make himself Master
thereof, and for that purpose caused his army to march directly toward the
City, betwixt Pog^o Royal and Saint Martins Mount, the companies extending
themselves within half a mile of Naples, and the Lord Lautrec in person was
Lautrec encampeth within two miles of Naples.
gonne somewhat farther then Pogio royal, to the Duke of Montalto his Farm,

At the same time, the Venetians nauall army having been refreshed and
restored at Corfou, after the loss that it sustained by tempest near to the
Isle of Sardinia, was come along the coast of Puglia, being sixteen Galleys in
number, under the conduct of John Mora the Prouidator, because that Petro Land^
General of the Venetian galleys was gonne into Candy, to appease certain
troubles of the country men in the straight of La Canea.

Now by the agreement and conuention of the league, six cities of Puglia Six
Cities appointed to the Venetians by the agreement of the league.
were appointed to the Signory of Venice, namely, Ottranto, Brundusium,
Monopoli, Po^ignane, Mol^, and Trani, which it had in times past enjoyed, and
therefore Mon^pli and Trani yielded to the Uenetians.
should be offered.

But the Lord Lautrec having solicited the Venetian captains to come and join
their galleys with Philippine Doria at the seege of Naples, they were enforced
to give over their enterprise, they being enjoined to follow his commandments:
for Philippin Doria was come before Naples with eight galleys only, to keep
victuals from entering into the City by sea, but fearing least the beseeged

At this stay stood the affairs of the Kingdom of Naples whilst the Venetians
were elsewhere busied with alarmes, because that Henry Duke of Brunswich, after
a great report of his coming, being solicited by the Emperor and his brother
The Duke of Brunswich comes into Italy with great ^orces.
Ferdinand to pass into Italy, had entered Lombardy to divert the Confederates
forces from the enterprise of the Realm of Naples, the which being reduced to
great extremity, he could not so speedily relieve as by this means, The Duke
of Brunswich then being come to Trent, he entered Lombardy by the Veronois
territory, leading along with him about twelve thousand footmen, saying that
he would join with Antonio de Leua, who was already come forth into the field
with eight thousand footmen, that they two being joined together might go
and assail the Cities belonging to the State of Venice, against Brunswich had
denounced war, and had with a vain and rediculous proposition challenged
Andre Gritti Duke of Venice to a single fight, who A vain and rediculous
challenge.
was a man of fourscore years of age.

The Venetians, resolving to defend themselves, concluded to raise twelve
thousand footmen, amongst whom were four thousand Swisses, unto whom they
speedily sent money into Swisserland, and entreated the French King by his
authority to favor that leauy: they had besides, great numbers of lighthorse
from Greece and Dalmatia: then they recalled the Duke of Vrbin from the Marches
of Ancona, and commanded him to visit all their towns and fortes of most
importance, to provide them of strong garrisons, and to take order Ieronimo
Diede was sent to Treuiso with an hundred and fifty footmen, Pedro Sagreda with
like number to Padua, to Verona went Zachary Doria, Philippo Correrio,
Alessandro Donato, Ambrosio Contaren, Iosepho Badoario, Lorenzo Sanuto,
Augustino Canall, and Almore Barbaro, each of them with five and twenty
soldiers with them to look to the gates and other important places of the
city.

In the mean time, upon these news great warlike preparations were made in
France to send into Italy, of whom the Count of Saint Pol was made General,
The Venetia^ preparations against the Duke of Brunswich.
who was of the house of Bourbon, to the end to follow the Duke of Brunswich,
if he should pass on into the Realm of Naples, if not, to make war on the
Duchy of Milan, together with the companies of the Venetians and those of
Francis Sforza. But all these preparations did little avail by reason of their
late coming. For the Duke of Brunswich being followed with his own forces
determined to assail certain cities belonging to the Venetians, being the
rather moved thereunto, because that at his arrival, Pescara, Reuotella, and
certain other towns upon the Lake of La Garda, had yielded to him. The Duke
of Vrbin, who had put himself into Verona, having still an eye upon Brunswich,
The Duke of Brunswich being joined with Antonio de Leua does come and beseege
Laud^
did prevent his deseignes, and went suddenly to Bressia, where he
strengthened Antonio de Leua, who upon report of his coming had passed over
the River Adda to join with him, that they might afterward execute some great
enterprise, and having repassed the Adda, they went and encamped before Lauda,
forth of which the Duke of Milan was newly departed, being aduertized of the
enemies coming, and was come to Bressia, by the consent of the Senate, having
left a suffitient number of soldiers in Lauda, with John Paul Sforza, his
natural brother, to command there, who being assailed by the enemies, did
valliantly receive and repulse them.

By means whereof, Brunswick finding himself without means to entertain such an
army any long time, and being frustrate of his hope to return home laden with
glory and spoil, not determyning to go on any farther toward Naples, (as at
the beginning he had purposed, he took his journey toward the Lake
Brunswich returns into Germany.
of Coma, to return into Germany: he was pursued at the heels by the Count
Gaiazzo and Mercurio Bue, who coming forth of Bergamo gave in upon his

The report of the Lansequenets departure did greatly afflict the beseeged
Neapolitans, loosing thereby all hope of succors, on whom it seemed that their
whole safety did depend: because that not long before they had with bad
success assailed the Galleys of Phillipine Doria, supposing to open to
themselves the passage by sea, seeing that by land was wholly shut from them,
Lautrec having taken Pozzuolo and the places near adjoining, by which great
abundance of victuals came to Naples; which was the cause that before the
Venetians Pozzuolo taken^y Lautrec.
Galleys arrived, they were desirous to tempt fortune, and to free themselves
of the stumbling block by sea, by breaking Phillippine Doria, who with the

They manned six Galleys, four Fusts, and two Brigantines, with a thousand An
enterprise of the Spaniards against the Galleys of Philippin Doria.
Spanish Harquebuziers of the choicest and most valliant of the army, with whom
went along Don Hugo the Viceroy, and almost all the chief captains and men of
authority. To these vessels were added diverse fisher-boates, to amaze the
enemies a far off, by the show of a greater number of vessels. All these
Lords being joyfully embarked, as if they had been going to a triumph, came
to the Isle of Capri: from thence, leaving the Cape of Minerua, on their left
hand, they came into the maine ^ea and sent two Galleys before; who were
commanded, that so soon as they should come near the enemies, to make show A
policy of the enemies.
of flight, to the end to draw them forth to fight at sea, hoping to take them
with ease: But the matter fell out otherwise, for Phillipine Doria being
aduertized the day before by trusty spies of the enemies determination, had
with great speed and secrecy drawn three hundred Harquebuziers from Lautrec,
then so soon as he discovered the enemies fleet a far off, making toward
it, he was at the first somewhat doubtful, in regard of the great number of
vessels that he discovered, but being soon freed of that scruple, when he
perceived that there were but six vessels only; he caused three galleys of
his own to keep aloose, as though they had meant to fly, to the end that by
returning, with a very fair wind, they might give in upon the enemies broad
sides, and himself with Phillippin being quicker then they, gave fire to a
very great Basilisk in his own Galley, which struck the Admiral Galley
wherein the Viceroy was, who with diverse others were therewith slain, then he
discharged all his other shot, which did hurt and kill diverse.

The enemies shot on the other side slew some, but not very many: then coming
near to one an other, they began with Harguebuzes and other weapons a very
fierce fight, which lasted along while, till such time as the The Imperials ^e
(...) at sea.
three first Galleys, which seemed to fly toward the maine sea, returning
Doria, and two others, which had been sore beaten, committed themselves to
^light, perceiving that the enemies were victorious.

There dyed at this encounter of chief Commanders, Don Hugo the Viceroy, The
number of the dead, and of the prisoners.
and Caesar Fieramosea, with more then a thousand men of the ordinary
companies: there were taken prisoners, the Marquis of Guasto, Ascanio Colonna,
the Prince of Salerno, Santa Cruz, Camillo Colonna, Gobba Serenon, and diverse
other Captains and Gentlemen; whereby the City of Naples was bereft of her
best and brauest defendants.

During these exploits at sea, Petro Land, General of the Venetians sea-army,
The great commodity which the arrival of the General of the Venetian Galleys
brought to the confederates.
arrived before Naples with twenty Galleys, who came from Puglia, where he had
taken the six Cities belonging to the Venetians. His arrival did greatly
profit the French, and annoy the enemies, because that having left six

Besides, it did greatly serve for the safe and more easy bringing of
victuals to The Lord of Barbezieu^ comes to Sauona.


At the same time, the Lord of Barbezieuz, being come from France to Sauona
with money for to pay the Army, and having sent it by sea into the kingdom,
great difficulties were made for the bringing it to the Camp: the Lord Lautrec
sends forces to the seaside to receive the money, but the Galleys being not
able to come to land, by reason of the working of the Sea, the Marquis of
Salusses returned the day following with his Lances, and a strong band of
Gascons, A fierce encounter of those of ^he league and the Imperialls.
by Valerio Vrsino with the Venetian troops, and by Hugo de Pepoli Captain of
the Florentines, to their great loss and hurt, but Hugo de Peopli having too
far pursued the runne-awayes, was within an Harquebuze shot of the
Battaillon of the black-bands taken prisoner by the Imperial horsemen.

Hitherunto had the affairs of the league prospered, with hope of giving a The
(...) of the A^my of the league before Naples.
speedy end to the war, by the conquest of the Realm of Naples: but within

The Lord Lautrec being greatly troubled by these difficulties, and either
enforced to continue the siege with these discomodities, or else to enlarge his
troops farther of, was councelled by all the Captains, to send the soldiers
into the territories The great sor^w of the Lord Lautrec.
near at hand, and by separating them in that manner, to take from the
disease, which was already become contagious, the cause of any greater
progression, and give means to the diseased to heal and to look to
themselves. But that which did most of all torment the Lord Lautrec, was, for
that he perceived the victory, which he had almost obtained, to be snacht
forth of his hands, and that by enlarging his troops, he knew very well that
the Imperialls, who had great numbers of horse to send abroad, and finding no
resistance at all, would have means to provide for all their discommodities.
He understood daily how that Simon Roman, whom he had sent into Calabria, had
fortunate success, that all Abruzzo was from the beginning at the devotion of
the French: that the Spaniards were already in a manner driven forth of the
whole kingdom: and yet nevertheless, that all these happy conquests would
turn to nothing, if by temporising they should give any relaxation to those of
Naples, who were already reduced to great extremity, and lose the occasion of
taking that City, whereon depended, the good or bad success of that
enterprise.

Besides, he was ashamed to see the Spaniards, who were afflicted with
grievous diseases and discommodities, should constantly bear them, without
enduring The Lord Lautrecs nature.
afterward received a far less sum of money out of France then he
expected, or was needful for the payment of the Army, he dispaired of being
able any longer to entertain it. But that which did most of all torment him
was, to see himself to be constrained to enforce his own nature, being not
wont willingly to hear nor esteem an other man's opinion, and least of all to
give over a resolution which he had once taken: Whereupon notwithstanding that
occasion was daily offered to change his mind, and to fit himself to time,
yet for all that he would never consent to discampe, nor suffer any man to
depart Lodouico Pisani, and Great sickness in the French Camp.
Petro Pesare the Venetian Prouidators, and the Earl of Vandemont within a
while after: diverse being stricken with the contagion, retired to Gayetta and
to other places.

In the mean time, a new accident did more trouble him then all the rest, and
caused him wholly to despair of any fortunate enterprise, which was, the
determination Andre Doria (...) from the Kings service.
of Andre Doria, who being malcontent with the French, had forsaken the
Kings service, and entered into the Emperors pay. The cause thereof The cause
of Andre Doria (...) revolt.
King would not satisfy his just request, to yield unto the Genowais the
accustomed sovereignty of Sauona.

Sundry signs appearing of this discontent, the Pope had some suspicion
thereof; Whereupon he advertised the King of it, persuading him to make more
dear account of such a man then he had done, who was able to do much for the
furtherance of the service of the league, and not to suffer him to perceiving
the matter to be of importance, knowing no means how to prevent it, or else
being peradventure willing to be freed from such expense, he councelled the
Pope to give him entertainment, in regard of his great desire to serve the
Church, rather then to suffer him to go to the Emperors side. The Pope seeming
The Popes answer to the King, concerning the entertainment of Andrew Doria
to be desirous of it, and yet not willing to displease the Emperor, excused
himself by reason of his own small means, adding that so soon as by the
Kings help he should recover Rauenna and Ceruia, he might then more freely,
be at greater expense.

Doria in the mean time without longer dissembling that which he had
determined Articles ^fgreement betwixt the Emperor, and Doria.
to do, sent one of his Gentlemen to the Emperor, in whose Court the Articles
Doria into the Emperors pay with twelve Gallels, and a yearly pention of
threescore thousand Ducats.

This revolt of Doria did greatly hinder the Confederates, and mightily
prejudice the enterprise of Naples, because that the Venetian Galleys,
remaining alone, The great discomodity which the revolt of Doria did procure.
were enforced to retire their Rowers or Gally-slaues, which wrought in the
trenches, to look to the business at Sea: and the Admiral Barbizieux on the
other side being come from France with sixteen Galleys, tarried at Sauona,
(not daring to sail to Naples) where he landed a great part of the footmen to
send them Lautrec: so as from this accident proceeded all the mishap of the
seege of Naples, and the loss of the leagues reputation.

As also because that the Lord Lautrec could never make use in time of those
forces which Ranc^ d^ Cera had at Ciuitauechia, by reason of the Popes
different and uncertain resolutions, who (being solicited by the Lord Lautrec
with huge and in a manner menacing speeches, and afterward with gentle and
courteous language to declare himself, promising to restore those of his
family in Florence) would never make any certain resolution; ever saying, that
as one zealous of the common good, peace was his chief aim and object, the
which, with more Lautrec to prove an open enemy, he answered, that to declare
himself, would nothing avail them, in regard (as he had oftentimes said) that
he had not sufficient forces for any great enterprise.

That the most Christian King might nevertheless make use of the Churches
State, and of the commodities thereof, without renewing upon that occasion the
Confederacy. By this means the French forces were daily weakened, and disorders
and discommodities increased in the Camp: and the beseeged on the contrary,

The aid from France, which had been so often craved of the King, and which his
The wants of the army beso^e Naples.
majesty had so often promised, did not arrive, and the troops raised in the
Kingdom of Naples were not sufficient to fill up the army, nor to supply the
want of the military factions, the Camp standing in need of all things,
because that the enemies Cauallery sallying forth many times to surprise the
victuals, which was brought to the Camp from the neighbor towns, the Army in
steed of beseeging was little better then beseeged.

In a word discomodities did so increase, as there was noe one company in the
whole army, but had great store of sick persons in it. The soldiers were
become Disorders (...) the army
nor any obedience, especially the men at arms who being disbanded without
their Captains leave, did forsake the Camp: the Captains likewise, were
partly absent far from thence, to cause themselves to be healed, and to
recover their healths, and part of them also lived unprofitably in the Camp,
being weak and ill disposed of their persons. But among others, the Lord
Lautrec was very sick, being spent as well in mind as body, for the great
danger that he perceived the Army to be in: Whereupon, his own fault
increasing the sorrow and grief of his heart, made him for the space of many
days unable to give order for the affairs of the war.

But being come to himself, and a little recovering his spirits, he began to
The Lord Lautrec grievously sick.
visit the whole Camp, to preserve order and the Guardes, fearing to be
assailed. Matters did daily decline, so as by reason of the strength of the
Imperials horsemen, there was no more commerce betwixt the Camp and the
Galleys, and The Lord Lautrecs death.
Lord Lautrec, upon whose valor and authority all matters relied, and it was
certainly thought, that his disease increased by too much travail.

The end of the seventh Book of the fifth Decade.
The Contents of the eight Book of the
THE Marquis of Salusses being made Andre Doria. The determination of the
Confederates to go and besiege Paul his journey to recover Genoa, is in vain.
The Castle of Genoa is raced by the people. The Genowais fill up the Haven of
Sauona with gravel. The Pope demands the Cities of Rauenna and Ceruia of
the Venetians. A treaty of peace held at Rome, but to no purpose. The great
warlike preparations of the Archduke of Austria to send into Italy to the
Emperors aid. The Venetians lend money to Paul by Antonio de Leua. The Duke of
Vrbins retreat to Cassan. The Antonio de Leua retireth to Milan. The Venetian
Senate are malcontent with the King. The Emperors arrival at Genoa. The
Emperors great forces in Italy. The Florentines send Ambassadors to the
Emperor. The great warlike preparations of the Venetians. Peace concluded at
Cambray betwixt the Emperor and the King. The King is very earnest with the
Emperor to make an accord with the Venetians. And lastly, a new confederacy
betwixt the Venetians and Francis Sforza Duke of Milan.



The Eight Book of the fifth Decade of the History of Uenice.
THE Lord Lautrec being dead, Michaele Antonio The Marquis o^ Sa^usses
General ^f the Army aft^r Lantrecs death
Marquis of Salusses a courageous Lord, and well beloved of the Soldiors, took
upon him the charge of the Army in a manner ruined, who being councelled to
discampe, not so much for the present state of their affairs, as for the
danger and necessity that pressed Rance de Cera. Upon his retreat, the
Imperialls coming forth of Naples, gave in upon his rereward: but by reason
of his good order, the loss was not great. Certain French troops were
broken, and Pedro of Navarre being taken prisoner was led to Naples, where
he dyed.

The Marquis being come to Auersa, was nearly pursued by the Imperialls, The
Marquis with the Army retireth to (...).
and being not able to make defense, he sent the Count Ouy de Rangone to
parley The Capitulation about the y^elding of Auers^
Munition: That as well himself, as the other Captains, should remain
prisoners, except the Count Guy, who treated particularly for himself: That
the Marquis should do his utmost to cause the French and Venetians to render
up the kingdom, with diverse other conuentions which made this French Army
miserable, who of vanquishers became vanquished, to the Venetians great grief
and discontent, whose fortune for the kingdom of Naples, was, to depend on
that of the French their friends and consederates.

This loss was accompanied by a very grievous and most preiudicious accident
Geno^ by means of Andre Doria (...) from the King to the ^peror.
to the league, and of great importance to the French, which caused great
strife betwixt them: for, the plague being very great in Genoa, and by reason
thereof in a manner forsaken by all men, and likewise by the soldiers, and
namely by Theodore ^riuulcio the Governor, who retired into the Castle: Anare
(...) making use of this occasion, came near to the City with certain
Galleys, and those few soldiors that he had, which did not exceed the number
of five hundred footmen, not hoping nevertheless to perform that which he
afterward did, and entering it without any great resistance, by the favor of
the people, who were greatly delighted with the name of liberty, which he
promised them, became master thereof, where on a sudden he changed the
manner of government under the Emperors protection.

It lay not in Triuulcio his power to hinder it, who being come to the City
but a while before, had much to do to escape into the Castle, hoping, (as he

The Senate in the mean time, did not cease to give order for necessary
provisions, The Venetians great preparations.
for the speedy renewing of the war in Lombardy, and for that they would not
give Antonio de Leua any time to make preparations they solicited Andre Rossi
into France, to hasten the forces which were to come into Italy: they did
besides, command the Duke of Vrbin to receive all those Almaines into their
pay, which had forsaken the Duke of Brunswich, having more-ouer sent to Iuree,
money for the payment of five thousand Lansquenets: so as the Republic had in
a very The number of the Venetians sorces.
short space, more then ten thousand footmen of sundry nations, Almaines,
Suisses, and Italians, fifteen hundred light horse, and eight hundred men at
arms, with which forces, and those of the French being joined together, they
did hope to drive Antonio de Leua forth of Italy.

The Duke of Vrbins chief purpose was to place a strong Garrison in Lauda, The
Duke of Vrbins determination.
being a place of great importance for the Duke of Milan, and for the
Venetians likewise, because the keeping there of did greatly avail for the
assurance of Bergamo and Crema: and then to pass the Po so soon as the French
succors should begin to come upon the Alps to join with the French, and
afterward to go and assail Antonio de Leua. For* the supplies of sieve
thousand footmen, and five hundred Lances, and as many light horse, which were
expected, being arrived, the Duke of Vrbin talked with the Count Saint Paul at
Monticella on the Po, to consult in what manner they were to proceed in this
war for the profit and commodity of the common cause.

The Duke of Vrbin by the advice of the Senate, propounded to employ their
Antonio de Leua, if it were possible, forth of the State of Milan, to the end
to cut off all means from the Imperialls of sending down any aid by that way
into Italy forth of Germany, and of having victuals from thence for the feeding
of their Army as they were wont. The proposition of the co^nt Saint Paul.
The Lord Saint Paul, and the other French Captains were of a contrary
opinion, saying* That it was not fit to abandon the affairs of Naples,
unless they should loose their honor and reputation both with the people and
the enemies, propounding besides, how important a matter it was to keep the
Imperialls busied in the kingdom of Naples, who by that means could not come
and join with Antonio ^e Leua.

In this diversity of opinions, a way was found to content both parties:
namely, not altogether to abandon the affairs of Naples, and yet to make the
chief attempts in Lombardy.

For, the Confederates, possessing diverse and sundry places in Puglia, where
the people did greatly affect the French and Venetians; it was resolved to
re-enforce those troops that they had there, to try if they could advance the
business any better, and keep the Imperial Captains amuzed and in fear:
and for that purpose the Senate wrote to the Prouidator of their nauall Army,
that he should carry his vessels into Puglia, and to place strong garrisons in
those towns which held for the Signory and for the French, and then to besiege
the Castle of Brundusium: and that on the other side, the Prince of Melfi, and
Rance de Cera, should pass over into those parts with five thousand footmen,
whom the Venetians should furnish with vessels for their passage.

But as concerning Lombardy, and the state of Milan, they resolved, (the forces
there being complete) to go and besiege the city of Milan, and to this end
all The enterprise of Milan broken.
the troops being come as far as Landriane, the Captains were of an other
opinion, he that was sent to discover the City having told them, that such an
enterprise could have no fortunate success: Whereupon they determined to go
and encampe before Pauia, the which they hoped to take with ease, because there
were no more then two hundred Lansquenets, and eight hundred Italians in it,
and both the armies being by sundry ways come near to Pauia, they encamped
round about it, and having planted on the hither side of the River Thesin, in
the plain on the lower side of the City, nine Cannons, they played in such The
Consederates besiege Pauia.
sort upon a bastion near to the Arsenall, that in a short space it was half
ruined, and on the farther side of Thesin, three Cannons to batter, (when they
should go to the assault,) a Flanqueer right opposite to the Arsenall, and
upon a little hill on the hither side Thesin five Cannons, which did batter two
other bastions, and at the foot of the hill three others which played upon the
wall, all which ordnance belonged to the Venetians: and that of the Lord Saint
Paul served for the beating down of the fortifications.

After a sufficient battery in sundry places, and so soon as they had drawn
the water forth of the Dikes, they went to the assault, where for two hours
space those within the town did valiantly defend it, but their number being
The Conse^erates take Pauia.
soldiers of the town were slain, the residue escaped into the Castle with
Galeas de Biraga the Cities Governor, and diverse of the inhabitants, who
yielded soon after upon composition, the City was wholly sacked, but of no
great value; in regard of the two former.

The taking of Pauia did procure to the league great contentment and notable
reputation, not only in regard of that City, but because that Nouara, Nouara
and diverse other towns yield to the Consederates.
and diverse other neighbor towns did within a while after, yield, to the
great loss and discommodity of the enemies, who from thence had abundance of
Paul, entreating and exhorting him to go forward as he had begun, hoping
that under his conduct they should be able to recover not only the State of
Milan, but the kingdom of Naples.

The news of the loss of Genoa being in the mean time brought into France,
did greatly grieve the King, who speedily sent commandment to the Lord Saint
Paul, that all other Commissions being laid apart, he Tri^lcio was in great
distress, protesting that if he were not speedily relieved he must of force
yield himself: The Lord Saint Paul leaves Milan to go to the releef of Genoa.
whereby, the affairs of the league, which began to prosper, did afterward
fall into great dsfficulties: because that as the commodity of conquering
Milan did present it self by the reputation of the taking of Pauia, and by the
discomodity which Antonio de Leua his army endured, where for the effecting
thereof it beehooued all the forces to be brought together, with two Camps to
assail and shut in so great a City; they were constrained to give over all,
the Lord Saint Paul having bent all his thoughts and deseignes to relieve
Genoa, whereupon, he did not only refuse to go to the enterprise of Milan, but
did solicit the Duke of Vrbin to go along with him thither with the Venetian
forces for the recovery

Persisting then both the one and the other in their opinion, the French Army
separated it self, and passed over the Po at Stella, to march through Tuscany
to Genoa, and the Venetians Camp, by the Senates advise, retired to Pauia, to
favor, with the reputation thereof, the affairs of Genoa, (it being in the
mean time in safety), and to excute like-wise what so-euer occasion would

But the enterprise of the Lord Saint Paul had no fortunate success, who
finding The lord S^ Paul his aeseignes to re lee^ Genoa proouet^ vain
Genoa to be mand with a strong garrison, and having in his own army but two
thousand footmen, being out of hope to obtain that which he desired by
tarrying any longer there, notwithstanding that he had made his approaches
near to the City, determined to return into Lombardy to spend the winter
time, where by the consent of Sforza he did put himself into the City of
Alexandria.

Now Trinulcio in the mean time having notice of his departure, and expecting
aid from no place else, resolved to yield the Castle, as he did, the which
Castle of Genoa raced by the People.
was forthwith raced to the ground by the People to take away that hinderance
of

The City of Sauona like-wise, where-into the Lord of Monteian (sent thither
with his forces to relieve it) could not enter, returned under the Genowaies
The Genowaies fill the Haven of Sauona with gravel.
Government, who on a sudden filled the haven thereof with stones and gravel
to make it unserviceable.

The Venetians perceiving that the French King did openly show himself to be
displeased with them, because that the Duke of Vrbin, with their forces, did
not go to the relief of Triuulcio, were very desirous for his satisfaction to
revive the enterprise of Genoa, as also for their own commodity, because they
accounted that City to be very convenient for the affairs of the league,
being Antonio The Veneti^ forces (...) diminis^d.
de leua lay sick, and his Army much weakened, all which were goodly occasions
where on ^o enterprise some great and notable exploit, they durst not for all
that in regard of the smalnesse of their forces go forth into the field to
execute any thing, being in fear likewise of the discommodities that commonly
grow in winter.

The Venetians were else where in great care for the towns which they
possessed in Puglia, which at all times both in peace and wa^re were very
commodious for them: they held Trani and Monopoli, and the French Barletta: the
others The Venetians keep the c^ties in Pagl^a.
being abandoned, these were kept, and yet not without great difficulty, since
the route of the French Army, by the diligence of the Prouidator Vitturi, who
being advertised at the siege of Mansridonia where he lay, of the disaster
before Naples* he sent speedily by Sea a certain number of footmen into
garrison into those towns, to keep them in their duty. Camillo Vrsino lay in
Trani, and Gioua^ni Conrado Vrsino in Monopoli, and Rance de Cera, who was the
Kings Lieutenant in the Province, was retired to Barletta.

The Venetians then being very careful to keep those places, and hoping to
be able not only to resist the enemy, and to keep the war far from their
own State, but likewise to make some progression, in regard of the enemies
letts, determined to send relief thither, as well of victuals, and all sorts
of munitions, as of Soldiors, by increasing the Garrison with six hundred
footmen leuyed in Dalmatia in the midst of Winter by the Prouidator Mula, who
having brought them into Puglia, went back on a sudden with his Galleis to
Cor^ou, there to repair and increase the nauall Army, to the end afterward to
join it Doria.

The Pope in the mean time continuing his former pursutes, concerning the
rendering of the Cities of Rauenna and Ceruia, caused the French King to The
French Kings instance to the Vene^ians in the Popes behalse.
send the Vicount Turenne to Venice, to entreat them in some sort to sa^isfie
the Pope, by yielding up those Cities which he demanded. The Senate making
show of nothing more then to please the King, did represent to the Ambassador
their just ti^les to them, having received Rauenna of Obizzo Polente Dominico
Malateste, by the payment of cert^ine godly Legacies, which they yearly
continued by accomplishing the Testators will.

How that if they had been desirous to possess Towns beelonging to other
men, they would not have refused the offers of those of Fu^ly and of other
Cities of Romagnia, who were desirous to be under their obedience; The
Venetians answer to the King^ Ambassad^r.
they would not besides have defended nor maintained with great cost and
danger, the City of Bolognia, and others belonging to the Pope, nor have kept
them for him: that those Cities had been taken at such time as the

Moreover, that they had spent a great mass of treasure in that war, which
those Cities were not able to recompense.

That the King was to consider, how much it might import him, if those so
commodious Cities should be quitted by his friends and consederates to be
g^uen to the Pope, who stood badly affected toward the Crown of France, nay
even into the very hands of the Imperialls, seeing that it was apparent that
the Pope, either by his own proper motion, or through fear, did wholly depend
upon the Emperor: that he was beside, to consider pusheth them foreward to
the affairs of the league, and moreover how that those towns, did presently
serve for a bridle to contain the Pope in his duty, seeing that without them,
he would already have openly showed himself, a friend to the Emperor. The
V^counts offers to the Pope.


The Vicount giving place to all these reasons, went to Rome to the Pope, were
for to compose the business, he propounded sundry offers to his Holiness,
namely, that those towns might be enfeoffed to the Signory of Venice, with a
certain annual acknowledgment, as diverse others belonging to the Church had
been, or that they might be sequestered by the French King to dispose thereof
as he should think fit.

These propositions being made to the Senate, were neither accepted, nor
wholly rejected: but calling to mind the Republics benifits to the Church,
and what it had done for the service of Popes, they seemed to repose great
trust in his Holiness wisdom, how that himself might find some honest remedy
for that difficulty, and in this uncertainty of business ended the year one
thousand five hundred twenty and eight.

The beginning of the year following did show great signs of being disposed
to peace, and of fear likewise of new trobles: but the discontent and
wearisomnesse of Princes caused the Confederates to procee^ slowly in their
provisions of war: whereupon as well by reason of the speech of peace, as for
the sharpness

The Emperor spoke openly that he desired nothing more then an universal
peace, and especially to fit himself to the Princes of Italy, and to these
ends had sent the Cardinal of Santa Cruz (for this was the General of the
Friars title) to Rome to treat of peace, and to cause Hostia and Ciuitauechia
to be surrendered to the Pope. The French King, who wished nothing more, sent a
commission to his Ambassadors, and the King of England sent Ambassadors to Rome
for the same purpose, as unto whom it alone appertained to conclude this
treaty. The Venetians did the like, by giving ample power to Gasparo Contaren,
their Ambassador in the court of Rome, whereby he was enjoined to follow the advice and The Uenetia^ offers to the Pope, so that peace might be procured.
Pope to take upon him the burden of that business, to bring it to such a
good end, as all men hoped for by his authority and wisdom: promising that if
he should procure an universal peace; in respect of the strife betwixt the Sea
Apostolic and the Signory, concerning the Cities of Rauenna and Ceruia, they
would then show their good meaning therein.

But on the other side, there were diverse presumptions why they wereto doubt
S^cret practices betwixt the King and the Venetians.
Venetians to renew their forces both by sea and land, declaring how that he
was in no sort troubled for the unfortunate success before Naples, as
proceeding from a certain maleuolent fortune, and not from the want of courage
of his soldiers, and therefore that he was more ready and desirous then ever,
to renew the war in Italy,

The Emperor on the other side, albeit that he did promise to come into Italy
The Emperor^ great preparations to come into Italy.
to take the Imperial Crown, and to establish peace there, yet nevertheless
the great preparations of war that he made, was the cause why men thought
that he had an other deseigne in his mind, clean contrary to his speeches,
together with his great desire to appropriate to himself the State of Milan.

The Pope likewise had a great desire to recover, not only the territories of
The Popes intention.
Romagnia, but Modena and Regio, and likewise to have satisfaction for the
wrongs and greeuances which he had received of the Florentines, with a will to
restore his Nephews, of the house of Medicis, into Florence to their ancient
greatness and dignity: the which was very hard to be accomplished without
coming to strokes. The Uenetians intention.


The Venetians in like manner, albeit that for many years they had been
entangled in war, having spent therein more then five Millions of gold, and
that therefore it behooued them to desire peace, to give some rest and
relaxation of

Such at the same time were the deseignes and propositions of the confederate
Princes, and such likewise were all men's discourses, concerning either war or
peace. The report, in the mean time, of the Emperors coming into Italy, did
daily increase, and for that end sundry great preparations were made at
Barcelona, Ferdinand being come to Ispruch, gathered together certain sums
of money to pay the footmen which he leuyed, to send them into Italy to his
brothers aid, giving out, that it was to assail the Venetians State.

Andre Doria, nevertheless, at the same time, and some other of the
Imperialls, propounded to the Senate sundry means of agreement, saying, That
the Emperor did bear a great and singular affection toward their Republic,
offering themselves freely (if so it pleased the Republike) to mediate a peace
betwixt them. The Venetians behaved themselves modestly in these offers and
treaties, fearing that it was some cunning to separate them by these iealousies
from the

By this time, the term of the Duke of Vrbins service was expired: They
confirmed hm again for three years more in the same office of General of
their Army, and augmented his pay with ten thousand Ducats every year, and
his company of men at arms to the number of two hundred, and besides, they
gave to Guy Vbaldo his son, a company of fifty men at arms in their Army,
Ian^ Fregosa General Superintendent of the affairs of war, with good
entertainment, for the acknowledgement of his valor and sidelitie, and for
that they would ever have in their army some one of authority and command, whom
they might trust in the Duke of Vrbins absence, (as he then was,) whereupon
they sent for him, being then at Bressia, commanding him to come with speed to
the Army, to execute his charge.

Diverse others were in like manner honored with sundry grades of honor in
The Venetians great preparation by sea and (...).
their Army. The Count Gajazzo was made General of the light horse, and
Antonio de Castello Captain of the Artillery: They did afterward, send to
Nani a great sum of money for the levy of a number of new footmen to make
the companies complete. And to show that they had likewise a care of their
Sea-affaires, they made Ieronimo Pesare General of their Nauall army, and
Alessandro Pesare, and Vincenzo Iustiniano, Prouidators commanding them to be
in readiness to depart: they did chose moreover ten captains for the
Galleys, who should cause those ten to be armed which at the beginning of
winter had been disarmed, to the end that the Signory might have above fifty
galleys ready to set sail: and al^hough that by the Confederacy they were
bound to surnish but sixteen galleys, they nevertheless, promised to add
four more, to make up the number of twenty for the leagues service, of which
Ieronimo Contaren was made General.

Now the Duke of Milan, and the Lord Saint Paul being solicited by them to
augment the number of their infantery (as they were bound to do) and The
Venetians love to the French and the Duke of Milan.
they excusing themselves, for want of money, the Senate resolved to lend the
French twelve thousand Ducats, and eight thousand to the Duke of Milan. But
above all things they entreated the French King not to abandon the Consederates
at such a time, in regard of the great affection which they had ever borne to
him, and for their constancy in pursuing the war. Without this supply, the
Lord Saint Paul would have been brought to an extreme want of men, money, and
all other things necessary for the maintenance of the war in Italy, for
there was not any preparation at all seen to be made beyond the mounts for
the execution of any enterprise, which the King had often promised

But they peceiuing that the King did rather incline to the war of Italy,
they were in great hope that at one time the war might be renewed in Lombardy
and in the Realm of Naples, and before that the Emperors aid should arrive,
to make some notable progression.

Upon these hopes, the Senate sent for the Duke of Vrbin to come to Venice,
Paul's Gentlemen, they might consult The ^esolution of the assembly held a^
Venice by the Confederat^.
and advise on means to make war, where in the end was concluded, before all
other matters to pursue the enterprise of Milan, by seege rather then by
assault, by surprising all the neighbor towns and places to reduce the army
of Antonio de Leua to want of victuals. And for this purpose it was likewise
decreed for to have twenty thousand footmen in their army, namely, about some
eight thousand in the French troops, and as^ many in those of the Venetians,
two thousand from the Duke of Milan, and two thousand Lansequenets which they
daily expected from Lions, leauied already at the

Now because that the whole safety of the affairs of Italy did depend upon the
stopping of the Emperors coming thither, they resolved to augment, they most
that might be, the French and Venetian nauall armies, and especially of great
vessels, which might easily resist that of the Emperors which was composed of
the like, to the end that the Emperor understanding the difficulty of his
journey, might abstain from coming.

In the mean time they had notice that the King had changed his purpose, The
King determines to make war i^ Spain.
the mounts, upon the Confines of Spain, as had been before determined: at
which news the Senate being assembled to dispatch An^re Nouagera newly chosen
Ambassador to the French King: the Senators were divided in opinion, whether
to persuade the King to come in person into Italy, or to send his army toward
the Pirenean mountains to enuade Spain.

The matter being debated in open council, where Moceniga on the one The
resolution of the Venetian council upon the Kings coming into Italy.
side, a man of authority and well acquainted with affairs of State, and
Mark-Antonio Cornare, a man of great understanding, on the other, being heard,
diversely to maintain the one and other opinion, that of Cornare prevailed,
whereby they decreed to enjoin the Ambassador Nouagera to persuade the King,
or if he were already inclined thereunto, to incite him more, to depart
forthwith and to come into Italy.

Nouagera being come into France did not fail to do that which had been
resolved in the council, whereof there had been sundry opinions, hoping to
obtain that which he had propounded, because the King had heard him with good
attention, and greatly commended his council, as determining to put it in The
Kings answer and determination.
practice: and for that purpose the King did mean within a while after to come
into Languedoc, to reduce all the forces that were there into the next and
nearest place to Italy, whether he promised to go, being followed (besides
twenty thousand footmen) with ten thousand Lansquenets, and ten thousand
Pioners. The Kings departure, being in this manner held for assured, the Senate
resolved that Nouagera should remain in France nere to the Lady Regent, the
Kings mother, Sebastian Iustiniano, whom Nouagera was sent to succeed, should
follow the King into Italy.

The Senate in the mean time did with speed make all necessary preparations
for the renewing of the war; making account that at the latter end of April,
the Republikes army should go before, and being joined with that of the Lord
Saint Paul, should march to the enterprise of Milan, which being executed, the
Emperors coming would seem to be wholly broken: and by means of this
victory, and by the help of the army, and the Kings presence, they supposed to
be afterward able to take the city of Genoa with ease, and any other deseigne
that they pleased to execute,

The Venetians at the same time were very careful to provide for the guarde
The Venetians care to p^serue the place^ which they held in Puglia.
of the places which they held in Puglia, by sending for that purpose into the
same country great numbers of footmen, to preserve whatsoever they there
possessed, and to attempt to make some farther progression, if occasion should
be offered, and also for to keep the Imperial forces busied and divided far
from Lombardy.

This great heat of the Kings began by little and little without any
apparent cause to cool, and the provisions for war to go slowly forward,
whereupon money was sent very sparingly from France to the Lord Saint Paul, who
despayring in a manner of being able to entertain the army, protested
Chastillon, who had been long expected, came to the camp, with less store
The Lord Chastillon comes to Venice and makes a show that he would g^ into
Puglia.
of money then was needful, and within a few days after, he left the camp,
and went to Venice, saying that he would go into Puglia to assure the troops
that were there, and to carry them a certain sum of money: for which
journey, the Senate having speedily commanded some vessels to be made ready,
according unto his request, he did daily with many e^euses, delay his
departure, which gave a suspicion that he had neither money, nor any

The King, doubting the matter, and knowing how great cause he gave them to
suspect, did within a while after send John Iaquin his Ambassador to Venice to
solici^e the departure of the army with the other provisions for war, without
making any mention at all of the Kings so much desired coming, which The
Sena^s susp^tion ^cerning the Kings coming.
did so highly import them. This did greatly increase the Venetians suspicion,
and did infinitely trouble them, in regard of the dangers which threatened them
from the Emperor, and also for that this delay did cause them to loose the
fruit of so many hopes, their army remaining unprofitable on the shore of the
River Adda, because that it was not able alone to execute the enterprise of
Milan. The Venetians solici^e the King to come into Italy.


The Senate nevertheless did not cease still to arm, soliciting the King for
that, wherewith he cause lesly did press them, and for this end they chose
G^sparo Pineli Secretary to the Signory, to go speedily into France to give
the King to understand, that for their part all things were in readiness to
renew the war, and that there was nothing wanting but his presence, promising
to send forthwith their troops to meet him: to the end that with greater
safety and speed they might execute some notable enterprise.

At the same time the Bandetti of the Realm of Naples came into the field in
The bandetti of Naples come into the field.
sundry places of the Kingdom, and did extremely press the Imperials,
whereby Rance de Cera did promise to himself some good success, being
supplied with Aquila is recouer^d of the Imperials.
Aquila by composition, by drawing forth of the city and the whole country
near adioying an hundred thousand Ducats for the payment of his army: from
thence he sent forces to Matri^a, where Camillo Parde lay in Garrison with
four Martrica taken by them.
hundred footmen, who being gone forth thereof a little before, promising to
return so soon as the Imperials should approach it, the footmen that were
within it, went over the walls and left it, whereby the town was yielded.

This notwithstanding, the success of the Imperials was not so good in Puglia,
Treason discovered in Barletta.
where treason being secretly practiced in Barletta, and discovered, Iulio of
Naples, captain of certain foot forces, and some of the townsmen as authors
and accomplices of the Rebellion were put to death.

Besides, the Venetians having drawn horsemen forth of Greece into the same
Province, they joined with those o Simon Romano, and all of them together
scouring the Country, did assure it, and kept the ways open to victuals,
having driven Pignatello Count of Borella forth of the whole Province.

Now the Marquis of Guasto being come into Puglia, would not deal with
Barletta, a very strong and well fortified city, but went and encamped before
Monopoli, Monopoli beseeged b^ the Marqit of Guasto.
with four thousand Spaniards, and two thousand Italians, and lodged in a
small bottom covered by the mountain, so as he could not be hurt with the
town ordnance, wherein lay Camillo Vrsino, Andre Gritti governor of the city
and John Vitturt the Prouidator, unto whom Rance de Cera forthwith sent three

The Marquis then caused a great Bastion to be made right over against the
walls within Harguebuze shot, and two others upon the sea shore, on each side
one, Then having battered the town, and made a breach he gave an assault,
where he lost above five hundred men, and great numbers of Pioners, The Ma^quis
gives an assault ^o (...) ^ity to his less.
with three pieces of ordnance that were broken, whereupon he retired a mile
and half further off, because that the cities ordnance did him much hurt in
the place where he was lodged, which caused the Venetians to sally forth, and
to assail the bastions that he had made, where they slew above an hundred men,
and then they assured the Haven by a bastion made upon their shore, opposite to
that of the enemies.

The Marquis being newly returned before Monopoli, and having made two
Caualiers, with two trenches, two hundred foot*men sallied forth of the town
and burned his works. After that, the Marquis making an other approach The
Marquis re^ireth from before Monopoli.
companies had entered the town the same night, sent by Rance de Cera, he
withdrew his ordnance, and at last discamped, whereupon being come to Conuersa,
he afterward retired to Naples. The brave resistance of Monopoli and the
retreat of the Marquis, did greatly encourage the Confederates, so that diverse
Barons and others, repenting that they had gonne to the Imperial party, showed
themselves very ready for a new rebellion: the which emboldened the soldiers
and captains of the league, to undertake some enterprise.

This being reported to the Senate, perceiving that their nauall army remained
idle at Corfou, expecting the arrival of the French army, they commanded The
city of Brundusium yields to the Venetians.
their General to sail into Puglia, where being arrived, he cast ankor near
to Brundusium, hoping, (as it came to pass) that those of the town, provoked
by a particular affection toward the Venetians, would forthwith yield. The
city being yielded on conditions was preserved from spoil, and from all
wrongs of the soldiers, and John Francisco Justinian was made governor
thereof, as Magistrate for the Signory, and presently afterward they begann^
to batter the castles, the charge thereof was committed to Camillo Vrsino, who
having in short space brought them to a straight pass, could not for all that
enforce

The Venetian army in the mean time did from the Cape of Otranto molest the
whole country, to the great hurt of the Imperials: Simon Romano died at that
exploite, who was a valiant and courageous person. The affairs standing at
this stay, the Prince of Orange knowing that the Confederates forces were not
so mean and weak, as they could easily be driven forth of the Realm,
neither yet so mighty as they were able to make any progression of great
importance, Or perhaps, because that the Emperor would have the Popes content
preferred before all other matters, that he might have him for his The Prince
of Orange de^ermineth to go to Pe^sua.
garrisons into the most important places, he turned with the residue of his
forces toward Perusa, to drive Malateste Baillone thence, and from thence to
enter into Tuscany, to restore those of Medicis to their country.

The behavior and approaches of the Prince, did cause the Duke of Vrbin to
suspect, that he went about to enuade his State, whereupon he departed suddenly
from the army, to go and provide for his own territories: The Venetians The
Duke of Vrbin runs to the defense of his own State.
were not well pleased with their Generals departure, in so trouble some a
season, as well for their own interests, as for fear of the suspicion of the
French, who by that accident, taking some occasion of a feigned suspicion,
might grow Nicolao Tepulo to him, who had been already before appointed to go
to him to the camp, to aduertize him of the new conduct, and by forcible
reasons to exhort him, in the name of the Commonwealth, to return speedily to
the army, and to induce him the more willingly thereunto, they sent him a good
sum of money for the payment of three thousand foot men appointed for the
guard of his State: but for that time there was no great need thereof. For the
Prince of Orange having intelligence that the Count of Aquila, and Camillo
Virsino called Parde, having joined their forces together, were come to Canosa,
and their troops daily increasing, it was to be feared that they would cause
some commotion of consequence, having changed his determination, would not at
that time depart forth of the Kingdom, fearing some great insurrection of the
people in regard of the great extortion that was there committed, by means
whereof the Spanish name was very odious to them, whereupon he The Prince of
Orange changes his determination.
thought it fit, first of-all to appease those stirs, and to make provision
of victuals, referring the execution of his former deseigne to a more
commodious season (the which he did) so that the Duke of Vrbin being thereby
freed of his suspicion, did forthwith come to the army, determining for to
march toward The Duke of Vrbin being come back to the army determines to
beseege Milan.
Milan with all his troops, the Lord Saint Paul having sent him word, that he
would take the same way; being invited thereunto by the difficulties wherein
the Imperials then were, and by the fortunate success of the French; because
that notwithstanding that two thousand Spanish footmen were arrived at Milan,
whom the Genowais would not entertain, al-be-it that they expressly came to
re^eeue them, discommodities, nevertheless, by their coming Enteruiew of the
French and Venet^an armies.


On the contrary diverse towns on the hither side Thesin were at the same time
yielded to the Lord Saint Paul, so as the whole country, in a manner, to his
great gain and reputation, was reduced under his power.

Both the armies then advancing forwards, they met together at Saint Martins
Burrow, five miles from Milan, where after a long consultation, concerning the
means how to execute that en^erprize they resolved with both the armies to
encampe round about the town, to encompasse and take in as much of The two
armies distrust one an other.
the walls as they could, thereby to weaken the enemies defense by busying

The Lord Saint Paul marched toward Landriana, the Duke of Vrbin took the way
toward Monce, and the Duke of Milan departed with a determination to enter
into Pauia with all his forces: making account by this separation, to scour
the ways, molest the country, and keep victuals from Antonio de Leua, hoping
thereby to overthrow him, and to obtain at last their common desire, which
was, to possess Milan and Coma, the two only Cities of importance which held
out in that whole State for the Emperor: But so soon as the French were
arrived at Land^iana, they suffered themselves to be carried away (as it was
thought they would) with the enterprise of Genoa, being very vehemently
solicited thereunto by C^sar Fregosa, who measuring matters according The Lord
S. Paul resolue^ to execute the en^erprise of Genoa.
to his own desire, made the event very facile and easy, whereupon, they
promised to themselves that they would soon return to their quarter, and
therefore they requested the Duke of Vrbin in staying for the^, not to stir from
thence where he was with the Venetian forces and the Duke of Milans, for the
execution of their former deseignes, suffering nothing whatsoever in the mean
time to enter into those cities.

Now the French army departing in this resolution to go to Genoa, took the
way of Pauia, the Lord Saint Paul, sending the ordnance before, with the
wagons and the vantgard, and himself somewhat late, followed with the
battle and the rereward. Antonio de Leua being aduertized by his spies, how
that he stayed behind, far from the vantgard, determined to follow and
assail him if occasion were offered: whereupon in the night he came forth of
Milan with his soldiers wearing white shirts upon their armor, and marching
without sound of drum in good order he met with them in the plain, before they
had any knowledge of his coming, Antonio de Leua assaileth the Lord Saint Paul.
the first squadron of the French being gonne on so far, as it could not in any
time arrive to the rescue of the rest, as also because that the Lord Saint
Paul's self, did stay behind, by reason that a piece of ordnance did stick
fast in the mire at the passage of a River, where whilst he was busied with
those few men at arms that were there with him, and some fifteen hundred
Lansquenets under the command of captain Bossu, he found, unlooked for, the
Spanish shot at his back, who were at the first bravely repulsed by men at
arms, even into the battaillons of the Almains, but there being a deep
stream betwixt the French and Spaniards, their shot retired behind that
stream, where was a pace of the breadth of thirty or forty foot. The
Lansquenets on the French side did fight valliantly, and with them Paul, who
was alighted from his horse, as were John Ieronimo Castillon, and Claudio
Rangone, captains of two thousand Italians, who did gallantly defend
themselves. But at the last the Imperials coming to the charge with a great
battaillon of Almaines, the horsemen and Lansquenets turning their backs, the
Italians did the like, and the Lord Saint Paul being remounted was taken as he
would have leaped over a dike, and there were taken prisoners with him,
Ieronimo Castillone, Claudio Rangone, Lignach, Carbon, and other captains of
great note.

The Count Guy de Rangone being gonne before with the vantgard early in the
Antonio de Leua went back with his prisoners to Milan. Those that escaped,
part of them retired themselves to the Venetians territories, where they were
kindly entertained, and others into other places. The Duke of Vrbin having The
number of the Venetian army.
intelligence of this defeat, forsook his abode at Monce, where he lay, and
retired to Cassan, a place of more safety, for which the Senate did highly
commend him: he had with him about five thousand footmen, four hundred men at
arms, and seven hundred light horse, with great store of carriage. But come to
Cassan, which is a place nere to the River Adda, he did then fortify himself
with strong Rampires, leaving but one way open which was fenced and guarded
withal Iano Mar^a Fregosa, who councelled him to retire with his army to
Bressia, for fear of any inconvenience, being not equal in forces to Antonio
de Leua. He being emboldned by this victory, and more desirous to break the
Confederate forces, had followed the Duke of Vrbin Ant^io de Leua follow^th the
Duk^ (...) Vrbin in his (...) (...) Cassa^.
as far as Vaury, two miles from Cassan, which caused some doubt in the
Venetians, least he would have passed the Adda to have made wast of the had so
affrighted them as none of them durst any more come forth of the trenches:
therefore the Duke remaining firm in his resolution, to continue in that
place, would not raise his Camp, as well in regard of his reputation, as for
the victuals that were brought to him from the country, near adjoining, which
would other-wise have relieved the enemies, and if he should have retired to
the City, he would have spent those which were appointed for their friends.

Now the two armies being so near one to an other, they did continually go
forth to skirmish on both sides, where the Imperialls were still beaten.
Antonio de Leua supposing to have some satisfaction for his losses, by some
other means, sent Caesar of Naples on the farther side of the river Adda, to
scour the Territories Gajazzo for the guard of the Camp, he took with him a
good troop of soldiers and went and ambusht himself, near to the place
where he knew the enemies would pass the river, from whence, part of them
being gone over, he came forth unlooked for, with great fury, upon those who
stayed behind upon the Part of the enemies are defeated by the Duke of Vrbin.
river shore, ready to pass over, having first of all sent his light
Cauallery, to intercept their way, if so be that they would have fled toward
their camp. But Caesar of Naples being troubled with this unlooked for
accident, did speedily cause the bridge to be broken, fearing least the Duke,
for his part, would have come over and fought with him, whereupon, all those
that stayed behind, to the number Gajazzo, and the Count having, for mirths
sake, called before him on a time, the Captain that was prisoner, showing him
Margueriton (for so the soldiors called her) told him that the same was the
soldier that had taken him prisoner, the Spaniard looking Great valor of a
woman in man's attire.
upon her, answered, that he did comfort himself in his mishap, for that he
had been taken by so brave a man, as he seemed to be, but when he told him
that it was a woman, shame and disdain did so seize upon him, as within few
days after he dyed with grief.

Afterward the two armies kept them*selues in their quarters, for the space of
many days: but the Duke of Vrbin calling the Captains sundry times to
council, and propounding diverse things unto them, did suffitiently manifest
his desire to assail the enemies, and to cause them to dislodge. At the last
he resolved to go forth with all his forces, and to use means by cunning to
come to strokes with Antonio de Leua, upon some advantage: he caused all the
ordinance of the Camp to be brought into one place, and then he began to
march with The Duke of Vrbins enterprise to defeat the enemy.
all the troops, both foot and horse, and with three pieces of ordnance,
meaning to leave them behind him, by retiring so soon as he had begun the
skirmish, fayning flight both for fear and upon necessity: whereby the enemies
Gajazzo coming forth sooner then he should, with a part of his Infantery, and
beginning the skirmish too far of from the Camp, being not able with those he
had brought with him long to sustain the enemies fury, was enforced,
not-with-standing that he fought valliantly, to retire in some disorder.
Whereupon, the Duke perceuing him to be in danger did on a sudden make have
to his reskew, and gave in with such fury athwart the Imperial The enimes
(...) beaten by the Duke of Vrbi^.
Infantery, which nearly pursued the Count Gajazzo, as he caused them to

Antonio de Leua lost in this action more then fifteen hundred foot, part of
them being slain, and the rest taken prisoners: whereupon he durst no more
after that suffer his soldiers to sallie forth of the Camp, nor attempt any
enterprise, continuing in great fear and doubt, what he were best to do,
being afflicted with sundry cares and difficulties. For, on the one side, he
could tarry no longer there for want of victuals, and then he perceived that
his abode there The doubts and fear of Antonio de Leua.
could in no sort profit him: on the other side, to dislodge, and to return to
Milan, he thought it would greatly blemish his reputation, and that of the
whole army, as if he should confess, that he retired for fear, being chaced
by a number of eenemies, far less then himself: That it was to no purpose
to enter into the Venetians state, but very dangerous, all their towns being
mand with strong Garrisons well fortified and on the other side the people of
Milan, were beyond Antonio de Leua retire^h (...) Milan.
them.

But not-with-standing all these reasons, Antonio de Leua being enforced by
necessity to dislodge, retired to Milan. Aftet his departure, the Duke of Vrbin
was desirous to come nearer to Monce: but the Senate having some suspicion that
Sforza did treat of an agreement with the Emperor, which if it should come to
pass, their army would be enclosed, and all the passages shut up from
releeuing The report of the Lancequen^ts coming causes the Venetian Army to
retire to the Cities.
Bergamo, caused him to go with the Army toward Lauda, to discover the Duke
of Milans intent, and to be assured of him: But since then, the report of the
Lancequenets coming, daily increasing, and how they did mean to come down
through the Verona Territory, to join themselves afterward with Antonio de
Leua, the Senate decreed to place all their troops in the towns and cities
of their own state: Whereupon, the Duke of Vrbin, according to this
resolution, retired to Bressia, with one part of the army, and the Count
Gajazzo went

At the same time as these things happened, the French King tending altogether to
peace, that he might have home his children, and the Emperor like-wise
enclining thereunto, the Lady Marguerite, the Emperors Aunt, was by him deputed
to conclude this treaty on his part, having for this purpose sent her a large
commission, which was imparted to a Secretary, whom the King had to that end
sent into Flanders: Whereupon, the King likewise did speedily appoint the Lady
Regent his mother, with like commission, which was like-wise communicated to
the Emperors Agents. The commissions being viewed on both sides, the City of
Cambray was appointed, where these two Ladies should meet, and talk together,
The City of Cambra^ chosen for the ^reaty o^ peace.
to treat of the particularities of peace.

The King did in no sort aduertize the Senate of this treaty till it was very
late, at such time as the Lady Regent departed to the Treaty of Cambray, when
the matter could be no longer dissembled, neither did he so much as
communicate unto them any particularities of the Treaty, but he only promised
the Ambassadors of the Confederates in general, that he would make none
agreement what-so ever with the Emperor, without their consent and
satissaction; then showing his great affection toward the Republike, he did
greatly exhort them to a general peace, (which assuring them should be
mentioned in that diet) he entreated all the Confederats to send ample power
and authority to their Ambassadors, which were at his Court, to be present
thereat in their names, and to The Venetian Senate are male content with the
Fr^ch King.


The Senate found this manner of proceeding by the King to be very strange,
who wonderful cunningly had along time entertained them with hope of his
coming into Italy, or to send great forces thither both by land and sea, and
for that he had done neither of them, and had ever fed them with words, for
fear of breaking of the treaty, yet for all that being desirous to show that
they had still the same mind, and in^lination to peace, which they had before,
they determined to send to their two Ambassadors Justinian and Nouagera, who
were at the same The Venetians give author^ty to their Ambassadors to be
present at the treaty of Cambray.
time in the french Court, commission and authority to be present at that
Treaty, and to promise in the Commonwealths name, what-so-euer should be
necessary and convenient for the conclusion of peaco. But Nouagera falling
sick before the arrival of this commission in France, died, to the great
grief of his Countrymen.

Now the whole burden of this charge lay alone upon Justinian, who had
particular Austria, The Uenetians meaning concerning the Articles of peace.
did only proceed from not observing the precedent accords: but that above all
other things, they would have the state of Milan to be rendered, and restored
to Francis Sforza: of which charge and commission the Venetian Ambassador had
no great cause to make use, For not-with-standing that he had followed the
Lady Regent to Cambray, he neuer-the-lesse remained the most part of Quintins,
certain miles distant from Cambray, none of the most important
particularities, nor truest articles of the treaty, being communicated unto him.

The Senate by this means did doubt, that the King was desirous to conclude an
agreement for himself alone, without any regard to their particular intrest,
The Venetians suspect the Kings carriage
nor to the other Confederates; and that as concerning that which he had
promised, to conclude nothing with the Emperor without them, proceeded from
fear, least they suspecting his intent, should prevent him, by making an
accord with the Emperor, and he by that means should be excluded from all
their friendshippes, and his accord made thereby more difficult, and with less
advantage. Triuulcio his request to the Venetians from the King.
And within a while after Theodore Triuulcio came to Venice, where in the Kings
name he required the Senate* to deliver over unto him in Deposito, the Cities
of Rauenna, and Ceruia, till such time as that business were ended, assuring
them that he did it to give occasion to the Pope to declare himself, it
being a matter of great importance to have his favor.

Answer was made to this request, that as concerning his coming, the Republike
The Venetians answers to Triuulcio.
would not fail him of all aid and succor, which it had before times
promised,

But in this, the Kings cunning, and sundry ententions, being discovered, they
did except, with great devotion, the resolution at Cambray. Therefore the
Senate commanded Lodo^ico Faliere their Ambassador in England, to treat with
The Venetians recourse to the King of England.
that king, who had ever showed himself a great friend to the Republike, to be
pleassed, (as he had at other times bin) to take it into his protection, and to
procure, that in those affairs which were handled at Cambray, nothing might be
concluded to the hurt and prejudice thereof, no^ to the liberty of Italy,
whereof, many years before, he had to his immortal praise, taken upon him the
defense while^ these preparations were made on all sides, the Emperor, who for
all the treaty of peace had not ceased to pursue his deseines, nor to make his
preparations for his journey into Italy came to Genoa, with many ships and
Galleis, within The Emperor arrival an Genoa.
which were a thousand horse, and nine thousand footmen the which he caused to
be landed at Sauona, for their more easy passage into Lombardy. His deseignes
for that present, could not be truly descouered, because he affirmed that his
coming into Italy was to establish peace there, and to compose all his
variances with the Potentates of Italy: yet nevertheless, he did with all
speed, and Nom^er of the Emperors (...) in Italy
from all parts assemble the greatest forces he could; Antonio de Leua came and

The Emperors arrival, and with such provision, did greatly amaze the minds
Italy amazed at the Emperor crmming.
of all Italy, together with the rumor that was spredde abroad, how that the
accord betwixt the Emperor and the most Christian King was already concluded,
the Confederates being not therein comprehended, notwithstanding that the

Therefore, the more to honor his coming, so soon as he understood that he
was landed at Genoa, he sent thither three of the cheifest Cardinals of the

The Florentines upon these news, whom it first of all concerned to purchase
Florentines send Am^assadors to the Emperor.
his favor, and to be assured of his meaning, did within a while after likewise
send their Ambassadors unto him, who after the congratulation, were to excuse
them for entering into confederacy against him, having therein been enforced by
the Popes authority and commandment, and for that they had since then
continued therein by necessity: and they proceeded no farther because they had
not any commission, especially concerning the strife betwixt the Pope and them:
bu^ the Emperor seeming to be desirous to satisfy the Pope in that which he
had promised him, their Ambassador was to no purpose.

The other Potentates of Italy, did likewise send their Ambassadors to his
Imperial What k^pt the Venetians from sending Ambassad^s to the Emperor
Majesty, requesting his friendship and peace* The Venetians alone remaining
constant in their determination, resolved to enter into no agreement with the
Emperor but upon extremity: not, but that they were desirous of peace, but
because he feared that the Emperor had a meaning contrary to the liberty of
Great preparati^ns of the Venetians.
Italy, and that he would so handle the matter as all the whole state thereof
should depend only upon him: whereupon, they thought, that to show themselves
humble and low-minded, was nothing else but to encourage him, and to confirm
him in his desire and hope of being able to command all Italy. So that they
did then wisely by not sending their Ambassadors to him: but they gave their
consent that the Duke of milan, (who as being tied unto them, had therevppon,
craved of other Cities: they chose Francisco Pascalie, Prouidator General for
the firm land, whose principal charge was to visit their forces, and to
furnish them with all necessaries: they took diverse Captains into their pay,
and among others Sigismond Malatest^, with a thousand foot, and two hundred
light horse; and because great numbers of Lancequenets, departing from
Bolognia, were already passed by, they caused John Contare^ the Prouida^or, and
Caesar Fregosa with a strong garrison to enter into Verona.

Now because it did greatly import them to keep the other Italian Confederate
The Uenetians exhortation to the consederats
princes in breath, The Senate did not fail to encourage the Florentines, and
to commend their constancy, exhorting them to defend their country and
liberty, Parmesan, and Placentine Con^ines, so soon as the Emperor should
dislodge, to draw into those quarters, for the defense of his Cities, the
Imperial forces which were in Tuscany.

They did the like to the Duke of Ferra^a, unto whom they sent Mark Antonio
Renier their Ambassador, to declare unto him the Republikes good meaning, for
the common defense of the liberty of Italy, and the particular affection The
Venetians offers to the Duke o^ Ferrara.
which they did bear to the Duke, and to his whole state, for which, being
conjoined by near neighborhood, and by sundry other respects, they would
never refuse to run one self same fortune with him: and therefore they
desired to be

The Treaty of Cambray was at the same time published, which already by a
Common rumor was known to all men, namely, how that none of the Confederates
Publicatio^ of the treaty of Camb^ay.
were comprehended in it. There was only, place reserved for the Venetias to
enter into it, so as within the space offoure months they would end their
controversies with the Emperor, which was nothing else but a silent exclusion
in

The King by the same treaty was among other things bound ^o cause those towns
which the Venetians held in Puglia to be rendered to the Emperor, and upon
their refusal to declare himself their enemy, and to help him to recover
them by force. For the execution of which article, the King did on a sudden
send his Ambassadors to Venice, to entreat them to render to the Emperor
whatsoever they held in Puglia, being bound to make that request by the Treaty
of Cambray, and that, according to the form of the Capitulations at Coignac:
adding thereunto, that he did so much rely on the affection which they had ever
made show to bear unto himself, and to the Crown of France, as albeit that
The Kings request to the Venetians.
neuer-the-lesse persuade himself that he should obtain it, at his own
private request, it importing him so highly, as he could not otherwise redeem
his children from the Emperor, who were one day to succeed him in the Kingdom.

The Senate answered that it did still continue, in that good will and
affection which it had ever borne to the King and Crown of France, the
Republike being in a manner joined to that Kingdom by an indissoluable band,
in regard of sundry The Venetians answer to the King.
fair reciprocal offices, and common interests: that they could not deny but
that they had greatly desired to have been comprehended in that accord made
with the Emperor, not so much for the providing for their own safety as for to
peace and assurance which they so much desired. But concerning the restitution
of the Cities of Puglia, it was evident, that they were not tied to do it by
any bond, seeing that the King had concluded peace, without comprehending them
therein, having thereby absolved them from the bond of the Confederacy, by
which was expressly mentioned, that the King could not make any accord without
them: Yet they neuer-the-lesse desired to give him therein some satisfaction;
but he was to tarry for some opportunity how to do it, seeing that the
delivery of my Lo^ds his children was to be made within two months, by which
time, they hoped to find some means to compose the strife betwixt the Empero^
and them, whereby the same business might in like manner by the same means

Upon this answer the King dispatched the Admiral into Italy, to exhort him to
universal peace, and cheefely to make an accord with the Venetians, by means
The King entreats the Emperor to make an accord with the Venetians.
whereof, he hoped to be able to accomplish the conditions of the Treaty of
Cambray, by causing the Cities of Puglia to be rendered to him, having already
for his part begun that which belonged unto him to execute, by commanding Rance
de Cera with all his companies, to depart forth of Puglia, having consigned
into the hands of the Emperors commissioners, all the places which he held in
his name in the Realm of Naples, by persuading like-wise the Venetian officers
to do the like: But they being before aduertized of the Senates intention, had

At this stay stood the affairs of Italy at that time. The Emperor being in
arms, and very mighty; the Pope his friend and Confederate, the other
Potentates of Italy being in a manner ready to obey him, and the French wholly
chaced forth of Italy; for albeit they had not as yet laid down their arms,
it was neuer-the-lesse mentioned in the Treaty, that the King should no more
meddle with the affairs of Italy nor Germany, in the behalf of any Potentates,
to the prejudice of the Emperor. The Venetians alone, in the midst of so many
difficulties, made preparations to resist the Emperor, if so be that he were
desirous, (as it was thought he would be) to seize upon the State of Milan:
therefore their confederacy Francis Sforza, exhorting him to take courrage, and
to hope well, meaning in his behalf to employ all their forces.

The end of the eighth Book of the fifth
The Contents of the ninth Book of the
FIRST, Soliman takes Arms to restore John Vayuode into the kingdom of
Hungary, with the taking of Belgrade. The insurrection of the Heretics in
Germany. A motion of peace betwixt the Emperor and the Clement crowns the
Emperor at Bolognia. Confederacy betwixt the Pope, the Emperor, the Venetians,
and the Duke of Milan. The Marquisat of Mantua is made a Duchy. The Venetians
send Ambassadors to Constantinople to be Solimans children, being by him
entreated to that end. The Almains demand a council, and the Popes answer
thereunto. The Emperor grants the Interim in Germany concerning religion,
until a council were called. Solimans great deseigns against Christendom.
The Venetians make great preparations and stand upon their guard. The Venetians
resolve to remain newter in the war, betwixt the Emperor and Soliman. The
Kings of France and England determine to make war upon the Emperor. Soliman
returns into Hungary with a great army. The Emperor Soliman. Coron and
Patras, are taken by the Imperial army. The Duke of Ferrara recouereth Modena
and Regio. A second enteruiew of the Pope and Emperor at Bolognia. The
Venetians refuse to renew the league, being satisfied with the former, and not
meaning to add anything to it. And lastly a new league concluded, betwixt the
Pope, the Emperor and all the Potentates of Italy, (the

The Ninth Book of the fifth Decade of the History of Uenice.
WHILST Italy was in alarm by reason of the Emperors arrival Soliman the
Turkish Emperor resolved to restore John Vayuode King of Hungary to his
Kingdom, from whence, Fernand had expulsed him, and being entired to this end
with a mighty army upon the Confines of Hungary, he came and encamped before
Buda, which he took Soliman takes (...).
with ease, then he caused his Cauallery to scour the Champaine Country of
Austria, spoiling all places that were subject to the Arch* duke, threatening
him that he would within a while after encampe with all his forces before
Vienna: Whereupon he caused great preparations, of victuals and warlike

This mischief was followed by an other as great, for his brother aduertized
him, that the Sect of Heretics did very much increase in Germany, that they
were assembled in great troops, and made show of great innovation, and that if
The Heretics begin to stir in Germany.
they were not speedily prevented by rooting them wholly out, it was to be
feared

But because he plainly perceived that he could not effect it without making
an accord with the Venetians, on whom, (during these troubles) the State of
all Italy seemed to depend, being yet doubtful whether the French king would
join The (...) in desirous of (...) accord with (...) Venetians
with them, who were so much distasted of him, by reason that he did no more
care to observe the Treaty of Cambray, now that he had home his children, then
he had done that of Madrill, after that he was set at liberty: He resolved
with himself to make an accord with the Venetians, and made this his desire
known to his own Councillors, the better to find some means to end this
business, in which diverse men of authority did employ themselves.

Andrew Doria sent Frederico Grimaldi to Venice to offer them freely to employ
himself in this treaty, assuring them that he knew for certain that the
Emperor was desirous of an agreement with them, and that if the Senate would be
pleased The Venetian ^nswere to those that spa^ to them o^ Peace with the
Empe^or.
to have him to meddle in the business, he did hope speedily to dispatch it.
The Senate neither accepting nor refusing this offer; answered that it had ever
desired peace, and highly esteemed (as it became them) the Emperors f^eindship*
being at the same present of that mind, but that they were very desi^ous to see
some evident sign whereby they might perceive the Emperors intention to be
such as

Soon after, Sigismond de la Tour, Chamberlain and Ambassador to the Marquis
of Mantoa came to Venice, to exhort the Senate in like manner to an agreement
with the Emperor, affirming the very same that Doria had done, how that the
Imperial Majesty was desirous of an atonement with them, entreating them to
give consent to suffer the treaty thereof to be concluded in the City of
Mantoa, whether he knew that the Emperor would forthwith send his Agents, with
commissions to that end.

During these treaties the Emperor prepared for his coming to Bolognia to
speak with the Pope, according as it had been concluded at Barcelona.

All men had great hope of this enteruiew, wherein, matters of importance
Expectation of the enteruiew at Bolognia.
were to be decided: of which, men greatly doubted, remaining with attention to
see what would be the end thereof, especially the Venetians, because their
affairs were very much intermingled and of great difficulty. The Pope seemed
greatly to affect them, seeking, (by the means of Cardinal Cornare) to induce
them to lay down their arms, and to come to some honorable composition: and
therefore he had already before then sent the Bishop of Vaison his Nuncio to
the Emperor at Placentia, who was thought to have greatly Sundry opinions in
the Senate concerning the motion o^ (...) with the Emperor.


This was the cause why diverse Senators showed themselves more strict in this
negotiation, some of them being desirous to tarry, till it were called upon in
the assembly at Bolognia: others, of a contra^y opinion, propounded that it
behooued them to accept of the offer of the Marquis of Mantoa, and make present
choice of Ambassadors to send thither to treat of agreement: And why should we
(say they) defer it any longer? The Emperor has a mighty army, the forces A
Discourse made in Senate concerning peace with the Emperor.
of the league, being broken and dissolved, are weak, nay rather de^eated: the
Florentines alone, the Duke of Milan, and We, are left to undergo the burden

And besides, it is not to be doubted, but that which Doria first of all; and
then the Marquis of Mantoa have so freely offered and promised, has not only
proceeded from his own consent, but has been done by his express
commandment, for which at this present more then ever is to be wished for? We
have had for many years, continual war, wherein we have spent more then
five Millions of gold, so, as this City, and our whole State, which did
scarcely begin a little to breath after the forepassed wars, is now wholly
ruined, and all men's means consumed, and yet for all that, a way being opened
unto us, to settle us hence-forward in rest and quietness to our honor and
reputation, by providing (as there is hope) for our safety and comfort, we will
hold the matter doubtful, and expose our peace to the hazard of fortune, which
may, (as it has often done) produce such an accident, as will change the
Emperors mind and will, or else, by his remaining armed here in Italy, may
increase our discommodities and dangers, or

Those which have hitherunto praised the constancy of this Senate, for that
without sparing cost, and without fear of any danger, it has defended, with
such great affection, the common cause, and the liberty of Italy, perceiving
now, (accidents being changed, and how needful it is to change opinions) that
it does continue in the same way and desire, to dwell in arms, and to make
war, having means to avoid it, will perhaps change their minds, and de^me
us to obstinate, and others will repute us foolish and ill-aduised, for that
we will not handle

Others were not of this opinion, thinking it more honorable and more
profitable A Discourse in Senate contrary to the ^ormer.
to temporize, not letting the Emperor know, that they were desirous of an
agreement. These men did consider the small assurance, that was in the Emperors
Army, which wanted money and victuals, whereby, these two failing, it was of
necessity to break: That their Cities were fenced with strong garrisons, That
the Emperor could not in any sort assail^ them upon hope of sudden taking of
them: That he was besides, called away else where, and enforced to depart ere
long forth distasting this Republic, because it had been for many years
united with the French, would come at this time for any love thereunto, to
propound conditions of agreement: but that they were rather certainly to
believe that it was his own profit that moved him thereunto, knowing the State
of his own affairs to be badly assured, and the impossibility of being able
to hold together his army and to make any long abode in Italy: That it was a
general rule, that whatsoever pleases the enemy, and is by him esteemed
necessary and profitable, ought to be rejected, as a thing which on the other
side may beget contrary effects. His show of humanity, and his desire of peace
and quiet, was a cunning of the Imperialls to court their own weakness, and
to make men believe that by truly procuring

But let us yet presuppose (said these men) that it were good at this present
to make an accord with the Emperor. It is at the least more then reasonable to
tarry till the assembly at Bolognia, where the Emperors will and intention may
be better discovered, especially in the accord which shall be treated of,
concerning the Duchy of Milan, whereon in the end, as well by reason of the
ancient and new confederacy, as for sundry great interests of the Commonwelth,
the most assured resolution of peace ought to depend.

These reasons did greatly move many of those that were there present, who
were of opinion not to lay down arms, but with honor and safety to the
Commonwealth, The Senat^s resolution.
deferring for that time, the nomination of Commissioners which were to go to
Mantoa to treat of peace.

They resolved to send the Secretary Andrew Rossi to the Marquis, to thank him
for his offer and kind affection which he did bear to the Signory, and to
excuse them for that they could not as yet resolve upon any treaty of
agreement, by reason that the Pope and the Emperor were shortly to meet
together at Bolognia, to compose the affairs of Italy, that the Bishop of
Faenza, the Popes Nuncio, had already a hand in that negotiation and
particularly in that which concerned the Commonwealth.

The Pope in the mean time being gonne from Rome came to Spoleta, and The Pope
and the Emp^ror come to Bolognia.
had made his entry, came thither within few days after, so, as sundry
welcomes and reciprocal caresses being made, they began to treat of the
affairs of Italy, and how to establish a firm peace there, either of these
Princes seeming to bevery desirous thereof.

But the first and most important* was, the accord with the Duke of Milan, who
after sundry goings, to and fro of the Prothonotory Carracciola, and of D.
Garcia de Padiglia from Placentia to Cremona, being advised by the Venetians,
who the more to honor him, caused Marc Antonio Veniero their Ambassador, to
accompany him, determined to go in person to the Emperor to Bolognia, having
received

This matter being almost finished, was interrupted by the Imperiallists, who
demanded, for the assurance of that which should be agreed upon, The Imperials
d^mand concerning the accord for Milan.
that Francis Sforza should deliver unto them, the Cities of Pauia and the
Emperialls were desirous to appropriate to themselves the State of Milan: The
Pope upon this refusal, demanded to have these Cities consigned into his
hands, whereof the Duke like-wise craving to be excused, because he could not
do it without the Venetians consent, and that it would be best to refer the
matter to the deciding of his cause in the assembly at Bolognia, it was referd
thither without any resolution.

The Duke then b^ing come to Bolognia, and brought in to the Emperors presence,
he did very humbly thank him for his courtesy, in that he had suffered him to
come before him: then he told him, that he did so much rely upon his justice,
at he desired none other assurance or support then his own innocence, The
Duke of Milans great humility to the Emperor.
and in so saying, he^laid down at the Emperors feet the letters of
safeconduct, which he had in his hand, wherewith the Emperor was highly
pleased: A month was spent in the handling of the difficulties, as well of his
accord as of that of the Venetians, and at last the Pope having greatly
employed himself therein, both the one and other were concluded.

Francis Sforza promised to pay unto the Emperor within a year four hundred
thousand Ducats, and other five hundred thousand within ten year, namely
fifty thousand yearly; Coma, and the Castle of Milan remaining in the Emperors
hands, who promised to surrender them so soon as the first years payment were
made, and gave him the inuestiture, or rather the confirmation of

As for the Venetians, they did like-wise consent to surrender Rauenna, and
Ceruia, with their Territortes, to the Pope (their clames saved) the Pope
pardoning those who had practiced or done any thing against him. They did
like-wise agree to render to the Emperor, in the month of January next
ensuing, all that The Articles of peace betwixt the Emperor and the V^netians.
which they possessed in the Kingdom of Naples, and to pay him the residue of
the two hundred thousand Ducats due at the last peace contracted betwixt them,
namely, twenty thousand Ducats within a month, and five and twenty thousand
yearly after-wards till the end of the payment, and to pay him another hundred

Florence alone was exempted from this good hap, unto whom other men's peace
had procured a worse and more dangerous war, by reason of the Florentines
contention with the Pope. The Imperial army leaving the Venetian State,
Malateste Baillone brought thither, after that he had by composition yielded
the City of Perusa to the Marquis of Guasto, which made them more unwilling to
grant the The Florentines great trouble.
Popes demands: As also because that their delay to make their approches, had
begotten an opinion in the Florentines, that the Emperor would rather in show
then in effect, satifie the Popes desire. But the Pope on the other side being
extremely incensed against them, because they would not refer themselves to
his with the Venetians and the Duke of Milan, he determined rather to come to
the extremest point of all then to give place in any thing.

The Venetians were greatly grieved for the Florentines troubles and vexations,
as their friends and confederates, and joined together in one self same cause,
for the tuition and defense of the liberty of Italy: but the Republike was
charged with such excessive expenses, as al-be* it that all her forces were
still whole, yet nevertheless it could not give them that aid and assistance
which was needful: and therefore the Senate exhorted the Florentines to make
an accord, if it were possible, with the Pope, upon any honorable condition
which might not prejudice their liberty.

The Emperor in the mean time commanded the Marquis of Guasto to set What
moved the Emperor to en^orcethe Floren^ines to obey the Pope.
forward with the army, and to go and encampe before the walls of Florence,
being moved thereunto by his own particular interests, besides the Popes,
greatly desiring to have those of Medicis to return into the city, because
that he had promised to give the Lady Marguer^te his natural daughter in
marriage to Alexander the Popes Nephew, to the end that his son in law might
hold an estate answerable to the greatness of so high a marriage: thinking
moreover that it would greatly profit him, for the increase and assurance of
his power in Italy to have the government of that City, which had ever showed
it self much inclined to the French, to depend wholly in time to come upon
him.

All the war being in this manner brought into Tuscany and near to the walls
of Florence, all the remainder of Italy, and Christendom, were at peace, the
which happened very opportunely at the same time, that all of them being united
together might march against Soliman, who desyring there to purchase glory and
reputation by arms, being the more emboldened thereunto by the quarells and
contentions of Christian Princes, did menace their Realms and Dominions: for
notwithstanding that winter approached, and that he wanted great ordnance, he
was constrained to discampe from before Vienna, the which was defended by a
number of brave men, he nevertheless cau^ed it to given forth abroad that he
would return again at the spring, and beseege it with greater forces, or else

Soliman dislodging from those quarters, did establish John in the Kingdom of
Soliman restores John King of Hungary to his Kingdom.
Hungary, showing thereby that his principal aim was to purchase the ^ame of
a valiant and generous Prince: he did moreover create high Treasorer of the
Kingdom Lodouico Gritti, son to Andre Gritti Duke of Venice, borne of a
Concubine at Constantinople, whilst being young he remained there about
business. The conditions of peace being thus accomplished, the Venetian Senate
being very careful to establish it, and to purchase and keep the favor and
friendship of these Princes, determined to send Ambassadors to the Pope and the
Emperor to testify both to the one and other, the great conten^me^t which they
had received The Venetian^ send Ambassadors to the Pope and the Emperor.
were appointed for this Embassage, namely Marco Dandulo, Lodouico Gradonico,
Lod^uico Moceniga, and Lorenzo Bragadin^, unto whom, to make the Embassage mo^e
honorable, were added Antonio Su^iano, chosen at the first for successor to
Gasparo Contare^ Ambassador with the Pope, and Nicolao Tepulo who was to be
resident with the Emepror.

These six then came to Bolognia at the beginning of the year 1530* where the
Pope and Emperorlay, who honorably entertained them, where they executed the
tenor of their commission a part, first of all to the Pope and then to manner
their strifes with the Emperor, and thereby sreed them from the expense and
trouble of war.

They declared to the Emperor the necessity which had enforced them to take
The Ambassadors discharge their duties to the Princes.
arms, and to continue the war, their sorrow and grief for matters past:
but above all their firm resolution to observe and maintain the accord made
betwixt them, and their desire of a perpetual and an dissoluable friendship
betwixt the house of Austria and the Republike.

The Ambassadors having in this mannerfully executed their commission, so as
nothing was left for them to negociate, they were nevertheless commanded not
to stir from Bolognia, that they might be present at the Emperors
Coronation, Charles, meaning at the first to be crowned at Rome, according to
the ancient custom of other Emperors, being called home by the Germains, for
matters of great importance, resolved to have the ceremony performed at
Bolognia, by reason whereof great numbers of people coming thither from all
parts, and Princes Ambassadors, The Emperor is crowned at Bolognia.
they thought that such an Embassage as theirs would become the pomp and
sollemnity of such a day, which was upon the four and twenty of February,
which being ended, the Ambassadors returned to Venice, being honored by the
Emperor with a gift of five hundred Portiguze worth ten crowns a piece, the
which, according to their custom, were laid up in the public treasury: The
ancient The Emperors gui^t to the Venetian Ambassadors brought into the public
treasury.
in Embassage to Princes, did receive any thing of them in gift, they were to
deliver it up in public, they, thinking it unreasonable to refuse that which
was given in honor to him that did represent the Commonwealth, nor likewise
to suffer that which was given to public persons, to be converted to private
uses, and if at times they were permitted to enjoy them, it passed by the
common suffrages of the Senate, whereupon he unto whom it was given, held it
afterward of the Senates grace and liberallity: and by this means, they did
cut off all occasion from bad Citizens of being partial for any Prince
whatsoever, upon hope of

The Emperor after his coronation went to Mantua, where he was received The
M^rquisate of Mant^a is erected into a Duchy.
with all royal magnificence by Frederico Gonzaga Marquis of that place, who
by Paulo Nani and Giouani Delfino, General Prouidators in the firm land, and
likewise G^ouani Mora, governor of Padua, and Pedro Grimani governor of
Vincenza, to meet him at Villafranca with great company of Gentlemen, which
lies upon the Mantuan and Verona confines, and to wait upon him so long as he
should make his abode upon their territories: they commanded likewise the
officers of Verona, to make speedy provision The great entertainment given to
the Emperor on the Venetian (...).
of victuals, and other necessaries for those of his Court, and for the
soldiers: and they did in particular, in the Republikes name, present him,
with wine, venison, fish, sweet meats, and all other exquisite delicates fit
for entertainment.

The Emperor then passed along with all his forces, being attended on by
great numbers of Lords and Princes Ambassadors, and amongst others by Nic^lao
Tepulo, appointed (as has been said) ordinary Ambassador with his Majesty,
and in passing by Verona, without entering the city, where, and in the castles
the gards were doubled, he came to Chiusa, being still accompanied by the
Commissioners that represented the commonwealth, and being through all their
State entertained with great honor, he seemed to be highly pleased and
satisfied therewith, and protested great love to the Republike.

As these things seemed to increase these Princes confidence, and to confirm
peace and friendship, even so was it to be feared that they would in Soliman
(great States being ever filled with iealosie) beget sum suspicion, that the
Signory would enter into league against him with the Christian Princes, and
that which made him to doubt it, was the common report that was spread abroad,
that peace was established amongst those Princes, that they might afterward,
being united Solimans great deseignes, who having once al^eady beseeged the
city of Vienna, did threaten to return thither again with a mightier army.
Certain Cardinals, appointed for that end, did meet at Bolognia with the
assistance of the Ambassadors of other Princes to treat of necessary
preparations to begin the war with the Turk, and though the Commonwealths
Ambassadors were not present at that Soliman distast^d of the Venetians by
reason of a report that was cu^rant in Constantinople.
assembly where there was nothing concluded on, the report nevertheless
increasing the matter (as the manner is) and being bruted at Constantinople for
otherwise then the truth, was the cause that diverse did blame that council,
who

Now, the Senate being aduertized by Lodouico Gritti, who as Ambassador to John
King of Hungary had followed Soliman to Constantinople, of the Turk^s The
Venetians s^nd an Embassage to Soliman.
suspicion, resolved to dispatch an Ambassador to the great Lord, to acquaint
him with the peace made with the Emperor, and with the reasons that moved
them thereunto: and also to assure him of the Senates firm and constant
desire, ever to continue friends to the Ottomans: and if he should perceive
Soliman to be well inclined toward them, then to renew the Articles of peace.
The Senate did not without cause use all these respects and demonstrations of
friendship to Soliman, because that not long before, at his return from
Belgrade, he had sent Ibraim Bei his Ambassador to Venice, to acquaint them
with that which had (...) John their friend and Confederate to his Kingdom: he
did besides, send an other Chiaus to the Senate, to entreat them to send their
Ambassador to Constantinople to be present at the sollem^ity of the
circumcision of two of his sons; and at the same time he used great liberalit
y toward them, by giving them for a present a thousand Canthars of Saltpeter,
brought from Alexandria having heard that the Venetians did need it.

Thomaso Moceniga was chosen for this commission, who within few days after
did set forwards on his journey with Francisco Barbaro, who was chosen Baylif,
to succeed Pedro Zene, who being sent as Ambassador to the Port of the great
Soliman had conceived a certain opinion in his mind, that the Venetians,
after the accord made at Bolognia, had with the other Christian Princes
conspired against him: whereby measuring all their actions past, he did among
other matters complain, for that by the peace they had given a great sum
So^iman (...) the Venetians.
of money to the Princes of the house of Austria his enemies which had the

But all these rumors being already spread abroad amongst the Bashas, and
other men of note, did at the arrival of the Ambassadors, vanish, whereupon,
The circumcision of Solimans children.
was speedily renewed and confirmed the league, on the same conditions as it was
before. Then the Ambassadors were present at the feast and sollemnity of the
circumcision of his children, which was done with great pomp, cost and royal
magnificence, in all which shows, the Venetians did still hold a very
honorable rank.

During these great feasts and sollemnities, Soliman being in deed invited to
great attempts, did in his mind ruminate on affairs of consequence, he did
oftentimes discourse with his Bashaes concerning the raising of an army
wherewith The incursions of the Knights of Malta against the Turks.
the Galleys of the Knights of Rhodes did continually scour, who having
planted themselves in the Isle of Malta, given unto them by the Emperor, did
nothing but scour and molest all the seas, and chiefly those which belonged to
the Turks.

Soliman at the same time, thought on the affairs of peace by determining to
cause all marchandizes to be brought to Constantinople, with the spices which
Solimans purpose to enrich Constantinople
were brought from the Leuant to Alexandria, and to other markets of his
Empire, meaning (as he said) to make that city, the seat of the Empire, to
abound in all things, and chiefly in gold, and therefore he had commanded all
strangers not to buy silks or spices any where but at Constantinople, whither
he caused them to be brought; with great store of such commodities which he had
bought with his own money.

These things did greatly discontent the Venetians, as well in regard of the
war he determined to make, as for the change of the traffic: for al-be-it
his meaning was to assail others and not them, yet nevertheless, growing
mighty by the ruin of other Princes, his power was fearful to the Venetians,
The Venetians pursuites to divert Solimans deseignes.
the usual and ordinary places, which did much disturb the business of
Merchants. These considerations did move the Venetians to entreat the King of
Hungary, who already did treat of an agreement with Ferd^nand, to embrace this
business, thereby to deliver Christendom from so many mischiefs. They made
the same request to the King of Poland, who was already a mediator in that
agreement, to pursue it to the end. They did likewise solicit Lodouico Gritti
at Constantinople, whose favor and authority did daily increase at the Port of
the great Lord, to cool, by means of the Basha, that great heat of Solimans,
to cause

Now, wholly to keep the Turks from arming themselves and entering into The
Uenetians forbid the Knights of Malta to come no more upon their Gulf.
the Venetian Gulphe, The Senate commanded the Prouidator of the army, to
aduertize the Galleys of Malta, no more to come upon their Gulphe, nor to hurt
those vessels which sailed on the Leuant seas which they held, and that he
should threaten to disarme them if they did otherwise. The Turks held this for
a grievous wrong* and complaining of the Venetians, said, that it did not
beseem The Turks complaints against the Venetians.
presuming upon the forces and provisions of the Republike, had not entertained
any armed vessels.

The Emperor being in the mean time come to Ausbourg, did there connoke an
assembly, where he caused his brother* Ferdinand to be elected King of the
Romans: then treating of affairs concerning religion, the Protestants craved
the celebration of a general council, where their opinions, touching says,
might be examined and concluded, which was a pretense to color their cause
with the authority of Religion* The Catholics likewise for other respects,
desired a council, hoping that the authority of the decrees that would there
The Almains desire to hau^ a General Council.
be made, should suffice, if not to divert the minds of the chief of the
Heretics from their errors, yet at least to reduce part of the multitude to
the soundest opinion; so as the one and other of them required one self same
thing, namely to

The Emperor being desirous to satisfy this earnest request of all Germany,
as also, because it fell out very opportunely for his affairs, to appease the
causes of tumults, and contumacy of the people in that Province, did very much
press the Pope to conuoke the council and promised him, to the end he should
not fear to have his authority and dignity endangered, to be there in person,
and to have a particular care of him. The Pope, perceiving the small hope The
Pope excuses concerning the convocation of a council.
that was in it of any great good, and fearing rather some occasion of other
disorders, without making any open refusal, he answered, That for diverse
respects, it was not yet time to treat thereof, because that peace was not yet
well established

The Protestants thereupon being more earnest, and the Pope fearing that it
would breed some greater inconvenience, began to detest that Nation, and to
The Pope has recourse to the Venetians, against the instances of the Germains.
propound, that they were to be chastised with temporal arms, whereof, he
often discoursed by letters, not only with the Emperor, but likewise with the
Venetian Senate, to whom of purpose he sent his Nuncio, to exhort them, therein
to interpose their council, authority and forces, by entreating the Emperor
to harken thereunto, and the easier to draw him to it, to offer him a sum

But the Senate being of a contrary mind, sought to dissuade him from it, The
Venetians answer to the Pope.
and in praising his good meaning they showed him, how that to take arms at
such a time, and without urgent necessity, was nothing else but to show that he
was afraid of a most just cause (whereof all men were desirous to be assured)
by preventing with force, the power which the concourse and favor of the
people might bring to the adverse party: That it did not beseem him, who
maintained reason and truth, to fly from the trial thereof, especially by the
Scriptures and by the same reason; and not to impose a necessity upon the
Protestant Princes to raise their forces, and thereby to make their cause to be
more favored by the

The Pope being moved by these reasons, or by the anthority of the Senate, to
whom he much referred himself, having changed his mind, desisted from sending
his Nuncio to the Emperor as he had determined: whereby this treaty was
broken off. And to speak truly, it was then thought most fit to consider
rather how to resist the Turks deseignes, and to keep (as much as might be)
the forces of Christendom united together, and chieflly those of Germany who
were to sustain the first attempts of the Barbarians, by reason that it was
held for certain that Soliman, being proud and haughty, could not digest his
shameful discamping from before Vienna which he could not take and that he was
(...) to return thither with a mightier army, the which, according to the
common report, he was already preparing.

The Emperor in this regard, did rather incline to peace then war, and (...)
(...) making any solid resolution, was content for that time to set down cer^
rules, concerning religion, until the next future council. He likewise
desired, Fedinana and the Republike of Venice: whereupon, he commanded to
choose vmpiers according to that which they had concluded; whereunto al be it
that the Senate did not only consent, but did likewise seem greatly to desire
it, by soliciting the deciding of the controversy, yet nevertheless nothing
succeeded thereof, contrary to the desire of both parties, by reason of the
difficulty they had to name a third person, if it were so that the vmpiers
could not agree amongst themselves. The Archduke chose the Duke of Mantua, the
Bishop of Ausbourg, and the Popes Nuncio residing with himself; And the
Venetians made choice of the Bishop Theatin^, the Archbishop (...) (...) (...)
(...) the (...) (...) the (...) and (...) (...).
of Salerne, who was of the family of the Adorni and the Popes Nuncio refiding
at Venice, but those which pleased one of the parties, displeased the other,
whereby matters remained still in controversy, to the great prejudice and hurt
of the subjects on the frontiers, and caused an alteration amongst the Princes.

Besides this, the Emperor had not yet surrendered (which was the very latter
end of the year) the castle of Milan nor the city of Coma to Francis Sforza,
as he was bound to do: whereupon the Venetians being desirous to have it
performed as soon as might be, for fear least time might produce some
sinister accident, Francis Sforza having not altogether means of his own to
furnish so The Castle of Milan and the city of Coma (...) to (...) Sforza.
great a sum of money, as was to be paid to the Emperor, they did lend him
fifty thousand Ducats to make up the payment, the which they re-embursed, upon
a bargain of salt they made with him, by which means the castle of Milan and
the city of Coma, were rendered to Sforza, to the Venetians great content, whose
only end was to assure the Du^chy of Milan to the Duke.

The Venetians great desire to conserve that State for Sforza, was the cause,
that he seeming to have some distrust of the French, entreated the Senate to
interpose their authority with that King, that he might desist from his great
warlike preparations, which he was reported to make to renew his old claim to
Milan: and notwithstanding that they gave small credit to that report, yet
nevertheless,

Now at the same time, the Venetians supposing that King Francis, being newly
married, and having recovered his children, should rather think on feasting,
and pleasure, then on the trauails of war, to make it known that they
desired to partake some part of his content, sent into France, John Pisani,
Procurator John Pisani extraordinary Ambassador into France.
of Saint Marke^, their extraordinary Ambassador to rejoice with him in the
name of the Republike. But he having discovered some true likelihoods, said
boldly, that they would not suffer the peace and public quiet to be troubled
or interrupted, and they would never fail in ought whereunto they were tied by
their confederacy.

In the Interim of these negociations, the Republike enjoying an assured peace,
The Venetians (...) the nomination of Bishoprics under their (...).
the Senate took care to re-establish it in her ancient preheminences, which
it had enjoyed before the last wars, and amongst others, to appoint all the
Bishops belonging to their own State: for which having made many requests

The Senate considering the difficulty of the matter, did consult thereupon in
open Council, where the opinions were very different, some affirming that it
was not good at that time to provoke the Pope, but to defer the matter till
some other time, and to quit the seizure: Others of the contrary opinion
councelled to pursue the business, and that the Pope would at the last be
enforced to grant their demands, so as in this diversity of opinions the
matter remained Clement, hoping that he would grant them more then they craved:
the Pope nevertheless, who at first made show that he demanded nothing else
but that, as a sign of obedience, without being satisfied, stood upon far
greater difficulties. But other matters of greater importance happening, caused
them to sue to the Pope, and to have good correspondence

Soliman having made peace with the King of Persia in the beginning of the
Solimans deseigne against the Christians.
year 1531. determined to assail Christendom on all sides both by sea and
land, and for that purpose had sent his Standard of General to Cariadine
surnamed Barbarossa, a famous Pirate, for his great experience in marine
matters, who was renowned for the infinite mischiefs which he had done to
Christians, and having thus received him into the number of his captains, had
aduertized the Venetians thereof, to the end they should no more use him as a
Pirate, but as one of his own Port.

And although the Bashas did o^tentimes affirm that Soliman would continue The
Venetians crave the (...) leauied upon the Clergy to help them against the
Turks.
money to suffize so great expenses: therefore it was necessary to have
recourse to other means, and amongst others, it seemed unto them that the
Tenthes leauied upon the Clergy of their Dominions would be suffitient for
that business.

Now they sought in all humility to obtain it of the Pope, but they could not
thereby surmont the difficulties wherewith he drew the matter forth in length*
but to the double discommodity and grief of the Venetians, he made account to
leauy two Tenthes upon all the goods of the Italian Clergy, for to employ them
(as he said) on the relief of the Cantons of the Catholic Swisses, against
the other protestant Cantons, who threatened them with war; and by this means
the Republike was frustrate of the commodity which it hoped for by the Tenths,
which being raised upon their State, seemed to belong unto them upon so just a
cause: as also because the said leauy of Tenths, gave some suspicion to the
Turk, that it was done for some league practiced against him.

The Senate nevertheless, al-be-it they were deprived of that help, and out
The Venetians preparations to stand upon their guard.
of hope to obtain it, did not cease to make provision of all things
necessary, but surmounting all difficulties that were offered, they determined
presently Soliman being come to Andrinople, intending (as it was said) to take
order for his preparations, being carried away with the pleasure of hunting,
did daily delay the affairs of war, so as that year remained peaceable and
quiet on his part.

The Venetians nauall army in the mean time was not idle, for the sea being
The Venetians by chasing away the Pirates make the s^as safe.
full of Pirates, who being joined together in great numbers did scour all
the Seas, and hindered the navigations and commerce, they were all of them
chased, broken, or taken prisoners, to the great profit of all men, and to the
Venetians

The King of Hungary at the same time, notwithstanding that he had all his
warlike preparations well ordered and in readiness, and that he was stronger
then Ferdinand, yet nevertheless whilst he expected the Turkish aid for his
better safety, fearing the great forces which the Emperor was reported to
leauy for his brothers aid, or desyring rather to end the matter in friendly
sort, then to come to strokes, and namely destrusting his own people, did not
enterprise The King of Hungary secketh peace of the Emperor and of Ferdinand.
any thing: so as both parties being quiet, he sent John Alasco his Ambassador
to the Emperor, of whom obteyning no certain resolution, he went to
Ferdinand, Ferdinand taking his safe conduct from him, he was enforced to
return into Hungary.

King John nevertheless, did not cease by other messengers to aduertize those
Princes that were assembled in the Diets held in sundry places of Germany, and
chiefly the Protestants, to divert them from aiding Ferdinand, that Soliman
accounted those his own friends or enemies, who showed themselves friends or
enemies to the Realm of Hungary.

This King, not to omit any thing, did likewise send his Ambassadors to
Venice, to entreat the Senate, to be a means, as well to the Emperor, as to
the John's intent was to try all means even to extremity, that he might keep
the Realm of Hungary to himself, al-be-it that he had the Turkish army at his
command fot his defense, to take away The Venetians do in vain solicit the
Pope for the King of Hungary.
the cause of new troubles in Christendom, they did willingly harken to this
request, and were desirous to further it to the Pope, but all their
remonstrances were to small purpose, because that his Holiness, favoring more
the cause of Ferdinand, then that of King John, seemed to consent that the
matter should rather be determined by arms then by accord.

Now within a while after, the rumor of war being blown abroad every
Soliman resolved with a mighty army to come down into Hungary to beseege the
City of Strigonium which Ferdinand kept, the Pope seat the Bishop of Verona his
Nuncio to Venice, to know of the Senate, their determination, and what they
would do, if the Turk should return with his army into Hungary, and if all
Christian Princes would unite themselves together against that common enemy.

The Senators upon this proposition were very doubtful and perplexed. For
zeal to Religion on the one side did move them, and the fear likewise for
their own State, the Turk waxing so mighty a neighbor: on the other side,
their doubt not to find in the Christian Princes such steadfast constancy as
to expose themselves to necessary travails and dangers, held them back: so as
in this diversity of opinions, they answered the Pope, that the Venetian Senate
had The Venetians answer to the Popes demand.
ever desired and sought the good of Christendom: but as the same did
suddenly incite them to undertake all matters for the service thereof, even so
they

Ferdinand in the mean time, al-be-it he perceived that all these treaties of
league would come to nothing, yet nevertheless, promising unto himself
Ferdinands deseignes against the Turks.
to be able to obtain by arms a more aduantageous peace then that which King
John had propounded unto him, contemned all treaties that were offered, by
reason that he had been declared King of Romans in the assembly at Colein,
and thereby successor to his brother Charles in the Empire, and had

The Venetians nevertheless without giving over their former proposition of
peace, having sent their Ambassadors unto Ferdinand, for to congratulate in
the commonwealths name his new dignity, caused him to entertain the The
Uenetians exhort Ferdinand to peace.
motion of peace, exhorting him to embrace it, and to answer the hope which
men had conceived of him, that as a wise and virtuous Prince he would have the
peace and quiet of Christendom in singular recommendation.

All those that had regard to the public good, and did nearly consider the
conditions of those times, desired peace, because they did foresee that great
wars and calamities would arise in other places, by reason that the Kings of
What moved the Kings of France and England to make war on the Emperor.
defend the Estates of his house and the Empire, did practice sundry ways to
make war upon him, the one being provoked with an ancient desire to recover
the State of Milan, and the other for a disdain newly conceived against
Charles for defending his Aunts cause, wife to the King, whom he had put away
that he might marry with an other, therefore they had jointly practiced the
German Princes who did not greatly affect the Emperor, and in the mean time
they armed: so as it seemed that they tarried for nothing else to make war
upon him, but till the Turk should begin, and thereby draw the Emperors
forces into

Soliman, who had daily intelligence of the Christian Princes deseignes, much
esteeming the self same occasions to see the Emperor at one time busied in
diverse and sundry places, seemed every day to be more resolute to defend and
maintain the Realm of Hungary for King John his friend and Confederate,
desiring to recover his reputation which he supposed he had lost at his retreat
from before Vienna.

At the beginning then of the year 1532. the Turk being come to Andrinople,
acquainted all men what way he meant to take: but before his departure, 1532.
showing both in word and deed, what great account he made of the Venetians
friendship, he called home the great Galleys which he kept in Soria and
Alexandria, for the above mentioned causes, and freely suffered them to
traffic in all places as they were wont to do, caring no more to reduce the
trade to Constantinople. Then being careful to raise his army, he sent for all
the Spaches The number of the Turkish army.
found that there were a hundred and fifty thousand fighting men in his army,
amongst whom, the most esteemed, were twenty thousand Ianissaries, who fight on
foot, being brought up from their youth in the exercize of martial discipline.

Soliman then being arrived with his whole army before Belgrade, a City seated
Soliman with his army comes into Hungary.
to come to battle with him, promising to himself easily to vanquish him,
threatening with insolent speeches to drive him forth of Germany, and to make
himself Lord of all the States of the Western Empire, which (as he said)
belonged unto him, as true Emperor and Lord of Constantinople.

Upon the report of the Turks arrival, the Emperor Charles likewise having
assembled a mighty army from all parts of Christendom, and such an one as in
The Emperor with a mighty army encampeth before Vienna.
the memory of man, the like had not been seen, went and encamped before the
city of Vienna: determyning there to attend the enemy.

All men were attentive to see what would be the issue of this war,
especially

The effects nevertheless of these two great armies were far otherwise, then
were the expectation and fear which men had, because that Soliman entering very
late into Hungary, being not able to come sooner, as well in regard of the
greatness of his preparations, as for the distance of the way, did not
directly march toward the Emperors army, but having only made a Solimans
retreat.
show of war, and some few incursions, he returned to Constantinople. The
Emperor (who had not stirred from before the walls of Vienna, not going forth
to met the the Turks, notwithstanding that he had intelligence of The Emperors
retreat.
left certain Italian footmen with his brother, and some numbers of
Lansquenets he took his journey into Italy, from thence to sail into Spain.

But both the Emperor and the Turk, having at one time great nauies at sea,
the Venetians thought that it behooued them for the safety of their own State,
to arm likewise, because they would not by any means be taken unprovided,
and to these ends determined to augment their navy with a good number of
Galleys: whereupon, by the Senates command, twenty galleys were speedily armed
in the Isles of Candy, Zant, and Corsou, and in the Cities Vincenz^ Capel was
made General, with express commission to take great heed that no hurt might be
done to the towns and subjects of the Signory, and that the Imperialls and the
Turks might be used alike as friends, by furnishing them with Havens and
victuals, but not with arms, not war like munitions, the Senate resolving to
have firm friendship and correspondency with both of them.

Now the Turkish Army being come upon the Leuant seas, conducted by The
Emperors and Solimans nauall Armi^*
Imerall, to the number of fourscore sail, reckoning with the Galleys twenty
lesser vessels, and that of the Imperialls upon the Western seas, which
consisted of forty light Galleys, with certain great ships of war, under
the command of Andre Doria, being yet uncertain what the Captains deseignes
were, and what way they would take: the General Capel went and spent the time
betwixt

Imerall being at last come to Preuesa, Capello remained still at Corfou, from
whence he sent one of his Galleys to visit him; the which the Barbarian taking
in good part, promised him that no harm should be done to the subjects of the
Signory; and the Turkish fleet arriving afterward in the Isle of Zante, and in
other places belonging to the Republic, took nothing away from them by force.
As for Doria, he departed from Sicily where he had made long aboade and
sailed Doria his subtle meaning.
he was desirous to sail thither with all his Galleys, to have some occasion
to talk with the General Capello, intending, as it was thought, and as
himself has since then affirmed, that by causing the Turks to suspect the
union of their Armies, to enforce the Venetians to join with him, of which
union he had before written to the Senate, with great offers and hopes: and
the Emperors Ambassador, resident at Venice, having earnestly entreated that it
might be so, demanded of them, that if upon occasion the two fleetes of the
Emperor and the Turk The Senates answer to the Emperors Ambassador.
should fight one with another, whether they would have their General to aid
and favor the Turks: whereunto the Senate readily replied, that they did
greatly

These two Armies then, Imperial and Turkish, remaining quiet for fear one
The retreat of the Turk^sh Army*
of another, did in a manner spend that whole summer without doing any thing.
At the last, the Turkish fleet being much weakened by the Pestilence, began to
retire toward Negrepont, to go afterward (as it was thought) to winter at
Constantinople. Doria being emboldened by this retreat, sailed with his Army
Coron and Patras, taken by Doria.
toward Morea, resolving to besiege Coron, which he took after some small
resistance of the Turkish garrison that lay there, he did the like to Patras,
but it

Both these Armies being retired, the Venetians meaning to be no longer at
such great expense in vain, did disarme the Galleys of increase, with some
other old ones which were in the Army. These things were done forth of Italy,
the which in the mean time was quiet in all places; but that the Duke of Milan
resolved to send his forces against the Captain of the Castle of Mus, who
being desirous to advance himself by some nouelty, and upon hope that the
Lansquenets would assist him, had taken certain places from the Grisons, and
did sore threaten the city of Coma. The Duke of Milan upon this report, sent
John Baptist^ Speciano, one of his household Gentlemen to Venice, to entreat the
Senate to aid him to prevent the Captains designs; the Senate answered that
the Duke ought therein to bear himself modestly for fear of altering the
quiet of Italy, and giving occasion to those that were desirous of troubles to
practice other novelties: but when need should be, he should find in them the
same readiness to help him, which he had at other times experience of. This
caused that small stir soon to be appeased, which would have fallen out
otherwise, if the Venetians had taken arms. For the Grisons having by the aid
of certain Cantons of the Suisses levied certain nombers of soldiers, did
enforce the Captain of the Castle to an agreement, whereunto the Duke
willingly consented, so soon as he understood the Venetians resolution, and
had at last, by means of a sum of money, the town of Locquaca and the
Castle of Mus restored to him.

The Duke of Ferrara did at the same time, by the Emperors sentence, obtain
The Duke of Ferrara recouereth Mode na and Regio by the Emperors sentence.
Modena and Regio, the which imported likewise, that the Pope receiving an
hundred thousand Ducats of him by a certain time, and reducing the reuenew
thereof to the ancient form, should again newly inuest him in the jurisdiction
of Ferrara, asbeit it was against the Popes will, who demanding caution and
assurance for the summer, fifteen Venetian Gentlemen were given unto him, whom
the Senate did promise should be answerable for it, whervppon he accepted it.
This Duke was not long before reconciled to the Venetians, who restored unto
him a goodly and magnificent Palace, which he had in Venice, it being taken
from him by reason of the last wars, and had been given unto his
Predecessors by the Signory.

According then to this sentence the Emperor consigned Modena to the Duke of
Ferrata, which till then he had hept in deposito, by reason whereof there had
been, for a long time, betwixt the Pope and that Duke, neither open war or
an assured peace, for it vexed the Pope to quit those two Cities, which he had
so The Emperor is again (...) rous to talk with the Pope ^t Bolognia.
much sought after.

The Emperor being speedily come into Italy, sent word to the Pope how
desirous he was to talk with him again at Bolognia, for diverse great
considerations, and cheefely to renew the Confederacy, made before betwixt
them, to the end to comprehend therein all the Italians, and to tax the sum
of money, which every one ought to contribute, if the French should invade
Italy: for he What was the cause of the enteruiew.
and the Realm of Naples.

The Pope seemed to be highly pleased with this enteruiew, for having
propounded to marry his Niece to the second son of France, and fearing least
the Emperor distasting it, would refuse to pass on any further in the marriage
already determined and concluded betwixt Alexandro de Medicis his nephew, and
the Lady Marguerite his natural daughter, sought all means to entertain the
Emperor

This proposition did for diverse reasons displease the Venetians: First for
fear least the Turk should suspect that the renewing of the league was rather
made against him, then for the defense of Italy, with whom they were to deal
with great respect. Next they thought it to be against reason, so to contemn
the interests and deseignes of the French King, which might beget great
discontent in him, which might turn to the loss and detriment of the Signory.
And then, that the Emperors intention, to renew this first league, being only
to comprehend of Genoa would enforce them to take arms against them, by reason
of the report which was already current, how that they had an enterprise upon
it. And lastly, they were in doubt that this renewing of the league was a
cunning of the Emperors, to cause the French King and Soliman to suspect the
Republic, and for to reduce it to this point, not only strictly to join and
confederate it self with him, but likewise to depend wholly upon him and his
pleasure, and altogether to follow his fortune, by declaring it self a friend
to his friends, and enemy to his enemies.

The Venetians made answer to the Emperors Agents which came from Rome for that
purpose, that they were willing to maintain and keep the confederacy The
Emperor returns into Italy.
which they had made with the Emperor, and the other Confederates, being
desirous of the peace and quiet of Italy. The Emperor in the mean time came
forth of Germany into Italy, unto whom the Senate sent four Ambassadors, Marco
Minio, Ieronimo Pesare, Lorenzo Bragadino, and Marco Foscare, who found him at
Pontiebe, and waited upon him through their State with all the honor that might
be, presenting him with confi^ures and other sweet meats, where in they spent
above ten thousand crowns.

The Emperor being come to Bolognia, about the latter end of the year, the
Pope speedily arrived there, where were showed the self same demonstrations
Marc-Antonio Veniero, and Marc-Antonio Contaren, Ambassadors of the Republic,
the one with the Pope, and the other with the Emperor, were called, and
earnestly entreated by these Princes, to persuade the Senate to The Venetians
are requested to consent to the renewing of the league.
hearken to that business, which concerned the safety of all men, and the
quiet of Italy, which they so much desired. The Pope, besides, these
exhortations made to the Ambassadors, sent Roberto Magio, his Nuncio, to
Venice, albeit it was more, (according to the common report) to satisfy the
Emperor, then for any

The Venetians had used all means possible to keep themselves from being The
Venetians answer concerning the renewing of the league.
called into it, by promising carefully to observe that which had been agreed
betwixt them, but being at last informed to deliver their resolution, they
refused to renew the confederacy, or to amplify the obligations therein
contained, alleging for their excuses (not mentioning the Freneh) how that
the Turk had notice of the former made at Bolognia for the safety of Italy, so
that coming now to renew it, in regard all the deseignes of Christendom were
presently meant against him, he would distrust it, and undoubtedly suspect
that the Venetians had a hand in it. Besides, it was sufficiently known to all
men, that for the A new league betwixt the Pope, Emperor and all the Italian
Potentates (the Venetians excepted).


The Emperor being not satisfied with this answer, and desirous speedily to
treat of the Articles of the Confederacy, which being determined and
concluded betwixt the Pope, the Emperor, and the other Potentates of Italy,
namely the Dukes of Milan and Ferrara, the Cities of Genoa, Sienna, Luca, and
Florence; notwithstanding that the latter was comprehended in the promises made
by the Pope, it was published at the latter end of February, and by the same,
each of those that were therein named, were bound to contribute to the wars,
according to his strength and means, by gathering together in the mean time a
stock of one hundred and ten thousand crowns, and monthly to furnish the like
sum, if war should happen; and in time of peace five and twenty thousand,
for the entertainment of the Captains and other soldiers: and at the same
Antonio de Leua, by a general consent, was declared General of the league,
with a decree, that ^ee should remain in the Duchy of Milan.

But it was a matter truly worthy of note, tha^ albeit the Commonwealth would
not consent to this treaty, nor in any sort deal therein, yet nevertheless it
was named in the publication thereof, and in the impression that was made of
it, either to make that action to be of more account, or else to cause the
Commonwealth to be suspected, and to become odious to other Princes, as it
came to pass: for, that impression being carried to Constantinople and into
England, it gave occasion to those Princes (both of them being the Emperors
sworn enemies) to complain thereof to the Senate, and to distrust them. Andre
Doria, to sail to Barcelona.

The end of the ninth Book of the fifth Decade.
The Contents of the tenth Book of the
VMPIERS are in vain appointed to end the controversy, betwixt the Venetians
and Ferdinand. The Emperors and Francisco Dandulo is taken by Pirates and
bannished at his return to Venice. The Venetians take the Moore of Alexandria
by night, and presently set him at liberty. Soliman calls Cariadin Barbarossa
the Pirate to his service. Henry Duke of Orleance second Son to Francis the
French King marries Katherine de Medicis the Popes Niece. Great troubles in
Germany by means of the Duke of Wittemberg. Sundry great fleets at one time
upon the Seas. The Cariadine Barbarossa takes Tunis. The Death of Pope Clement
the seventh, and the Creation of Pope Paul the third. The Pope takes arms
for the Duchy of Cameryne. Solimans great friendship toward the Venetians.
The Emperors journey into Affricke where heetaketh Goletta and Tunis. The death
of Francis Sforza Duke of Milan. The French King seeks by all means to draw
the Venetians to his ^ide. The Duke of Sauoy denies the kings passage through
his country. The French take Thurin, Fossan, and Pigneroll. Antonio de Leua
dies in Prouence. The Kings deseigne to make use of the Turk against the
Emperor. Diverse wrongs and outrages done to the Venetians in Solimans
countries. And lastly the Bascha excuses all these wrongs as done without
Solimans knowledge.

The Tenth Book of the fifth Decade of the History of Uenice.
THe Emperor departing from Bolognia to go into Spain, being come to Cremona,
wrote weary lovingly to the Senate, giving them to v^derstand that he had
willingly admitted their excuses, in that they would not consent to the
renewing of the league; and how that he was desirous to Firdinand King of the
Romans Vmpiers appointed wi^h a third man, to end the controversy betwixt
Ferdinand an^ the Venetians.
and the Signory, concerning the restitution of certain towns held by
Ferdinand, which did belong to the Venetians, the Emperor dealing therein, they
agreed at last upon a third man, which was Lodouico Porro a Senator of Milan,
Ferdinand having chosen for Vmpiers, Jerome Bulfarch a German Doctor, and the
Venetians Matheo Auogadre of Bressia, a Doctor and Knight; who being come to
Trent, ^he Senate likewise sent thither Andre Rosse the Secretary, that he
might The assembly is bro^n up without an^ conclution.
disbursing a sum of money, to recover their fortes of Maran and Gradisca,
they commanded Giouani Delfino governor of Verona to go to Trent about that
business, Yet neuer-thelesse, both in this and other matters, so many
difficulties were presented, as the assembly brake up, without any resolution
at all.

Whilst the Christian Princes were busied about these affairs, the Turk
determining to recover Coron, had prepared a mighty fleet for that purpose,
which was sent toward those quarters. Doria to give counterpoize to this
Turkish army, caused great numbers of vessels to be armed in sundry places,
that he

These preparations caused the Venetiens like-wise to arm the Galleys which
they had disarmed at the beginning of winter: continuing neuer-the-lesse in
their first resolution, not to meddle betwixt those Princes, whereupon, they
sent word The Venetians make preparations for their safety.
to the General Capello, who was still in commission, to keep the same order,
and manner of proceeding as he had done the year before, by reason whereof
he sent Francisco Dandulo Captain of the Gulphe with certain Galleys into
the Gulphe, to guard it against Pi^ats, who being assembled in great numbers did
much harm: and for the same purpose he dispatched four Galleys to Zante, and
to the Promontory of Mailla the Gallion which was a great shipp of a
merueilous which belonged to the Republic from being spoiled and molested, but
yet he could not so well handle the matter, but that the subjects of the
Signory did susttaine much harm and many losses, as it often happens in such
cases. Now Francesco Dandulo being come into the Gulf, toward the coast of
Dalmatia with six Galleis descried from far twelve Galleo^s of the
Barbarians, and supposing at first, that they were the Galleys of the
Prouidator Canalis, he held on his course, but being come within kenning, he
perceived that they were Pirates, whereupon having changed his mind he did put
himself more to Seaward, determining (as he after*wards said) to come and
incompasse them that he might M^rco Cornare who commanded a bastard Galley.

The Pirates being come very near them, and perceiving their own advantage,
by reason of the retreat of the other Venetian Galleys, fell upon them and
took them, and carried both the men and the vessels into Barbery, and among
others, Francesco D^ duo is taken by Pirates.
the Captain and Cornare, These news being brought to Venice, did much troble
the Senate, as well in regard of the auda^iousnesse of those the eues, as for
the Captains indis^retion, who thorough his own fault had caused the Galleys
of S^dry opini ons in ^he Senate concerning the revenge of that wrong.
toward the Seacoasts of Afric, and cheefely to Gerbes and to Argier, there
for to burn all the shipping they could find, and to do other harms in
revenge of the wrongs they had sustained of that nation: but others confidering
that it would not be well done to ^urt all the i^habitants of that Country with
whom they traded, and thereby ^ut off from the Venetians their traffic and
nauigations, caused this Council to be rejected, yet nevertheless, to free
the commonwealth from disgrace, happened by the default or ignorance of one
particular person, Dandulo being returned to Venice, having first been carried
Gritti, set at liberty, was confined Dandulo is banishe^ at his return to
Uenice.
to Zara, for ^ot well behauing himself i^ this place.

There happaned besides within a while after a more notable accident, whose
beginning was much more dangerous, but the end far more fortunate. Ieronimo
Canalts, prouidator of the (...), departed from Corfou with twelve Galleys, to
conuoy the great Galleys which were appointed for traffic into Syria and
Alexandria, and to safe conduct them from Pirates, who did usually scour those
Seas; and all of them being ^ome together near to the I Will of Candy not far
from the firm land, resolved to ^ay and cast an^or there, where the great
Galleys lay, some miles distant from the light ones; lying in this sort, about
sun set, upon Daniele Bragadino Captain of the great Galleys having
speedily aduertized the Prouidator, he supposed that they were Pirates*
whereupon he forthwith bravely resolved to go meet them, and that (...)
confirmed him in this opinion, was, the ^duertizement which he had received,
what course the Turkish army held, the which departing from Modon to go and
winter at Constantinople, the Pirates had been discharged.

Departing then with speed, and being come forth a good way to ^ea, he him,
each of them like two Lanthornes to deceive the enemies, by making them to
think that the number of his vessels, were far greater then they were: then
making a stand in their view, he suffered them to come forward, himself
keeping still before the wind to incompasse them at his advantage. They were
twelve Turkish Galleys conducted by the Moors Son of Alexandria, Solimans
Captain, who, (the army being dissolved) returned to his quarter into Barbary.
This young Moore then having descried the Venetian Galleys, keeping on his way
with full sails, was already passed beyond the Prouidators Galleys, either
because his intent was not to come any nearer to the Island, or else perceiving
so many Lanthornes he was afraid, and had not the boldness to do so.

The Prouidator then enforcing the banks of Rowers went and assailed them A
fight at Sea betwixt the Venetians and Turks.
on their backs, and discharged the ordnance, and beating some of them in
flank, others in poope, he^ did greatly ^urt them, himself receiving no
harm by the Turkish shot, by reason of the place where he lay. The chief
meaning of the Venetian Galleys was to inues^ the Moors Admiral Galley,
where*vpon the Prouidator having assailed it, there was a fierce fight, by
reason of the great number of Ianissaries that were in it, who valliantly
sustained the assault a long time, but the Prouidator had near him a Gallie of
supplies, which did continually furnish him with soldiers in their sted that
were slain or hurt, to sustain the fight: whereupon the Moore being (...)
hurt, dispayring of being any longer able The Venetians victory at Sea against
the Moore o^ Alexandria who was taken
to defend his Galleys, and meaning to cast him self into the Sea to escape to
some other of his Galleys, was taken by the Christian Rowers, and making
himself known, his life was sa^ed, but his Galley was altogether spoiled,
and four others were taken, and two were sunk, the rest escaped by flight. So
soon as the Turk perceived the Vene^ian Galleys to come toward him, he had
determined to fly, but artificial ^ire was thrown from the Prouidators Gallie
which burnt his fails* and after*wards the Helm of the same Gally was broken
by a Cannon shot, whereby he was enforced to tarry and to come to strokes.

This fortunate success did highly content the soldiors, and people of Candy,
Soliman, a very mighty Lord, fearing that he would take it ill, and imagine
that affront to be done to himself, by reason he was at peace with the
Republique: Whereupon it was thought fit by the Magistrates of Candy, and the
Captains of the Galleys, speedily to send home The wisely remedy the error
committed by night.
these ^allies into Barbary, and in the mean time, respectively to entertain
this young Turkish Captain, and to gi^e him kind and curtuous language,
excusing that fault by the error of the Nigh^.

The report hereof being brought to Venice, the Senate was extremely grieved
thereat, for the self same reasons and doubts, and so much the more, for The
Venetian ships are sta^ed by the Turkish offic^rs.
injury would be badly disgested at that time, as indeed it came to pass.
For so soon as the Turks officers were aduertized thereof, without tarrying
for any special commandemen^ from the Port, they made a stay of the Venetian
ships which were come thither for corn. In regard whereof, some propounded to
elect a new Prouidator in Canalis sted, and being thus dismissed of his place,
to call him home to yield an acc^unt for what he had done, thereby in some sort
to appease Sundry opinions in the Senate conc^rning Canalis (...).
discontented Soliman: Diverse others maintaining Canalis cause, did defend it,
as a matter done by right of war, and worthy rather of recompense then of

This reply overcame the former proposition, and caused them to determine to
send Daniele Federico Secretary of the Preguais to Constantinople, who was a
wise and discreet person, to the end to justify by speech, as well before the
Baschas as Solimans self, what had happened, by declaring how that their
Captain was enforced to fight, perceiving in the night so many armed vessels
near to him, not knowing whether they were friends or enemies: and besides,
how that the sudden restitution of the Galleys, done the very next morrow, and
the kind entertainment given since then to their Captain could sufficiently
witness their Soliman accepts o^ the Venetians. excuses.
good and sinceere meaning toward all those that did belong unto him. Ibrahim
Bascha and Gritti, stood them in great stead to cause Soliman to allow of these
excuses, but yet much more the new war with Persia, whereunto Soliman
directing Conalis was with greater praise honored by all men, who dying within
a while after in executing The Senate acknowledge Cana^ service by recomp^nsing
his sonn^.
the same office for the Republic, the Senate in acknowledgment of his good
service decreed that Antonio his son should during his life enjoy the reuenew
of the I Will of Corfou.

These things happened in the Venetians Army; but, that of the Emperor having a
long time stayed at Naples and at Messina, did at the last boldly adventure to
relieve Coron, which was reduced to all extremity, where at the first, having
had some hope of Victory, by reason of the flight and shameful retreat of the
Soliman being displeased with those unto whom he had committed the charge of
his Cariadi^e Barbarr^ssa his gre^ experience at sea.
fleet, taxing their small experience, determined to call Cariadine surnamed
Barbarossa, who of a Pirate being become a Prince, commanded at the same time
in Argier, to give him, (as he did) the whole superintendence of sea matters.

He being most expert in marine matters, and having of a long exercised the
trade of a Pirate in Barbary, had gotten a perfect knowledge of all the
Christians sea places of retreat, and in Afric likewise making incursions
upon the Moors; Hugo de Moncada to meet Doria at Genoa, he did assail and
defeat them. We may justly say that this man was the first which taught the
Turks the means of well ordering a nauall Army, being before then smally
experienced in sea matters, as those who till then had increased their power by
arms on land: he likewise was the first that began to use slaves in galleys,
whe^as before they were wont to man them with the first unexperienced comers,
which has ever since made the Turkish fleetes more mighty, and more fearful
to Christians. Soliman then resolving to make use of this man, would so dainly
advertise Catherine, daughter to Lorenzo de Medicis his Niece, with Henry Duke
of Orleans his second son: for the which treaty it

The report of this enteruiew, the occasion thereof being v^knowne, had
greatly troubled the Venetians, and especially because it was added that the
Emperor The Pope acquainteth the Ve^etians with all hi^ (...).
would be there: whereupon they carefully observed these Princes actions,
because they would not be over taken as they had been at the assembly of
Cambray, saying that by reason of Princes ambition, they were to beware of all
things, and to suspect all things, but this meeting, which should have been in
the month of July, being deferred to September following, the true occasion
of that enter view was in the mean time discarded, for which there met
together at Nice, the Bishop of Faenza for the Pope; and the Lord great Master
of France for the King, which did free the Venetians from all suspicion.

The Pope did afterward advertise them of his departure, and of the occasion
The Popes prete^ ces to coullor (...) joy conc^iued by that m^riage.
other shadow, saying that in this treaty, he had not so much respected his
own particular interest, as the common good and safety of all Italy, wherein
nothing did so much avail (as the Senate had often told him) as to hold the
forces of two most mighty Princes in equal balance, to the end that the power
of the one might give counterpoize to the other: in regard whereof, fearing
least the French King, being wholly out of hope, by reason of the treaty of
Bolognia, of the friendship of the Italian Princes, would presently break off
from him, and that the Emperor thereby might come to command all, according to
his own pleasure, he thought it fit to draw him unto him by the bond of
kindred; as he had likewise

Now these nuptials, which all the Princes of Italy did suspect, were
celebrated, not at Nice, by reason of the difficulty which the Duke of Sauoy
made (because he would not displease the Emperor) to grant the Castle unto the
Pope; but at Marseilles, according to the Kings desire, who thought it more
honorable for himself, to have the meeting in ^is own Rea^me, wherewith the
Pope was pleased, being desirous to give the King all content: but that which
men feared came not to pass, by reason of ^dry accidents, and then by the
Popes death, which happened ^oone after, so as Italy continued quiet, and the
Venetians freed from all obligations of taking Arms again.

That which did greatly help to moderate the Popes great desseignes, were (as
it was reported) the stirs in Germany, because that the Lantgraue of Hesse
having with other protestant Princes levied great numbers of soldiors, to
restore Great troubles in Germany concerning the Duke of Wittenberg.
V^drick Duke of Wittenberg to his Estate, it was reported that they would
afterward march into Austria against Ferd^nand, and that from thence they
would come into Italy, the which the Germans did very much desire: but all
these troubles were soon appeased, by an accord made with the King of
Romans, against whom their principal quarrel was about the Duke of
Wittembergs lands which he possessed.

In this manner were the affairs of Italy quiet in the firm land, whereby the

It was no more freed the year following, one thousand, five hundred, thirty
and four, from troubles and ^pitions, then it had been before, because that a
(...) great preparations for (...).
great fleet was prepared at Constantinople, which was to be commanded by
(...), surnamed Barbarossa, and the like was expected in the West; for the
Emperor supposing that the Turkish forces would fall upon his States, used
all means to increase his sleete, and to make it fit and able to resist to
join with the Turk^h Army conducted by Ca^aaine, and among other Captains
Great (...) (...) at on time in (...) p^aces.
there was a very famous Pirate called Sinam C^fut, surnamed the Jew, a man
very valiant and well experienced in marine business. The Pope in like manner
to assure his Sea towns from all incursions and invasions, or ^or some other
deseigne (as it was s^pposed) had armed ten Galleys.

All these fleetes began jealousy in the Venetians, and enforced them to
expenses by augmenting the number of their Galleys, and the soldiers of the
garrisons in their sea towns: whereby being in extreme need of help in
these extraordinary expenses, it was propounded in the Council to acquaint the
Pope again therewith, to the end to obtain leave of him for that purpose to

B^t notwithstanding these prepositions, the zeal of Religion, and the respect
to the Sea Apostolic, were of such force with the Senators, as preferring it
before all other profit and commodity, this proposition was rejected,
constantly affirming The Senates holy resolution
that it did not beseem the Republic, which was founded and increased in
Christianity, under a continual obedience and union to the Church and Pope of
Rome, whereby it had purchased an immortal glory and commendation to lay The
Veneti^ pre parations for their safe ty.
wisdom of the Venetian Senate.

This opinion being allowed, they pursued with all honor and reverence the
expedition Capello was still General, and to leuy footmen to send to the
Islands, and other sea places under their obedience, to the end to assure them,
expecting what would become of the preparations of so many fleetes. Now the
Turks whi^est their nauall army was preparing, were come by land to besiege
Coron, and did so strictly shut it in, as the Spaniards that were within it,
being impatient, and in a manner desperate, by reason of the miseries they
there endured, made a sally upon the Turks, which succeeding unfortunately,
they were enforced to retire into the castle with great loss of their
soldiers: whereupon, finding themselves The Turke^ reco^r (...).
so soon as the Sicillian ships arrived which brought supplies, the Spanish
Captains being out of hope to keep that town, embarked themselves in the
same ships, and left it to the Turks discretion. Yet nevertheless, it was
supposed, as a matter more likely, that the same happened by the Emperors
express commandment, who perceiving that he would not but with great
expenses defend that place environed on all sides with enemies, and being out
of hope of any farther progression, determined to quit it. Cariadine in the
mean time having put to sea with an hundred sail, and being come near to
the Venetian Gulphe, the General, who narrowly observed his actions, prepared,
according as the Senate had willed him at the beginning, to retire farther in,
and not to abandon the defense The Turkish fleet s^oureth the Sea coast of
Calabria.
and safety of the Gulphe: but the Turkish fleet directing their course
toward the Tirrhene sea, sailed to the sea coasts of Calabria, where on a
sudden having landed great numbers of soldiers, they did not only spoil the
country,

The fear of the inhabitants of Naples and Rome at the report of the arrival
of these Barbarians was very great, so as if Cariadine had marched thither, he
might easily have taken them, there being no forces to hinder him: but the
Turk hauin scoured and spoiled the whole Province, went unto the Isle of Ponze
to take in fresh water, and then sailed toward the coast of Afric, chiefly
to exectute his deseigne, for which he was come from Constantinople, albeit
that he had cunningly made show to ^aile toward the coast of Spain, that he
might on a sudden, and unlooked for, assail his enemy Amulcasse King of Tunis.

Cariadine was sufficiently informed of the whole State of that Country, of
Roscetta with him the Kings brother, knowing how pleasing that name was to the
people, where after Cariadine takes Thuni^.
sundry exploits he did at last take the City of Thunis.

The other fleetes at the same time did nothing worthy of memory, except that
of the Venetians, which was enforced to come to strokes with certain vessels
of Malta to chastise their Captain. It was Philippo Mazzo a Knight of Malta,
who having very audaciously, with certain vessels, scoured not only the
Leuant Ph^lippo Mazzo a Knight o^ Malta loses ^is head for ^is many robberies.
his ^ormer courses: whereupon the Prouidator having narrowly watched him, did
in the end surprise him, and having disarmed his vessels, caused Philippos head
to be stricken off as author of all those misehiefes, setting all the Turkish
slaves at liberty, whom he sent to Constantinople.

It was supposed that this execution would have incensed the Emperor, who had
that Religion under his protection, and the great master of Malta; but they
being advertised how the matter stood, both of them were appeased.

In the midst of these affairs, the Pope who was fallen fick at the
beginning The death of Pope Clement the seventh.
of summer, having a long time endured sundry accidents, departed forth of this
present lise, at such time as he was at the height of all his happiness. He
being dead, the Cardinals, who according to the usual ceremonies had shut
themselves up into the conclaue, did with a general consent, elect in his
steed, Alexander The Cr^ation of Pope Paul the third.
of the family of Farneses, a Roman by nation, and the eldest Cardinal of
the Court of Rome, who took upon him the name of Paul the third. All men the
which was very pleasing to the Venetians, as they who greatly desired to ^ee
all matters brought to a settled quiet, and who did besides persuade themselves,
by reason of the love which he had ever seemed to bear unto them before he
was Pope, that if he should leave his neutrality he would rather confirm the
league which they were at with Clement his Predecessor, then practice any
novelty; therefore they sent eight Ambassadors to him, namely Marco Minio,
Tomaso Moceniga, Nicolao Tepulo, Ieromino Pesare, Giouan Badoari^, Lorenzo
Bragadino, The (...) sends ^ight (...) to the Pope.
Gasparo Co^taren, and Federico Reniero, not giving them any other commission,
then to present to the new Pope their accustomed obedience, thinking it not fit
to sue unto him for any thing, until they had better discovered his deseignes

But the Emperor being desirous to know his meaning from himself, being
thereunto moved by his fear, least the French would stir, he did forth
with The Emperor seeks to the Venetians.
sound him concerning the renewing of his league with the late Pope: And the
more easily to induce him thereunto, he made the same request to the
Venetians, that they would again confirm betwix^ them the former Articles of
their confederacy, exhorting them thereunto for the quiet of Italy, which he
knew they so much wished for, and they being united together, would be able to
maintain and defend themselves from all the attempts of the French, although
the new Pope would not join himself with them: and yet nevertheless the true

The Venetians did not altogether approve, nor yet reject the Emperors motion,
The Venetians answer to the Emp^ror.
for they being in no sort desirous of innovation, said sometimes; That there
was no need to have it renewed, and at other times seemed to be ready so to do,
when need should be. And in these practices ended the year one thousand five
hundred thirty four.

The Pope who did maturely confider all these matters, not doing anything
rashly, did at the beginning of the year following, show how desirous he

Whilst the Sea Apostolic was vacant, the nuptials had been solemnized
betwixt Guido Vbaldo, son to Francesco Maria Duke of Vrbin, and Iulia the
only daughter to John V^ran Duke of Camerine, who succeeded in her Fathers The
Pope tak^th Arm^s ^or the Duchy of (...).
having to this end raised great forces to hinder the fortifications which

This declaration of the Pope did greatly discontent the Venetians, under whose
protection the Duke of Vrbin was, unto whom, and his whole house, they did
bear singular affection, for the good services which he had done to the The
Venetians seek to app^ase the strise betwixt the Pope and the duke o^ V^bin.
commonwealth; and therefore they used all possible means to appease the
Pope; as also because that the Duke of Vrbin did freely offer to have the
matter consulted and d^bated on by reason: but the Pope giving no ear to their
entreaties or messages, said that he could do no otherwise therein then he
was councelled and advised by affairs of State, and that he did determine
without any more dissembling to recover by force, that which had been detained
from that State: the which all men did account very strange, in regard of those
times, Christendom being infinitely molested, both by the arms of the
Infidels, and

The Emperor did willingly embrace this business, and having hotly pursued The
Emperor ^or the Venetians sake does maintain the Duke of Vr^ins cause.
it with the Pope, did greatly moderate his former heat: But it was supposed
that the same which did most of all appease him, was a proposition made unto
him by those who managed the affairs of the Duke and the Venetians, which was,
to Pietro Lodouico, some honorable estate in Romagnia, and to r^nder Rauenna
and Ceruia to the Venetians, to the end thereby to oblige them to take the
person of Pietro Lodouico and his State into their protection and safeguard,
because it was not to be doubted, but that the Venetians, in acknowledgment of
such a benefit, and sor their own proper interest, desiring rather to A new
prac^ise be^wixt the Pop^ and the (...).
have a particular Lord of that State to be their neighbor, then the Church,
would employ all their forces for the maintenance and preservation of the
greatness of the Farne^ia family: whereunto the Pope harkening very willingly,
and hoping for some greater matter, the pursutes for the Duchy of Camerine was
for the Venetians sakes smoothered, of whom he then ^eemed to make The
Emperors preparations for (...).


All the Princes of Italy at the same time, and especially the Venetians were
in fear, and stood upon their guard, by reason of a mighty Army which the
Emperor prepared, until such time as they were advertised, that it was for
Afric to recover Thunis, and thereby to assure the kingdom of Naples, a
near neighbor to it which Cariadine did daily threaten to invade. The Emperor
did particularly advertise the Venetian Senate of all his deseignes, seeming to
be very zealous for the common good of Christendom, and in particular for that
of their Republic, desiring to continue the same friendship and good
correspondence which was betwixt them.

This demonstration of friendship was the cause of the renewing the confederacy
betwixt them, according to the same conditions which had been concluded at
Bolognia, only to show that by the Popes death, it was neither finished nor
broken off; Whereupon, they commanded Marc-Antonio Contaren their Ambassador,
that in sign of continuance of amity, he^ should follow, (which he did) the
Emperor whether soever he went. After that general processions and public
prayer were made in Venice by the Clergy, that it might please God to favor
that enterprise.

This great preparation of the Emperors Army had caused the T^rkes to suspect
diverse matters, and this suspicion was most of all increased in them (as it
was John Forest the French Ambassador at Constantinople, through his reports
made to the Baschaes, seeking to make them believe, that the Venetians did
persuade the Emperor to turn his great forces upon Greece against Solimans
state, and yet ne^erthe less the French Ambassador resident at Venice, did
offer to the Senate, in his Kings behalf all favor and courtesy that might
be* he did likewise en^reat them to take special heed to the Emperors actions,
and that such great preparations ought verily to cause them to suspect, and
that the common rumors abroad were so many signs of the imminent dangers and
preiudices which threatened the Commonwealth* These offers and aduerticements
did greatly trouble the Senate, who did well perceive that they tended only to
cause the Republic to suspect and distrust all men, and to thrust it into open
war, either against the Emperor or Soliman, to enforce them thereby to have
recourse to the French King to make use of his favor toward the Turk, Soliman
adue^tiseth the V^netians of what he had done in Persia:


Howsoever it was, it is certain that notwithstanding all these reports and
bad offices done to the Venetians toward Soliman, he did still love and highly
respect them: for at his return from Persia he failed not particularly to
acquaint them Cariadine and diverse other Captains before him to consult with
them about the affairs of war, thereby showing that his meaning was, not to
suffer his Army long to continue idle.

The Emperor in the mean time, (the winter season being past, and all things
The Emper^rs great army for his voyage into Affr^ck.
in readiness for the Voyages of Affricke) took shipping at Barcelona, where
all the fleet lay to the number of three hundred ^aile of all sorts, under the
conduct of Prince Doria, with forty thousand fighting men, not accounting the
Mariners and Rowers, who were very many, being attended on by all the Spanish
Nobility, together with the Infant of Portugal who met him at Barcelona with
fourscore sail of ships of war. The first landing of the army was in
Sardinia in the Haven of Caliers, and having there taken order for all warlike
necessaries, it sailed to Carthage: then being come near to the land, not
far from Goletta, the arm^ was forthwith landed, which encamped not far
from thence, knowing very well that on the taking thereof depended that of
Thunis: because that Goletta (...) beso^ged.
is a Tower environed with diverse Bastions, and seated almost upon the mouth
of a Channel, through which the Sea entering in a good way, it makes a Lake
right over against it, upon which the City of Thunis is seated, some twelve
miles from Sea.

At their first arrival the Turks Garrison in Goletta did valiantly defend
themselves; but the Emperors ordnance having (almost) ruined the Fort, it fell
into the Spaniards possession, who entering afterward into the Lake, did
without any disficulty or fight take fifty three vessels, as Galleys,
Galliots, and Fusts, which Cariadine had left there as in a place of most
safety.

This loss did so daunt Cariadine, as notwithstanding that at the beginning
coming Cariadi^e (...) (...).
forth of Thunis with his army, he made a show as if he would give the
Emperor Battle, yet neuer-the-lesse giving place on a sudaine, he retired
into the City of Bonna, where finding himfelfe in no great safety, and
understanding that Doria followed him, he went to Argiers.

The Cities of Thunis and Bonna being forsaken by their Captain,
notwithstanding that there were strong Garrisons in them, did very quickly and
with ease The taking of Thunis and (...).
fall into the Spaniards hands. Cariadine escaping all these dangers, went
within a while after to Constantinople, whither he was sent for, and being come
into Solimans presence, who was newly returned from Persia, he did in the best
manner he could excuse all that which happened, and the loss of the Kingdom:
Solima^ being joyful for his victories, obtained in Persia, did pardon and
receive him to favor, and after-wards gave him the super-in-tendence of his
Army by Sea.

The Emperor on the other side having with royal bounty rendered the Kingdom
Amulcasse, on condition to pay unto him as his feodatory, an Annual tribute of
six Barbery horses, twelve falcons, and twelve thousand crowns for the payment
of a thousand Spanish footmen, whom he left in Garrison at Goletta, departed
victorious from Afric, and sailed with his whole army into Sicily; where
having made some abode in the Cities of Palermo and Messina, he dismissed the
greatest part of his fleet, and cassed his The Emperor retur^eth to Naples.
army, retaining no more then two thousand Almai^e footmen for his guard, and
afterward went to spend the winter at Naples,

Sundry Princes, and Princes Ambassadors went thither to him: the Slgnory
likewise, according to their ancient custom, sent sour Ambassadors thither to
Marco Foscare, Gionan Delphino, Vincenzo Grimani, and Tomazo Contaren, to
rejoice with him in the Republics name for his victories obtained in Affricke.

Whilst the Emperor was on his journey, Francisco Sforza, Duke of Milan,
deceassed, The death of Francis S^orza Duke o^ Milan.
without any Children of his own to succeed him. The Senate after his death
requested Antonio de Leua to have an eye upon that State, and to govern it in
the name of his widow, until that the Emperors pleasure were therein known.
The Duchess went to Naples to the Emperor, where being honorably entertained
by him, he seemed to be very sorry for the Death of the Duke her hu^band;
either for some particular friendship which he had borne unto him, or

But the Venetians were extremely sorry for his death, who having so long a
time with great expense and discomodity maintained war, to the end that the
same state might be possessed by a particular Italian Lord, perceived
themselves, by the Dukes death, to be thrown into new doubts and
difficulties, and being deprived of their hopes, to be peradventure enforced to
renew the war. Therefore so soon as the Emperor was come to Naples, the
Venetian Ambassadors that followed him, did represent unto him the Senates
desire, together with the The Emperors (...) answer to the Venetians conce^ning
the Stat^ of Mil^n.
belonged to him as chief Lord to provide for that State, he did likewise
therein desire to give content to the Princes of Italy, and cheefely to the
Venetians: therefore he would very willingly learn of them what were best to be
done for the safe establishing of the quiet of Italy, and also what their
meaning there*in was*

The Venetians, notwithstanding they desired to have the State of Milan fall
into the hands of some particular Lord, yet nevertheless being therein
ignorant the four departed* Ambassadors had no commission at al for this
business when they departed toward Naples, whereat the Emperor wondering, and
being defirous to draw the Venetians to his party, (occasion now being
offered), he began again to discourse of that matter, concluding in the
end, (as he had at other times done) that being not yet well resolved on whom
to bestow the State of Milan, he would willingly know their opinions, the
which he would greatly esteem and respect in that business.

Within a while after, there being some suspicion that the French did mean to
stir up new troubles, the Emperor sought to the Venetians, that as by the
Popes death they had renewed the league betwixt themselves, even so to renew it

The Venetians being of the same mind did therein give consent to fatisfie the
The Confederacy confirme^ betwixt the Emperor and* Venetians.
Emperor, by confirming the league on the self same former conditions,
reserving therein, place for the Pope, and for him also that should be chosen
Duke of Milan.

It was well advised, suddenly and freely to grant the Emperors first
entreaties, to show by that readiness how much they did affect him, and to
avoid besides, the occasion of handling that business at Rome, whither he
determined speedily

The Pope not well considering all these occasions, or else being ignorant of
them, made show to be displeased with the Venetians, for that they had so
readily granted the Emperors demand, saying, that they ought to have tarried
for his presence, and until the Emperor had been come to Rome. The Duke of
Milans death had revived in the French King, his former claims, and his The
French Kings Ambassade to the Venetians concerning the business of Milan*
earnet desire to conquer that State; wherein being resolute, knowing how
greatly the Venetians might aid him in that enter prize, he determined first of
all to

The Senate supposing it to be no fit time to give an ear to these
propositions, The Venetians answer to the Ambassador.
made answer in general terms, that the Republic had been ever desirous of
peace, and never more then now, as well by reason of the great discommodities

The French King for all this, not giving over his deseigne of sending his Army
The Duke of Sauoy deniet^ the Kings pa^sage.
into Italy to conquer that State, did levy as great forces as he could to
enuade it on the sudden, and to that end sent to the Duke of Sauoy, to crave
passage through his country, which the Duke denying, by the perswation (as it
was reported) of the Duchess his wife, the King took it very strangely, in
regard

The King had sundry occasions to be displeased with the Duke of Sauoy, which
did the more heat and hasten him on: for, the loan of money made by the same
Duke to the Duke of Bourbon, a traitor to the King: his gratulatory letters
written to the Emperor when he was taken prisoner: his practices to allienate
the Suisses from the alliance with France: the purchase of the County of Ast:
his (...) of the Kings discontent with the Duke of Sauoy.
refusal to lend Nice for the enteruiew of Pope Clement and himself: the
Kings claims to the dowry of the Lady Loisa of Sauoy his mother, sister to
Duke Philibert, who died without children, the King affirming that a great part
of the succession of Sauoy did belong unto himself, by reason that his mother
was borne of the first wife, and sole sister and heir to Duke Philibert,
together with his ^resh refusal to give him passage through his country, to
march to the conquest of the

This business could not be so secretly carried, but that the King had
speedy intel^igence thereof, which caused him on a sudden to send his forces
beyond the mounts, under the conduct of Philip Chabot Admiral of France his
Lieutenant General, whom he sent to enuade Piedmont, about the beginning of
the year The French take (...), ^ossan and Pigne^oll.
1536. where finding the country badly provided of defense, he easily took
the Antonio de Leua who was in the Duchy of Milan come thither to the speedy
rescue thereof, staying by his arrival the designs and progression of the
French. The Emperor seemed to be extremely displeased and incensed against the
French King, for making war in Piedmont, and causing speedily a mighty Army
to be levied, he did soon hope to overrun him, affirming boldly that he
would go in person to assail him in his own kingdom, and within a while
after coming to Rome, he come into the Consistory, where in the presence of
the Pope and Cardinals, and great numbers of Ambassadors and Prelates, Dukes,
Earls, Barons, and other noble personages, he (...) chalenget^ the Frenc^
King to (...) fight.
he proceeded so far, as for the avoiding of greater effusion of blood, he^
would end all controversies by fighting with him hand to hand, and that he^
would challenge him for that purpose.

The Pope did all he might to appease him, and had already employed himself
to make them friends, but all in vain. The greatest difficulty was, to find^ a
means which might content both the one and other, concerning the Duchy of
Milan, in which treaty, although the Venetians had an hand, (the Emperors
pleasure being to have them acquainted therewith,) yet nevertheless they did
very slowly proceed in it, in regard of the above ^entioned reasons, which were
(...) to acco^d the Emp^ror and the Frenc^*
of Angoulesme, for the Duchy of Milan, the Emperor being desirous to give it
to the Duke os A^goulesme, and the French King to the Duke of Orleance, the
matter remained undecided; and the Emperor departing from Rome, after some
small stay in Tuscany went, without tarrying any where, to Ast. Having there D.
Fernand of Toledo Duke of Alua, the Marquis of Guasto and D. Fernand de
Go^zaga, he conferred with them concerning the means to make wars, where of
h^s own proper motion, he propounded against al reason and the opinions of the
best experienced into Prouence, whereupon to that end the rendezuous for all
his troops was at Nice whither Doria likewise came with fifty Galli^s, to
second the land army, The Emperor came thither in person; from thence, entering
into the French Kings country, he encamped not far from the City of Aix,
being not well resolved The Emperor (...) with b^sarmy into Prouen^e.
what to attempt first, cheefely desiring to assail either Marseilles, or
A^les; and having spent much time in this irresolution, he gave the King
leisu^e to assemble a mighty army, who being come to Lions for that purpose,
did practice The Kings ente^ prose upon Genoa.
with sundry Italian Captains, who in his behalf having raised forces near
to Mirandola, made an attempt to surpri^e Genoa, and to reduce it to the French
Kings devotion.

The Emperor being by this means called away to defend his own, perceiving
likewise that his army sustained diverse discommodities, by reason of the bad
disposition of the air where it was encamped, was enforced to retire, without
doing any thing, but only making a show of his great desire to hurt the King.
The Emperor (...) to retire forth of Pro^ence.
But before he came into Prouence, he sent Roderico D'Analos to Venice to
acquaint the Senate with his great preparations of war, and with his deseigne
to invade France, and to entreat them by the same means to make ready those
forces, which they were tied to furnish by their Confederacy, for the defense
of the state of Milan: if need should be.

The Senate thereupon determined to leuy six thousand footmen, under the The
Senate^ answer to the Emperor.
command of Antonio de Castello, General of the artillery, and did in the
mean time answer the Emperor, that as it had been ready to renew the league,
it was likewise as diligent to maintain that whereunto it was bound, and that
for their parts they would in no sort fail to defend the State of Milan: they
did afterward add to these foot-forces five hundred light horse armed after
the Burgonian manner, commanding all those forces of foot and horse to meet by
a certain day at Azola, upon the Bressan territory, to pass from thence when
need should be upon that of Cremona: The Duke of Vrbin was likewise sent for,
to come in person to the Arm^: but truce being granted by the arrival of the
Cardinal of Lorraine, this former heat of the French seemed to be quenched,
whereby the

C^sar Fregoza, Captain of a company of light horse in Verona, departing
without leave and going to Genoa to favor the Kings party, was deprived of
his pay, and rank which he held, and was wholly banished from their State.
The King

The Emperor departing (as has been said) from Prouence went to Genoa,
Antonio de (...) (...) Prou^nce.
meaning to pass (as he did) into Spain, leaving the Marquis of Guasto for
his Lieftenant General in Italy in Antonio de (...) steed, who dyed in
Prouence,

Other Ambassadors from the Republicke, came unto him to Genoa, namely, Nicolao
Tepulo, Marc-Antonio Veniero, Marc-Antonio Cornare, and Antonio Capello, and at
their arrival, he dispatched Do^ Pedro Gonzales de Mendoz^ to Venice, to
acquaint them with his success in war, and with the cause of his return,
together with his great love to peace, particularly rehearsing unto them, The
Emperor acquainteth the Venetians with that which he had treated with the King.
whatsoever had been treated of with the King, the first practices being
again renewed, where the King had taken time for three months to resolve
him*selfe, whether he should accept the Duchy of Milan for his son the Duke
of Angoulesme, and thereby have him to marry with Duke Sforzas widow. And if
within the time prefixed, the King did not resolve thereon, he did intend to
give that State to Don Luigi Infant of Portugal, or to Emanuell son to the
Duke of The Venetians answer to the Ambassador.
not greatly please them. The Senate being constant in their former
resolution, not to declare their meaning concerning the Duchy of Milan, until
they had more particular notice of the Emperors intent therein, nor yet to make
any new confederacy, other then that of Bolognia so oftentimes renewed:
answered, that concerning the new Duke of Milan, when the Emperor should
directly name any

The Venetians did advertise the Pope of what had passed, still assuring him of
their great affection to the peace, and safety of Italy, for which they
entreated his Holiness readily to employ himself, because that having revived
the matter concerning the Duchy of Camerine, he seemed to neglect this other
important business, satisfying himself only for that he had declared
himself as never: The ^ree chee^e points with the Pope bandled with the
Christian Princes.
that he had undertaken to conuoke a general Council, which was published to
be held at Vincenza instead of Mantua, where it had been first appointed, he
did expressly resolve to send his Legates to both these Princes, to treat
particularly of this business, namely, of an universal peace betwixt the
Christian Princes of the league against the Turk, and of the celebration of
the Council.

The Cardinal Triuulcio went to the French King, and the Cardinal Carracciola
to the Emperor: but these Legations were fruitless, because none of these
three points did take effect, by reason of sundry difficulties whih happened.
War by this

Now by that which has been said, the deseignes of Francis the French King
may be sufficiently discerned, who determining to try all means to abase the
Emperors greatness, and to revenge all those wrongs which he said he had
received from him, he did at sundry times sound the Venetians meaning, and did
by diverse means seek to separate them from the Emperor: at the last, the Lord
of The King (...) (...) Am^ to (...), ^o dra^ them fr^ the (...).
Rhod^ coming from him to Venice, propounded sundry fair hopes and promises
to the Senate, and used all means to change their former determination to
continue the league with the Emperor, but it was in vain. For the Venetians
were as firm and constant in keeping their promise with the The King sends
an Ambassador to Venice, to vs^ means to ^raw them from the Emperor.
Emperor* as they were hard to be drawn to do any thing which might disturb
the quiet of Italy. The kings hope herein being frustrate, and himself being
mightily animated against the Emperor for coming to assail him in his own
Kingdom* knowing likewise that he was to weak of himself alone to finish
the enterprise of the Duchy of Milan, which was defended by the entire ^orces
of the Emperor and the Venetians, supposed that there was nothing which would
sooner cause him to obtain his desire, then to purchase the friendship of
Soliman (which he had already practiced) whereby he did hope to enforce the
Venetians, either to take his part, or at least to abstain from following that
of the Emperor; Solimans authority; and on the other side, by causing the
Turkish army to pass over into Puglia, or to other places of the Emperors
obedience, he did The King purposes to use the Turk against the Emperor.
think to divert his forces and greatly to weaken his defense for the State of
Milan.

The King then turned all his designs toward the Port of the great Turk,
where not-with-standing that John ^orrest was his Ambassador, he did besides,
send thither Dom Zerafin de Gozi of Ragusa, with new and more important
instructions, and great promises. These two, being often in company of the
Baschas of Soliman, might easily induce him to grant the Kings demands: as the
Emperors greatness the which if it were not moderated, would become fearful,
or at least to be suspected The m^nnes which the French Ambassadors propounded
to Soliman against the Emperor.
of all other Potentates, with diminuation, if not of their States, yet
certainly of their reputation and greatness: the facility of the enterprise,
there being but a s^nal space of Sea for the transportation of the Turkish army
from Albiana to Ottranto, and at one time to scour the Sea coast of that
country: The great discontent of the inhabitants of that country with the
Spanish government and especially of the cheifest of them, who as desperate
persons would embrace all occasions to open the way to higher enterprises which
might abase the Emperors Ajax Listibei was at the ^ame time in great authority
in the Port of the great Turk; holding the place and guard of first Bascha, a
mighty enemy to Christians, and who since the death of Ibraim had often
persuaded Soliman to turn his forces upon Christendom. This man because he
would not lose the occasion, and praising the ouertures, and propositions of
the French Ambassadors, propounded them with much amplification to Soliman,
using all means to incite him to the enterprise of Italy, laying before him
the example of Mahomet, Ajax Bascha perswad^th Soliman to make war in Italy.
a discreet and valliant Prince, who with fortunate success did easily take
the city of Ottranto, and by his arrival did bring that whole country to
extreme consusion opening him*selfe a way for the conquest of Italy, one of
the excellentest countries of Europe, had he not been prevented by death.

These things being represented to Soliman, did greatly preuaill with him, who
did covet glory, and was full of pride, supposing himself to be highly
honored, in that so great a King did send to crave his aid and asistance,
against another Soliman cons^eteth to make war upon the Emperor.
most mighty Prince his enemy, and he was like-wise glad that so fair an
occasion was offered to divert him from the enterprises of India and Persia,
where he unprofitably consumed his army: where upon he did on a sudaine
consent to promise the French Ambassador, that the next summer he would raise
great forces both by Sea and Land, to enuade the Emperors dominions.

But above all other things, supposing it to be most necessary to separate the
Soliman aduer^seth the Venetian of his determination.
Venetians from the Emperor, he resolved to send Ianusbei one of the Dragomans

The Senate did forthwith answer this proposition. That the republicke had
ever made great account and dear reckoning of peace with all Princes, and
especially The Venetian answer to So^ liman.
with the Lords of the Ottomans family, with whom having of a long time
contracted peace and friendship, with a free commerce betwixt each others
subjects they did at this present retain the same desire to continue it more
then ever, whereof there was no need to make any more ampl^ declaration.

It seemed that Soliman was well content and satisfied with this answer, who
was a Prince (if these quallities may be found in a Barbarian) of a goodly
understanding, and a friend to justice and honor: but diverse of his servants
being desirous for their own interest and particular affection to disturb
this quiet, and to break Andrew Contaren taken upon the Sea of Ciprus, by the
Galleys of the Garrison of Rhodes as a man of war, and the other Wrongs dove
the Venetians in Solimans Dominions.
in the haven of Alexandria, Soliman saying that he would use them in his most
important affairs: The merchandise besides which the Venetians were wont to
bring forth of Syria had an imposition laid on them oftenne in the hundred: the
Bailies letters to the Senate were oftentimes intercepted, and without further
dissembling their meaning, M^stapha, one of the chief Baschas complaining of
them told them, that because they were so straightly allied to the Emperor
their enemy, they had incurred the hatred and indignation of Soliman.

This gave him some just occasion to resent it, and some color of a lawful
war, if he had been disposed thereunto, notwithstanding that diverse other
reasons and conjectures did testiffe unto them the contrary, for it was not
likely that Soliman had ever made show, both in his words and actions, to
desire nothing so much as the Venetians friendships: That since then nothing
had happened on the Venetians part, that might alter that quiet, or enforce
them to take arms, seeing that the Senate discreetly mesuring Tomazo Moceniga,
Ambassador for the Commonwealth arrived at Constantinople* being sent,
according to the manner to rejoice with Soliman in the name of the Senate for
the happy success of his wars in Persia, and for his safe return home to
the City, He having kissed Solimans Ajax the Vizier Bascha, who did
oftentimes assure him that their Lord did bear great good will the
Republicke, and was ver^ desirous to maintain that ancient peace and
friendship with it, so long as the Venetians should bear themselves in his
behalf with the like offices of friendship: That Soliman had ever used to
The (...) ex^uses.
keep his word and promise, and thought they ought not fear that h^e would
ever do other-wise. Therefore he began modestly to excuse the matter
concerning Contarens ship, and other things done to the Venetian Merchants
and their merchandise, as matters happened without the great Turks express
commandment, and which should be speedily remedied.

There was then a report at that time, how that the Sophy of Persia had taken
arms, and that he would shortly be in the field whereby the Turks would be

The end of the tenth Book of the fifth Decade.
The Contents of the first Book of the sixth Decade.
THE Turk makes great preparations both by Sea and land to enuade
Christendom. The Venetians are Count Guy de Rangon comes to Venice, being
sent thither by the French King, and is answered quite contrary to his
expectation. Three sundry accidents are cause of war betwixt the Venetians
and Soliman. The Venetians fleet is by force of wind cast upon the Coast of
Puglia, where that of the turks lay. The Venetian fleet being retired from
Puglia, Soliman declares himself their enemy. Doria his policy to enforce
the Venetians to join with him. The Baily Canalis advises the Senate to
reconcile them*selues to Soliman. The Venetian Merchants are stayed, and their
goods seized on over all Solimans Empire. Barbarossa wastes the Isle of
Corfou. The description of the Isle of Corfou. The Venetians determine to fight
with the Turk. A league contracted betwixt the Emperor, the Pope, and the
Venetiams. Doria his delays, and in the end his refusal to join with the
Venetians against the Turks. The Venetians are constant to assail the Turks,
not-with-standing that Doria had forsaken them. The Vifier Bascha councelleth
Soliman to raise his camp from before Corfou having viewed the place. Soliman
seeks the Venetians friendship.

The seege raised from before Corfou. Soliman determines to assail Naples of
Romagnia, and Maluefia. Barbarossa his incursions upon the Venetians Islands.
The Venetians take the Isle of Scardona. The Emperor although he ^ffirmed that
he would make war upon the Turks, is suspected of the contrary. The Popes
diligence to atone the Emperor and the French King. Sundry oppinions in the
Senate concerning either war or peace with Soliman. And lastly the Emperors
Ambassador goes about to break the Venetians Newtrallity, but in vain.



The First Book of the sixth Decade of the History of Uenice.
THE Venetians by the Bashas speech, remaining irresolute and in doubt either
of war or peace, were greatly troubled,

In the mean time sundry rumors were bruted in Constantinople, so^e affirming
that those great preparations for the fleet, was to Sund^y reports concerning
the Turkish a^my.
pass into Puglia, and others said that it was to enter into the Venetian
Gulf, there to ^aile what-so-euer it could find to belong unto the Emperor:
others Cariadine Barbarossa, and others like-wise did threaten the Venetians,
naming particularly the Isle of Corfou.

These preparations were as great by land as by ^ea, and made with great speed,
so as it was certainly thought, that he would set forth more then three hundred
sail, with great store of ordnance, war like engines, and great quantity of all
sorts of munition.

The Venetians being troubled with these preparations, and for diverse occasions
suspecting the Turks faith, non-with*standing that the league made of a long
time with Soliman did still continue, resolved likewise to arm as fast as they
could, to build fifty new ones, they stayed some Venetians, and strangers that
were bound for sundry voyages, to make use of them for the carriage of the
munitions and other necessaries for the fleet; determining if dangers did
increase to arm the number of an hundred Galleis; and for that purpose, they
chose for Gene^all according to their usual manner, by way of lotte, in the
Council of the Preguais The Veretians pr^ arat^ns to (...) upon their gu^rd
against the Tu^ke.
Ieronimo Pesare, a man very skillful in the affairs of the commonwealth, and
cheefely in sea business, who was afterward allowed by the great Council.
But that which among other matters did most troble them was the care from
whence to have means to furnish the expenses which they were to make, their
treasor being wholly exhausted by the late wars, whereby they were to invent
Andrew Capello, Iero^imo Bragadino, Iac^mo Cornare who did each of them aid
the Republicke with twelve thousand crowns, they did afterward entreat the
Pope to permit them to raise two hundred thousand Ducats upon the Clergy of
their state, which the Pope making great difficulty to grant, alleging
sometimes the Clergyes poverty, and then that he could not bel^eue that Soliman
did intend to march against Christendom, they were The Senates carc^ ^rnish
m^anes ^or ^e the expenc^ o^ war.
enforced to raise it some where else, and amid these troubles and perplexities
of mind, they did not forget, following the holy and religious institution of
their

The Imperialls were in no less care and trouble to be assured of the Turkish
forces, whereupon they caused great numbers of Spanish footmen to pass
Imperials aff^aid o^ the Turki^sh (...)
into Italy, to lie in Garrison in the Realms of Sicill and Naples, and in
other places exposed to the enemies arrival; they sent word to Andrew Doria
Prince of Melfi, who at the same time was Admiral for the Emperor on the
Mediterranian seas, that he should speedily make ready his Galleys, and come
into the kingdom The King comes to (...) to go into Italy.
purpose was come to Lions, from whencehe had sent before him into Italy
fifteen thousand Almaine and Gascon footmen* whereupon the Emperor, to divert
these deseines, r^ised in his Country of Flanders an army of twenty thousand
footmen, and eight thousand horse, to enter upon the Frontiers of France.

Now that which most hindered them from providing for the imminent dangers
threatened by the Turks, were the rumors which were spread abroad, how The
(...) forbid Doria to carry the Gal^s o^t o^ G^noa.
that the French had an enterprise upon Genoa, where the Genowaies, being
aff^ighted, did boldly tell Doria that they could not suffer him to abandon his
country, nor to carry the Galleys from thence, which were the sinews of the
Imperial army, because that the two and twenty spanish Galleies that lay at
Barcelona were in bad equipage to put to Sea. During these contentions betwixt
the Princes of Christendom, the Turk taking his advantage thereby (as he had
done at sundry times to molest Christendom, departed with his land army about
the beginning of March and came to Andrinople, where having remained a while,
and spent some small time in hunting whilst other provisions were made for his
journey, he went from thence about the la^er end of June, and other lesser
vessels, under the command of Lufti Bascha Captain General, who represented
the great Turks person: it was not certainly known what commission he had,
nor whither he would bend his course: some said that he was commanded to
assail the Venetians, if occasions were offered: others affirmed the The
vn^rtaine cours^ of the Turkish fl^et, does put the Venetians in (...).
contrary, saying, That he was commanded in no sort to touch any thing that
belonged unto them: but the common report was, that he went to invade Puglia.

Doria in the mean time, being come to Ciuitauechia, and finding the Popes
Galleys to be ready there wen to the Far of Messina, there to make a fleet of
the Galleys of Naples, Sicill, and other places and perceiving, that when they
were all joined together, they were to weak to resist the Turkish forces,
determined, Pesare were best to do, who was already arrived at Corfou with
threescore and ten Galleys.

The General had not till then received any other commissions then general,
and comformable to the Senates intention, still to remain neuter, namely to
hold The Venetians remain neuters betwixt the Imperialls and the Turks
them: to avoid all occasions of suspicion, and to keep themselves far off
from the Fleets: whereunto they added, that he should still keep his fleet
together, and not, if it were possible, lea^e the Gulf to the discretion of
the Turks, least they should hinder the Dalmatian Galleys, and others which
were making ready at Venice, from joining with them, if need should be.

The opinions in this Council were very different (as it often happens in
such consultations) what he had more to do, but at last they resolved to
refer A second General created at Venice.
to which, Captains did for the most part use to govern themselves. They only
concluded to divide the Army, and to create another General, of less
authority then Pessare, so as both of them being together Pessare, should have
the sole command, and the other was to remain in the Gulf, whilst Pessare
should be at Corfou, or any where else. John Vituri created second General.


Giouan Vituri was by the common consent of every one appointed for this place,
who was in great account both for his wisdom and valor. This man having taken
speedy order for his voyage, departed from Venice with some armed Francesco
Pascalic the Prouidator, with certain Galleys which were at Corfou, Nicholao
Bondimiero Captain of the Gulf, and Dominico Contaren Number of the Venetian
forces at Sea.
Captain of the Fusts, so that Vituri had six and forty Galleis under his
command, besides six Fusts, and the General Pessare had four and fifty
Galleis, one Gallion commanded by Bert^ci Contaren, and a great ship of war
governed by Iacomo Armiero.

Now within a while after there arose among the Senators a doubt almost like
the former, by reason of the report that was spread abroad how that the Turkish
Fleet was coming into the I Will of Corfou, and that they had already descried it
from the I Will of Zante, sailing thitherwards amayne, some thinking it fit
thereupon Pessare, if he should find it expedient for the Commonwealth, to
make a fleet of all the Galleys; and to Command Vituri, that if Pessare should
send to him for that purpose, to obey him without expecting any other express
commandment from the Senate. Diverse did likewise reject this opinion, for many
reasons, and propounded for the safest course (if that the peace with Soliman
were broken) to join their forces with the Imperials (who had already sought
it at their hands) and that, as soon as might be; for the more easy defense
of Corfou. This proposition being rejected like the rest, they at last
concluded to refer the whole matter to Pesare, who might join with Doria if
need should be.

The French being aduertized of all these difficulties, and hoping to be able
by new practizes to induce the Venetians to consent to that, whereunto till
then they would ^euer harken, did forthwith send the Count Guy de Rangone to
The French King sends Count Guy de Rangon to Venice.
Venice, who being brought in before the council of Ten (the French
Ambassador not being present) who afterward did the like a part by himself,
having presented his letters of credit from the King, began with great
eloquence to declare the great good will which King Francis did bear to their
Republike, and how highly he did esteem it, then he did put them in mind of
diverse and sundry things which the French Kings had done for the maintenance
and stay of that The effect of the Count Rangon ^it ora^ion to the Senate.
common wealth; from thence falling upon the sundry and particular accidents of
those times, he did persuade them to abandon the Emperors alliance, and to
embrace that of the French King, offering them from him and by his commandment
the city of Cremona, and all the country of Gyradade, so, as by their

This proposition being uttered with great vehemence did greatly trouble the

The Senate being assembled thereupon, the Collodge of the wise men, having
determined to tell the Count Rangon; that the Senate did first of all thank
Propositions in the Senate ^or the answering o^ the Count Rangon.
him for his great and notable offers made unto them, then, concerning the
vinon which he propounded, that the King might have perceived by their actions
past, Mark* Antonio Cornare, a man, at that time highly esteemed, Antonio
^ornare repug^th the sormer prop^sition.
for his eloquence and great reputation, though he were not very old, being of
a contrary opinion, would have them freely to answer the Count Rangon, That
the commonwealth had ever used to keep her promise inuiolably, which was a
matter worthy and beseeming a Prince, and that therefore the same being united
with the Emperor by a new confederacy, could not harken to any other Leonardo
Eme one of the wise men of the council, a man of authority, and well
experienced in matters of importance both at home and abroad, rose up, and
began Rangon it answered according to the opinion of Cornare.
to answer to every point of Cornares speech: But neither his authority nor all the reasons which he all eadged to the contrary, could keep them from
answering Rangon in the same manner as Cornare had propounded.

In the mean time news were brought to Venice how that the Turkish fleet was
arrived at Valona, and that passing along through the Channel of Corfou, it had
saluted the castle with ordnance shot in sign o^ friendship, according to the
use and manner of war, that the castle had in friendly sort given them the
like salutation: and how that Solimon had neither in that Island nor elsewhere
committed Pesare, in acknowledgement thereof, and under pretense of peace and
friendship, should send some captain of his Galleys to Soliman, to use means
to discover some of his deseignes; but it was rejected, for fear least the
Turks would interpret it sinisterly to their advantage, and least the
reputation of the Venetian forces should thereby be diminished with them, or
else give them some occasion to make some great and unreasonable demand: but
they were within a while after freed of that care, by news that they received,
how that Iacomo Canalis, going to Constantinople to execute the office of Baily
in steed of Nicola Justinian, and being come to Nouobazar, was by Solimans
commandment brought back to the camp who could satisfy them in all things.
At this stay stood the Venetians affairs at that time, neither at open war,
nor assured peace, Three sundry accidents caused war betwixt Soliman and the
Uenetians.
all matters being full of fear and suspicion, when as unluckily and unlooked
for, three sundry accidents happened which did cast the Republike headlong
into war with Soliman. The first was that of Simon Nassi the Zaratin, who
commanding a Dalmatian Galley, did unfortunately meet with a small Turkish
vesselladen with victuals which was going to Valona, against which (because it
would not obey Solimans haughty courage, and all his Bashas, yet nevertheless
making show to Solimans discontent for the first accident.
bear it patiently because he would not perhaps at that time interrupt his
other deseignes, he determined to send Ianusbei the Dragoman to Corfou to
complain to the General Pesare, how that through the insolency of a mean
captain of a Galley, the peace betwixt them had been violated and infringed,
and to demand to have the author thereof punished, and the damages, amounting
to more then thirty thousand Ducats, to be repaired. Upon the neck thereof the
second accident The second accident worse then the first.
happened. There were four captains of galleys at the same time at the guard of
the channel of Corfou, to wit, Iusto Gradonico, Micaele Grimani, Iacomo de
Mezze, and Ieromino Micaele: these men so soon as they perceived those armed
vessels to come toward them, which were two Galleys and one Fust, conducting
the Turkish Ambassador, without taking any farther notice of them, they
fiercely charged them, so as the Turks being amazed betook themselves to
flight, and supposing that they could not soon enough escape from them, sailed
as fast as they could to Cimera, a barbarous nation and enemy to the Turks:
whereupon, they were badly entreated there, and al of them committed to prison,
and among the rest this Ianusbei. This exploit did greatly discontent the
General Pesare who in some sort to moderate the fact, did suddenly send
Francisco Zene captain of a Galley to Cimera, to use means with a good sum of
money to redeem Ianusbei, the which for Solimans knowledge, he was provoked by
some of his servants to take speedy revenge thereof, yet nevertheless he
would not for that time harken thereunto, but sent for the Baily Canalis to
come before him, unto whom he greatly complained of the officers of the
Republike, who did not daily cease to commit deeds clear contrary to the
desire of peace and good will, which he had at his arrival assured him that
the Commonwealth did bear unto him, at the last he seemed to be content that
the Baylife should expressly send some of his servants to Corfou, truly and
particularly to understand how matters had passed, whereupon he suddenly sent
Alessandro Vrsino thither who was then with him.

Soliman in the mean time continuing his purpose to assail the coast of
Puglia, caused great number of horse to be landed on the territory of Ottranto,
who scouring the whole country brought away men, women, and all sort of
cattaile, with other moueables, filling the whole country with fear and
terror.

Doria in the mean time having manned eight and twenty light galleys with
soldiers and mariners, coming to scour the seas nere to Zante and Zeffalonia,
took diverse Turkish vessels, which being laden with victuals, were going to
Valona, then sailing toward the Gulphe he arrived upon the sea of Corfou, at
Doria his incursions canseth the Turks to suspect the Uenetians.
the very same instant in a manner, that Ianusbei being chased by the Venetian
Galleys, landed at Cimera, whereby he had his part in the booty, and carried
away the empty Turkish vessels, which did much increase the Turks hatred to
the Venetians, and made them to suspect that they had some secret intelligence
with the Imperials.

The General Pesare being aduertized of Barbarossas departure from the
confines of Zant, where he had remained to assure the victuals which came from
Constantinople to the camp, and of his sailing toward Corfou, did think it a
very fit occasion for himself to make use of the liberty which the Senate had
given him, to join both the fleets together, whereupon he resolved to enter
into the Gulphe and to join with the General Vitturi, meaning nevertheless
by all means to avoid meeting with the Turkish galleys: But being on his way,
and driven by a contrary wind, he was carried to sea-ward before the wind, to
those The wind carries Pesare with all the Venetian forces near to th^se of
the Turks.
quarters where he was to meet with that which he had most of all avoided: for
having sailed a long time with the whole fleet, and about night being come
near to land, he was councelled to ankor there, to pass the rest of the
night, which Alessandro Contaren the Prouidator, did unawares strike upon a
Turkish galley (this was an Imperial galley, prepared for the great Turk, if
he should desire to come to sea, and was commanded by Bustan Raise) those
within it The third accident occasioned by the taking of Solimans Galleys.
having, in the Italian tongue, demanded of the Venetians, whose vessel that
was which was so near them, and they replying that it belonged to the
Venetians, did ask them the self same question, who they were, but they
making no answer, used all means to escape thence, and then on a sudden shot
off a piece of ordnance: Contaren being then moved with disdain, and spurred
forward by a zeal

Contaren was by some reprehended for this deed as though being carried away by
a particular desire of revenge, he had enterprized that which he knew to be
against the commodity and service of the commonwealth, by executing that
hostile act upon the Turks: yet nevertheless others in excusing him said;
That He had more then any man else foreseen all those disorders; by means
whereof, to avoid all occasions, he demanded to have the army conducted into
Candy, seeing that the Turks had passed as friends through the Channel of
Corfou.

The General after this exploit passing forwards on his way, came very nere to
the coast of Puglia, where they descried an infinite number of fires, and heard
at the same time sundry shot of ordnance. They thought at the first that it had
been those of the country, who having descried the Venetian fleet, and not
knowing what vessels they were, did give warning to the inhabitants round about
to retire The Venetian fleet upon the coast of Puglia.
themselves into the strong towns: but they soon found the contrary, for it
was a warning to the Turks that were there, speedily to embarke themselves (as
they did) and to fall into order of battle before the Venetian fleet.

Then was there great confusion in the Venetian army for the unhoped for
arrival The confusion of the Venetian army when it saw that of the Turks to
be nere them:
of the Turkish galleys; on the one side danger was very nere, and their doubt
very great, whether they were best to escape by flight, or dispose themselves
to

Matters remaining in this confusion by reason of these irresolutions, either
to abide, or to be gonne, it happened that when the General commanded to turn
the Prowes, and to return toward Corfou, it was done in a manner in disorder,
so as all of them preparing with speed to get forth of that danger, five
Venetian The Venetian ^leet lo^seth four Galleys taken by the Turks.
galleys tarried behind, either because they had not soon enough turned their
Prowes, or for that they were not so light as the others, four of them fell
into the Giouan Baptista Mirchouich of Pago, al-be-it it was farther behind
then any of the rest, did nevertheless by chance escape that danger, for
carrying in her flag the cressent or half moon, they thought it to be a
Turkish galley, and thereby, being not meddled with, it found means afterward
to escape to Ottranto.

Now this latter exploit caused Soliman wholly to resolve to make war upon
Soliman resolves to make war on the Venetians.
the Signory of Venice, who was before that time halfe-minded so to do by
reason of the precedent actions, whereby he perceived the small affection that
Doria written to Pesare coming to his hands, assured him of that which he most
doubted: Doria had (as it was thought) forged that letter, and found means to
have it fall into the Doria his policy to enforce the Venetians to join with
him.
Turks hands, to make them believe that he had some secret intelligence with
the Venetians, and by that means to set them at ods, thereby enforcing them for
their safety to join with him, for the which purpose, passing along at the
same time almost nere to Corfou, he had craved conference with the General
Pesare, meaning expressly more then once to hold long discourse, that he might
cause the Turks to enter into some suspicion.

All these exploits being known at Venice did greatly trouble the Senate,
where the opinions nevertheless were different, some blaming the indiscretion
of those who by their rashness had thrown the commonwealth headlong into a
great and dangerous war, contrary to the Senates intentions, others,
publicly affirming the contrary said, that they had done well and discreetly,
according to the rule and discipline of sea affairs, and the reputation of
their army, and after sundry other reasons propounded on both sides, they
concluded to tarry for aduertizements from the Baily, to understand
particularly in what manner the Turk had taken those things which were past:
and all their determinations against those who had offended, were deferred till
then. Canalis commanded by Soliman ^o send to the Venetian Senace.


The Baily within a while after, by Solimans commandment sent Alessandro
Vrsino, who did wholly resolve them of all that they desired to know, and sent
them word, sharply to punish those who had violated and broken the peace, and
to make it apparent that whatsoever had been done was not by the Senates will
or consent, and that by so doing, Ajax the Visir Basha, did put them in hope of
the continuance of the peace. Upon this advertisement they resolved to write to
the General to send the Zaratine captain, Iusto Gradonico who commanded those
Galleys that were for the guard of the Channel of Corfou when Ianusbei was
pursued, with all the rest whom he should think had offended in that action,
with their legs and hands bound to Venice: as for the Prouidator Contaren they
commanded The Senates resolution upon the Bailies eduertisement
him to sail with his Galley to Zara, where leaving both it and his office, he
should come to Venice and present himself before the Magistrate of the
Auogario. Some of the Senators were of opinion to call home the General Pesare
likewise, for to purge himself of that matter, because that all errors
committed

The Senate not consenting to call home the General did sendbacke Vrsino to
Soliman at that time to be acquainted with that which had been concluded
against the Prouidator, and the captains of the galleys, because they would
not have the Turks to think that what they had decreed, was done rather to
satisfy them, then for their love to justice. Therefore they enjoined the
Baily to demonstrate the Senates sound and sincere affection, and how desirous
the Venetians were to continue their friendship and peace The Senates answer to
the Baily.
with Soliman; and that for the better testimony thereof, they would shortly
send an express messenger unto him with particular instructions of what had
passed, and within a while after, Vincenzo Grimani, Procurator of Saint Mark,
was chosen for that purpose.

But before Vrsino camebacke with his instructions to Valona, Soliman, who
after Barbarossas pursutes, notwithstanding that he had promised the Baily to
attempt nothing til Vrsinos return, did nevertheless determine to return to
Soliman resolves to make war upon the Venetians.
Valona, and to turn all his forces both by sea and land against the
Venetians, and especially to assail the Island and fort of Corfou, it being at
the same time very commodious for him.

It is reported that Ajax the vizier Basha, sought by soundry reasons to divert
Soliman from this resolution, by showing him that in so doing he would increase
The vizier Basha his reasons to divert him from his resolution.
the Imperials forces, who were deadly enemies to the Ottomans, with whom the
Venetians should be enforced to join for their own defense and safety:
besides, Doria had taken so many small vessels laden with victuals: But
Barbarossa being greatly incensed for that Doria had taken and sunk twelve of
his Galleys at the Merleres, sought to revenge himself upon the Venetians,
saying that it was They, who had given means, and advised the Imperials to
assail his Galleys near to the Channel of Corfou, and in their sight almost,
having secret intelligence with their enemies, furnishing them with havens,
victuals and all other commodities, so as by these reasons he caused Soliman to
condescend to his council. The Venetians are imprisoned and their goods seized
upon over all the Turkish Empire.


Now so soon as he had resolved to make war upon the Venetians, he wrote to
all places of the Ottoman Empire, where the Venetians had most traffic, that
they should imprison their persons, and seize upon their goods, and especially
at Alexandria, whither three great Galleys were come upon his word.

Soliman came in the mean time from La Valona to Butrintotto, right over
against Corfou, the more commodiously to pass over his forces from thence into
the Island. Barbarossa was already gone thither with part of the fleet and some
thousand horse to spoil and scour the country (which he did.)

The news thereof being brought to Venice (which they had before that time
suspected) did greatly trouble all men: for notwithstanding that the castle of
Corfou was thought to be strong enough to sustain all the furious attempts of
the Turks, they nevertheless feared, that they should not long be able to
resist so Description of the Isle of Corfou.
mighty an enemy, and defend their own State exposed in so many sundry places
to his mercy. The Isle of Corfou lies right over against the Venetian Gulphe

This Island had belonged to the Venetians more then an hundred and fifty
years, and they did carefully keep it, as most fit for the conservation of
their dominion at sea, it being accounted the Bulwark of Italy against the
forces of Barbarians: Babon di Nalda was governor thereof, being accompanied
with diverse The number of soldiers and munition in the Island.
Venetian Gentlemen. There was a strong garrison of Italian soldiers in the
castle to the number of two thousand, and as many of those of the Island all
good soldiers: and besides the Rowers of four Galleys which were lest there
for the guard of the Island, great store of artillery and munition; and for the
avoiding of all confusion, every man knew what he had to do, which made them
without any fear at all to attend the arrival of the enemies army.

The Senate fearing a long seege, and the sinister accidents which do commonly
accompany it, did resolve to fight with the enemy to cause him to raise his
camp, being invited thereunto by sundry reasons, because they knew first, that
so long as the Turkish fleet should remain whole, furnishing the camp with
men, of whom they had great numbers, that the Isle of Corfou and all the rest
should remain exposed to infinite dangers, not for any other cause then the
long continuance of the war, all the forces of the Republike being consumed
The Senate determines to fight with the enemy.
and they in danger besides, to loose some portion of their dominions: next,
that which did incite them to hazard the fortune of a battle, was, their own
great fleet of an hundred strong galleys, with the means to increase it,
because thing against the Turk, especially of the Pope and the Emperor; and
not to accept of them at that time, the Commonwealth should seem wholly to
have forgotten her own safety, and that of all Christendom.

The Imperials had fifty light galleys at sea, with as many other great armed
vessels, the Pope had four galleys there, and the Knights of Malta some other.
The forces of the Imperials, and the Pope.
These forces being joined to theirs, they hoped to chase away the Turkish
fleet, and if they could not free Corfou from the seege, yet at least to open a
way to some great and notable exploit, whereupon* having certain notice that
the enemies army was come to Corfou, and thereby war declared against them,
they determined to write to Marke-Antonio Contaren their Ambassador in the The
Venetians remonstrance to the Pope.
with the Senates resolution, he should declare unto him the greatness of the
danger, in the common cause of Christendom, and the speed which it behooved
them to use, against the common enemy.

The Pope having understood the Senates resolution seemed to be highly pleased
therewith, saving that he did desire nothing so much, as during his Papacy, to
The Popes answer to the Venetian Ambassador.
see all Christian Princes united together against those Infidels, who in the
mean time that the Christians had particular quarrels one with an other, were
so mightily increased, as they now did threaten to ruin them.

Thereupon, he did not only confirm the offers and promises that were made

This league being resolved on, it was concluded by a General consent of all
men to arm two hundred light Galleys, and the greatest number of A league
betwixt the Pope the Emperor and the Uenetiane against the Turk.
ships of war and other great vessels that they could, and in them to embarke
fifty thousand footmen, and four thousand horse; But because some
difficulties seemed to arise concerning the distribution of that expense, and
upon other Articles, and that the time in the mean space did urge them
speedily to send away

It was sollemnly published in Saint Peeters Church, where Gasparo Contaren,
the Venetian Cardinal, celebrated mass in the presence of the Pope, and the
The league is published at Rome, and at Venice.
whole College of Cardinals: the like was afterward done at Venice, with
prayers in all Churches, to give thanks unto God for that he had united the
Christian Princes against the Infidells: and for the execution of that which
had been The Venetians preparations for the army.
speedily cause them to be made ready, which sailed all of them under the
conduct of Boudumiero, captain of the Gallion: so as in a short space, all
things were ready on the Venetians part.

Andrew Doria, who lay at Naples, having intelligence of that which had been
Doria delays to join with the Venetians.
concluded at Rome and Venice, that he should meet at Brandiza to join with
the Venetians fleet, alleging sundry excuses, some times that he would sail
toward Marseilles against the French nauall army, then, that he would go to
Genoa, to new man his galleys, and to make provision of other necessaries, did
by all means prolonge his departure, notwithstanding that Gasparo Bassalu the
Venetians Counsull at Naples did earnestly urge it, by declaring unto him the
importance of the Isle of Corfou, which was to be preserved and defended from
the danger wherein it was, in doing whereof, notwithstanding that he was to do
the Emperor service, he should nevertheless purchase great glory and
reputation, the enterprise being executed under his conduct and command as
General of the army: As also, for that he was obliged thereunto by his promise
often made to the Venetians, upon which they had not feared to commit into his
hands all their forces, which were very great, and such, as the assurance of
their Estate by sea, did wholly depend upon them.

Doria, not being moved with all these reasons, answered that they should
Doria his answer and departure toward Genoa.
have accepted his offers at that time when occasion was offered of
overthrowing Barbarossa, when with a part of his army he passed through the
Channel of Corfou, so, as neither the Popes letters which he wrote unto him
with his own hand, nor the arrival of the Emperors Ambassador at Naples, who
for that purpose came thither expressly from Rome in post, could in any sort
alter his determination, but he speedily departed from Naples to go to Genoa,
saying that he would acquaint the Emperor with what had passed, and there
attend his commandment. The departure of Doria, and his manner of proceeding
did greatly trouble the Venetians, not so much for that their hope was
frustrate of being able to break the How Dorias departure did trouble the
Venetians.
Turkish army, as for to see themselves under vain promises, deceived by the
Imperials: Doria his departure, and the report that Barbarossa was coming into
the Gulphe with an hundred galleys might have persuaded them to countermand
their Generals not to go to Brandiza; the Senate notwithstanding, to show
their constancy in matters determined and resolved upon, and to preserve the
reputation of their army, which would have The Venetians constancy.
been much blemished, if they should have seemed to depend wholly upon Dorias
councels and actions, after sundry opinions, resolved to alter nothing of that
which had been determined, but made a new request to the Pope, that he would
command the Count of Anguillare to sail with the Churches galleys and those

The Turks in the mean time had landed five and twenty thousand men and
thirty pieces of ordnance in the Isle of Corfou, and builded four Caualliers
round about the castle, to make them equal to those within it, and to beat
down their defenses, having first wasted the whole Island, cut down the
fruit trees, burned the country houses, and led away as prisoners al those
whom they found in the Island which had not saved themselves in the castle,
many nevertheless escaped into Saint Angelos castle, the sytuation of the
place being able to guard them: Then having begun the battery and perceiving,
that by reason of the long distance of the place, where they had been enforced
to build their Caualliers, for The Vizier Basha, councelleth Soliman to raise
his seege.
and being come upon the brinke of the castle dike to view the place, reported
to Soliman that the sytuation of the place, and the fortifications were such as
their was no hope in a long time to do any good there, whereupon he councelled
Soliman to raise the seege, and to retire his armies, which began already to
seele great discommodities, as well by sickness, as by the small store of
victuals that was brought thither: as also because that winter drew nere, a
very unfit season for such an enterprise, and that the longer he tarried there,
the more he should loose his reputation, being afterward enforced to discampe
fortunate success which was wont to follow the wise and discret councels of
the Ottomans: that he should send away his two armies by sea and land to
Constantinople, there to refresh them which were much weakened by sundry
accidents, to the end they might the year following with better success
enterprise some exploit more assured and generous.

Such was the opinion and council of Ajax the Vizier Basha, yet nevertheless
to preserve their reputation feigning some other deseignes contrary to that
which he spoke; or rather envying Barbarossa his greatness, and seeking to
disgrace him by reconciling the Venetian Commonwealth to Soliman, he called
for the Venetian Baily, who had still followed the camp, and told him, that if
his Soliman had sustained at that seege, and make a demonstration, how that
whatsoever had happened, was not by the consent or appointment of the
commonwealth, he had so handled the matter, that the seege should be raised
from before Corfou, and his countrymen should recover peace and friendship, as
in times before with Soliman: Ianusbei the first Dragoman did afterward
affirm that the same came from Solimans self, as that did manifest which
soon after ensued, the Baily having leave given him to send one of his
followers to Venice for that purpose, who was conducted in safety by two Chiaus
to Castel-nouo.

But Soliman almost at the same time not tarrying for any answer raised his
Soliman dis lodges fr^ before Cor^
camp, and having shipped his ordnance and al his soldiers, sailed toward
Constantinople after that he had continued his seege for ten days space, and
carried away with him more then fifteen thousand souls into bondage. The Isle
of Passu very nere to Corfou, with Butrintor, seated on the firm land on
Albanias side a nere neighbor to it, tasted the like harm and loss.

Barbarossa departing with the army from before Corfou, sailed toward Preueze,
Soliman not permitting him to remain upon those seas with an hundred galleys
to scour the coasts of Puglia and Sicily.

It was supposed at that time, that the chiefest cause that moved Soliman so
suddenly to raise his camp, was certain news from Persia: because, that two
Ajax had discovered in that enterprise of Corfou.

The news of the enemies discamping did infinitely rejoice the Venetians, and
general processions were made for it, with prayers in Churches, and sundry
Soliman de mineth to a sail Naple in Romagn and Malu^
alms given to the poor Monasteries and other devout places of the city.
Soliman seeking to molest the Venetians in sundry places, had at the same time
commanded Cassin the Sangiack of Morea, that assembling all the soldiers round
about, he should beseege Naples of Romagnia and Maluesia.

The Republike had held under her dominion diverse of the principal towns of
Morea, the fruitfullest country of al Grecia, and the most renouned for the
great number of virtuous men that are issued from thence: it had lost in the
former wars against Bajazet Ottoman, grandfather to this Soliman, Modon and
Coron; it still possessed these two, being seated in a most strong place, and
filled with inhabitants that did greatly affect the Venetians.

Naples is seated on a small Promontory, the which coming forth from the The
discrip^ of Naples ^ Romagnia.
land makes a great and safe haven, and is in such sort encompassed by the
sea, as of the four parts thereof, the therd is environed therewith, and the
land side has a very high and difficult going up, so as there is but one
little narrow way to go unto the town, which lies betwixt the hills side
and the sea; and the outward banks are so high and uneasy, as it is
impossible for the galleys to batter the walls, or to land those that are
within them: the entry likewise of the Haven has a very narrow mouth, so as
but one galley at once can enter i^to it, which may be easily defended by the
ordnance of a little castle, seated on a small rock, in the midst of the sea,
right opposite to the entry, some three hundred paces off, which can on all
sides beat upon the vessels that will come nere to the haven, and yet it self
not to be battered from the land, nor by the galleys, none but small boats being
able to come nere it, by reason of sundry points of rocks which lie round about
it.

Maluesia is likewise seated in the same Province, and more near to the
Description of Maluesia.
Cape of Mailla, upon a mountain, or rather a small rock of eight hundred
paces, which being divided from the firm land, extends it self in a long
and narow form to sea wards: so as this town being seated on an high place is
environed on all sides by the sea, there being none other entrance into it but
by a bridge, the waters near thereunto not being in any sor^ foordable by
reason of their exceeding depth, and as nature has furnished that place with
such strength and natural safety, it has likewise given it wholesome
fountains, with a good and fertile soil, and a goodly plain on the top of
the mountain, from whence victuals may be provided for fi^ty or three score
men, who are sufficient for the guard thereof.

Vittore de Garzons, in quality of Baily; commanded Naples, a man of ripe
years, Vittore de Garzons gouern^r of Naples.
and of great experience, by reason of the great offices which he had borne
both by sea and land. This man by his valor and good council, and by the
trustiness of the inhabitants did not only defend the place from all peril
and danger, but likewise by the sallies of his cauallery, did assure the
country nere adjoining, and greatly molest the enemies.

Cassin, who for to obey Soliman was come into those quarters with as great
forces as he could raise, having sounded those of Maluefia both by promises
and threats, returned toward Naples, and having perceived the difficulty of
the enterprise, and being without suffitient means to take it by seege or by
assault, he dislodged

Barbarossa on the other side with three score and ten galleys, and thirty as
well Galeots as Fusts given him by Lustimbei, having scoured the Islands of the
Archipelago belonging to the Republike, took some of them which had not means
of defense, either for want of soldiers, or for that their sytuation was not
strong enough to sustain his attempts, such as were the Islands of Scyro,
Pathmos, Ligina, and some likewise belonging to particular persons, as Nia,
proper to the family of the Pisani, Stampallea to the Quirni, Paros very famous
for marble, The Islands taken from the Venetian^ by Barbarossa.
subject to the family of the Venieri, with diverse others, Barbarossa pursuing
his

Diverse Venetian captains after that the enemies had raised their camp from
before Corfou, propounded, that the Venetian fleet should follow them to stop
these incursions and disorders which every man did already foresee, by that
means to preserve those Islands, from whence they received many commodities,
and chiefly great numbers of men for to man their galleys, yet nevertheless,
they had respect to the time, and to the enemies forces, from whom Pesare
taking with him a great number of soldiers from the garrisons of Dalmatia,
should with certain galleys go and beseege Scardona, and Vitturi with other
some should sail to Obrouazza.

Scardona, lies nere to Sebenic, and therefore they thought it fit to take it,
for the safety of that fort, and to take away the great discommodities which al
those of the country round about might receive from thence, it being possessed
by the enemy: it was circled with very weak walls, and had two small castles:
whereupon, Scardona taken by the Venetians.
so soon as the Venetian troops drew nere, the Turks that were within it,
after some small resista^ce, did yield to the discretion of the general
Pesare, who notwithstand^g that he had ^termined to receive them, on condition
to give Francisco Salom^ne for the guard and government of that place,
determining at that time to fortify it, yet nevertheless having afterward
considered, the great difficulty of so doing, and the expenses of entertayning
a garrison amongst so many of the enemies fortes, with the hurt which would
redound if it we^ again recovered by the Turks, he thought it fittest and
most profitable to race the castles, and to satisfy himself, for having taken

As for those of Obrouazza, the Turks that were within it, though they were
The Turke^ of Obrouazzo re^ire (...) (...) (...).
but few in number, did valliantly for a time defend the place, afterward,
being enforced to quit it, they retired into the castle, the which whilst the
Venetians made al things ready to beseege, the galleys were countermanded by
the General, having had a new commandment from the Senate to sail with the
army to Corfou, as resolving above al things to guard that place, which was of
so great importance for them. The winter season being much spent, the exploits
of war did for that year cease, all men expecting what would be the
beginning of the year following 1537. Soliman seemed to be desirous of peace
with the Venetians, whereof An. 1537*
the Vizier Basha by his commandment made a motion to the Baily Canalis,
persuading him to cause the Ambassador to come to Constantinople who had
Soliman seems to desire peace with (...) Venetians.
been already appointed for that purpose, unto whom he promised to give a
pasport, and good enterteinment* But by how much the Turks did use gentleness
and curtezy, contrary to their fierce and haughty nature, by so much the more
did The Venetians suspect hi^*
the Venetians suspect their speech and actions, doubting that under these
treaties, they sought not a firm peace, but how to separate them from the
Emperors friendship, and to break the practizes of the league.

The Emperor Charles on the other side made show that all his thoughts were
bent to make wars upon the Turks, so as he often times said, that he greatly
desired The Emper^ in show desire^ to make war on the Turk.
to march against them in person, to have a share in that glory, craving none
other recompense then that; being willing to have whatsoever should be
conquered from them, to be joined and united to the dominions of the Venetian
commonwealth, the which he termed the very bulwark against the Turkish
forces, and that he might the better* intend that enterprise, he had consented
to a truce with the French King in Flanders. Such in outward appearance were the
discourses of the Emperor and his officers in Italy, who made a show to be very
careful of His officers confirm his desire.
preparing al things for the wars. Doria promised to have his galleys ready
in a short space, and to join them with the Venetian fleet, assuring them that
he would in that war do some notable service to Christendom, and to the profit
of the Signory. the Venetians in the mean time to war, who by altogether
intending the league, might wholly break it with Soliman, and thereby be
enforced to join with him, who was more desirous to make war upon the French,
to assure unto himself the State of Milan, then upon the Turks.

Sundry signs of the Emperors secret purposes were discerned: his long delay
The great signs why men did suspect the Emperor.
to answer the Senate concerning that which it had written to him about the
league, then his refusal to make a general truce with the French, and lastly
the report which was current, how that by means of a Spaniard, nephew to the
viceroy of Sicil, and prisoner to the Turks, he made means by fair promises
to purchase the friendship of Barbarossa, and namely, that Barbarossa passing
by the Far

As for the French King, all men did perceive how desirous he was of peace, and
that the Venetians should be in league and amity with Soliman, that he might
see The French Kings designs and end:
them freed from all constraint of being united to the Emperor, to the end that
if he should happen to make war upon the Emperor he might easily draw them to
his party; although he did greatly desire to be friends with him, hoping
thereby to obtain the Duchy of Milan for the Duke of Orleans his second
son, perceiving very well that he could not get it by force, whereupon he did
willingly harken to all motions of peace that were propounded to him.

Francisco Iustiniano by the Senates command went to him, not in quality of an
Ambassador, but only as a Gentleman of Venice, who was honorably entertained
and welcomed by the King. The Pope likewise to this end, sent both to the The
Pope sends to the Emperor and the French King to make them friends.
Emperor and the King, to every of whom the King answered that he desired
nothing so much as peace: and whereas he understood that the Emperor propounded
a meeting at Narbona, there to consult thereon, he speedily sent the Cardinal
of Lorraine and the great Master of France thither, with ample instructions to
conclude a peace. But all these assemblies proving vain and to none effect,
the Venetians were greatly perplexed. For some, rejecting that which did make
them to Sundry opinions of the* Senate.
doubt and fear, did promise to themselves that being joined with the other
Christian Princes, they should be able not only to defend their State from the
Turks, but likewise to daunt and overthrow their pride, whereupon they were of
opinion to embrace the league, and to continue the war. Whereunto they were the
more provoked by an opinion that al Germany was wholly ready to take arms
against those Barbarians, being incited thereunto by Ferdinand King of the
Romans to revenge himself on Soliman, who had a long time molested him in
Hungary. Upon this hope, time hasted away, they not answering the Bailies
letters, for that they could not resolve on the motions of peace made by the
Turk, and upon the Bashas particular discourse to the Baily, the which did
greatly displease the other Senators who opposed themselves against all
propositions that were made The reasons of those who desired peace with Soliman.
to examine the conditions and State of the present affairs, and afterward to
see how they could make war, with what forces and means they could continue
it: that the public treasure was so exhausted by the last wars on the firm
land, as the Republike had more need of long quiet, then to enter into a new
war, more dangerous then all the former; and for to show that their hope upon
the aid of other Princes was badly grounded, they were to call to mind, that
the Isle of Corfou by Dorias means, who derided their deseignes, had been
almost

Diverse other reasons were propounded to direct them from war, which were
answered by those of the contrary opinion, how that they did not abhor peace,
but that they did in some sort seek to provide for the necessities of the
times, if they should happen to maintain war, and that which kept them from
writing The resons of those that were desirous to join with the league and to
make war upon the Turks.
to Constantinople, was because they would not give any cause of iealozie and
suspicion to the Christian Princes* (...) least they should after-wards grow
could in their (...) (...) war^: that to make (...) great have to send an
answer, was to discover their weakens to the Turk, and to make him become more
insolent in the conditions of (...) (...): (...) they were not to make account
of expenses, in regard that they were to arm howsoever, and being armed to
treat of

In this manner did the practice of the league continue, by delaying the
affairs of Constantinople. But at the last, by means of diverse, who did not
cease to solicit them to send an answer, and not wholly to give over that
treaty, and to take What the Senate propounded to write to the Baily.
arms, it was propounded in the Senate to write to the Bailey, still to
entertain the Basch^ Ajax, and to tell him how that the commonwealth had
great cause to complain of Soliman, who without being provoked had broaken the
peace, and came like an enemy to enuade the Isle of Corfou, not tarring for
Vrsinos return, who by his express command was sent to Venice, with promise
to attempt nothing Soliman, whose enterprises it had never sought to hinder,
but had inuiolably kept there promise with him, ever behauing themselves as
newters: If the General ^esare had met with his forces upon the coast of
Puglia where the Turkish army lay, it was by mere chance, having been driven
thither by force of the winds. Their drift that propounded this was, to have
the Baily by this discourse to use means to discover the Turks meaning
concerning peace, and if he should see any good likelihood thereunto, then to
begin to motion it.

This being thus propounded in the Senate, three days were spent in the
resolution The proposition takes none effect.
Senators, two voices wanting for the ending of it, the whole matter remained
unresolved; the promises of Princes having made such an impresion in all men,
as they wholly relied thereon.

Don Lopes the Emperors Ambassador having notice of this irresolution, hoping
that the Commonwealth would make a more strict alliance, with the Emgeror, The
Emperors Ambassador uses means to break the Venetians neutrality.
began to solicit the Senate (as Doria had already done) to Unite and join
their nauall Armies, and to be no longer newters, but openly to declare
them*selues enemies to the Turks. But the wisest and best advised among them,
meaning not to be carried away by words abused by vain and idle promises, did
The S^ts answer to the Emperor.
that for diverse respects they could not pass on any father, and namely
because that the French and the Turks seeking their friendship, they had
answered them, that they would not therein give them satisfaction, by reason
that the Senats meaning was by showing themselves newters, to keep their
promise with

At this answer the Ambassador held his peace, not making any farther reply:
but within a while after coming into the Senate, he made another request unto
them, which was, that for fear least the French should come down into the
State of Milan, they would raise the six thousand foote-men to defend it, which
they were bound to furnish by their last accord, for which the Duke of Vrbin
having taken speedy order, who was their Captain General, they replied, that
there was no need to cause those troops to march any farther, which were
appointed only for the defense of the State of Milan; seeing that the French
were still making war in Piedmont, and that so soon as they should pass the
river Sefia, it would be the^ time to urge their promise, which they would in
no sort break.

The end of the first Book of the sixth Decade.
The Contents of the second Book of the
THE Venetians do hasten the fortification of the Islands and Sea towns of
their jurisdiction. Andre Doria is chosen General of the Army of the league.
Solimans great preparations against the Venetians. The Venetian Senate resolve
to make war upon Soliman. The league concluded andresolued on betwixt the
Pope, the Emperor and the Venetians against Soliman. Barbarossa wastes the
Islands of the Archipelago; He comes into Candy, with his retreat thence.
The Senate sends supplies into Candy. The Sangiach of Morea summoneth the
cities of Naples and Maluesia in Morea to yield. The Turks, wast and Spoil
Dalmatia, whither the Senate sends supplies. The Turks take certain Castles
in Dalmatia. A motion made in the Senate for the recovery of

The Army of the league resolves to go and assalt the Castle of Preueze.
Doria favors the Army of Barbarossa Doria is unwilling to give Barbarossa
battaill. The General Capel complains for that they did not fight. And
lastly, Dorias retreat to Corfou, to the great grief and discontent of the
whole Army.



The Second Book of the sixth Decade of the History of Uenice. The Venetians
diligence to fortify the Islands against the Turks.

THE Treaty of peace being wholly broken, and no hope remaining but in arms,
dilligent and careful provision was made in Venice of all things necessary for
the war, great numbers of vessels, and soldiors, munitions and victuals to
furnish the Islands, and other towns on the Sea coast. Those of Naples and
Maluesia made suit to have their Garrisons augmented, and especially to furnish
them sufficiently with victuals and munition, for want of which

The Isle of Candy made the like request, where certain troubles being raised
The Isle of Candi^s offers to the (...).
and sundry scandalous speeches given forth that they would yield to the enemy,
if he should come thither, for fear of sack and spoil, as it had happened
in the Islands of thy Archipelago, the chief towns of the Island sent
Ambassadors to Venice to clear them*selues o^ that imputation, and to let them
know that the error of some of base condition had occasioned those reports,
rather by cowardice and indiscretion, then for any evil will: and therefore
they did offer to spend

The Senate did willingly give ear unto them, and with fair speeches, and
great promises, they were sent back again; whereupon, the General was
commanded to send five and twenty Galleys to the Isle of Candy, under the
conduct of the Prouidator Pascalie, who had like-wise commission to carry
soldiers and victuals to Naples, and to leave four Galleys there for the
guard of the city. They did in like manner furnish the Castle, and Isle of
Corfou, with all things necessary. Dalmatia, sundry companies of light horse
drawn from Greece The Venetians are uncertain what way the Turks would take.
and Croatia, were sent thither to guard the country against the enemies
incursions. But that which did trouble them, was the uncertainty which way they
would take, there being sundry speeches thereof: whereby they were at one time
to provide for all the places which they held upon the sea, and likewise to
assure Patria in Frioul, because the report was, that Soliman in person would
be in his land army which made them fear that he might come thither.

In the mean time the last conclusion of the league, was most ernestly
solicited, whose forces were supposed would be very great, which was the cause
that no Andrew Doria chos^ General of the Army^ (...) the League.
more mention was made of the treaty of peace, the which for a time lay dead.
The Venetians, to please the Emperor, had chosen Andrew Doria General of the
whole army, and the Pope, in favor to the Commonwealth, had appointed Marco
Grimani Patriarch of Aquileia to command his Galleys, a Venetian by nation, and
of a noble and rich family. But there rested to conclude the portion of

The Emperor at the last fearing least that the delay of the conclusion of The
Expense d^uided betwixt those of the League.
the league, might breed some coldness in those who were most foreward to
war, and might in the end cause the Senate to give ear to the propositions
of peace, and that thereby he might be enforced alone to sustain all the
Turks attempts,

Whilst these treaties were made in the Court of Room, Genesino who at The
Venetians acquainted with Solimans preparations for war are exhorted to peace.
Constantinople served as Dragoman for the Common-welth, arrived at Venice,
bringing letters from the Bayley, and was enjoined by the Vizier Bascha, and
the admiral, to advise, council, and exhort the Venetians to harken unto
peace, he did afterward acquaint them particularly with the great warlicke
preparations which were made in sundry places of Solimans Empire: he told them
besides, from Ajax the Vizier Bascha, that he did greatly marvel why they had
not answered his former letters; that he did nevertheless bear the self same
good will and affection to the Republike; that a way lay open unto them for
peace, if they would send their Ambassador to the Port of the great Lord, to
justify their actions past, and by the satisfaction for losses to use means
to appease Soliman, who otherwise was ready to make invasion upon them.

The arrival of this Dragoman and his new offers, did cause sundry effects in
the Senate, for it did more animate those that craved war, and strengthened
the other in their opinion which required peace. Therefore the Senate being
therevppon Marc Antonio Cornare, who had at other times maintained in that
place, That it behooued them to join with the League, and to The Senate
determines war against Soliman.
make war: and by Marco Foscare who was one of the Council, and by his skill
and long experience in the managing of public affairs, had purchased great
authority, it was determined by the plurality of voices, according to the
former resolution, not to write unto Constantinople at all, but only for to
make war.

Therevppon, within a while after, they sent ample commissions to their
Ambassadors at Rome, for the conclusion of the league, and for the signing to
the Paul the third, the Emperor Charles the fifth, and the Republic and Senate
of Venice, as well offensive as defensive, against Soliman King of Turks:
whereby the Confederats did promise, to make war upon the Turks with two
hundred Galleys, a hundred armed ships, and fifty thousand Italian footmen,
ten thousand Spaniards, and twenty thousand Almans, with four thousand five
hundred horse, armed after the Bourgonian manner, to which forces were added a
sufficient quantity, of artilery, munition and other necessaries, which should
yearly be ready about the midest of March.

Of these Galleys, the Pope armed thirty six, the Emperor four score and two,
and the Signory of Venice as many, under the command of Vincenzo Capello their
General, the Emperor was bound to furnish all the ships of war, and the
Venetians to lend the Pope Galleys ready furnished with all necessaries.
Concerning Ferdinand King of the Romans, was vnder-stood to be comprehended in
that Confederacy, whom the Emperor did promise should wholly ratisie it, and
would cause him to leuy an army a part to assaille the Turks in Hungary. The
most Christian king was therein likewise comprehended, so soon as he should
declare that he would accept of the chief and most honorable place, which they
had reserved for him: wherein the Pope was to appoint with what forces he
should be present there. That the Pope should likewise use means to draw the
King of Poland, and the other Christian Princes to this Union: and if that any
contention should arise among the Confederate Princes Andre Doria, General by
sea and the Duke of Vrbin by land.
concerning the League, the Pope was to decide it, and to make them friends.
Andre Doria was (as has been said) General by Sea, and the Duke of Vrbin for
the enterprises of the firm land.

As for the conquests which should be made by the common arms, it was
mentioned in a scedule apart, that every of the confedrates should enter upon
the same state, which had belonged unto him: so as if they should conquer the
Empire of Constantinople, it should belong to the Emperor, without prejudice to
the claims of the Republike, and so in like manner of the rest, but for the
Apostolic sea was reserved the preeminecne of some State worthy the merit
thereof, and according to the quallity of the conquest that should be made.
Concerning other things whereunto no man laid any claim, that every of the
Confederats might The Venetians seeke^ to draw the King of England to the
league.
under the Dominion of the Knights of Saint John of Jerusalem.

In this treaty there was no mention made of the King of England: The Venetians
neuer-the-lesse supposing that they might draw great aid from that King, who
was a Prince of exceeding great wealth and authority, and had in time before
showed great affection to their Commonwealth, went about by means of Ieronimo
Zuccate their Secretary, resident in his Court, to dispose him to favor the
league. But the King, disdayning the matter for that he had not been
particularly The French King (...) to enter (...) the League.
invited to the treaty thereof, would by no means endure to hear of it, but

The Venetians then, the league being concluded and established (as has bin
said) commanded the General Capello, that if the Turkish fleet did come into
the Gulphe he should keep aloof toward the Leuant, that he might with more
ease pass into Sicily, where he was to join with the Confederates fleetes, as
well to assure those quarters, as to hurt the enemies, if occasion were
offered. to the occurrences of the affairs, and not to limit him what he had
to do, which might peradventure be clean contrary to reason, seeing that
war is managed by the sight of the eye: alleging for example that which
happened the year before, by limiting the General Pesare what he should do,
which has occasioned sundry disorders, and at last the war against the
Turks: yet nevertheless, the other opinion was followed, because they would
not hinder nor delay the union of their Army with the Confederates.

Now the Senates greatest care, was to find ready money for the great expenses
The Senate uses means to get money to d^fray the expenses of the w^res.
they were speedily to be at. By means whereof it was decreed, that all those
who

They did moreover create three Pocurators of Saint Mark, Ieronimo Marcello,
Bernardo Moro, and Iulio Contaren, in regard of some loan of money. As for the
goods of the Clergy, they could never make any use of them* for although the
Pope had permitted the Senate to alienate of Church goods by reason of ten in
the hundred, to the worth of a million of gold, and afterward calling back
that favor had given them leave to raise the said sum upon the revenue of
the

In this great want of money the Senate went very slowly foreward in the
propositions that were made unto them of raising the said sum, peradventure
for fear of displeasing many people, and cheefely those of the Champaine
country of the firm land: whereupon it rejected a proposition which was made
(although it would have amounted to a great sum) to sell the medows of the
communalties, of which there are store over the whole state, in a manner, of
the Republicke on the firm land.

The Senate nevertheless in this great necessity did spare nothing that was
necessary A treaty of peace betwixt the Emperor and the French King is broken
off.
for the wars. Peace at the same time was treated of betwixt the Emperor and
the French King, which each of them made show greatly to desire, and they
concluded to send their Agents for that purpose to Canus which lies betwixt
Perpign an and Narbona: but having spent all the time there in contestations,
the assembly brake up without any resolution, by reason of the distrust that
the one had of the other, which did greatly grieve the Venetians, because that
by those Princes discord, the war against the Turks would prove more
difficult, the likelihoods thereof being already discerned. For the Marquis of
Guasto, The Emperor declares that he could not take arms for the (...).
whom the Emperor had in the beginning appointed to serve in the enterprise of
The Pope resol ^th to go to Nice to ato^ the Emperor and the French King.
Turks and for to assure his own States from receiving any hurt from their
Army. The Pope being infinitely sorry that the enterprises against the Turks
were not foreward, and it concerning him, as the head of Christendom to
procure peace and union among Christian Princes, resolved, seeing that his
letters and Ambassades had been to no purpose, to attempt to prevail by his
presence, supposing that his authority and entreaties joined with reason, might
cause them to The Venetians were very glad of this proposition, because that
the desired effect of peace falling out successfully it would much augment the
forces and hope of the League, the which with out that help would be very
poor and weak: but on the other side they were very sorry for the loss of so
much time, which was to be spent in the provisions for war, and in the union
of the Armies: because they well perceived that the Emperor coming from
Barcelona by sea to Nice, Doria must needs be employed in that journey, at
such time as he should be busied in ordering the fleet, and sailing against the
enemies, who were already with great forces upon the Seas: on the other side
they feared, that the same meeting What mo^ued these Princes to grant the
enteruiew at Nice,
their iealozies being equally alike to purchase the Popes favor, by allowing
all his Counsels and deseignes: for his Holiness ever fearing to advance the
one of them more then the other, would not suffer any of them to grow more
mighty by the forces and authorityes of the Sea Apostolic, and especially in
Italy.

Some likewise did think, that the Pope was not moved to procure this
enteruiew Octauio Farneze marries the Emperors bastard daughter.
did afterward manifest, having at that assembly concluded the marriage of the
Lady Marguerite the Emperors natural daughter, and widow to Duke Alexander of
Medicis, with Octauio Farnes^ the Popes Nephew, whom the Emperor invested with
the State of Navarre.

Notwithstanding that the Venetians were possessed with these doubts and
suspicions, the Senate nevertheless did not cease to do the duty which the
time re Ambassadors chosen at Venice to be present at the Assembly of Nice
Nicholao Tepulo and Marc Antonio Cornare, to be present at that assembly to
make known the Senates good will, and withal, how greatly it desired peace
betwixt Christian Princes, and also for to make war upon the Turks.

Now the Pope departing from Rome in the month of April according as it had
been determined, came to Parma, where he celebrated Palme-Sonday in the
Cathedral Church, staying in that City and at Placentia certain days,
expecting the Duke of Sauoyes resolution concerning the City of Nice where the
The Pope denied entrance into Nice.
directly toward Nice, where at his arrival, the entry into the City was
denied him, the Governor thereof saying, that he held that place for the
Prince, and that the Duke his father was not to dispose thereof, where upon
the Pope was enforced to retire himself into a Monastery of Moncks being not
far from thence, whither within a while after the Cities keys were brought
unto These two Princes refuse to set one another at Nice in the Popes presence.


The Emperor and the French King came suddenly into those quarters, the one
being lodged at Villafranca and the other at Villanoua beyond the River Var.
Yet the Pope could never procure them to meet in his presence, because they
both determined not to grant the Popes desire in that meeting, which was to
make them good friends and to establish a firm peace betwixt them, yet
neuer-thelesse he procured the prolongation of the truce, which was already
confirmed, for the space of ten years, hoping that in the mean space, the
hatred, which was so deeply rooted in their hearts, might be worn out; that
being done, every one went his own way, the Pope toward Rome, the Emperor
toward Barcelona, and the King iournied to Auignion, from thence to return
into France.

But the King being come to Auignion, was adnertized that the Emperor was
desirous to confetre with him; and that for the same purpose he entreated him
Enterview of Emperor and king at Aigues* Mortes.
to come to Aigues-mortes where he would land; which the King willingly
granting, went thither, where both their majesty's did carsse each other, and
the Emperor went and dined with the King in the town, with great demonstration
of brotherly friendship: Then the king wentinto the Emperors Gallie, where they
had long conference to gether, whereupon all men hoped shortly to see a firm
peace established betwixt them, but no effectas thereof could ever since be
discerned: but on the contrary the Emperor perceiving himself to be assured,
by the confirmation of the league with the Venetians against the Turks, not
alone to sustain their attempts, began to make greater demands to the King,
accorping War renewed betwixt the Emperor and the King.
to the treaty of Madrill, the King on the other side promising to himself,

Now whilst Christian Princes stood upon terms of making war one upon
another, the Turk had in the winter time prepared all that which was necessary
for his coming forth into the field, who like-wise remembering that which did
belong to his own religion (for those Barbarous people have some impression of
divinity in their hearts,) did before his departure celebrate with great
solemnity, The Turkish feasts of Baieran.
the feasts of Baieran, (those days are celebrated and reverenced by that
nation even as Easter is by the Christians) he caused prayers to be made in
all his Soliman was in person, and Barbarossa near to him, who held the rank
and grade which Lufti had done not long before, who was deprived of his place
of Bascha, and confined into Macedon: But the whole army being not yet well
accommodated, Barbarossa in the mean time, with six score sail, went to
wards the Archipelago, Barbarossa spoiled the Islands of the Archipelago.
as to an assured booty to assail the Islands, the which being defended the
year before, had as then no Garrisons that were suffitient to make defense,
whereby it came to pass that Schiros, Schiaroc, Schiati, with certain others
of less fame being first sacked and spoiled fell into the power of the

There happened a memorable accident at the Taking of Schiati; for the
Islanders and those few soldiers that were within it, having constantly
sustained the first assaults of the Turks building upon the assurance of the
situation of the Castle, seated upon an high place; some of the chief amongst
them were desirous, either through fear or a premeditated malice, to yield
themselves unto the Turks, but fearing peradventure to be punished for their
baseness and treachery, if the matter should not fall out according to their
desire, did run to the Palace where Ieronimo Memio governor of the place lay
hurt in his bed, who by his valor giving example to his soldiers, had beaten
the enemies from the walls, Barbarossa, as insted of recompencing those
villains, he did by death chastise their infamous wickedness. Then having
increased A worthy recompense.
his forces, he sailed into Candy to get more booty there, or else to view the
strong places of the Island.

The Senate upon the report which was current at Constantinople, how that the
army should sail into Candy, had carefully provided what-so-euer was necessary
for the guard of the Island, against so mighty an enemy, by sending thither,
money, soldiers, munition and victuals, and Giouani Moro to command there,
during the war in quallity of Prouidator General, a man very well
experienced and of great valor and discretion. The conservation of that Island
was thought to be of very great importance, as well for the Nobillity thereof,
being descended

Now Moro being come into Candy, did assembly the General council of all the
Nobility of the Collony in the City of Candace, to dispose them by some honest
exhortation constantly to attend the enemies coming.

If ye consider (said he) the quiet of your state, where at this present, ye
do Moro his oration to the gentlemen of Candy.
and commodity of all things as grow here, or else are brought hither from the
countries near adjoining, I do assure my self that this remembrance will be
of greater force with you, then the efficacy of all my words can be able to
persuade you to do all you can, and to be sparing neither in expenses,
trauaill, nor life itself, to keep either your selves, or children, from
changing your present condition, and to fall from the top of so great
happiness, into a Gulphe of misery and calamities, as it is like to happen, if
this Island falling into the Turks power (I tremble with fear only to think
thereof, and to tell you of it) ye should be enforced to go and dwell
elsewhere, to forsake your country, so great they should come hither to that
end, what-like-lihood is there that they will busy themselves in a long and
difficult enterprise, perceiving so many mighty fleetes of the Christian
Confederat Princes at sea, which may on a sudaine assail and fight with,
either their fleet, or some of their towns: for they are no less careful
for the preservation of their own, then they are to offend and conquer other
men's. I know, and am expressly commanded from the Senate to acquaint you with
it, how highly above all other things it esteems the preservation of this
State, and your safety, for which, they are ready to expose all their forces,
witness the provisions which of it own proper motion, it has speedily sent
unto you. You then, whom these dangers do more nearly concern, and for whom
we

The Prouidator had skarce made an end of his exhortation, when all of them The
Prouid ators speech is applanded by all men.
arose, applauding his speech, and promising with great offers, to employ all
their power, care and diligence in the defense of the Island: He did
afterward make the same remonstrance to the people of Candy, exhorting them to
their own The Candio (...) preparations for their defenc^.
of Italian foot men, and the rest were sent to the guard of sundry passages
and places of importance to stop the enemies progression. The Gentlemen of
the Island and the feudataries of the Commonwealth, did proceed therein with
such earnestness and courrage, as the family alone of Calergians, which is one
of the chief and ritchest of the country, did raise more then five and twenty
thousand armed men.

Barbarossa pursuing his iourny came near to the Island on the North side,
betwixt Standia and the City of Candace, and without casting ankor ran along
the Island as far as Rettima, where making but a short stay, because that the
Barbrrossa comes into Candy.
Cities ordnance did greatly hurt him, he sailed to La Suda, having there
found better abiding then in any other place, by reason of the Haven which is
great and safe, whose entrance was then open to him, it being not fortified as
it is now at this day, he landed great numbers of his people to scour and
spoil the Country.

This City was in old time called Cidonia, and reckoned among the chief of
the Island. Andre Gritti was Governor thereof, having with him about a thousand

Barbarossa hoping for better and more fortunate success in another place,

This place is seated in another corner of the Island on the west side, being
weak and ill provided of defense notwithstanding that a particular magistrate
sent from Venice does usually make his abode there. From thence the enemy might
easily pass into the I Will of Scarpenta, possessed at that time by the Turks
and distant from thence some forty miles.

The enemy finding that place to be abandoned, took away certain pieces
Barbarossa bi^ etrc^t from Candy.
of ordinance and other munitions, spoiling all the Champaigne near adjoining.
But fearing least the Venetian Fleet coming to the aid of Candy would enforce
them to come to strokes, the Soldiers being speedily embarked and all the
Galleys being united together, they sailed toward

The Sangiach of Morea did at the same time by Solimans command beseege The
Sangiach of Morea sum month Naples and Maluesia to yield.
Naples and Maluesia. He having encamped before those two towns, wrote to the
Governors and people thereof that they should speedily yield, promising to them
great rewards in so doing, and on the contrary, severe punishment, if they
should continue to make resistance: that Soliman had sent him thither
commanding him by no means to stir from thence until he had reduced both of
them under his obedience: that their succors were sarre off, and their hope
vain, long to hold out, and therefore that it was best for them to fit
themselves to the time and to the fortune of the van quisher.

The Governors and all the people, resolving bravely to defend themselves, as
Resolution of those Inhabitancs.
well by reason of the situation of the place as for their hope that the
Venetian Army would shortly relieve them with victuals and necessary
munitions; made none answer to his letter, but betook themselves more
carefully to the Guard of their towns.

And because they in Naples wanted water, the horssemen that were Stadiots a
hardy and warlike nation, making diverse sallies, being followed by the Italian
Harquebuziers did provide for that want. The General Capello having
intelligence of this sieege, and being very desirous to relieve those valliant
and

But during these exploits those of Dalmatia were in like manner greatly
aflicted The Turks wast Dalmat^
by the Turkish Army, who entering into the Country made an horrible spoil
there, carrying away, men, women, little children, and all sorts of cattle,
burning the houses, and putting the whole Country in fear and confusion: so as
Camillo Vrsino, Governor of the Province, had thought to have abandoned all
the other Cities, and that the Soldiers should retire to Zara to assure it, as
the chiefest and easiest to guard, fearing that to attempt to preserve al of
them against such great nombers of enemies, would be a cause to expose them
all to great dangers.

The Senate did not allow of this opinion, esteeming much more, besides the
loss of so many Cities, this note of infamy, to have at once without any
fight given place unto the enemies insolency, and abandoned so goodly a
Country: wherefore, using all means to preserve and defend it, it determined
to make a new leuy of horse and foot, to weet, twelve thousand footmen and
fifteen hundred horse, hoping with these forces to be able sufficiently to
assure the Province: and also to increase the Peoples affection toward The
Venetian^ aid sent into Dalmatia.
the Commonwealth, and to encourage them bravely to defend themselves, they
appointed fifteen Gentlemen who should speedily be transported thither for the
guard of Zara, S^enic and Catarra, with thirty men a piece* Lodouico Badoario
was sent unto Zara, in quality of Prouidator General of Dalmatia, with
commandment nevertheless, not to go forth of that City without the Senates
permission and leave: the Inhabitants like-wise of Dalmatia were permitted to
send their wives and children to Venice for fear of the enemies.

In these occurrences, the Prince showed the Senate, how that every man was to
help his country in a time so miserable, and alleged unto them for example
that which had been performed and done in the last wars of the firm land,
in which (said he) the Citizens love toward their country, the union and
readiness of their help, had been of so great force, as in dispight of bad
fortune, they had drawn the Republike forth of so many calamities, and had
restored it to her favor, splendour and dignity, wherein, (God be thanked) it
now continued. That the dangers present, were no less then those that were
past, having to do Dalmatia with the new provisions thereof, did monthly
mount to more then five and twenty thousand crowns: that it behooued them to
glad the people who were over pressed with sorrow, and amazed, and to comfort
them by the presence of those, unto whom the conservation of the state did
belong, to show that they were desirous to be sharers in the dangers, and
troubles, which should be offered. Let those then (quoth he) who were
appointed depart with speed, and go to execute that which is commanded them,
and let others, unto whom some public charge shallbe committed, freely accept
thereof: He that is moved thereunto by his duty, increases his own glory, and
he that makes none account thereof, The Princes authority, and the force of
his reasons, did confirm diverse, who would have freed themselves from taking
any public charge upon them.

The Turks in the mean time, the more that they vnder-stood the great
preparations which were made to prevent them in Dalmatia, the more they made
The resolution of the Turks in Dalmatia.
have to come and assail it: And for their better weakening of the Venetians
defenses, they resolved at one time to assail all the Principal towns, to
the end that the one might not help the other: And having assembled great
forces at Cluin, a town under their obedience, they entered with four thousand
horse Nadin yields to the Turks.
chief Castle, seated upon those confines, Sebastiano Sagreda being Governor
thereof, who had an hundred and fifty Italian foote-men with him, unto whom
the only sight of the enemies gave such fear and terror, as they basely
yielded on condition to have their lives saved, without making any proof of
their valor, or use of the places situation, and retired to Zara, whether they
brought more fear then comfort, by exalting the enemies forces to cover their
own shame.

The like befell the Castle of Laurana which was commanded by Vittore Sorance
with like number of soldiers as in Nadin, who having for one whole day
sustained The Turks take the castle of Laurana.
the battery, fled away and was taken by the enemies: but Zemo^ being abandoned
by the I^alian footmen, was guarded and defended by certain Sclauonians, whom
some Venetian gentlemen of the family of the Venieri, unto whom it did belong,
had placed there.

The Turks having put Garrisons in Nadin and Laurana, went up and down
scouring the country even to the gates of Zara, so as none durst come abroad
although the enemies camp lay far off. The Cities of Antiuare, Dulcina, and
Sebenic, were in the same trouble. The Sangiach of Scutari went with great
forces of foot and horse to Antiuare, and did encampe betwixt the sea shore and
the walls, and had sent part of his forces to beseege Dulcina. Succors sent to
Antiuare.


But Bondulmiero, captain of the Gulphe, having notice thereof did speedily
relieve the Antiuarians, the like did the General Capello within a while
after, by sending them soldiers and munition, so as the Basha despayring of
any speedy or happy success in his enterprise, determined to raise his seege
from before Antiuare,

As for Sebenic, part of the forces that were assembled at Cluin, went thither
at the first, and after the taking of Nadin and Laurana, many soldiers did go
thither, who never came near the city, because their number was not comparable
to a The Sibenssans brave resolution.
true army, but went scattering up and down, and spoiled the country. The
Sibenssans having intelligence of the enemies coming, resolving bravely to
defend and keep the town for the Venetians, did assemble themselves together
in the marketplace, where they all swore a sollemne oath that they would not
yield to the enemy, but endure all extremity rather then falsify their faith.
But the Turks being not able to execute their deseignes upon the other towns
so easily as they The Turks leave Dalmatia, and go into Hungary.
upon Hungary: whereupon so soon as they had reduced all their forces
together, and made up the body of an army, leaving three thousand men for the
guard of the frontiers, they marched toward Bossina, from thence to pass into
Hungary. The Turks departure forth of the confines of Dalmatia did greatly
ease the Venetians, and freed that poor people from much calamity. But as the
alteration of affairs do easily alter men's deseignes, the governors and
captains of that Province, who did badly digest the wrongs which they had
sustained by the enemies, and most of all because an infamous imputation was
laid upon them for the loss of certain towns, and for suffering them
without resistance to scour and The Proposition of the captains in Dalmatia.
which did offer it self by reason that the enemies camp was far off) to
attempt the recovery of those towns which the Turks did possess; wherewith
acquainting the Council of Ten, they did affirm that the forces which were
in Dalmatia, were sufficient for the execution of that enterprise: As also,
because that if the castles nere to Zara were not recovered, the city would be
still in fear, having such mighty enemies to their near neighbors who not
stirring forth of their Garrisons, did hold it in a manner beseeged.

These propositions were enterteined in the Senate with great attention, where
the desire to be revenged on the enemies caused the more credit to be given
unto The Senate and the Duke of Vrbin, allow this proposition.
to those Italians that were in Dalmatia, and certain numbers of Italian horse
to the Greeks and Stradiots, it would be an easy matter with those forces to
enter into Bossina, and seize upon some good town, which might open them away
to greater conquests. That it was better and more profitable to make war in
their enemies country then in their own, and that there were but three
thousand horse in garrison at Bossina.

This advise carried with it a goodly show, and a certain valor attended by
Constantino Ca^zza, Secretary to the Council of the Preguais, was sent into
Bauaria, who by means of Duke Lewis, a great friend to the Commonwealth, did
in a short time perform that he was enjoined, so as those soldiers having
received their first payment, marched forthwith into Friull. Camillo Vrsino
having in the mean time assembled forth of the garrisons of Dalmatia four
thousand foot and five hundred horse, and taken with him some pieces of
ordnance, went and beseeged Obrouazza.

The taking of that town was of importance, it being a place of retreat for
the Turks, where they were wont to assemble themselves to enuade the Venetians
confines. The castle was neither strong nor well manned, whereby the enterprise
was thought to be as easy as profitable. The castle then, having The Venetians
take Obronazza.
been battered two days one after an other, the third day the soldiers went
to the assault, where after some small resistance, they entered by the ruins of

Vrsino being Master of the place, perceiving that he could not fortify it but
with great difficulty, nor afterward keep it, but with much trouble,
commanded it to be razed down to the foundations. But the Turks being
aduertized thereof, came back on a sudden and found the Venetians ruining off
the castle, who being possessed with fear and terror by the Turks unlooked
for arrival, did forsake their work and retired in disorder toward their
ships, being The Turks arrived causes the Uenetians to quit Obrouazz^ and
there other enterprises.
followed at the heels by the Turks, who in the end would have broken and
defeated them had not captain Camillo de Monte the Neapolitan with certain
troops made head against them, whilst the soldiers were embarked.

As these deseignes had at first increased men's courages and hopes, even so,
the condition of the affairs altering in a short time, there was no more
speech of the other enterprises of Nadin, Laurana, Clissa, and Ostrouizza,
greater difficulties being daily discovered concerning them, those likewise who
had showed most heat and forwardness toward the Turkish enterprises, began
by the same accident to grow could, and especially the Duke of Vrbin; who had
propounded it, did allege diverse impediments, saying that the number of
soldiers which he had first craved was not sufficient to enuade those places,
and The difficulties allead^ed by the Duke of Vrbin.
withal to keep the passages against the enemies, and that a great number
would need so great a quantity of victuals and other provisions as it would be
an hard The Senate resolves to send home the L^squenets, to pass on no
farther.
expedient to quench that fire then to kindle it, in regard that all foreign
aid did deceive them. These reasons were allowed of, and the Lansquenets were
sent home into their country.

The Turks after this exploit returned into Hungary having first refreshed
their Garrisons, which remaining quiet the country was for a time at rest.

All men were in the mean time very desirous to see what would become of those
naual armies: Barbarossa departing from Candy retired toward the confines of
Negrepont not attempting any thing, for fear of meeting with the Christian
armies. The General Capello having great number of galleys, one gallion, and
diverse ships of war, the Patriarch Grimani being joined with him with the Popes
The Venetians ^aual army, and that of the Pope, joins ^ogather.
galleys, did wait for the Spanish nauall army which was reported every day to
arrive, but none effect thereof was to be seen, consuming to the great grief
of all men the fittest time and season for Marine actions.

The Emperor did promise, speedily to send the 30. Neapolitan galleys which lay
at Messina, to Corfou, and fifteen ships of war with three thousand Spanish
footmen conducted by Don Ferrant de Gonzaga, Lieutenant for the King in
Sicily, who (because the Duke of Vrbin by reason of his indisposition could not
come to the army) was to supply his place: he promised moreover, that so soon
as he should come to Barcelona, he would forthwith send away Doria with two and
thirty galleys, to sail to Corfou to join with the other army. M^n did doubt
the Emperors promis^s.


Diverse things nevertheless caused men to doubt that it would not so come to
pass: first, because that the Emperor before his going to Nice, had often
said, that it was impossible for him at one time to assail the Turks and the
French, and the assembly of Nice being broken off without any effect, by reason
of the Camillo Vrsino had sent to leauy soldiers in the Kingdom for the
defense of Dalmatia, but under seigned excuses refused (contrary to the treaty
of the league) the General Capello a certain quantity of corn for the
entertainment of the army. Diverse others deeds and words gave just occasion of
suspicion, that the Emperor sought nothing else but to let time ship away
unprofitably, not being willing, or else able, to make war upon the Turk as
he should, hindering on the other side as much as he could, the Venetians The
Emperor^ desci^ne.
from agreeing with them, for fear least the whole burden of the war should
light alone upon himself.

The Emperor in the end seeking new means of assuring himself, propounded to
the Venetians the renewing of the capitulations of the league, the which
although it was a superfluous matter, in regard of the short time since the
agreement was made at Rome, they did nevertheless satisfy him therein,
because they would not omit any thing which might serve for the union of the
armies to let all men know their great desire to pursue the war.

The Capitulations being confirmed, the Emperor commanded Gonzaga, who was not
yet gone, to sail to Corfou, where he arrived with the Galleys only, having
left their ships behind to the end (said he) that the residue of the foot
forces Don Ferra^ de Gonzaga comes (...) (...)
which were not yet come thither might have shipping. But his so much desired

The armies remaining in this manner at Corfou, the Patriarch Grimani being The
Patriarch Grimani his enterprise upon the castle of Pr^ueze.
impatient of so long stay there, without doing any thing, departed thence with
six and thirty galleys, and sailed toward Saint Nicolao de Ciuita, and having
intelligence by the way, that the castle of Preuese was not very well guarded,
he resolved Paul Justinian did show the way to the rest, where all of them
being entered, he landed his soldiers and artillery in the plain field a mile
of from the castle, and because the greatest hope of the happy success
consisted in speed and diligence, without spending time in making trenches and
rampires, he began suddenly to batter the castle-walles with the artillery,
himself being come on shore to hasten the business, and to continue the
battery without intermission. should come and ouer-run them, whereupon they
resolved on a sudden to re-embarke The Patriarch saileth of his enterprise.
the soldiers and the ordnance, and without any farther attempt to return to
Corfou.

Grimani his valor and speed was highly praised by some, and condemned by
others, who said, that he should have used more mature deliberation, and not
rashly to have exposed himself to so great a danger, his journey nevertheless
was to purpose, for the viewing of the sytuation of the place, and for
what-soeuer should belong to such an enterprise, and was the cause that within
a while after, an occasion of a goodly victory was offered, if the Venetians
had known better how to have used it: because that Barbarossa having
intelligence that the Patriarch had

Now news being brought to Corfou which way Barbarossa directed his course,
and that he had tarried at Preuese, the captains opinions were very different
concerning that which was to be done. Some said it was best to send to
Messina; whither Doria was come from Spain, for to hasten his coming to
Corfou: others, that it was not good to depart from Corfou, but there to expect
him, because he did mean to come thither shortly, it being neither for the
profit nor safety of the Commonwealth, to abandon the castle of Corfou and the
guard of the whole Gulphe.

Doria at the last came to Corfou upon the seventh day of September, but not
Doria comm^ to Corsou.
with all the galleys, for he had some of them in Spain for the guard of those
seas against Pirates, and other some were gone into Afric to the aid of Thunis
and Goletta, there being some suspicion that the Moors and Turks of those
quarters would raise some tumults. At his arriual they began a new to consult
on that which was The army of the ^eague resolves to go to Preueze.
to be done, where by the General consent of all men they resolved to go to
Preuese to fight with the enemies. The meaning of our men was, so soon as they
should come thither, to land the troops, and to use al means to become
Masters of the castle, and to build a fort right over against it, to keep the
entry of the Gulf Francisco Doria, and in the other four, all the light
vessels divided in this manner: The Patriarch Grimani sailed foremost, and the
General Capello last of all, and in the midst, were Doria and Gonzaga. The
whole fleet stayed a The order of the league army.
while at the Gomenizzes, tarrying for the Emperors other ships, but they
making no haste to come, and the Generals having a prosperous wind, sailed
toward

The Turks having notice that the Christian army, which departed from Corfou,
did sail directly toward them, were greatly amazed, as those who thought The
Turks do wonder at the Christians boldness.
themselves safe enough in that haven, and could not think that those armies
would so soon have been united together, or that being united, they would
have resolved to seek them out to sight with them: whereupon, wondering at
their sodainnesse, they were in great doubt what they were best to do: some
thought it a goodly matter, for that after they had scoured the seas all the
summer, and greatly endammaged the Venetians, they had retired themselves
without any loss into the Straight of Gallipolis, being able (as they said) by
drawing the war out in length, to consume the Venetians, and to separate the
intelligence and forces of Sundry opinions of the Turkish army.
the Confederates, and by that means, purchase to themselves a more assured
victory: whereupon they councelled Barbarossa not to stir forth of the Haven,
where they might live safely, by reason of the castle, and the Straight of the
Channel, with commodious abundance of all things: others with a barbarous
insolency not being able to endure that the Christians who were wont to fly
from them, should now shut them up into an haven, made a motion presently to
go forth with the whole army to fight with them, saying, that to continue so
shut up, besides the great infamy that would redound unto them thereby, it
would not purchase them any safety, by reason that they might be kept in longer
then they thought, and thereby be deprived of all commodities: How that Soliman
would undoubtedly commend that valliant and generous council, rather then to
endure that his enemies should come and defy his army in his own havens and
under his own fortes, to the contempt of the reputation of his forces and
happy fortune, and of the Ottoman Empire. Barbarossa his considerations upon
those sundry op^nions.


Barbarossa was a man valliant and courageous, and accustomed to the hazards of
fortune, who had often favored him, he knew likewise how that diverse of the
great Turks Port did envy his greatness, and that the retreat from Corfou
and the unfortunate issue of that enterprise, whereof he had been the chief
author, had caused them to use sinister speeches of him, whereby he feared the
diminution of his credit, and the losing of the great Turks grace and favor:
besides, he had some hope, that the captains of the Christian army,
notwithstanding that they were nere them, were not fully resolved to fight: and
that which confirmed him in that opinion, was the treaties of agreement which
Doria had already practiced with him.

These things made him resolve to go forth with the army, and promised him The
number of Barbarossas slect.
great reputation for such an exploit. He had in his fleet, a hundred and fifty
vessels which used the oar, and a certain number for fail, wherein were
comprehended, diverse Galeots, Fusts, and other smaller vessels. Resolving then
to go forth and to show himself to the Christian army, not to seek, nor
refuse the battle, but as a politic and well advised captain, to use means
to discover the enemies Barbarossa sends sorth fifty Galleys to discover the
Christian army.
behauior and deseignes, he would before his going forth with the whole fleet
send forth fifty of his galleys, to sound the meaning of the Captains of the
league, and to discern whether their intention was to fight, and in what order
they did set forward.

The Confederates nauall army did at the the same time sail toward Saint
Maure; but those in the tops having discovered the enemies that were come
forth, aduertized the captains, who altered their course, sailing against them
toward the entrance of the Gulphe of Larta, from whence they came: whereupon
by altering their course the order of the fleet was likewise changed, so as the
General Capello was in the vauntgard, who from as far as he could descry the
Turks vessels causing those of his battaillon to double the banks of Rowers,
did speedily The Turkish Gallics are in a manner put to^out by the army of the
league.
set forward against the enemies and by discharging diverse Canons upon them,
enforced them to return from whence they came, the which they did speedily
(being come forth only to discover and not to fight) as they fell into some
disorder,

Doria who sailed in the battle, so soon as he perceived it, did set
forward, all men supposing that he did it to keep the enemies from entering
into the mouth of the Haven, who being beaten both in poope and flank, could
not choose but be vanquished or sunk: But so soon as he came nere to them,
he sent commandment through the whole fleet (no man knowing the cause why) that
Doria in savor to the enemies causes his army to retire.
altogether should sail to the Ducall Cape in the Island of Saint Maur, to the
great astonishment and grief of all men, whereupon, men did boldly and openly
thorough the whole army use reproachful speeches against him, for that by his
means they had lost the commodity of ouer-throwing a great part of the enemies
fleet without the loss of one only man.

Being come to that place the chief of the army began a new to consult
onwhat were best to be done: some were of opinion to send part of their galleys
to assail the castle of Lepanto, affirming that Barbarossa would neither
himself come forth nor yet suffer his galleys to leave the Gulphe without
urgent necessity: and if he should come forth, it would be in their own power
to take what advantage they pleased to give battle; others thought it fit to
return speedily to Preuese, because that the Turkish army not stirring forth
of his place, they might assail the castle, and if it did come forth they
would be enforced to come to battle

This opinion was allowed, as being thought fi^rest for the honor of our army,
and for the assurance of breaking that of the enemies: and thereupon the army
of the league, departing from Saint Maur on the eight and twentieth of
September, sailed forward in the same order as at the first. But the wind
having failed them by the way, which till then had ever favored them, they
were enforced because they would not separate the galleys from the ships to tow
them with great discommodity and delay, by means whereof the Turks had time
to come The Turks come forth of the Gulphe and do put them selves in battle.
forth of the Gulphe, and to order themselves in battle as they desired,
contrary

We have now (said Doria) caused the enemy to dislodge according to our desire,
it is now in our power to fight, but certainly it behooves us well to
consider of it: it is a matter of very great importance, and repentance
afterward will be in vain. We are to consider, that by giving battle, we
commit to Doria his remonstrance (...) the whole army.
the hazard of a short time not only this army, but likewise the whole
reputation of the Confederate Princes, and if I may so say, the wealth and
safety of all Christendom;

Capello made answer, that the Senate had commanded him to fight with the enemy
when occasion should be offered, and that at the same time so fair an one
being Capello his answer.
presented, he was to obey that commandment, and to beseech God that the
Grimani seemed to be of the same mind, notwithstanding that in the beginning
he had councelled them to go to Lepanto.

Doria perceiving that all men consented to a battle, Be it so the^ (quoth
he) and I beseech God to favor our enterprise, and in so saying, he did
speedily cause the battails banner to be erected, and gave order for whatsoever
was necessary, saying that with his own battaillon he would be the first that
should charge the enemy: All men were joyful when they understood this
resolution, for the great hope they had of victory, and in regard of the small
forces that were in the enemies army, The resolution to give baitaile rejoices
the ^hole army.
whereupon they imagined that they would not have the courage to attend them,
but that they made that show only in bravery. The captains in the mean time
did exhort the soldiers to fight valiantly, setting before their eyes the
greatness and facility of the victory, the rich spoils, and the immortal
glory prepared for the vanquisher. Doria would needs sail foremost with his
galleys, placing Capel in the battle, and Grimani in the rereward, to succor
with his battaillon those parts which he should perceive to have most need, he
commanded Antoni^ Doria who conducted the great vessels, that keeping before
the light galleys, he should use means to get the wind of the enemies, that
he might with more ease run upon them, and with his ordnance disorder them,
before they should come too near the light galleys. But the Turks on the
other side, seeking the same advantage, The Turks purpose broken by Doria.
used all means they could to get before the Christian Army, that they might
first assail it; which Doria perceiving, did in time draw his army toward the
land, to keep the enemies from possessing those quarters. Then upon the
sudden,

So soon as Barbarossa perceived those two great ships coming against his
Army before the calm, fearing least he should be first enforced to fight
with them, having avoided it as much as he could, began to repent his coming
forth ^arbarossa repentcth his coming sorth of the Gu^phe of Preueze.
of the Gulphe of Preueze: Yet nevertheless taking presently courage, he did
Trabacchio, the left by Salecca, both of them valiant Captains, and renowned
for their great experience, and Barbarossa was in The order of Barbarossa his
Army.
the midst with the body of the battle. Dragut a famous Pirat, went before
the whole army, with great numbers of Fusts, Gal^ots, and some light Galleys,
as it were to lead the way to the rest, and with those lighter vessels to begin
the skirmish. The long delay and irresolution of our men, or the speed and good
fortune of the enemies, the sea being calm, so that the great vessels could
do no service for want of wind, did give the Turks time and leisure first to
possess that part near to the firm land, which the Captains of the league
had determined to seize on, and to drive the enemies from it, who lying in a
very commodious

Doria in the mean time being followed by all the light Galleys, turning
toward The enemies got into a plac^ of safety through the fault of those of the
league.
those great vessels, had for a time not only held our men, but the enemies in
doubt what he would do, all men expecting when he would turn the prows upon
the enemy, and begin the fight. But during this long delay, he gave time to the
Turks to get the vantage, and to eschew the battle. Dorias policy was (as
he said afterward) to beguile the enemies, who being uncertain what course
What Dori^ purpose wa^.
he would hold, thought it best to lie at sea in the same place, and close
order which they held: whereby it had been an easy matter for him, by
fetching a great compass, to have assailed them with his Galleys in sundry
places. But Barbarossa perceiving his intent, did with great speed (as has
been said) make to land-ward, keeping still, as he sailed along, the prows of
his Galleys turned toward our Army, keeping as far off as he could from our
great vessels.

The Army of the league in the mean time, to all men's wonder, stood immovable
to behold the enemies insulting, and the fair occasion which it lost; the
General Capell, and Grimani, began to cry out with a loud voice, that they
were no longer to loose time, nor the certain hope of so goodly a victory.
Capel, presently after, leapt into a Frigate, and was carried round about the
fleet, stirring up all men to battle, being reciprocally welcomed and
commended of all men, and being Capels speech to Doria to provoke him to the
battle.
come to Dorias Galley, he said unto him, Let us go my Lord to charge the
enemies that fly from us; time, occasion, and the soldiers cries do call us
forth, the victory is ours, I will be the first that shall charge, and I tarry
for nothing but the commandment to begin the fight.

Capell was a man of three score and thirteen years of age, of a cheerful
countenance, The whole army cries out for battle.
healthful constitution, singular judgment, and was reverenced of all men for
his age and great discretion, joined with a singular experience in marine
matters, so as great estimation was made of his advice and council; and indeed
all men were desirous of battle, and did jointly cry out, battle, battle,
victory, victory. Doria at the last being moved by these cries, and spurd
forward by A beginning of the battle a sarre off.
begun, and yet neither on the one side nor other, did the Galleys set forward.
Doria did still look when that the Turks, all amazed, would forsake the
Galleys without fight, and save themselves on shore, and Barbarossa perceiving
the light Galleys to be backed by the Gallion and the Argozey, durst come no
nearer for fear least the Ordnance of those great ships would disorder and
sink him, but Doria his retreat encourages the Turks.
Doria having for a time continued in this manner, and perceiving that his
policy took no effect, and resolving (as his actions did afterward show) not
to commit himself to the hazard of a battle, began openly to retire.

The Turks taking courage by the retreat of our men, did come so far
forward, as diverse of the enemies Galleys were very near to the Gallion and
the Argozey, who by reason of the place, wherein they were, and their
greatness they could not retire so soon, but a Cannon shot being made upon
the Gallion, and fire taking in a barrel of powder, the mariners and soldiers
were in great fear and disorder: but the Captain providing a speedy remedy
for it, did defend them from danger, and the Turkish Galleys coming still
nearer to these ships,

In this manner the whole army of the league being safe and untouched (saving
The Army of the league returns to Corsou.
a few vessels that were lost in the retreat) was brought to Corfou. Doria in
his Galley would be the last that should retire, thereby to show himself more
brave and valiant, or else that he had a great care of the Army: but all men
knew, that it did not proceed from magnanimity of courage, or from any good
will that he did beat to the cause, but only because he trusted to the
swiftness of his own Galley, wherein he might easily escape, which Capel
perceiving, would not likewise depart, till the very selfsame time that he
retired.

The end of the second Book of the sixth Decade.
The Contents of the third Book of the
BArbarossa retireth into the Gulf of Larta, for fear of Sea tempests. How
all men did condemn Andre Doria. The Confederates take Castle Nouo in the
Gulphe of Cathara. Doria with his Galleys retireth into Sicily. The Venetians
take Rissana. The occasions which moved the Senate to make peace with the
Turk. Gritti goes to Constantinople for that purpose. Guy Vbaldo, Duke of
Vrbin, son to Francesco Maria, is made General of the Venetian troops. An
Accord betwixt the Pope and the Duke of Vrbin for the Duchy of Camerin.
Barbarossa recouereth Castel-nouo. The Bascha alleges Solimans complaints
concerning the accord with the Venetians. Barbarossa gives an Charles passes
through France into Flanders, to chastise the Gantois. The Cardinal Farneze
comes into France, as Legate at that enter view. The Conclusion of the peace
with the Turks according to their own mind. The sorrow and discontent of
those of Naples and Maluesia, when they understood that their Towns were made
over to the Turks. And lastly, the Consignation of

The third Book of the sixth Decad of the History of Uenice.
THE Army of the league being returned to Corfou, Barbarossa not being
satisfied that he had escaped shame and danger, went into the Isle of Paxu,
some twelve miles from thence, where he continued for a time, daring as it were
the Confederates to come forth of their Haven and fight, or else waiting for an
opportunity to endanger them, but the Army Doria his conduct being thought
most unfortunate, and his loyalty and counsel much suspected: there was no man
that durst undertake The Turkish Army retireth into the Oulph of Lar^a.
a deed of consequence: if any proposition were made, infinite numbers of
difficulties were found therein, and the Galleys remaining thus in the haven,
without any military action, the Turks after that they had braued the
Christian army, fearing foul weather and tempests, by reason that part of
October was spent, retired into the Gulf of Larta.

Such was the success of that year, such was the end of so great a warlick
preparation, Andre Doria, against whom, all men cried out, some taxing him of
cowardice, All men cry out upon Doria.
others of treachery, and for that he stood badly affected to the good of
Christendom, and particularly to that of the Venetians. Those who spoke of it
more openly, did blame his sundry immoderate affections, his intolerable
ambition, his fear to expose himself to dangers, his great avarice, wherewith
he was sometimes so blinded, as he esteemed nothing so much as his own
private gain. The Spaniards more then all others cried out against him, and
especially the Marquis of Aguilar the Emperors Ambassador at Rome, who (...)
so^row for his fault.
of that which had happened in that voyage, he did seem to be extremely
sorry for it, being scarce able to keep him self from shedding tears,
(either true or seigned,) in acknowledgment of his fault.

All the Army of the league after that retreat, did for a time remain at
Corfou: but the Confederates supposing it to be a disgrace unto them to
continue so long in the haven, the season being fit for sea actions,
notwithstanding that it was then Autumn, and the enemies being far from
thence, they began to propound sundry matters. The General Capell did solicit
them to sail with the whole Army into the Archipelago, where (as he said) some
new occasion might be offered of fighting with the enemy, and though that
should not come to pass, yet an other notable and certain profit might
redound by that journey, in regard that diverse ships that were laden going to
Constantinople, would fall into their hands as an assured booty, besides, they
should relieve Naples and Maluesia, and Sundry opinions in the confederates
council.
might recover diverse Islands of the Archipelago, as easily as they had been
lost, from whence they might draw great commodity, and chiefly of Rowers for
the Navy, whereby double profit would redound to them, as to drive the enemies
from thence, and to make aboade there by reason of the hauen^, wherewith those
Islands do abound, where the fleet might lie in all safety, and their abode
there would make Barbarossa jealous and fearful, so as he would not dare to
carry his fleet to Constantinople, and that Gulphe being taken from him, which
was very commodious for his use, he would not come forth at all, or else very
late, to sea the next year: whereby his honor and reputation would enforce him
to come

Others, and especially Doria were of opinion, rather to go and besiege
Durazzo, thinking it a dangerous matter to sail at that season upon the
Archipelago, and the labor likewise which should be bestowed in the recovery
of those Islands would be lost, there being no safe nor assured Fort;
whereupon so soon as the Turkish Army should show it self, they would be
again recovered: But on the contrary, they could but have great hope of the
happy success of the enterprise of Durazzo, inregard of the quality of the
place, being of it self very commodious, a near neighbor to Italy, and
fit for opening the way to greater exploits in Albania. But this proposition
likewise did find sundry difficulties, first, that there were no havens there
fit for the Fleet, especially for the ships, who Barbarossa do coming to
Valona: so as it would be no safe matter to land the soldiers, and to leave
the vessels unfurnished, having so mighty an enemy near them: that they were
to make war elsewhere, and to molest the enemy in places farther off from
his greatest forces, which consisted in horse and foot.

Both these propositions then being for these reasons rejected, they resolved
to enter the Gulphe, there to enterprise somewhat, which might assuredly, and
without difficulty answer their desire. The Army then departing from Corfou,
Mahomet had certain years before, taken from Chersega: that place was
sufficiently esteemed, not for being great, or of an impregnable
fortification, but only for the situation, The Confederates Army comes ^o
besiege castelnouo.
commodious for diverse matters, and chiefly for the Venetians, for the safety
of Cathara. Above the Town there is a Castle, kept by a garrison of Turks,
all the other inhabitants are Dalmatians or Sclauonians.

The fleet having entered the Gulf, Doria landed his footmen not far from the
castle, and within a while after his ordnance to batter it, giving the
particular charge thereof to Don Ferrant de Gonzaga. But whilst they planted
the ordnance, Capello being come near to the Cities walls with his galleis,
forth of the danger of the Castles short, the which coming from above ^lew
over their heads, he began to give an assault to the Tower with his Rowers and
mar^iners, who using their oars instead of ladders, and (...) it in sundry
places, did at last enter it, and opened the Gates to the soldiers: Whereupon
the Turks did suddenly retire into the Castle, but within a while after,
perceiving that they could not long hold out, they yielded upon discretion. The
town was sacked by the Spaniards, notwithstanding Don Ferrants prohibition, who
knew that the spoil did belong to the Venetians, but the insolency of that
nation was so great, as not being satisfied with the spoil of the City, when
they did meet with any of the Venetian Rowers, returning to the Galleys laden
with pillage, The Spaniards insolency.
they did take all from them, and would perforce enjoy the fruit of other men's
labors. Barbarossa being advertised that the Christian Army was gone to
besiege Castel-nouo, did leave Preueze, and was onward on his way, meaning to
go The most part of Barbarossas fl^et is cast away by tempest.
enterprise: But having sailed half way thither, a marvelous tempest arose,
in which thirty of his Galleys were cast away and sunck: Whereupon he returned
with the rest, very much beaten to Volona.

The Christian army having intelligence of this loss, all men began to cry out
and said, that it behooued them to sail forthwith toward the enemies, who
were weakened both in courage and forces, to fight with them: the General
Capello did with great vehemence persuade Doria not to lose such an occasion,
seeing it was not far from thence to Valona, where they might assail the
Turkish fleet, which was not in state to fight, being weakened by the fortune
of the sea, nor was Doria making excuses, saying sometimes that he resolved
to go thither, and Doria his excuses because be would not fight with
Barbarossa.
afterward that the season was unfit for such an enterprise, with diverse
other impediments, did make such long delays, as he gave Barbarossa time and
leisure to conduct his army in safety to Constantinople, having left Dragut in
the Gulf of Lepanto with five and twenty Galleys, and a certain number of
Galeots and Fusts belonging to Pirates, to hinder the Christians navigations.

Doria afterward alleging new occasions, that he might be gone from thence;
Ferrant, to keep the armies joined together all that winter, either at Corfou,
or in some other commodious Do^ia with his galleys retireth unto Sicyll.
place, to the end they might at the spring put to sea betimes, and outstrip
the enemies preparations. He left four thousand Spaniards for the guard of
Castel-nouo, under the command of Captain John Sarmiento, notwithstanding that
the Venetian General entreated him, that according to the capitulations of the
league, the town might be consigned to him, to be kept by his soldiers: but
excusing himself for that he had no commission so to do, he referred that
business

Doria being gone, the Patriarch Grimani followed him within a while after,
and sailed to Ancona, where he disarmed the Galleys, and sent them empty to
Venice: afterward he went to Rome to yield an account to the Pope of that
which had been done. Capello in this manner remaining alone (all the other
Commanders being gone) in the Gulphe of Catharra, went to Rissane a small
town not far from thence, held by the Turks with a small Garrison, which
Lodouico Zene their Governor. Capello in the mean time, by reason of the toil
and travail which he had sustained, or rather with grief and discontent, to
see matter, handled contrary to his desire, fell into a grievous sickness, in
regard whereof he besought the Senate to give him leave to return home to
Venice to take order for his health.

The Duke of Vrbin at the same time being consumed by a lingering disease The
death of the T^uke of Vrbi^.
dyed, not without suspicion of being poisoned, to the Venetians great grief
and discontent: Sollemne obsequies were made for him at Venice in the Church of
the Saints John and Paul.

Now the occasion being so often lost of fighting with the Turkish fleet with
a certain assurance of the victory, and the Spaniards seazing upon Castelnouo,
did more and more increase the suspicion which all men had conceived of the

The Emperor by good offices had been disposed to the observation of the
Articles of the league, namely, to grant a proportion of corn out of Naples
and The Emperors excuses for not performing his promise.
for concerning the proportion of corn, his officers were first to have their
own share and division: for the restitution of Castelnouo, they aleadged that
the Commonwealth should first pay the Spaniards for keeping that Fort till
then; and as concerning the ready expedition of the Army, in regard that the
Emperor determined to be in it in person, it behooued them to make greater
preparations, and also to have more forces, and so consequently a longer time.

But in some of these things, reason, and the effect did manifest, that he did
neither regard equity nor the common good: the Emperors speeches were very
magnificent, full of goodly promises, but greatly suspected that he did only
intend The Emperors (...) aim.
to keep the Venetians bound, by means of the league, that he might make use
both of their arms and friendship, in as much as concerned his own particular
profit and comodity, and not for the wealth or service of the Republicke, by
reason that it was known, how that the Estates assembled in Spain did beseech
him not to deparrt forth of the Country: besides, his want of money was so
great, as although his meaning had been to have gone in person into the Army
yet he would not have had means to have defraied the expenses of The Senate
resolves to be at peace with the Turk.
to obtain peace on honest conditions, seeing that the Turks did use them
with more respect then they were wont, for they had released the Baily forth of
the Tower of the great Sea, and admitted them into Constantinople, and did
likewise put them in hope (as it came to pass) speedily to restore all the
Venetian Merchants to their liberty, and to suffer them to trade in the same
manner as they had done before, so as they would be bound one for another, not
to depart from Constantinople, nor to send their goods forth of the Ottoman
Empire.

There came besides to Venice a man whose name was Antonio de Modon, dwelling
at that time in Zante, bringing letters from Ianusby his friend, which he had
written to him concerning their own particular traficke, wherein he mentioned
how that the great Turk and the Bascha were desirous of a Peace with the
Republic: so as if an Ambassador were sent from Venice to Constantinople for
that purpose, some agreement might be easily concluded, and that this Iauusbey
did offer, (so that they would entreat him) willingly to employ him self
therein.

All these things did move the Council of Ten to begin some practice of
agreement: but to the end it should be kept secret, they would not for that
time send any public person to Constantinople, but appointed Lorenzo Gritti
the Gr^tti goes to Constantinople to treat of an agreement.
Dukes son for that journey, under coullor of some affairs of his own, and
in particular for the recovery of certain goods belonging to a brother of his,
who a little before dyed at Constantinople. They enjoined him first to speak
of a

The French King had an hand in this treaty of truce, sending an Agent expressly
for that purpose to Constantinople, but the small hope of any peace was soon
discerned, the Turk being not willing to have any accord with the Emperor,
whereupon the better to turn all his forces against him, he had propounded and
consented to an agreement with the Venetians. But so soon as Gritti his going
Soliman. Don Diego Hurtado de Mendoza, Ambassador at that time for the The
Emperors Ambassador does in the Senate complain against this agreement.
Emperor at Venice, being come into the Senate in secret audience, did
discover this suspicion, and made a modest complaint, for that they went about
to treat of peace with the common enemy, not comprehending therein the
Emperor, their friend and confederate, and did afterward seek by a long and
perswasiue oration, to dissuade them from peace with the Turks. They answered
him that the Republic had more then two years since entered into the league,
and yet nevertheless The Senates answer to the Ambassador.
it might truly say, that it had alone sustained all the Turkish attempts: That

The like pursuit was made in the Emperors Court betwixt his Majesty and the
Ambassador of the Commonwealth: But it was not to any purpose, either to
hasten the Emperor to make provisions for war, or to withdraw the Venetians
from the treaty of peace already determined. With such success ended An. 1538.
the year 1538. about the latter end whereof, on the seven and twenty day of
December, Prince Gritti deceased, being four score and four years of age,
having governed fifteen years and seven months, and was buried in Saint
Francis Church.



PIETRO LAND the seventy eight Duke.





PIETRO LAND was chosen in his place, a noble man, and of three score and
eighteen years of age. The year following was in a manner spent about the
negotiation of peace, at the beginning whereof, the Venetians supposing that it
behooued them only, to trust and hope in their own forces for the safety of
their state, went about to increase the Garrisons of their The Senate prepares
for the conservation of their sea towns.
fortes, and to re-enforce their Army, whereupon* they made a great leuy of
Soldiers, and armed other light and great galleys at Venice, they likewise sent
a commandment to Alessandro Contaren the Prouidator in Candy, that he should
speedily arm five and twenty Galleys in that Island.

The Senate at the same time decreed, that four thousand artificers of the
City should be enrolled, with whom, four times a year, the Galleys
appointed for that purpose should be manned, that they might all of them row
together, and they did commonly call it, Regater: and sundry stipends were
appointed for such as had continued that course thrice together: This was done,
that they might be assured by this exercise still to have men fit and ready to
man on a sudden, a

They did likewise confirm Guy Vbaldo Duke of Vrbin, in the degree of General
of their forces by land, who in his fathers life time, had served the
Republic, they increased his place with an hundred men at arms, an hundred
light horse, and the pay of ten Captains, with four thousand Ducats for his
entertainment. This Duke was thought a very fit man for the service of the
Common wealth, as well for the excellent parts that were in him, having from
his youth been trained up in martial discipline, under his deceased Father,
as by reason of his Country, full of good Soldiers, it being commodiously
seated, for the easy sending of them from thence to their Fortes along the Sea
coast: Therefore the Senate after the death of the Duke his father, did in
sign of love and honor, send Francesco (...) their Ambassador, to condole with
him for his death, and to assure him that the Senate would never forget the
notable services which he had done to the commonwealth. But certain months
were spent before they confirmed him in his place, in regard of the Pope,
fearing least he would take it ill, to see them honor and entertain a Duke
that was a feodatarie of the Church, he being at variance with him. The
occasion of their stri^e, (as has been already mentioned) proceeded from the
Duchy of Camerin, which the Duke of Vrbin did enjoy, by reason of his wife,
the sole daughter and heir to the last Duke of Camerin, and the Pope pretended
that the line masculine failing, that infeofment was to return to the sea
Apostolic. The Senate in remembrance of Duke Francesco Maria, who had deserved
well of the common wealth, and for the love that it did bear to the Guy his
wife, did determine to defend him, not only with his own forces, but with
those of strangers whom he did mean to call into Italy. The Pope at the last,
resolving by force to have that Duchy, if he could get it by fair means, it
was agreed that Duke Guy should refer himself to the sea Apostolic, and
that his Agreement betwixt the Pope and the duke of Vrbin.
Holiness should give him a certain sum of money in recompense, in name of
dowry of the Duchess Iulia his wife.

This controversy being thus ended, Duke Guy was confirmed (as has been
said) in the pention of the Commonwealth. But to the end likewise that the
Capell, by the Senates permission lay at Venice for the recovery of his health,
who was not yet in state to execute his place, they chose in his steed John
Moro, Prouidator General at that time in Candy: but the Senate having notice
within a while after of his death, the place of General was given to Thomaso
Moceniga, a man excellently seen in the important affairs of the
Commonwealth at home and abroad. John Moro was slain in Candy in a Popular
Comotion betwixt the Greeks and the Italians of the Garrison, among whom he
running with his Halbardiers to appease the tumult was stricken with a stone
upon the head, whereof within a while after he died.

These were the preparations of the Venetians, whilst the Turks did speedily
The Turks great preparations for the recovery of Castel-nouo.
make ready their fleet, being not able to digest the loss of Castel-nouo,
as men that were always wont (to the great loss of all Christendom) to
win and not to loose: therefore resolving before all other things to attempt
the recovery of that place, thereby to repair their honor which that accident
had bereft them of, they made great preparations of men and warlike engines,
sufficient for a far greater enterprise.

Dragut in the mean time, whom (as has been said), Barbarossa had left in
the Gulphe of Lepanto, departed thence with thirty vessels both Galleots and
Fusts, all well armed, and being come into the Isle of Paxu, did there bar
the Nicholas Haven, four miles off from Corfu, he often sent his vessels to
scour the channel of Corfou, and to take those ships which should arrive in
that Island: but the Prouidator Pascalic being not able to bear that
indignity, determined to go forth with twelve of his best Galleys, against
certain Turkish Galleys, which were come near to the land: but the enemies
not tarrying for him, fled toward the Gulphe of Larta, to deceive the
Prouidator, and to make him think, that there were no other Vessels of theirs
at Paxu: but as the Prouidators Galleys, giving chase Draguts policy to
encompasse the Venetian Galleys.
to those Galeots, were come farther to Sea-ward, they discovered Dragut, who
coming forth of Paxu, with the residue of his Galeots and Fusts, had put
himself did suddenly hoist sails, and turned back toward Corfou, being
still pursued by the enemies vessels, which coming very near to them, caused
three Venetian Galleys, who feared that they should not be able to escape by
flight, to run on ground upon the Sands of Messanga twelve miles off from
Corfou, where they did beat themselves in pieces, all the men within them, with
their goods, escaped, one only Galley, belonging to Antonio Canalis, whose
sail yards were broken and thereby unable to follow the rest, was taken by the
enemies.

This success having made the Turks more bold and insolent, they went with
those vessels into the I Will of Candy, where landing upon the territory of
Canea, they burnt and spoiled the Country; but great numbers of Stadiots and
Gritti the same time returned* from Constantinople about the beginning of
April, having made great have in his journey: he reported how that by the
means of Ianusby he had been brought into the presence of the Vizier Bascha,
who although he entertained him very courteously, did nevertheless first of
all greatly complain, of the hostile actions which sundry officers of the
Republike The Basche complains to Gritti against the (...)
had executed upon the Musulmans, which the Signory had left unpunished, then
proceeeding farther he told him how badly he did digest their manner of
proceeding against the great Lord, and all those of his Port, having never
Gritti upon this discourse supposing that the Turks were not at that time much
disposed to peace, had craved a suspension of arms, on all Truce for three
(...) betwixt the Turks and Venetians.
sides, for threee months, to the end that in the mean time they might treat
of an agreement, which having obtained, he did at the same time publish as he
passed along upon the Frontiers; so as the Turkish troops encamped before Sa
ona to take it, that they might afterward go and beseege Spalatia, did
suddenly retire upon this publication.

The news of this truce did not greatly please the Venetians, diverse fearing
that his suspension of arms for so short a time might rather tend to cause
some distrust Soliman to treat of peace, and Petro Zene was chosen to that end.
And whilst he was preparing Petro Zene (...) chosen Ambas sador to go to
Soliman.
for his journey, and the accustomed presents, Gritti was dispatched to
Constantinople to carry news of the Ambassadors election, and to use means to
prolong the truce, and to begin, as occasion should be offered, to motion
peace, being expressly enjoined, therein to employ the favor and Council of the
Lord of Rincon, Ambassador for the most Christian King at the Port of the great
Lord, who had very earnestly often times offered himself to deal in that
business: Soliman, The French Ambassadors deseigne.
and thereby oblige them to himself and disioyne them from the Emperor.

At the same time that Gritti arrived at Venice, the new General had received
the Standard of the Commonwealth and was ready to depart to his charge, but
being not yet gone forth of the Haven, his departure was deferred, supposing
that his proceeding on his journey might cause the Turks to suspect that this
negotiation of peace was feigned, and by that means might return to invade
the confines of the Republique, which newly began to live at quiet: but to the
Contaren.

The Ambass. Zene within a while after departed from Venice being sufficiently
instructed what he had to do, but being come to the Serraglio of Bossina, and
falling grievously sick, he dyed there within a while after, whereof the
Senate being advertised by Petro Franceschis his Secretary, they chose Thomas
Contaren in his steed, a man of four score and four years of age, but
greatly esteemed for his wisdom and particular knowledge in the Turkish
affairs, with whom he had a long time conuersed upon sundry occasions. He
was enjoined to depart within four days, and in the mean time they speedily
advertised Gritti, and the Secretary of the new election, to the end he might
acquaint the Bascha therewith, with whom Gritti his proposition, concerning a
general truce, was to no purpose, the Turks still continuing their
preparations, determining to recover Truce is prolonged wi^h the Venet^ans.
Castel-nouo rather by force then by agreement. Barbarossa was already gone
thither with an hundred and fifty sail of all sorts, and with great store of
Artillery: the Beglerby of Grecia was at the same time gone thither with a
great Cauallery: so, that being contented to make an agreement with the
Venetians, they did likewise make no great difficulty to prolong the truce with
them for the whole month of September. The report of this treaty being
diuulged, men did diversely discourse thereof; interpreting it according to
their own passions: the Pope nevertheless among others did greatly commend
the Venetians, for that they had in such sort provided for the safety of their
state, seeing that the other way would rather have hurt then profited them. Now
Barbarossa pursuing his journey, did in The Spaniards not being ab^e to keep
Castelnouo, offer it to the Venetians.
by the Imperials: The Spaniards that were within it being dannted by the
arrival of the Army, and great numbers of Turks, did offer that to the
Venetians which they had before so bravely refused, namely, to deliver
Castle-nouo to them; but the Senate answered, That the same offer was out of
time, that they had oftentimes requested that the Capitulations of the league
might be observed, and that according thereunto, that the same place might be
delivered to them, and that at the same present, being enforced to a treaty of
peace, they neither ought

Barbarossa then in the month of August, being come into the Gulphe of
Catharra with ninety Galleys and thirty Fusts, did cast anchor so far off
from Castel-nouo, as the Artillery within it could not offend him, and safely
landed his troops, with four score pieces of ordnance of all sorts. At the
same time in a manner, Vlaman Sangiach of the Province came thither with great
numbers of foot and horse, which encamped round about the town, those within
it not being Castel-nouo it taken by Barbarossa.
able by their sallies to hinder their encamping. The Turks having begun the
battery in three places, did so well continue it, and did afterward assail it
in such sort, as all those of the town, after they had bravely defended
themselves, being taken Barbarossa made himself master of the place, who
after the taking of Castel-nouo went to Rissane, which was yielded unto him
without contradiction, by Lodouico Zene, the Garrison being not strong enough
to defend it: Barbarossa sent to Matteo Bembo Governor of Catharra, to will him
to deliver that place unto him, with whom he sought occasions of quarrel,
that he might assail that town.

In the end, after sundry complaints that his runne-away slaves were retired
thither, with other feigned matters which he alleged, having laid aside all
Barbarossa su^moneth the Governor of Cata^ra to deliver the town unto him.
respect of the truce, he did audaciously send word to the Governor to
deliver the City of Catharra into his hands, otherwise he would come and
Soliman to seize upon that Forte, and on what-so-euer the Signory did possess
in those quarters: therefore he should not do well to attend and wait for
his own ruin, but to provide in time for the safety of himself and people;
that he would give leave to as many as would depart thence, so to do, and good
entertainment to such as would abide there.

Bembo not being daunted with these summons, although he did not look for The
Governors answer to Barbarossa.
them, used speedy means to provide all things necessary for the defense of
the town, and to stir up the Citizens and soldiers to a brave resistance;
then he answered Barbarossa, that he did greatly wonder, and so would
likewise all the world beside, at his audacious demand, the which being
wholly against all reason, he could not imagine to proceed from Soliman, who
was ever wont to keep his word and promise, and that therefore he did so

Barbarossa made no reply to this answer, but caused part of his Galleys to
set forward, the which being inconsiderately come near to the forte, were to
their great hurt and loss beaten back by the Artillery: Barbarossa being the
next day come thither with the residue of the army, was likewise repulsed by
the ordnance; and having landed great numbers of soldiers far of from the
castle, those which went by the way of the hill, coming very near Barbarossa
does in vain give assaults ^o Catarra.
haste they could for to return toward their Galleys: but upon those who
went on the land side where the Church and Monastery of Saint Francis stands,
with whom Barbarossa was in person to view the place, the Stradiots with
certain Harquebuziers on horse back made a salley, and enforced them to
retire to their loss, and to save themselves on the top of the next hill
whither the horsemen could not follow them.

Barbarossa having well viewed and observed the castle, and the resolution of
those within it, bravely to defend themselves, despayring of being able to
take it, having stayed there one day longer without enterprizing any thing,
determined

The report of the taking of Castel-nouo, and Barbarossa his enterprise upon
Cathara was not very pleasing to the Senate, fearing, that their army being
Andrew Doria Doria his proposition to the Prouidator Contar^n.
departing from Sicily was come to Casopa, from whence he sent word to the
Prouidator Contaren, who lay at Corfou, that a fair occasion was offered to
overthrow the enemies, whilst they having forsaken their Galleys were busied
in battering Castel-nouo, therefore he did advise him for to join both their
fleetes together: the Prouidator having answered him (the better to sound his
intent) that he would be ready to relieve Castel-nouo, and to The Prouidators
answer to Doria.
execute any other enterprise, so that all the forces might be joined together
with hope of profit: Doria making no reply at all unto this answer, retired

The Ambassador Contaren in the mean time iournyed toward Constantinople,
whither being come and brought into Solimans presence who had granted him
audience, all the time that he was delivering his commission, Soliman held his
hand upon his breast, signifying (as his servants interpreted it) a troubled
mind, yet nevertheless having quietly heard him, he told him that he was
welcome, not making any other answer to his negotiation, referring him (as the
manner is) unto his Bashas: with whom Contaren afterward The Basha^ demands
to Contaren.
conuersing, and beginning more particularly for to explain his commission, so
soon as they heard him to motion the yielding up on both sides, of places
taken in that war, they answered on a sudden that he was not to speak any
more of that; how that their Lord was greatly animated against them, and
especially for their league made with the Emperor against him, whereby he was
so far off from harkening to any restitution, Soliman recompensed for his
expenses in that war, having been by them drawn to it perforce, and not
moved thereunto by any avarice, but for his own honor, knowing very well
that they had granted as much to the Emperor, a far meaner Prince then he.

The Ambassador declaring that he could not grant any of their demands, The
Ambassadors answer to the Bashas.
ought verily for to desire peace, so far forth as it might stand with her
honor and dignity, the which it would ever maintain and defend by arms, and
that for himself, he being but an actor of the Senates will and pleasure,
neither could nor would say or do any other thing, but that he would acquaint
them at Venice with the whole matter; entreating them in the mean space that
the same business might be delayed till such time as having written thither
he might understand the Senates resolution thereupon.

The Bashas did put him in hope that the business might have a prosperous end,
so that the Venetians would grant part of their demands: how that

Contaren upon these words, notwithstanding that so many iourneys and delays
were tedious to him in regard of his years, and the important business that
was in hand, yet nevertheless supposing that if he should stay any longer at
Constannople, after this leave given him, it would put the Turks in hope to
obtain their

The Ambassadors departure did greatly trouble the Senate, together with the
difficulties made upon the accord: for the found it a very hard matter alone
and The Senates doubt upon those news.
of themselves to make war upon so mighty an enemy: that their hopes grounded
upon other men's forces, although weak and to small purpose, were by that
negotiation wholly lost: on the other side, to accept peace on such unjust
conditions would to much blemish the Republikes reputation, and by quitting so
easily their towns, and giving away their money, was nothing else but to cause
the enemies who by nature are insolent, to demand greater matters.

During these irresolutions Casar Cantelmo came to Venice, who having been
already sent (as he said) to Soliman from the most Christian King, about the
negotiation for the truce, at his return into France, had informed the King of
the whole matter, whereupon he returned again by his commandment to
Constantinople for the same business.

The French Ambassador coming into the Senate, told them that the King his
Master did expressly send that gentleman to Constantinople, about the affairs
of the Venetian Commonwealth, and from him to deal in the negotiation of
peace, and therefore he was come to Venice to receive their commandments
thereupon, being by the King enjoined to execute them as though they were his
own. The Lord John Francesco Valerio a Venetian Gentleman, did affirm the
very same, who having remained a long time in France, had been very familliar
The French Kings love toward the Venetians.
with the chief Lords of the Court, who did often acquaint him with matters of
importance: this Gentleman did testify the Kings love and hearty Soliman, if
the Senate should dislike of Cantelmo; exhorting them to trust to the King, and
to his love toward the Republike, the total sum of this negotiation: that
there was no better nor safer way then that to reconcile them to the Turk,
with more honor, and less loss.

They were aduertized at the same time that an enteruiew was practiced betwixt
The Emperor desi^eth passage through France to go into Flander^.
the Emperor and the French King: the cause thereof was the journey which the
Emperor determined to make into Flanders, to chastise those of Gant who had
rebelled, resolving to go thither through France, and to talk with the King,
and to treat with him (for so it was reported) about some good agreement,

The enteruiew of these Princes furnished all men with matters of sundry
discourse, and chiefly the Venetian Senate, where it was a long time debated
whether they should continue the treaty of peace with the Turk, in regard of
matters offered, and the hard conditions propounded by Soliman: On the other
side, some were of opinion to embrace the occasion of Cantelmo his voyage, and
the Kings offer; if they should refuse it, it was to be feared, that his
Majesty would take it in ill part, thinking that they made small account of him
or his friendship: that they were at least to entreat that Gentleman on the
Kings behalf Sundry opinions in the Senate.
serve, for the fitness of the time and the quiet which thereby would arise,
to enjoin him besides, to assure the Turk, that the Senates intention was
none other then to procure a firm peace upon honest conditions.

Others propounded that it was best to send a speedy messenger to Contaren to
command him for to tarry in that place where he should meet with him, and
there to expect a new commission which the Senate would send him, according to
the progression of the affairs: others thought it fit to proceed to the
election of a new Ambassador, or else to refer the whole business to the
Bailey Canalis, who was at liberty, and able to negociate: but these men were
not of opinion Cantelmo in this negotiation, nor to impart any thing unto him:
that he was a Neapolitan, bannished from his Country, who besides the Kings
deseignes and interests, quite contrary perhaps to those of the Republike, had
his own likewise a part, which might hinder and not further the good success
of that business: That their safety and public dignity did not permit them to
discover unto such men any jot of the Senates intention, the which they were to
suspect, and not without cause, that he was very desirous to know rather to
cross then to further it: that the Emperor sought all occasions to break
this pursuit of peace, which did so much trouble and anoy him;

To all these considerations they added an other, which was of no mean Dearth
of victuals in V^nice.
consequence, which was, that because the harvest of the same year had been
every where, and especially over all Italy, very badde, wherewith the City of
which was to feed an infinite number of persons, was greatly troubled, so as
the people, who were wont to fare delicately, and to eat none other bread then
that which was made of wheat, were enforced to feed on all sorts of grain,
and in hazard likewise to want them, unless they might be brought from
foreign countries (Venice having no corn territory of her own) a thing which
did greatly trouble the Senate; whereupon, the better to provide for a matter
of so great importance; some said that the friendship of the Turks was very
necessary: and others thought it fit to have recourse to the Spaniards to get
proportions of wine and grain from their countries: whereby it fell out that
the same subject served for a foundation whereon to build the two sundry
opinions.

In this manner was the time spent without any certain resolution, so as the
Ambassador Contaren having continued his journey, and received no new
commandment Cantelmo departs from Venice without any commission.
from the Senate, arrived at Venice, and Cantelmo departed thence without any
commission.

These irresolutions gave the Emperor some hope, who espied al occasions to
break the negotiation of peace with Soliman, and once more to draw the
Venetians to confirm the league, therefore supposing that there was nothing
which could better further his intention, then to make them believe that he was
friends with the French King, and that being thereby freed from all other lets,
he would

The Marquis of Guasto who was governor of Milan for the Emperor, and the Lord
of Annebault Marshall of France, and General for the most Christian The
Emperor and French King send to the Venetians to divert them from peace with
the Turks.
King in Piedmont, came to Venice upon the tenth day of December. Their
entertainment was magnificent, as well in regard of the Princes greatness that
sent them, as for the quality and nobility of the persons, great numbers of
Senators

Returning at an other time into the Senate in secret audience, the Marquis of
The Marquis of Guasto his speech to the Senate.
Guasto began to tell them, that he was sent by the Emperor Charles to acquaint
them, as his trusty and inward friends, with the enterview which he determined
in France with the French King, and in Flanders with King Ferdinand his brother
and the Queen his sister, who did then govern those countries for him,
assuring the enemies, wherein he would not fail to have as great a care of the
safety of his friends States as of his own.

The Lord of Annebault spoke in a manner to the same effect, protesting his
Kings good will and desire to the peace and profit of all Christendom. It was
no hard matter to discern whereunto all these practices tended; and what the
Emperors true deseignes were, namely to feed the French with a vain hope of
restoring unto them the Duchy of Milan; and the Venetians, by propounding unto
them to make great preparations for war against the Turks, not caring very
much to perform these things, but only thereby to win time, by being
assured of the arms of the French, diuerting the Kings thoughts from

Answer was made to the Marquis and to the Lord Annebault how that their The
Senates answer to the (...).
arrival was very pleasing and acceptable, as well for respect to the Princes
which sent them, as for their own persons, for which, and for the honor and
friendship which they did bear to the Commonwealth, they did infinitely
thank their Princes* the news of the good correspondence, and certain hope
of peace betwixt such mighty Princes, had much rejoiced them, and so much the
more, by how much greater the profit was which al Christendom might receive
thereby. But as concerning the declaration of their meaning and intent toward
the Barbarossa

This answer without any resolution at all was thought fit for their
proposition, and the condition of the times: and without proceeding to any more
particular negotiation, the Ambassadors of the Emperor and the King returned

The Pope on the other side having had notice of these Ambassadors coming to
Venice, was displeased therewith, because that the enteruiew was resolved on,
without his knowledge and consent; not that he did These cause of the Popes
doubt and discontent.
any way distrust the Republike, being very well assured that it would ever
run the self same fortune as did the Sea Apostolic: but because he greatly
feared, least all that outward show of honor and friendship should cover (as
at other times) some important practice against the liberty of Italy:
whereupon, he did by all good offices solicit the Venetians, that their might
be betwixt the Sea Apostolic and their Commonwealth a sound and perfect
intelligence

The Emperor having intelligence of these suspicions of the Pope, fearing least
his discontent might be some hinderance to his deseignes, did on a sudden lend
Luigi Dauila to Rome, and caused the French King to send the Lord of Saint Just
thither, to acquaint the Pope with that enterview in France and for to justify
their actions. The Pope by the arrival of those Ambassadors was greatly
satisfied, and the better to demonstrate it, he determined to send his Nephew,
the The Pope sends the Cardinal Farnese Legatinto France.
Cardinal Farneze, into France, to the end that as Legate to the Sea of Rome,
he might be present at the assembly of those Princes, favor the conclusion of
peace, and offer the Popes authority, with all the Churches treasure, for the
enterprise against the Infidels. The Senate in demonstration of the friendship
and respect which it did bear to those Princes, did appoint two Ambassadors to
be present Antonio Capello, and Vincenzo Griman^, both of them Procurators of
Saint Mark, who were enjoined by the Senate to thank the Emperor and the
French King for the friendship and honor which they had showed to the
Commonwealth, by acquainting it with what they determined to do; next to
praise and commend their intentions, and to incite them to provide for the
dangers of Christendom, and lastly to excuse them for that they had sent an
Ambassador to Constantinople, being enforced thereunto, because they had not
sufficient forces to resist the enemy.

At the same time an Ambassador came to Venice from the King of Hungary, to
request the Senate to make a firm alliance with him for the common defense An
Hungarian Ambassador comes to Venice.
of both their States, and to exhort them besides to continue the treaty of
peace with the Turks, in regard the Emperor would never be at peace with the
French, so long as he could have the Estates of the Venetian Republike, and the
Realm of Hungary for his Bulwark: for the which advertisement they thanked
his King, and for that present dealt no farther with him.

But although the Pope did offer his forces to maintain the war, and
exhorted the Senate to provide dilligently for the conservation of their States
and defense of Christendom, yet nevertheless he did not dissemble the
suspicion which he had conceived of the Imperials, and the small hope he had in
their aid: whereupon, he did often times affirm, that being assured that the
Venetian Senate, as

Now about the same time the Senate received letters from the Bailey Canalis,
who advertised them that great and magnificent triumphs were preparing at
Constantinople for the nuptials of the great Lords daughter, married to Rusten
Basha and for the circumcision of two of his children, and to that end they
expected some from Venice, and that the Basha did greatly desire, that
according to the usual custom, some Ambassador of theirs might come to the
Port, to have an occasion to revive the treaty of peace.

The Senate being assembled thereupon, and a proposition being made to elect an
Ambassador to send to Soliman, all of them with one voice and consent embracing
the business, did choose (...) Badoario, a Senator of great authority, and one
of those who had most of all persuaded the Senate to an accord with Soliman,
offering himself, if need were, to go thither for that purpose.

They did then enjoin him first of all to procure the negotiation of the
General Lodouico B^doario is chosen Ambassador to go to Soliman.
truce, according to the former instructions of the Ambassador Contaren,
continued by the French Kings Agent: then to motion the restitution of all
What the Senate did enjoin the Ambassador.
giving authority for to offer some five or six thousand Dicat^ a piece for
the Cities of Naples and Maluesia, and to promise three hundred thousand Ducats
for the expenses that Soliman had been at in that war. This was the Senates
commission. But the council of Ten, who at that time did Soueraignly treat
of the most serious affairs of state, without communicating them to the
Senate, to the end they might be more secretly managed among fewer persons,
added another more ample commission, namely to have power, if he should
perceive the treaty to be wholly desperate, to surrender unto them the towns
of Naples and Maluesia.

These Senators, who were of the ancient and best experienced in the
government, did very well know how grievous, and insupportable that war had
bin unto them: how that Naples and Maluesia were far off from them, and
therefore The Emperor comes to Paris.
hardly to be relieved and easy to be beseeged by the enemy, whereby they had
been in danger oftentimes to have been taken, in regard of their want of many
things: So as they would ere then have fallen into the enemies hands, had not
the truce protected them. That the Commonwealth was at the same time in great
danger, whereupon it was discreetly advised, to cast away some*what, although
it were dear and precious, to conduct it safely to the Haven of peace, forth
of the rocks of that dangerous war: That it was a Maxim confirmed by many
experiences, that time, in the Negociations with the Turks does breed danger,
and the conclusion of matters, by delays, have ever had a bad and difficult

This happened about the latter end of the year, and at the beginning of the
next which was 1540. the Emperor came to Paris, where the king entertained him
1540.
with all possible signs of honor and friendship. Christophero Capello,
Ambassador at the same time for the Signory in France, did acquaint both of
them with the Senates answer to the Marquis of Guasto, and the Marshall D.
Anibault, whereunto the Emperor answered, that although for his own part he
did resolve to make war upon the Turks, yet neuer-the-lesse he could not
see, in regard of the shortness of the time, how they might satisfy the
Republcks desire: and therefore that it would be to more purpose, at that
present, to obtain a general The answers of the Emperor and the French King
to the Venetian Ambassador.
truce, during which they might have time to prepare forces, convenient for
such

Capello having acquainted the Senate with the Emperors and French Kings
answers, they were found to be very general, so as no certain hold could be
taken thereon; neither of peace betwixt themselves, not of war against the
Turks; The Senate resolves on peace with Soliman.
whereupon they resolved more earnestly to pursue the treaty of peace already
begun: and did write to Badoario, who ariuing at Constantinople about the
midst of April, began to treat according to his commission with the Baschas,
therein using the favor and advice of the French Ambassador. But at the
beginning of their negotiation, great difficulties did arrise, not that the
Turks were unwilling of an agreement, but because they having notice of the
secret commission, Badoario, and thereby being grown more insolent, as well in
regard of the fear and desire of peace, which they discovered to be in the
Venetians, as for that they were assured to obtain what-so-euer they demanded,
began forthwith to protest that they would not harken to any other proposition,
unless* that besides the Islands of the Archipelago and the Castles of Nada
Laurana which they already enjoyed) the Cities of Naples and Maluesia might
be freely surrendered to them, and restitution made for the expenses of the
war.

The Ambassador being amazed at these demands so suddenly and obstinately
made, and suspecting the truth of the matter, did for certain days give over
Bado^rio is greatly (...).
that negotiation, incertaine of himself what he were best to do, on the
other side he was drawn from it, when he considered how that by continuing
this trea ty and consenting to the Turks demands, he should put them in hope
to obtain other matters. Having spent certain days in this perplexity,
Barbarossa Peace conclu ded with the Turks according to their own minds.
years toward the expenses of the wars, the sum of three hundred thousand
Crowns. Then were the ancient Capitulations renewed and confirmed, together
with diverse other particularities concerning the establishment of the

The report of this agreement being brought to Venice, although every man
desired it, the Republic being in great distress by reason of the
discomodities of the wars, and the dearth of victuals, and at such a stay as
it had need of, being restored by peace, was nevertheless badly welcomed, when
men understood the particularities thereof, many blaming that Council for
having bought peace at so dear a rate, by the giving away of so goodly a
portion of their state and so great a sum ofmoney, wherewith they might have
been still able for a time to have maintained the war: others did tax the
Ambassadors ignorance, or to much fear, who by a precipitate resolution had
yielded at the first to the

Within a while after, the treachery of certain perfidious persons was disco
uered, The Tr^itors which bew^ayed (...) commission to the Turks. are
disc^nered.
whereby the intention and honor of the Ambassador Badoario was preserved. The
traitors were Constantine and Nicholao Cauazzo of the order of Citizens, who
entering into the Council of Tenn and into that of the Preguais in quallity
Maffeo L^one, of the order of Senators, was joined, who by reason of his place
had access into both of the Counsels: besides Augustino Abondio, and
Francisco Valerio had a hand in that treachery. These men being discovered by
means of certain letters found in the Cabinet of Abondio, where-in matters of
State were mentioned, three of them, to wit, Nicholao Cauazzo, Abondio and
Valerio, retired unto the Palace of the French Ambassador; as unto a place of
franchise.

This retreat of theirs having caused the Senate to think very badly of Force
is offered to the lodging of the, French Ambassador.
with two great pieces of Ordnance in it to spoil and batter the house,
whereupon the traitors were delivered to them, and being committed into the
hands of the officers of Justice, and their process made, they were hanged in
The traitors are punished.
the market place of Saint Mark. Constantine Cauazzo and Maffeo Leone, leaving
the City betimes, had leisure to escape to some place of safety: They were
proclaimed thorrow the City three several days, with promise of a good sum
of money to any that could take them alive or dead.

The King seemed to be much displeased, for the violence offered to the
Ambassadors The French king compla^neth to the French Ambassador.
lodging, so as for certain months space he denied audience to Giouan Antonio
Veniero Ambassador to the Signory, until that one day being at the Camp
before Perpignan, and being desirous to here news from Constantinople, The
Ambassadors brave answer.
among others, what would you have said, if the like had been done unto you?
Venier made this ready answer. If God should send into my house, and under my
power, a traitor to your Majesty, I my self would lay hands on him, and
deliver him unto you, being well assured if I should do otherwise, that the
Signory would sharply reprehend me.

During the negotiation of the treaty of peace, albeit that the General
Moceniga was abroad with a great fleet of Galleys, yet neuer-the-lesse he
executed no warlike exploit, for fear least he should hinder the agreement,
but only sailed Dragut lay near to the Isle of Zante with great numbers of
Fusts, and other vessels belonging to Pirates and robbed all those that he met
with, he sailed thither-ward to meet and fight with him; But he having a
far off descried our Galleys, and having a fair wind, took another way and
escaped, and after*wards not daring any more to return into those seas, he
went into the West, where he was taken by Ianetin Doria, with eight of his
vessels.

Now after the conclusion of the peace, the General before he would go to The
sorrow and grief of those of Naples and Maluesia when they understood the
conditions of the peace.
Dalmatia to disarme the fleet, went to Naples of Romagnia, and Maluesia, to
acquaint those people with the success of the business concluded at
Constantinople,

The General then to comfort them, (the whole people of Naples, being
assembled in the market place) spoke to them in this manner.

The fatherly love wherewith the Commonwealth has embraced and received The
(...) Moceniga his oration to the people of Naples.
you from the beginning under her rule and protection, and then gently governed
you for a long time, may very easily persuade you, that the same which I am now
Soliman, has been done rather upon extreme necessity, then by any free or
voluntary will. Diverse things may make you see how dearly the Republike has
ever loved you, and especially in these last wars, in which for your relief
it has readily exposed part of her forces to great dangers: it has furnished
you with money, soldiers and victuals, for fear least ye should fall into the
enemies power, who with barbarous cruelty would have bathed their hands in your
blood, (as they threatened to do) and made this City desolate: has in aword,
not to come to this last point to leave her dear and well-beloved to depart, to
give them another fit dwelling place wherein they may safely live under her
protection, and to help, favor and nourish them. The ancient Sages said, how
that the same place may be truly termed a man's Country, where he lives well:
but what better thing is there, or more to be desired, then to live under the
moderate government of a good Prince? ye shall remain under the government
of the Common wealth, we will find ye out a dwelling place in an other
Country, where ye may live, if not so commodiously as here, at leastwise
more safely, and free from the continual dangers and alarmes of the Turks, to
which I may truly say that ye were daily exposed. Diverse nations, their
numbers waxing over great at home, have of their own free will departed from

Whilst the General did thus comfort them, all men did shed warm tears,
being no less moved by love, then by grief and sorrow.

The General after-wards did make the same remonstrance to those of Maluesia,
whereby the poor people beginning by little and little to be resolved, the
Naples and Miluesia are consigned to the Turk.
greatest number of them prepared for their departure, carrying with them their
best and dearest wealth: And so within a while after, in the month of November
Contaren came thither with twenty Galleys and diverse other Vessels of all
sorts, in which having embarked the artillery, munitions, soldiers, and those
inhabitants who were willing to depart, with their bagage, consigned, (as it
was decreed) those two towns into the hands of Cassin Bascha of Morea, who
came thither with small forces.

All matters being in this sort pacified, the General and the Prouidator did
disarme, leaving only abroad the ordinary number of Galleys for the guard of the
Gulf. But so soon as the Prouidator Contaren came to Venice, he was called
into question by Petro Moceniga, Auogator for the commonwealth, to answer
(according to the Senates decree made three years before) for that which he
Contarens cause, the Commandment of the Auogatore was declared to be of none
effect, and Contaren was wholly acquitted, in regard of the worthiness of his
good services done, during the time of that war. No other thing worthy of
Memory happened during this year 1540. which was made notable by the peace
concluded with the Turks, which continued for the space of thirty years.

The end of the third Book of the sixth Decade.
The Contents of the fourth Book of the sixth Decade.


THE occasion of the war of Hungary. Soliman determines to make war in
Austria. The French king resolves to make use of the Turkish forces against
the Emperor who had broken promise with him. The Imperialls do murder Rincon
and Fregosa going in Embassage from the most Christian king to Soliman. The
Emperor grants the Interim in Germany.

The Senate deny the Pope the holding of a Council at Vincenza. The Accord
betwixt the Turk and the Venetians is confirmed. The Venetians are
discontented Ferdinand. A league betwixt the Emperor and Henry King of England
against the French King. Barbaros^a with his Army aideth the French King.
Enteruiew betwixt the Pope and the Emperor at Basset. The Turkish Army in
Hungary. Maran by agreement remains to the Venetians. The English men take
Boloin. Peace betwixt the Emperor Ferdinand on the one side, and Soliman on the
other. The Pope gives Parma and Placentia in title of Duchy to Petro
Lodouico. And lastly the great contentions betwixt the Emperor and the French
King, which were the causes of the quiet of Italy.



of the History of Uenice.
PEACE being in this manner concluded betixt Soliman and the Venetians (as has
been said) and the Venetians having elsewhere no war with any Christian
Princes, they did hope after so many toils and trauaills of war, to see an
age full of peace Soliman made show, that he was disposed to make a general
truce for a long time with the Princes of Christendom. Wherein the French
Ambassador did much good, who assured them that he held the to ^all resolution
thereof in his own hand, and that which made them to give more credit to his
speeches, was because though the fleet were ready to set sail, yet Barbarossa
his journey was held doubtful, and beside, no preparation The great hope of a
long peace.
at all for a land army was made, which might give cause of suspicion of any
enterprise.

The Emperor on the other side and the French King had confirmed the truce,
formerly made at Nice, and showed to one another sundry good offices of love

For John King of Hungary being deceased, and leaving a young Child by his
wife Is^bell, daughter to Sigismond King of Poland, and Perdinand King of the
Romans; saying that the Realm belonged unto him and not to the child, by The
cause of the war of Hungary.
virtue of a late agreement made with that King, made have to get it by arms,
Ieronimo Alasco to Constantinople to treat with Soliman that he might obtain
the Kingdom after the same manner as King John had held it: but the Queen,
widow to King John, had likewise sent thither, procuring by means of a
sollemne Ambassade of the chiefest Barons of the Kingdom, the aid and succor
of the Turkish army to keep the Kingdom for her Son, which by the self same
arms had been maintained Soliman incensed agoinst Fer dinand determines to
make war in Austria.
for the Father. Soliman seemed to be greatly displeased therewith, and by so
much more, as he supposed to have received a double injury from Ferdinand,
injury determined to assail Ferdinand with great forces both by Sea and Land,
and at the same time to keep the Emperor so busied as he should not be able to
help his brother: Therefore having revoked that which he had treated with
Rincon the French Ambassador concerning the truce, he sent him back to his
King to tell him that he had changed his mind, resolving altogether upon war.

The troubles of Flanders were in the mean time appeazed, the Emperor having
The Emperors reso^ution contra^y to his promise.
rigoro^sly punished the Gantois for their rebellion, to give fear and terror
to others. This being done sooner then was expected, was cause, that the
foundations of peace betwixt him and the French King were not surely laid, and
finding The King resolu^th to use the (...) aid^ against the Emperor.
himself freed of that let which hindered him, he resolved in no sort to quit
the Duchy of Milan. On the other side, Solimans hatred to the house of
Austria, did augment the French Kings courrage, hoping to make use of his
mighty aid, and thereby to revenge the wrong which he had supposed he had done
to him by contemning his friendship.

Rincon then being come to Venice did acquaint the Senate particularly with all
what-so-euer had been done, and of the Turks great warlike preparations, the
which he presumed to be able to dispose of at his Kings pleasure, and craving
after-wards a conuoy for his safe passage into France, Mercurio Bue was
commanded to attend upon him with his company of light horse as far as the
confines Caesar Fregosa, by certain Spanish footmen, and by the commandment
(as it was thought) of the Marquis of Guasto.

This deed, did more then can be imagined incense the French King, for that
during the truce they had so vilanously slain his servants, and that the
Emperor not Rincon and Fregosa being sent Ambassadors to Soliman are marthered.
being satisfied (as he said) to have deceived him with words, having at first
put The kings complain^s against the Emperor.
giving them to understand that he had not broken the truce: Then he did
particularly aduertize Soliman thereof, to whom he sent Captain Polin,
enioyning him to go first to Venice, to feel how they stood affected to the
Emperor, and to acquaint them with his just occasion to take arms for the
revenge of such aniniury, and after-wards, to offer unto them for his own part
what-so ever he

Polin having executed his commission, and craving of the Senate that he might
pass on safely, a Gallie was given him for his transportation to Raguza.

The Emperor at the same time was in Germany, where at Ratisbon he held a Diet
concerning matters of Religion, wherein nothing being concluded he granted to
the Protestants an interim, so as every man might use the same ceremonies which
before he had done; and upon report of the Turks great warlike preparations,
who were already come into hungary ( Soliman being there Guillan of Rocandolf,
Lieutenant General to King Ferdinand, perceiving that in regard of his own
honor, being in Germany and so near a neighbor to that defeat, all men
expected when he would march against the Trukish forces; he, the better to free
himself from it, determined to undertake the enter prize of Argier, thinking
it to be easier then that against the great Turk, to the great amazement of
all men which did see him to attempt an enterprise nothing so honorable as the
other: but he did it upon hope that passing along by Italy he might take the
King unprovided, and make some attempt upon him, desiring rather to leave his
own patrimony in prey then to omit any occasion to be revenged on the King,
whom he knew he had greatly wronged by the murder of his Ambassadors: but he
found that the Lord of Langey, Leiutenant fot the King in Piedmont, had
dilligently provided for all matters. Such were the State of affairs and such
were the deseignes of Princes concerning Peace and war. The Venetians thought
it fit in those stirrs Ferdinand was not strong enough of himself to resist
the Turkish army: the Emperor resolved not to hazard his forces against the
Turks in his brothers defense. Germany, badly The reasons that mo^ued the
Ven^ians to keep themselves (...).
affected to the house of Austria, would enterprise nothing which might augment
the power and authority thereof* and on the other side the widow Queen Isabell
and the King her son, young and without means to defend that Kingdom,

Whilst these affairs were thus carried the Pope entreated the Senate to
grant, That according to that which had been concluded at Luca, betwixt him and
the Emperor, the Council might be held at Vincenza, the year following 1542.
but the Senate supposing that it would greatly hurt them, by reason The Senate
refuses to have their Council helda^ Vincen za.
of the Turks, made an excuse, saying, that at that time when they had wars
with the Turks, they could willingly have granted it, but that now, Soliman
would think that the Venetians went about to stir up the Christian Princes
against him, and by that means they should draw ruin upon themselves, for a
small and uncertain hope of a great good: As also because they knew very well
that the chief Prelates did intend to make the Christian Princes friends,
before that they would assemble the coun^ell. This excuse was strengthened by
an accident newly happened, which gave suspicion that the Venetians stood badly
affected to Soliman: it was thus, two Turkish Galeots going from Barbary toward
Constantinople, and suspected, by reason that they fled from our fleet, to be
Pirates, Barbarossa, unto whom those vessels did belong, who being grievously
incensed thereby, threatened to be revenged.

The Senate speedily excusing the matter, did at last obtain that their might
be a treaty concerning the making of amends for it, and the business being
delayed, and Barbarossa being by time and sundry good offices appeased, the
strife was ended by means of a sum of money to the content of both parties,
the Venetians resolving to continue their freindship with Soliman who sent
Ianusby to Badoario, who was likewise enjoined upon enteaty of the French to
dispose the Venetians to contract aliance with their King.

The Turkish Ambassador was honorably entertained, and his demands attentively
heard: as concerning the confirmation of the Treaty of peace, he was therein
speedily satisfied: But to his proposition of favoring the French they
answered, how that they were at peace and friendship with the French King,
intending to continue the same: But they they could not as then do any thing
which might enfore them after-wards to take any arms against other Princes:
how they were assured that Soliman being a most wise and just Prince, would
like wise allow of their lawful reasons and excuses. This answer being reported
to Soliman by Ianusbey, Peace confirmed betwixt the Turks and the Venetians.
was allowed by him, and understanding by the same man, the Venetians firm
desire faithfully to observe the agreement, he was very glad of it, and seemed
to be desirous to perform the like toward them. This is all which passed at
that time betwixt Soliman and the Signory of Venice: But as concerning the
Christian The Venetians are grieved for that there is not a Duke of Milan.
with the contention betwixt the Emperor and the French King, they were
likewise displeased for that the Treaty of placing a new Duke in the State of
Milan was broken, a matter so often promised to them, and treated of not long
before with the French king at the enteruiew of Paris: and to suffer the
Emperor peaceably to enjoy that state, was nothing else, (as the wisest and
discreetest Senators had a long time before foreseen) but to support the
Emperors immoderate greatness, to the great prejudice of the liberty of Italy,
and yet for all that, to depart from The Venetians are solicited to leave their
neutrality.
for that the Turks being solicited by the French against the Emperor, had
determined to march with their army to the hurt of Christendom: yet never
the-lesse they only busied them selves, in furnishing their sea towns with
soldiors, munitions, victuals, and all other necessaries, in re-enforcing and
augmenting their army not meddling with the affairs of other men. Each of those
Princes did use means to divert the Senate from the resolution of their
neutrallity, by propunding sundry means unto them of new agreements.

The Emperor was ready come into Italy, resolving to pass into Affricke,
notwith-standing Ferdinand his brother, and diverse other Princes should enter
into it: But the Senate resolving no more to enter into those dangers, The
Senats refus^th to make any new alliance.
wholly refused that proposition, especially when they heard that the Pope had
no great inclination thereunto, by reason of the small hope he had (being wise
and well advised) to bring that business to a fortunate end, as also because
he having dispoiled Ascanio Colona of all his Estates, by reason that he had
been rebellious and disobedient to the Sea Apostolic, would avoid all
occasions of restoring them again unto him, as he well perceived that he
should be enforced to do, by making a new league with the Emperor, who for
his own honor could not forsake a man that had so well deserved of him, and
that had been chief of his faction in Italy: besides, aiming at an other
matter, he was Octauiano Farnese as Guardian thereof, and to yeeeld to the
Emperor and the French King a certain homage, til such time as they should
find out some more assured means of Agreement wherein he presumed that the
Venetians would interpose their authority. The Venetians perceiving that they
proceeded slowely in that business, and with small hope, being desirous not
to give the Turks any occasion of suspicion, did abstain from it,
notwithstanding that they were diverse times solicited by the Emperor, to send
their Ambassadors to Luca where the Pope and he were to meet* In all other
matters they had never failed in their duty to the Emperor. They had given
passage through their state to the Almaine footmen levied for the journey of
Afric, and so soon as they understood of his coming into Italy by the way
of Trent, they appointed four Ambassadors, to weet, John Antonio Veniero,
Nicholao Tepulo, Marc Antonio Contaren, and Vincenzo Grimani, who entertained
him very honorably upon the Verona territory, and attended upon him so long as
he remained upon their State, which was for the space of two days; for being
come to Pescara he entered the Mantuan territory, from whence afterward, he
went to Milan, from thence to Genoa, and then to Luca where he met with the
Pope, with whom having made some small abode, he pursued his journey for the
enterprise of Afric, which succeeded badly, as it had been foretold: for
having landed his soldiers upon the sands of Argier, he found more resistance
in the Garrison of the City then he did expect, and did besides receive great
hurt by the Arabian horsemen, procured by the Turks, who coming upon them with
great celerity, and fighting Marin Iustiniano Ambassador for the Signory, who
by the Senates command had still followed the Emperor, and Doctor Nicholao de
Ponte, who at that time was governor of Vdina, was sent The French King is
incensed against the Emperor.
being mightily incensed (as has been said) against the Emperor, thought on
nothing but means how to be revenged of these wrongs which he had offered him:
therefore by means of his Ambassadors whom he sent to Luca to meet the Pope,
he had earnestly entreated his Holiness to declare the truce made at Nice by
his own means and authority to be broken and infringed, by the murder of
Fregosa and Rincon, the better to let all men see the justice of his cause: But
resolving by all means to prevail by force, he did with greater vehemence
revive his former conceits to prevent the Emperor by means of the Turks aid
and friendship, whereupon he determined to send back Polin to Constantinople

Polin then being come to Venice from thence to pass to Constantinople,
Polin* soliciteth the Venetians to make a league with the French King.
he with the Bishop of Montpellier, ordinary Ambassador to the King, came into
the Council of the Ten, according to the usual custom of secret audiences,
where they discharged their commission from their Prince: Polin. siriuing very
much by a long oration to persuade the Senators by a new aliance to embrace the
Kings friendship. But all his discourse and goodly reasons could not prevail
with the Senators to make them alter their opinion, or to draw them to any new
alliance, thereby to entangle them in a new war. The Senates answer to (...)


Therefore that business being referred to the Senate their resolution with a
general consent of them all was like to that of the council of the Ten, to
give the lame answer to the French Ambassadors as was made to Ianusby: How that
the Common wealth did dearly account of the French Kings friendship, the which
for their parts they would ever constantly and inuiolably maintain: yet
neuerthe*lesse; they determined to live at peace wi^h other Princes, and not to
enterprise any thing which might procure war betwixt them. Polin after this
answer being inbarked in the Venetian Galleys sailed into Albania, and from
thence pursued his iourny toward Constantinople, with a certain assurance to
cause the Turkish army to march whither he would desire: but the deseignes of
the French took none effect for that year, either because it was already to
far spent to make great preparations, and to execute all at one time, or else
because Soliman had settled all his thoughts upon the enterprise of Hungary,
making account to go thither in person with a far greater army. The French
King in the mean time resolving The French king at one time raises three
armies against (...) Emperor.
marched to enuade the French County and Luxembourg: the third greater then any
of the rest, by reason of the supplies of the Duke of Cleaues, governed by the
Duke of Vendosme Prince of the blood of France, entered Flanders by the country
of Artois. But all these forces did by the report of such great provisions more
am aze then hurt the Emperor: because that the Daulphin finding Perpignan to be
suffitiently fortified by the Duke of Alua, returned without any notable
exploit, the Duke of Orleans on the other side, did but scour and wast the
country: Whereupon the French King perceiving all his deseigns were to no
Soliman and the Venetians because they had not taken Arms to favor his party
whilst the Emperor was busied elsewhere.

The King being thus discontented, was the more incensed against the Venetians
The King is (...) with the Venetian*
through the bad offices of the Bishop of Montpellier his Ambassador, so as
Polin being informed of his Masters discontent, did openly in all places
oppose himself against the Venetians affairs, scandalizing the Baily and the
Commonwealth: and because he hoped to have the Turkish army the year
following, at his kings devotion, he said, that it being once ready, he would
make the Venetians feel, to their loss, what great force his Kings pursuts
and authority had against them. The cause of the kings coffeehouse proceeded
from that which is above Polin iis pract^ses against the Venetians.
the matter was handled, his majesty showed both by word and action to be
highly displeased with the Venetians: but afterward having truly understood
their manner of proceeding therein, he sent the Prothonotary Monluc to Venice,
to excuse him, if by means of a false report he had sinisterly conceived of
the Commonwealths friendships, protesting unto them that he would never more
remember any thing that was past, but esteem them as his good and trusty
friends: within Prothonotary to return to Venice (who by his commandment went
to Rome, to acquaint the Pope therewith) to remain there as ordinary
Ambassador, in the Bishop of Montpelliers place, who was called home at their
entreaty and to please them. Another accident happened at the same time which
did greatly troble the Commonwealth as well for it own particular interest,
as for the respect to other Princes which was the surprising of the town of
Maran upon King Ferdinand, unto whom it had bin given by their last agreement.
Miranis taken from Ferdinand.
Bertrand de Sacchia a subject to the Venetians having of his own proper
motion seized on Maran, perceiving himself not strong enough to keep it
called Petro Strozzi to his aid who was banished from Florence, who speedily
came Ferdinand. That, as the beginning to a great war was very troublesome to
the Venetians.

For on the one side they considered how that Ferdinand might suspect that they
were consen^ing thereunto, the chief Au^hor of that trouble being one of their
subjects: on the other, they knew not what to think, in regard those that had
seized on it did shield themselves under the name and authority of the French
King, The Venetians doubts upon the taking of Maran.
being ignorant of his meaning therein: But that which did most trouble them,
was their fear least that town should be delivered to the Turks, it being
but four and twenty miles of from Venice, where being once settled they might
howerly at their pleasure make incursions upon the land, by means of the lake
which is a very near neighbor to it.

The Senate then determining speedily to provide for those inconveniences,
Sacchia who were at Vdina, that they might have in their power, a sufficient
pawn to bridle his audatious rashness: yet neuer-the-lesse they did still
entertain those of Maran, with fair and gentle speeches, putting them in hope
to end all matters to their content, for fear least Ferdinand coming with a
great Army, and they disparing (without aid) of being able to resist him,
should receive a Turkish garrison into the town. The Venetians in this
diversity of suspicions resolving not to meddle therein, but only so far
forth as necessity should enforce them, did

Upon these news Ferdinand sent the Bishop of Trent to Venice to request the
Senate to aid him with vessels for the recovery of Maran, concealing that
which concerned the French King: The Senate answered, that it was very
desirous, The Senats answer to the French Ambassador.
as a lover of justice and equity, that Ferdinand should recover Maran which
had been so trecherously snatched from him, and therefore it was ready to give
passage to his troops and to furnish them with victuals: yet neuer-the-lesse,
they were in hope that all matters would be ended in friendly sort. And
questioning with the French Ambassador there-vpon, he answered that the King
would The Senats answer to Ferdinad.
and therefore he desired to know their meaning therein: The same Senate
replied that his King was so discreet, as he needed no other men's council; but
that their desire was to proceed by such means as might preserve union and
concord.

During these Treaties time ran on, and those which continued in Maran (
Sacchia having been driven from thence by his own fellows, who going forth
of the gates, to accompany the German governors wife, who went to get money to
pay their ransom, returning back, was shut forth) waxing more bold and
insolent began to build a Fort at the Haven of Lignare, five miles of from
Maran, The V^netians raise the sort of Maran.
that they might have a safe place of retreat, when they should come forth,
Bernardo Sagreda, who speedily and fortunately executed it. This resolution
made them to obtain that certain Imperial galleys, sent for the recovery of
Maran, did not enter into the Gulphe: for the French King being aduertized of
their going thither prepared other some to go to the same place, to the
relief of Maran, which would have been a great prejudice to the Venetians to
have seen both those fleets in their Gulf, but both the one and the other, at
the Senats entreaty, refrained from coming thither.

The affairs of Maran remaining thus doubtful, the French King and the king
of Romans, had in the mean time begun to treat of an agreement about that
town, in which new difficulties daily arising, Storssi and those within Maran,
seemed desirous to deliver up that Fort rather to the Signory of Venice then to
any other Prince whatsoever, protesting that unless they did speedily agree
amongst themselves, they would treat and deal with the Turks.

Ferdinand although he truly knew the Venetians int^grity, or else being
desirous to dissemble the suspicion which he had conceived, knowing that their
friendship and aid might greatly avail him in that business, did choose two
Commissioners to end the controversy, heretofore often mentioned, concerning
the intelligence and observation of the treaty of Trent: They came to Venice:
Francesco The controversy be^wixt the Venetians and Ferdinand is put to
compromise.
Contaren, and Francesco Sanuto, chosen in former time for the same business,
were deputed by the Senate thereunto, who conferring together, and with them
the Emperors Ambassador as a loving vmpier, matters seemed to be brought to

This assembly was broken off by reason of the rumors spread abroad at the
beginning An. 1543.
of the year 1543. of the great provisions for war made in sundry places,
and chiefly at Constantinople, to enuade Hungary and Austria, and to scour
Great preparations for war on all sides.
all the seacoasts belonging to the Emperor. The French King hoping by means
of this army, raised in his behalf, and at his entreaty, to break the
Emperors Henry King of England, notwithstanding that the same King The Emperor
allieth himself wi^h Henry King of England.
had repudiated his Aunt Queen Katherine, and shaken off the yoke of the
Romish Catholic Church, that they might both of them together make war upon
France.

King Henry did easily agree to the Emperors motion, being distasted of the
French King, for favoring James King of Scots his enemy.

The Pope in the mean time and the Venetians did still continue in their
neutrallity, meaning as much as in them lay to maintain the peace of Italy.
The Pope nevertheless being for sundry reasons displeased with the Emperor,
made suite to the Venetians to contract a more strict alliance together for
their common The Pope goes about to make alliance with the Venetians.
safety, propounding at that time terms tending wholly to peace, and not to

The Senate continuing the accustomed answers, and telling the Pope how that
there was not any cause to move them to renew their alliance, which might The
Sena^es answer to the Pope.
(not without suspicion to Princes) rather hasten then prevent the mischief to
come, made an excuse, saying, that it could not make any new agreement with any
one, for fear least the Emperor would be incensed against them, who had so
often sought unto them for new confederacy, to the which they had never
consented. But they were most of all troubled to see the Turkish army to Polin,
who was to go along with it, had assured them of the like, who by his Kings
commandment had changed his mind. Yet the Senate not relying over much on all
these promises, determined likewise to arm the number of three score Galleys,
and to appoint a General over them, which was Stefano Tepulo, a man very
famous for his rare virtues and deserts: whereof they forthwith aduertized all
Princes, to the end that The Venetians do arm for their own safety and
defense.
the making ready of their fleet, might not make them to suspect that they had
any sinister meaning; saying that the Republike had armed certain Galleys for
the defense of their own subjects, and for the guard of their seacoasts: and
they commanded their General to visit the Islands under their dominion, and
all their forts upon the sea, to give order and provide for all things
necessary, with express charge to avoid all occasions that might give the
Turks any cause of distrusting Doria would have oftentimes cunningly drawn
them.

The Turkish nauall army in the mean time consisting of six score sail
departed from Constantinople under the command of Cariadine Barbarossa,
captain Polin going along with him, and coming to Negrepont where it made
some stay to take in soldiers and other necessaries, it sailed to the Haven of
Figara, and from thence directed their course toward the West, and having
passed the Far of Messina, came near to Calabria, where landing certain of
his troops, he took the city of Regio, and after he had spoiled it and
scoured the country round about (the castle still holding out) he did
re-embarke his people, The Turks take Regio in Calabria.
and held on his course toward France, and by the way, he took in water at
the Isle of Ponze, and next at Ostia upon the River Tiber, whereby Rome was in
alarm, but Polin did by letters assure the Governor of the town, that no
harm should be done to any one upon the coast, then hoysing ankors, and still
coasting along the Rivers of Tuscany and Genoa, he arrived in the Haven of
Tolon, where finding two French Galleys, he was by them conducted toward
Barbarossa his fleet at Mars^illes.
Marseilles, whither the Kings other four and twenty Galleys came.

Barbarossa went on shore where he was magnificently entertained in the city
together with great numbers of Ianissaries, Polin riding post to find the King
and to receive his commandments, whom Barbarossa was enjoined wholly

The Artillery and soldiers being landed, the City for certain days was
Barbarossa takes the city of Nice and then r^turneth to Marseille^.
battered, whereby it was enforced to yield without being sacked: but the
Marquis of Guasto having victualled the castle, and Barbarossa being diswaded
from making any longer aboade there, Autumn being very far spent raised his
camp and returned with his whole fleet to the haven of Marseilles.

Now the Venetian fleet being truly aduertized what course the Turks held,
and how that Ianetin Doria was gonne into the Leuant, did entertain time in
the Gulphe, the General thinking it more safe and proffitable to provide for
that which concerned themselves, and to avoid occasion of meeting with the
others, that he might take away all suspicion of being desirous to help or
hinder their deseignes.

The Emperor at the same time resolving to go into Germany to stir up that
country against the French King, having first caused the Estates of Spain to
accept the Prince Don Philip his son for their King, came to Barcelona where
finding Doria with forty Galleys and certain ships he embarked himself Carlo
Morosin, The Emperor returns into Italy.
Gabriele Veniero, Lodouico Faliere, and Vittor Grimany, to meet him as he
passed through their State and to entertain him by the way.

The Pope in the mean time having promised other matters to himself, seeing
that the confederacy propounded to the Venetians had taken none effect,
resolved to talk with the Emperor, determining first, better to assure his
own affairs, as well for temporal matters as for Religion, and his
Pontifical dignity The Popes des^ignes to confer with the Emperor.
in the council which was to be held at Trent a city in Germany: and next,
meaning once more to try if the Emperor would quit the Duchy of Milan to
Octauio Farneze for a certain sum of money, which he perceived the Emperor
stood in great need of, by reason of the wars he had in hand: but concealing
for that time those his secret deseignes, made show, that the cause which
moved him as the common father and head of Christendom to embrace the Emperor

Now the Pope having acquainted the Venetians with his departure from Rome and
going to Bolognia, alleged no other reason of his journey then the former,
wholly concealing the negociating concerning the Duchy of Milan, thereby to
feel if he could discover any thing from them concerning it, for, on the one
side he knew that the same treaty was pleasing unto them, but on the other, it
behooved them to proceed therein very respectively in regard of the above
mentioned matters.

The Pope seeming to be greatly desirous of that enteruiew did not cease to
pursue it, notwithstanding that he was alone in that negotiation, and that the
Emperor alleged diverse difficulties and lets, who making no great account of
him, made show that he did not much affect him, either because he was
distasted The Emperor resuseth to conser with the Pope.
of him, the Pope having not openly showed himself his friend as he ought to
have done by reason of the honor done by the Emperor to him and his house,
Octauio Farneze, the which he resolved not to quit to any man whatsoever: and
therefore he was desirous to eschew all occasions of discontenting the Pope,
and of provoking him to embrace the French Kings friendship, by refusing his
demand.

But the Pope supposing it would greatly blemish his greatness and dignity, if
he should let the Emperor pass thorough Italy without seeing him, had to that
end sent, first, Petro Lodouico his son to Genoa, and then the Cardinal
Farneze The Pope and Emperors enteruiew at Buss^tisto no purpose.
concluded they should see one an other, which was a town very discommodious
and smally frequented belonging to the Palauicins: but this enteruiew had no
better success then all men expected, nothing being there concluded, either
for the Churches service or the particular profit of the Farnezes. For the
Emperor continued his resolution to make war upon the French King, and the
Duke of Cleues, and as for Milan, because he would not flatly deny it, he told
him that he could not dispose of that State, until he had acquainted the
Princes of the Empire

The enteruiew being dissolved which only lasted three days, the Emperor
pursuing his journey entered upon the Venetians State, where the four above
mentioned Ambassadors met with him, and did honorably entertain him,
furnishing him with whatsoever he needed either for his own person or his
household, so long as he continued upon their territories, waiting upon him as
far as the confines of Trent, making diverse offers unto him in general in
the name of the Common wealth, not mentioning any negotiation till they were
ready to take their leaves of him, and then they besought him to be a means to
his brother for a dispatch concerning the agreement of Trent which they had
taken upon them. From Trent the Emperor went to Vuormes, and from thence to
Spire, to be nerer to that which he had determined to do, having still
resident with him Daniele Bouricci Secretary to the Commonwealth, the
Ambassador de Pont remaining sick at Trent, who being returned to Venice for
the recovery of his health, Bernardo Nouagera was chosen in his stead.

War was at the same time much kindled in Hungary whither Soliman being The
Turk makes war in Hungary.
come in person with a mighty army (having first scoured and wasted the
country) had beseeged the city of Strigonium, from whence he sent an Ambassador
to Venice to acquaint the Senate with his journey and deseignes, and also there
to understand news of his fleet, which at that time lay in the haven of
Villafranca at the enterprise of Nice, where of the Senate aduertized him, and
withal A Turkish Ambassador comes to Venice.
did infinitely thank him for the honor he did them by acquainting them with
his actions and deseignes. This demonstration of friendship from the Turks did
Soliman having again sent an other Ambassador to Venice to aduertize them of
his progression in Hungary, the Senate resolved in reciprocal manner to render
him the like demonstration of honor and friendship, by sending an Ambassador
to him. This charge was committed to Stefano Tepulo (he having given over the
place of General) who at the spring was to go to Constantinople to Soliman
(who was come thither from Hungary) to rejoice with him in the Commonwealths
name for his fortunate success, and to make show at his Port of a
correspondency of love and frindship.

The affairs of Maran were not yet appeased, but on the contrary much more
enkindled, as well in regard of the French, who did mean to keep and defend
it, as for the Almaines who determined to have it by force: so as besides four
hundred Sharp war about Maran.
footmen which the Lord of Senei brought thither, the French King sent great
troops of horse and foot: on the other side the King of Romaiues having caused
certain companies of Lansequenets to pass the mounts at Pontieba, under the
command of John Baptista Sauella, did besides assemble all the soldiers on the
nearest places of his Dominions to make a body of an army, and to beseege it.
The Senate had given free passage through their State both to the one and
other, to show that they had no hand in that business: they were nevertheless
Maran from that place: the which they determyning not to suffer, because they
would proceed modestly therein, did entreat Ferdinand and the Emperor
likewise to cause those armed vessels to depart forth of the Haven, sending
thither at the same time an armed galley to hinder their incursions, till such
time as they should receive an answer.

During these treaties, John Francisco de Pacis a Florentine came to Venice, to
A motion made to the Senate for the having of Ma^an.
offer unto the Senate in Strossi his name the fort of Maran for some honest
recompense, protesting that upon their refusal, he should be enforced to
negociate with some other great Prince, whom he knew would gladly accept it:
Strossi resolving in no sort to render it to Ferdinand, but rather to get some
great sum of money for it, by contracting with the Turk: that the French
King had left Maran to be disposed of at Strossi his pleasure, to make his
profit thereof, in recompense of the good services done by him to the crown of
France.

The Senate thereupon was greatly perplexed, either to accept or refuse it. It
desired to avoid all occasions of contention with Ferdinand, who might suspect
that they had some intelligence with Strossi: and to suffer that place so nere
a neighbor to Venice to fall into the Turks hands, would be very dangerous,
not only for the Commonwealth but for all Christendom. Being then moved with
fear of such a danger, they resolved to harken to Pacis proposition, and
Antonio Capello, and Francesco Contaren, to treat with him upon the
particularities of the agreement: where after sundry contestations the
composition was made in this manner: that Strossi for Agreement betwixt Strossi
and the (...) concerning Maran.
consigning Maran into the Venetians hands, should for recompense receive five
and thirty thousand Ducats at one entire payment. This being thus concluded,
Alessandro Bondimiero was so dainely chosen Prouidator of that place, who going
along with Pacis, with some few foot forces, was brought into it, and Strossi
having consigned the town to him, the whole people with great joy did
forthwith take the oath of obedience to the Republike of Venice.

The Venetians did afterward acquaint the Emperor and Ferdinand with the The
Venetian^ excuses to the Emperor and Ferdinand, concerning Maran.
causes which had moved them to embrace that necessary resolution: that their
actions in two years space, that the town had been offered unto them, could
yield sufficient testimony of their integrity, during which time they had not
only refused to give an ear to their often propounded offers, but had given
passage, victuals, and other commodities to Ferdinands troops for to recover
it: that they had likewise considered, how that place was of no great
importance to Ferdinand, neither for the States confines, nor reuenew there of:
but on the contrary of great expense, accompanied with extreme danger for all
his States if it should have fallne into the Turks hands, as undoubtedly it
would have so happened, if they should have refused Strossi his offer.

These reasons being cunningly delivered to those Princes by Bernardo Nouagera,
and Marin de Canalis, Ambassadors for the Signory, the one with the Emperor,
and the other with King Ferdinand, did in some sort appease them, both of them
having at first taken the treaty concerning that place in bad part: and then
the quallity of the times did greatly help to make those Princes capable of
the reasons by them alleged: by reason that a Diet had been published at An.
1544.
the beginning of the year 1544. Where all the chief Princes and Lords of
Germany were to meet to treat of affairs of great consequence, to make war
upon the French, and to resist the Turks attempts: for all the thoughts of the
Emperor and the King of Romans tended only to those two ends; hoping

Now the Emperor was greatly afraid least that the Venetians, upon the least
discontent given unto them from himself, should quit his alliance and embrace
that of the French King, who had so often sought to them for it; and his fear
The Emperor^ and French Kingspractizes to draw ^he Venetians to their party.
was at the same time greater then ever, in regard of his hope (being joined to
the King of England and the Suisses) to molest France more then ever he had
done, perceiving himself to be freed from the care of releeuing Italy, which
would be

The French King on the contrary having the self same considerations, did hope
to defend his own Realm by troubling Italy, with the wars of Naples and the
Duchy of Milan, to constrain the Emperor to divide his forces, and to send
part of them to the aid of those countries, and to that end did again use
means to draw the Venetians to his party, and supposing that the quallity and
reputation of the man might greatly further the business, he caused the
Cardinal of Ferrara to go to Venice to that end, who was honorably
entertained The Cardinal of Ferra a exharieth the V^netian. In the French
Kings behalf.
there, and coming into the Senate in secret audience (as he had desired) he
began in substance to declare unto them what the Emperors deseignes were;
who only aspired to a sole Monarchy, and especially to that of Italy, the which
he might with ease attain to, did not the French King counterpoise him, who
being their loving and trusty friend, did by him entreat them to enter into
league with him, and speedily to send their nauall army into Puglia, where they

The Senate according to the custom, did not at that time give the Cardinal
any answer to his proposition, but the business being afterward debated in
the council, they answered him, That as the Republike did highly esteem and
dearly The Senates answer to the Cardinal.
reckon of the French Kings friendship, it did likewise determine still to
embrace and cherish it: but it neither could nor would (being now at peace with
other Princes, and in want of diverse things by reasons of the last wars)
enter into trouble

The King supposing this answer to be no flat denial (so desirous he was to
draw the Venetians to his party against the Empetour) within a while after the
Cardinals return to Rome, imagining that the speech which the Pope had used in
his behalf would be of force to alter the Venetians minds, caused Barthol^meo
Caualcanti, who was banished from Florence, to go from Rome to Venice, to
acquaint the Venetians with the Popes great affection toward the affairs of
France, and to revive the negotiation of the league, not long before
propounded; Anew practice to draw the Venetians to the league with the King.
although the King by dissembling it, to make the offense and sorrow seem
less, for that so many of his attempts had not taken effect, did protest that
Caualcanti his going to Venice proceeded from the Cardinals sole and only
motion.

Caualcanti was a man of great judgment, and an excellent Orator (as his
works that are published do manifest) who made a long and excellent discourse
to the Senate, containing the self same substance that the Cardinal had
before uttered: but the Senate being firm in their resolution did stop their
ears to his speech, till they heard him speak of peace betwixt the Emperor
and the French King, with all men so much desired.

The Pope to hasten the matter, sent two of the chiefest Cardinals, to wit,
Moron Two Legates sent to those Princes to procure peace.
to the Emperor, and Grimani to the French King, exhorting the Venetians

The Senate although it desired to see peace and concord betwixt those Princes,
did nevertheless know that it behooved them to govern themselves moderatly
therein for diverse reasons, having oftentimes had experience of the bad offices
done unto them, by sinisterly interpreting in the Courts of Christian Princes,
their sound and sincere actions, and that the self same interpretations had
been divulged at Constantinople under false colors, to their prejudice, yea,
even Solimans hearing, and satisfying themselves with doing their duties by
their ordinary Ambassadors, they were desirous to eschew that vain and
dangerous appearance. These Ambassadors acquainting the Senate with what was done
in the Court of those Princes, reported, that they were very much inclined to
peace, not so much for any desire they had to be good friends, as because they
The English do beseege (...).
were weary of the wars: for the French being on the one side assailed by the
King of England who coming to Calais with a mighty army did in person beseege
Bullin, and on the other by the Imperial army, which after along seege had
taken the city of Saint Desire upon Marne, was very desirous by peace to free
himself from so many discontents: the Emperor on the other side, wholly
wanting money for the continuing of the war, and fearing the loss of that
which he held in Italy, by reason of forces raised in the Kings behalf near
to Mirandola. Doubting likewise the success of that war in regard of the
great numbers of Swisses which went to the Kings aid, and being very desirous
to see

The French Queen offered to employ her self therein, who was the Emperors A
Spanish Friar begins the treaty of peace betwixt those Princes.
sister, having caused Don Gabriel de Guzman a Spanish Friar and her Confessor
to go to her brothers camp, to motion the matter to the chief of the army,
supposing therein to do a pleasure to her husband and brother both at once.

This treaty then begun by Guzman after sundry goings and commings from
Bayard, which Granuelle and D. Ferrant de Gonzaga to conclude in their Princes
names on the conditions of peace, it was The Capitulations of the peace.
deereed; that on either part those towns which had been taken since the
treaty of Nice, should be redeliuered; that all particular controversies which
might arise thereupon should be decided in the city of Cambray by Commissioners
thereunto appointed: that the French King should aid the Emperor with a
certain number of horse and foot whenever he should make war upon the
Turk: that the Duke of Sauoy should be restored to his State, certain places
thereof excepted, to the which the French King laid some particular claim:
Ferdinand, according as he should think fit, (who within four months was to
resolve himself thereupon) and yet with a different dowry; for marrying with
the Emperors daughter the whole Low Countries were promised him for her dowry,
and for the Niece the Duchy of Milan. The Venetians as friends to them both
were comprehended in that peace, who had so discreetly behaved themselves
during those wars, as both the one and other of them were satisfied Both
sides complain of the Pope.
and pleased with their proceedings: the like did not happen to the Pope, of
whom the French did greatly complain, because that he having made a

This peace happening at a time and after such a manner when all men Diverse
opinions concerning this peace.
least expected it, gave occasion to men to discourse diversely thereof, some
thinking that it would continue, because the King did thereby purchase the
English (which was the cause of the agreement) would not likewise endure to see
it grow great and flourish by peace, and by the purchase of so many goodly
dominions. The Venetians for all that did not let to rejoice therefore both by
bonefiers and other demonstrations of joy, yielding sollemne thanks to God for
that he had inspired the hearts of those Princes to embrace peace.

Barbarossa in the mean time departing from Villafranca to return toward
Constantinople, and sailing along the coast of the Realm of Naples, he
spoiled and wasted the whole country, and chiefly the Isles of Ischia and
Lipari, which with a barbarous cruelty he did miserably ruin; from thence
sailing to Corfou, and saluting the castle as a friend, he received the
accustomed presents, not suffering Barbarossa his cruel spoils as he returned
home.
any harm to be done to the inhabitants of the Island. Captain Polin was in
that fleet with five Galleys and other vessels, who having brought the Turks
as far as Lepanto, returned with all his vessels to Marseilles.

The Turks were displeased at the news of this peace betwixt Christian
Princes, thinking it be done, the better to break their deseignes upon Hungary
or Transiluania, for which they had already made preparations; but they went
about to conceal their discontent for the better maintenance of their
reputation, being wont to contemn Christians; and therefore not giving over
their former determination they caused to be given out that they were making
far greater preparations then at any other time before, to march at the
spring against the Ferdinand The Emperor and Ferdinand do send Ambassadors to
treat of agreement with the Turks.
expressly to dispatch their messengers to that Port to treat of peace and
agreement: and for their safer going to work, they caused the French King
first of al to send one of his servants to sound Solimans disposition
thereunto, and withal to crave a passe-port for their Ambassadors.

The King did willingly entertain this business, as well to free himself of
that

This Ambassador being come to Constantinople found Soliman disposed to
whatsoever he demanded, and the passe-port which he craved being delivered to
him (which was at the beginning of the year 1545.) Ioronimo Adorni, did in An.
1545.
Ferdinands name go to Constantinople; the Emperor having to that end
appointed Doctor Girardo, caused him first to go to Venice, where he, and the
Prothonotary Monluke, ordinary Ambassador for the French King with the
Signory, did imbarke themselves in the Venetian Galleys for Raguza, and from
These Princes Ambassadors come to Constantinople.
thence went to the Port of the great Lord. Before their departure from Venice
they had entreated the Senate that their Baily might have an hand in that
business, the which was granted, and commandment sent to him so to do, but
that he should do it so cunningly as the Turks might not conceive any
sinister opinion, whereby any harm might redound to the Commonwealth, or
profit to themselves. Commissioners decide the controversy betwixt Ferdinand
and the Venetians.


They treated at the same time in Venice of composing the strife betwixt King
Ferdinand and the Republike, as well for the execution of the sentence of
Trent, as for that which happened since concerning Maran, where after great
contestation they did at last conclude for the business of Trent, to send
Commissioners thither to decide it, but for Maran it was referred to the
Emperors council: one of the chief conditions was that the Venetians should
give to Ferdinand threescore, and fifteen thousand Ducats, the which (all
other controversies being ended) they promised to pay in three years, and at
three equal payments.

This accord although it took none effect, was maliciously interpreted by
Solimen is (...) informed of the Venetians.
some, who used to sow discord and contention, telling Soliman that the same
treaty was made against him in Ferdinands behalf, unto whom the Venetians
promised that sum of money to leauy soldiers. These false reports being
justified and the truth of the matter known, Soliman was satisfied therewith:
whereupon the Senate thought it fit not to give him any more cause of
suspicion: and therefore they wrote to their Baily, willing him no more to
visit the Ambassadors, nor to Ferdinand should not attempt any thing in Italy
during the truce.

Rustin having heard this proposition, and seeming to be desirous to perform
Solimans self: yet nevertheless, it was thought that the Venetians had
opposed themselves against that truce then handled, seeing that they could not
procure peace, which caused the Emperor for that purpose to return from Trent
to Venice his Ambassador Mendoza, who not dissembling this suspicion, and
assuring them of the Emperors hearty affection toward them, entreated them
from

This did the rather move the Venetians to solicit a suspension of arms
betwixt those Princes, in regard, that besides other commodities, they were to
receive thereby great assurance, and reputation, by being declared friends to
both parties, enjoying the benifit of peace which they were to hope for by such
an agreement. It was thought that the Emperor did not so earnestly pursue the
What did move the Emperor to solicit truce with Soliman.
conclusion of the league, for any distrust not to be assisted by Germany
against the Turks; but because he perceived himself to be enforced to take
arms against

The Venetians on the other side perceiving that the assembly of the council
(though they would not openly hinder it) was not pleasing to the Pope, as being
made in an unfit time and place, and by means not beseeming the dignity and
authority of the sea Apostolic, would not send their Ambassadors thither.

Concerning the accord treated of at Constantinople, of which al men hoped for
a prosperous end by means of a long truce of many years (certain
difficulties arising about the restitution of some few castles in Hungary) it
ended by a Truce for one year betwixt the Emperor, his brother, and Soliman.
short suspension of arms for one year, with an intent nevertheless (as
Solimans self did say, and write to the French King) that after the matter
should be well debated in Ferdinands Court, the Ambassadors might return to
the Port the next year following with new Commissions to strenthen the peace
with a longer term.

In the mean time a new Contention arose betwixt the Turks and the Venetians
about the confines of Dalmatia, where the Sangiacks of Bossina and Clissa
Contention betwixt the Venetians and the Turk.
being desirous to disturb the peace for their own particular profit, or else
to spoil the country, or to receive so me presents of the Venetians, would
have usurped a great part of the territory of Zara, saying, that a country
containing nine and forty villages did belong unto them, as dependances of the
castles of Nadin and Laurana, which by the last accord remaining to the great
Lord, they said did likewise belong unto him with all their territories:
whereupon they forbad the inhabitants of those places upon grievous penalties,
to acknowledge any other Lord but Soliman.

This new trouble did greatly vex the Venetians, the country in question being
of great importance, both for it self and for the preservation of the city of
A tyrannical law of the Turks.
yet nevertheless fearing least the strange and insolent proceedings which the
Turks are wont to use in such businesses (who hold it for a law, that the
whole country whereon the horse of the great Lord has once trod does belong
unto them) might occasion longer strife, had recourse to Soliman, who referring
the decission of that controversy to the Sangiac of Chersega, and to two Cadis
(these men are ordinary judges in law) was desirous to have whatsoever they
should set down to be executed, who were to meet in the same place with the
Lodouico Rayniero who handled the business so wisely and discreetly with the
Turkish officers, as the whole territory in question was quietly adjudged to
the Republike of Venice.

The same year deceassed Prince Landi, leaving behind him a great and singular
reputation to have well and wisely governed the Commonwealth for the space of
six years and eight months, and lies buried in Saint Antonies Church.
Francesco Donato was chosen in his place.





FRANCESCO DONATO the seventy ninth Duke.





ABout the beginning of the year 1546. all those that desired An. 1546.
the peace of Italy were afraid, least it would be shortly shaken with new
troubles, because that the peace betwixt the Emperor and the French King (the
principal Articles thereof taking none effect) was so badly assured, as there
wanted nothing but a fit time to take arms.

The French King by the sudden death of his son the Duke of Orleance having
not obtained the Duchy of The Pope gives Parma and Placentia in title of
Duchy to his son Petro Lodouico.


An other new matter happened in Italy which gave cause of fear of some new
troubles: for the Pope perceiving al his deseignes to fall out contrary to his
desire for the advancement of his house, having cut off from the Churches
demaines the cities of Parma and Placentia, which Pope Julius the second had
annexed thereunto, gave them in see to Petro Lodouico his son, on condition to
pay a yearly rent Octanio had been invested. This Cession did so much
displease the Emperor, as he could by no means be induced to give the Pope the
inuestiture The Emperor refus^th to inuest Petro Lodouico in the Duchy of
Porma and Placentia.
of those two cities which he demanded, having been in formet time
incorporated into the Duchy of Milan.

This resusal of the Emperor had equally incensed both the father and the son:
so, that Petro Lodouico would willingly have embraced the first occasion
offered against the Emperor: and the Pope, distrusting both the Emperor and
the French King, resolved by all means to maintain and defend what he had
done not at the Diet of Ratisbon draw the Protestant Princes to his desire,
would be enforced to make war upon them: therefore he did exhort the Senate
to join with him a firm and sound intelligence, as it behooued them for their
common interests, and for a greater assurance, he caused the new Duke to send
Augustino de Lands his Ambassador to Venice, who acquainting them with the new
grade The new Duke his offers to the Venetians.
and dignity which he had lately obtained, did in his name offer both his State
and person to the service of the Signory.

The Senate did very lovingly thank him for his offers, offering him the self
same, but in general terms, which could not tie them to any thing, because
they would not thereby give his Holiness any hope by their means to raise any
Guido Vbaldo Duke of Vrbin, in quallity of General of their forces by land,
with a yearly pension of five thousand crowns, and fifteen thousand crowns
for an hundred men at arms and a hundred light horse, which he was bound to
have continually ready for the service of the Signory.

But the troubles wherein the Emperor and the French King were engaged, was
cause of the safety of Italy; because that the one, notwithstanding all his
attempts could not get Bolloigne from the English: and the other having called
the Protestant Princes to the Diet of Ratisbon, to treat of affairs concerning
Religion, The Emperors and the French Kings difficulties were cause of the
peace of Italy.
to send their Doctors to treat of matters concerning faith, and afterward to
hold and embrace what there should be decided: they did then crave first of all
to have a national council held in Germany, and if afterward it should
happen to be referred to that of Trent, that the assembly might on all sides be
free, with diverse other exorbitant and unreasonable demands. This caused the
Pope no more to fear the council, and to assure the State of Parma and
Placencia to his son, the Emperor, Princes and people of Germany, having
turned their

The end of the fourth Book of the sixth Decade.
The Contents of the fist Book of the
THE Venetians go about to divert the Pope from taking arms against the
Protestants. The Venetians grant passage through their Territories to the Pope
and the Emperors Soldiors, Lantgraue of Hesse. The Protestants take the Castle
of Chiusa to stop the Italians passage. The cause of the loss and overthrow of
the Protestants. What the Venetian Gentlemen are, with their prerogatives. The
commotion of the Sienois against the Spaniards. Petro Lodouico Duke of Parma
and Placentia is murdered. The Death of Francis the first, French King. The
death of Henry the eight King of England. The occasion of the new war betwixt
the French and the Horacio Farnese marries the daughter of Henry the French
King. The Venetians being solicited by the Pope and the French King against the
Emperor, continue Neuters. The Popes great perplexities. Soliman takes arms
against the Persian, making truce with Christian Princes. Contention betwixt
the Emperor and the French King concerning the Truce with the Turk.
Controversy about the Place wherein the council should be held. The death of
Pope Paul the third with the election of Pope Julius the third. Horatio Farnese
commits himself and his family into the French Pietro Strozzi his policy
to reuictuall Parma. The German Princes Treat with the French King against the
Emperor. The French King being incensed against the Pope forbidd^th the Annates
in France. The Turks war in Hungary and Transil^ania. All Germany in league
against the Emperor and his brother. Ferdinand to free him self from the war
with the Turks, offers to pay him tribute for Transiluania. And lastly the
murder of Friar George, Cardinal of the Sea Apostolic.

The fifth Book of the sixth Decade of the History of Uenice.
THE Pope perceauing the Emperor to be distasted of the Protestants (as has
been said) began to heat him more, by promising to aid him with great numbers
both of horse and foot paid by the Sea Apostolic. The Senate from the
beginning used means to appease the Pope, and to divert The Venetians reso^s
^o divert the Pope from meddling with the Protestants
could bring no good to Italy, and there was small hope to preuaill by force in
matter of Relligion: For all the free towns of Germany having declared
themselves for the Protestant Princes, fearing that the Emperor, under other
pretenses, went about to subiugate them, Germany on the other side standing
badly affected to the Pope, and Court of Rome, it was to be feared, and not
without cause, that the same fierce and warlike nation would by reason there of
make incursions into Italy, where they that had in no sort dealt in that
business were to smart for it: Or if the Emperor should happen to quell
Germany; he by that victory growing more mighty, both in forces and The Senats
answer to the Pope and the Emperor.
Emperor, without praising or dispraising it, being not willing to give any
occasion to be requested to aid him. Yet nevertheless it was certainly
reported, that the Commonwealth had promised at the conclusion of the league
at Rome, to give

The Venetians being desirous, in some sort, to content these Princes in any
thing which was not of expense, and being entreated so to do, did promise free
The Venetians grant passage to the Pope and Emperors troops.
passage to the Popes soldiers, who being assembled at Bolognia to the number
of twelve thousand footmen, and five hundred horse, were to pass thorrow the
Territory of Verona to go to Trent: the like was done to the Emperors forces,
who for their money were furnished with victuals and other necessaries. The
best and The number of the Emperors Army.
brauest soldiers of all Italy were in the Popes Army, whereof Octania Farnese
his Nephew was General, who was a young Lord of great hope: But that of the
Emperor was composed of sundry nations; namely of diverse Almans, drawn forth
Albert of Brandenbourg, who did follow the Emperors party, so that the whole
number of his forces were forty thousand footmen and five thousand horse.

The Protestant Princes made preparations at the same time, the chief of whom
were John Frederick Duke of Saxony one of the Electors of the Empire, and
Phillip Lantgraue of Hesse, who, saying that they would defend the liberty of
Germany, which Charles went about to usurp, (as they said) did draw unto their
Who they were that took part with the Protestants.
parts diverse of the greatest Lords and Cities of Germany, as the Duke of
Wittemberg, the Count Palatin another Elector, with the Commonwealths of
Argentine, Vlmes, Francfort and Norimberg, the City of Ausbourg having a long
time before declared it self in their behalf: all which having resolved to
hold a diet at Vlmes did send their Ambassadors and Commissioners thither, to
treat particularly of the preparations for war, where the concourse of all
Germany The number of the Protestants Army.
was such, as they levied a very great army of fourscore thousand footmen,

They feared none but foreign soldiers, and especially the Italian Fantery,
levied by the Pope: whereupon, to stop their passage, they did write
lovingly to the Venetians, and by putting them in mind of the ancient
freindship betwixt the German nation and them, they entreated them not to
give passage to those through their territories, who came only to offend them,
and to serve the Emperor, The Pro testants suite to the Venetians.
who went about to bring Germany into servitude. The Senate answered that it
did hold their freindship dear, which they had ever embraced, and generaly
that of all Germany, but, their Country being open and Champaine, they could
not stop the soldiers passage but with great forces, which they were wont to
employ but against open enemies. Within a while after, they received particular
The Senaoes answer to the Protestants.
letters from the Duke of Saxony and the Landgraue of Hesse, which acquainting
them with their deseignes, and how that for their own defense they had been
enforced to take arms, did ernestly entreat them to lend them a certain
sum of money. The King of England did greatly favor his demand, by his
Secretary residing at Venice, who presented his letters; (that King being
distasted of the Emperor): but the Senate making still one answer, said, that
it did hold those The Duke of Saxon and the Lander^ue of Hesse their suite to
the Venetian Senate. with their answer.
Princes for their good and trusty friends, and did wish them all prosperity
and advancement, but that they could not satisfy their request without
offending other Princes with whom they were in league and freindship, which
they did mean to maintain, and that (these respects excepted) they did greatly
affect the German nation. Those of Ausbourg likewsie having by their letters
and by an express messenger recommended their Merchants to the Senate, (many
of whom were retired to Venice, and greater numbers coming daily thither for
fear of those trobles), were kindly answered, that their Citizens, with all
others of any The Venetians gentle answer to those of Aus bourg.
other Cities of Germany, which came to Venice, should be very welcome and
used as their own Citizens, as they had been in former times. Now Whilst
The Venetians are in some doubt seeing so many soldiers in Italy.
the Venetians doubt, and fearing least the Senate would determine, for their
safety, whatsoever did belong to the safety and greatness of the Venetian
Commonwealth: wherefore he willed him to assure the Senate of his good meaning,
that they might continue their sound intelligence with him, seeing that thereby
they should preserve one another states in safety, yea and all Italy beside;
that he was The Popes discourse to drive the Venetians from their suspicion.
desirous at that time to revive that discourse when he was armed and out of
danger to be outraged, to let them know that it was not fear, but a true and
zealous love that moved him so to discourse with him, and to open unto him the
secret of his thoughts.

The treaties of peace being broken, and the Armies on both sides in the field,
the Protestants seeking to do that of themselves, which they could not obtain
of others, namely to stop the Italians passage which were coming against them
The Protestants take Chiusa.
but the Pope and Emperors Armies, keeping the way that leads nearer to
Ispruch, entered the Duchy of Bauaria and from thence went to Ratisbon, where
the Emperor with his other forces expected them.

The two armies as well that of the Emperor, as the enemies, continued a long
time idle, each of them watching for some advantage, notwithstanding that they
were oftentimes so near together, as sundry great skirmishes were many times
The occasions of the enemies loss.
made in one an others view, without coming to battle, which the Emperor,

For the soldiers and the towns beginning to loose their former great opinion
of being soon able to vanquish and defeat the Emperor, and to feel the
discomodities of tedious contributions toward the wars, King Ferdinand having
on the other side entered Duke John Fredericks State with a mighty army,
accompanied by Duke Maurice of Saxony his enemy, there arose such a confusion
and amazement in the enemies Camp as suffering diverse Castles to be taken
before their faces, and their Army dissoluing of it self, the Emperor might in
a short The Cardinal Farn^se comes to Uenice
space contrary to his expectation give an end to that dangerous war. For
having

This War thus ended, winter being already come the Emperor dismissed the
Popes troops, which being disbanded returned back into Italy. The Cardinal
Farnese, the Popes nephew, who had been his Legate in that Army, returning
toward Rome was desirous as he passed along to see the City of Venice, where
having notice that they made preparations for his entertainment, he determined
Who be Venetian Gentlemen with their Pre^ogatiues.


The Venetians do call those Gentlemen that have a share in the government of
the Commonwealth, that is to say, those that have authority to elect the
public magistrates, and may themselves likewise be elected: this authority is
given them from their birth, so as who-so-euer is borne of noble parents, is
noble and may at a certain time and manner limited by the laws, enter into
the great council, where the ordinary electon of Magistrates is made. Into
this rank are received, either those who having been the chief inhabitants
of the City, and most famous for virtue and wealth, have from the beginning
had the mannaging of public affairs: or alse those who for some notable and
worthy act, done in serof the Commonwealth, are at sundry times, and for
sundry accidents, admitted thereunto: who for the most part have been of the
chief and noblest families, of some other place: or some others unto whom by
special grace and favor, this title of Nobillity has been given: Wherein
neuer-the-lesse they have carried themselves very moderately, it being
granted but to Lords of great Estate, Este and Gonzaga, with some others of
the chief of Italy, admitted thereunto; namely, Henry King of France and
Poland, being at Venice, in the year 1574. and among other honors receiving
the title of a Venetian Gentleman, did seem to be highly pleased, and
satisfied with that gift. Besides, all those that descend from them, who have
been once received into this degree, have the same preeminence, and to the end
it may continually be the better maintained in it perfection, they do curiously
search out the pedegrees of those who are to enter into the great council, not
only the nobillity of the father, but like-wise whether they be borne of
lawful matrimony, and of no common woman, but of some honorable degree and
condition, whereof a regester Auogario of the Commonwealth. But to return to
our history, the Emperor Charles was in all places highly praised, and
commended for his fortunate success, and for breaking the enemies army: Duke
Frederick and the Landgraue, were yet unvanquished, who despayring, as authors
of al those troubles, of obtaining the Emperors favor, did still continue in
their rebellion: and yet for all that men might perceive that they The Popes
complaints against the Emperor.
could not long resist the forces or so great and victorious a Prince. The Pope
calling to mind by himself, whatsoever was past, perceived how much more
proffitable it had been for him to have followed the Venetians council; whose
wisdom he highly praised, for he saw no prosperous success of any thing that
he had taken Pietro Lodouico was in no great fafety, in regard the war was so
son ended, the which he thought would have continued longer, with diverse
other matters which discontented him, and gave him cause to complain. The
Emperor on the other side made his complaints, saying that he had broken
promise with him, because the war being not yet ended, which he had begun
through The Emperors complaints against the Pope.
his persuasion, he had countermanded his troops, leaving him still entangled
in Germany, betwixt two mighty enemies, the Duke of Saxony, and the Landgraue
of Hesse; the which he much amplified, to draw the Pope to a new contribution
John Frederick Duke of Saxony prisoner, and enforced the Landgraue to crave
his pardon: whereupon entering intriumphant manner into the City of Ausbourge,
he there held a Diet, where he obtained whatsoever he demanded for his own
proffit and commodity. Yet neuer-the-lesse, in the midst of all these
prosperities his mind still ran upon the affairs of Italy, how he might keep to
himself the State of Milan, whither he sent great store of ordnance, which he
had taken The Emperor returns so Milan.
from diverse Lords of Germany, with great numbers of Spanish foot, as those in
whom he reposed most trust, and himself going thither afterward, caused the
oath of allegiance to be made unto himself, and to him whom he should appoint
for their Prince, (meaning his Son Philip) who for that purpose was shortly
to pass into Italy: yet neuer-the-lesse he procured an agreement with the
Swisses, whereby they were bound to maintain and defend the State of Milan. He
had moreover placed four hundred Spaniards in Siena, for the guard of the City
with an officer of his own, who in diverse matters used great authority, and
went The Sienois rise against the Spaniards.
about to build a Castle there, that he might afterward make himself
absolute master thereof, under color of the commotions of the people and
nobility, who being not able in the end to endure to see themselves brought
into bondage, The Emperors deseigns in Italy.
had driven the Spaniards forth of the city, and committed diverse other
outrages against the Imperial Majesty; he did likewise use means to seize on
the town of Piombino, to take it from the true Lord upon sundry pretenses, The
death of Petro Lodouico the Popes Son.
promising to recompense him with some other place, hoping to make use of the
commodiousnesse of that place, being seated on the sea of Tuscany, and fit for
his other deseigns: But his seasing on the City of Placentia, together with
the death of Petro Lodouico, did more then all the rest amaze every man, and
especially the The death of Francis the first French King and Henry the eight
King of England.
Pope: and for the full accomplishment of the Emperors happiness, there died at
the same time, not long one after another, the two greatest and mightiest Kings
of Christendom, Francis the first of that name French King, and Henry the
eight King of England; so, that all things seemed to favor him, and to fall
out according to his desire, seeing that those two great and mighty Princes,
being taken away, who were his enemies, and envious of his greatness, he
remained alone

Henry Daulphin of France succeeded King Francis his Father, not only in the
crown, but in the self same affections and desires, in no sort to give way to
the Henry the Second French King.
Emperors fortune. The Senate were greatly grieved with King Francis death,
whereupon they chose two Ambassadors, namely Vittore Grimani and Mateo
Dandulo, who were in all have to go into France to the new King, and according
to the custom to bewail with him his fathers death, and next to congratulate
his coming to the crown, and to assure him that the Venetian The Senate
sends Ambassadors to the new Fench King.
Republike was disposed and resolved to continue peace, and friendship with
him, Henry King of England, Italy was not so much grieved fot him, that Kingdom
being farther off: the Venetians alone bewailed him, by reason of their
ordinary commerce, and traffic into that realm, for which, they kept an
ordinary Ambassador in England. Edward the sixth of that name succeeded his
Father Henry, who was young and governed by the And to Edward the Sixth, King of
England.
chief Lords of the Kingdom, unto whom the Senate send Dominico Bollano for
their Ambassador, who found them very willing to continue friendship and
usual traffic with the Venetians, promising to give kind usage to as many of
their nation as should come into those parts.

The French King was desirous at the same time to make war upon the English
The Cardinal Saint George is sent Legate into France.
George into France, under color (as it was given forth,) to cause the French
Prelates to come to the council published at Bolognia: But in effect it was
for other ends, namely to incite the French King to turn his deseigns against
the

King Henry did willingly harken to this motion, as one desirous to execute
some great enterprise, and who would not omit any occasion whereby he might
hope to purchase glory by some generous action: wherein the Pope, by means of
his forces, was thought to be a very fit Instrument for the affairs of Italy,
as well in regard of the commodiousnesse of his State, as most of all for his
authority. Pet^o Stross^ sent sor into France to troble the peace of Italy.
whereupon the King being easily persuaded to harken to this proposition
resolved to strengthen his intelligences in Italy, and to purchase friends
there, and among othere, he sent for Perro Strossi into France, whom he forth
with honored with the order of S. Michell, which at that time was a great
honor, and given to none but noble persons, or to such as had well deserved of
the Crown of France: this man was highly esteemed for his excellent wit, and
also for that he Horratin Farn se marries King Henry's daughter.
liberties. But together with the Pope (for the union betwixt them was already
confirmed, Horatio Farnese son to Pedro Lodouico having married King Henry's
daughter) he was likewise desirous to draw the Venetians to that league and
Union, because he would attempt nothing against the Emperor in Italy, but that
which he was sure would take effect.

The King to this end sent his Ambassador to Venice, so did the Pope his
Nuncio, who supposed to find the Venetians more ready to condescend to their
demandes, Petro Lodouico who had been murdered by certain Place nti^e
Gentlemen, by the consent (as it was reported) of D. Ferrant of Gonzaga,
Lieutenant to the Emperor in Italy, who presently after had seized upon the
City of Placentia, leaving great numbers of Spaniards in Garrison there in the
Emperors name who by that means Gonzaga ^xeu seth^im concer ning the death of
Petro Lodouico.
went about to take away an other man's rightes not by open force but by deceit.

Gonzaga knowing that the Venetians would suspect and think strangely of that
deed, did speedily send Giouan Baptista Schizze, a Senator of Milan to Venice,
toacquaint the Senate with what had been done, and by quallifying the matter
to Octauio Farnese complained in vain that so great an injury was done unto
him he being the Emperors son in law.

This stir being in very deed of great importance had caused the Venetians to
make provisions for the defense of their towns: therefore they made Stephano
Tepulo Prouidator General on the firm land, to the end that in that office
he should provide for all their soldiers, visit the Forts belonging to the
State, and take speedy order for what soever should be needful: They did
besides, call home the Duke of Vrbin General of their Army, who was then at
Rome, about his marriage, not long before concluded with Virginia, daughter to
Duke Pietro Lodouico, Farnese They wrote afterward to Antonio de Castello, who
served them as master of their Artillery, and a man of great credit, that he
should make have to the City of Bressia, to augment the ordinary Garrison that
lay there; the Prouidator The Pope an^ French King do solicit^ the Venetians
against the Em peror.
Venetians supposing that all places were full of deceit and treachery. Things
standing at this stay, the Pope and the French King did daily more ernestly
solicit the Venetians, openly to declare themselves without any more delay,
and not to defer the remedying of the present mischief till it were too
late. The Senate for all that did not make have to take arms against a most
mighty Prince their neighbor, who at the same time exalted to the very height
of his prosperous greatness, because that the commonwealth was not so weak and
low brought, as whosoever those should be that were desirous to assail it,
might think their enterprise easy; nor yet so mighty as it was able to keep
others in awe, and thereby gave them cause to go about to abate their
greatness: so as the condition thereof was far different from that of
others, because it might without any fear of being assailed by the Emperor,
expect that which time, and the alteration of affairs might procure it; which
might (as it often happens) open a way The Senates answer to the Po^e and
French King.
well debated in open Council, the Pope and French Kings demands were answered
after one manner, and yet apart, how that the Senate did infinitely praise their
care of the common safety, together with the provisions which they had made,
for the mainetainance and defense of that which did belong unto them: that they
would follow and imitate that Council, and have a watchful eye on the defense
of their State, supposing that remedy alone to be sufficient for that time, to
free them from all fear and dangers: and therefore, they did not think it
necessary to enter into a more strict and particular union, whereby they might
stir up and provoke those that were desirous to trouble their peace.

Although this answer did not greatly please the Pope and King, they did
neuer-the-lesse dissemble it, because they would not altogether estrange them
from their friendship, and loose their hope of seeing them one day (having
changed their minds) to be joined with them. Whereupon, commending the grave
and mature Council of that Senate, they said, that when they should have a
further insight into the Emperors intention, which could not be long
concealed, together with the suspicion which all men had conceived of his
ambition, they would then on a sudden resolve with true and firm foundations
to assure that which concerned themselves and the whole State of Italy. Now
notwithstanding this Sundry practices in Italy.
resolution of the Venetians, and that their hope of their good success in
their own Farneses in sundry Cities of Italy, and chiefly at Genoa, Siena and
Millan, Cities infected with the humors of diverse factions. The year
following 1548. was in a manner spent in such like businesses and secret
practizes, and conspiracies of An. 1548.
Princes against one ano^hers States and yet without any effect of importance.
For although the French King was desirous to trouble Italy, that he might
altogether keep the Emperor busied there, and yet neuer-the-les, he thought it
a weak and Octauio Farnese) some means of agreement: he did likewise perceive,
that the Venetians being not well resolved to take arms, were still desirous to
remain neuters, and were so strongly united with the Emperor since certain
years, as he thought it an impossibility to be able to disioyne them,
besides, he was desirous to pursue the war with y^ English, hoping by reason of
the conte^tion The French Kings doubts and deseignes
in England betwixt the Governors of the young King, not only to keep Scotland,
which he hoped one day would fall to his eldest son, by the marriage of the
Infanta of that kingdom, but likewise to win and recover the town of
Bouloigne, by means whereof, although he continued his sundry practizes, not
only with the Pope, concerning Parma, but likewise at Genoa and Siena, for the
alteration of the government of those towns, depending on the Emperors
authority, yet neuerthe-les he made no preparation to put his desiegnes in
execution, nor declared himself openly the Emperors enemy.

The Pope on the other side being extremely desirous to revenge the wrongs
which the Emperor had done him, and to restore the City of Placentia to his
house, did greatly doubt, whither it were best for him to proceed therein by
arms, or by way of agreement: sometimes he hoped that the Emperor as Lord of
so The Pope is greatly ^erpiexed.
many great States, although he did for a time show himself stern and
severe, would not in the end deprive Octauio his son in law with his
children descended from that marriage, of that State, and reduce them to a
private fortune and condition, for which he had more then once sent express
messengers unto him, to entreat him to deliver the City of Placentia to
Octauio, and to for bear to molest him any more about the possession of the
City of Parma: but at the same Octauto, with the City of Parma, into his
protection against the Imperial forces.

The Pope in this sort being tossed up and down, resolved, (for the
satisfying of the Emperor and the Almaines, with whom he was at odds in
regard of the Council which he would have had to be kept at Bolognia, and
others at Trent) to send the Bishop of Fane his Nuncio to the Emperor, and the
Bishop of Verona at the same time for his Legate into Germany, with power and
authority to grant the The Pope to (...) the Atmains sends a Legate into
Germany.
Almains sundry things which they craved for some alteration of the ordinary
customs in the Roman Church, the which the Emperor had justly looked into,
Octauio likewise, with sundry hopes, without any certain resolution;
propounding sundry kinds of agreement unto them, some times that he would
recompense him with some other State in an other place: then he said that he
would first see who had most right to that State, either the Church, or the
Empire: at other times likewise, seeming to be discontented, instead of
surrendering Placentia, he demanded to have Parma delivered to him: in a word*
those which best knew his inward meaning, did suppose that he went about by
those incerteinties to entangle the Pope in perpetual doubts, having already
determined with himself by no Soliman was desirous to lead his Solimans Army
against the Persians.
Army appointed for Hungary against Persia, being thereunto provoked by a
desire of glory which he hoped to purchase by the defeat of Tamas forces.
This caused him more willingly to grant the truce for which Ferdinand had sent
an Ferdinand should pay him a yearly tribute of thirty thousand Ducats, for
the lands which he possessed in Hungary. The Venetians in this agreement
Soliman makes truce with Christian Princes.
were on both sides mentioned, which procured them much safety and reputation,
especially by that wherein it was expressly said, that none of those that were
mentioned, should during the time of the truce, trouble the peace and quiet one
of another. There happened certainly at the same, a matter worthy of note, which
was, that our Princes distrusting one another, did of themselves, by
diminishing their own reputation, increase the authority and pride of the
common enemy. For the Emperor craved that the French King might be mentioned in
that agreement, Strise betwixt the Emperor and French king
and enjoined to perform that which the late King Francis his father had
promised him, and on the other side, the King did earnestly labor to have it
expressed in that treaty, that the Emperor, during the time of the truce,
should not make war upon any Christian Prince, and the matter went on so sar,
that although the treaty was in a manner concluded: King Henry did with speed
send the Lord of Cottignac his Ambassador to Constantinople to cross the
accord, saying, that the Emperor had not consented to the truce for any other
end, but that he might with more ease make war upon him, whereby Soliman was
to be advised and not suffer the Emperors power so much to increase, who would
never have entertained the truce, had he not thought to profit himself
thereby. The Lord of Cottignac used the same speech at Venice as he passed
along, exhorting the Senate to use means that this treaty, without that
clause, might be of none effect, Soliman sends Imperio^s letters to the
Emperor.
which the Venetians making small account of, he went forward to
Constantinople, where finding the truce to be concluded and finished, he did
nevertheless Soliman to the Emperor, and to Ferdinand, written very
imperiously, but with a style fit for a great and just Prince; how that he had
willingly granted the truce, with an intent that there should be a sur^ease of
arms on all sides, betwixt those who were friends to either party, and
therefore if any of the Princes, mentioned in the accord, should go about to
molest one another by arms, he would give aid and succor to the party
offended, against the disturber of the peace.

The French King in this business had diverse suspicions of the Venetians, who
being desirous speedily to conclude that accord, wherein they were to be
mentioned, had without caring for the King their friends interest, too much
favored Ferdinands party: and on the other side, the Emperor complained of
them, saying, That they had first given that council to the French King, and
afterward favored it at Constantinople, to the end he might be more strictly
enioined to be at peace with the French King, by reason that they were desirous
to take away all occasion of war in Italy, which was so highly displeasing
unto them. At the same time, the discontents betwixt the Pope and the Emperor
were much increased, and men did already perceive great signs of war betwixt
them two, by reason that the Emperor continued in his resolution, that the
Council should be speedily held (according as it had been published) in the
City of Trent, as well to satisfy the Almains who desired it, as because he
supposed that Contention concerning the place where the Council should be held.
who on the contrary sent to the Prelates that were at Bolognia, and to the
Popes self, making great protestations: and to have more appearance on his
side, he Madrucis, a Prince of the Empire, to go to Rome, where he protested
that he would not allow any other council, then that which had bin published
to be held in the city of Trent, and if they should go about to cross that,
and thereby be cause of infinite other miseries, he did request to be acquitted
of it before God and men. These things being very grievous to the Pope, and
happening presently upon the neck of the bad success of Parma, did greatly
trouble him: yet nevertheless his hope of agreement with the Emperor did make
him proceed more slowly therein. But during these delays and prolongations,
Octauio being impatient of staying any longer for the event of the business,
concerning the recovery of Parma, after that he had attempted in vain to
Camillo Vrsino, who commanded the city, did on a sudden determine by a
precipate council, to throw himself into the arms of the same Spaniards of
whom he had received so many wrongs, that he might be able (as the Emperors
Ambassodor at Rome had craftily persuaded him) by means of their Arms to get
that City: at which strange action the Pope greatly wondering, and by reason
of the grief thereof, together with his weakness and great age keeping his
bed, he being four score and four years old, did within a few days after
depar^ out of this mortal life, after he had with great commendations
governed the sea Apostolic fifteen years, having ever showed himself a good
and discreet Prince, and a lover of good and virtuous people, and above all
other things, he had for a The death of Pope Paul the third.
time remained neuter betwixt those Princes being very desirous of peace and
quiet. The Popes death did put the Italian Princes in great fear, that it
would be cause of the disquiet of Italy, seeing that the French and the
Imperials did in diverse Camillo Vrsino did still possess, but with a very
weak garrison and Parma is kept by Camill^ Vrsino.
small provision, for the maintenance of the war, who would not obey the
letters and commandments of the college of Cardinals, who had willed him to
consigne that City into the hands of Octauio Farnese, who promised to keep it
for the future Pope. This fear of troubles increased by reason of the long
time that the Cardinals spent in the creation of a new Pope, for the two
factions of Cardinals French and Imperials, did obstinately strive one with
another.

The Venetian Senate in these long disputations, according to the custom of
their ancestors would not meddle therein, but aiming only at the common Giouan
Maria Cardinal of Monte, was The Cordin^ll de Monte is chosen Pope, and called
by the name of Julius the third.
for his sanctity created Pope, who was borne at Mont S. Seue in^ in Tuscany, a
man who obteining the dignity of Cardinal, not by favor of Nobility, or help
of kindred, was reputed to be very virtuous, and especially to be a man newter:
the Venetians being very joyful for this election, were persuaded, that he
depending no more on the Emperor then on the French King, they might procure
him to hold them both for friends, and mediate likewise betwixt them, and
especially in Italy, a firm peace. Whereupon the Senate did speedily write to
Matteo Dandulo their Ambassador at Rome, to congratulate Pope Iul^us (for so
the new Pope Philippo Tron, Francesco Contaren, Marc-Antonio Venieri, and
Nicolao de Ponte. But the effects did in no sort answer the hope The Senat^
(...) Ambassador^ (...) the Pope.
which men had conceived of this new Pope, and especially in that all men did
expect and desire, namely, that he would appease the troubles, and provide for
the quiet of Christendom, and for the safety of Italy. For addicting himself
to buildings and other vain matters, he seemed to contemn serious things, and
such as beseemed the rank and grade which he held, and the miserable condition
of those times, (...) the French King being greedy of Fame, and finding
himself freed from the war with the English, having recovered the town of
Bulloigne, could not long live in quiet: for Horatio Farnese coming into
France to entreat his Majesty Horatio Farn^se puts himself and family
into the French Kings protection.
to take his house, himself, and brother into his protection, and to defend
and keep the City of Parma, things which had been already motioned by
others, he was very kindly welcomed, and the King did embrace his protection
upon certain conditions, being desirous to disturb the peace of Italy,
whereby he might afterward have a more open occasion to take arms against the
Emperor, hoping more-ouer (although the matter fell out very diversely) that it
would open him away, either to unite himself more strictly with the Pope, or
at least to disioyne him from the Emperor, by taking upon him to defend a
vassal of

King Ferdinand on the other side, hoping under coullor of some contention
betwixt the Barons of the Realm of Hungary, and certain rebellion happened in
Transiluania, to be able to impatronize that Province, departed from August^
(upon sundry promises of aid which the Emperor had made to him, the better to
induce him to quit the succession of the Empire to his son Philip) and went
into Austria, where he had already assembled a Diet to leuy men and money for
such an enterprise: it was besides reported, that Soliman at his return from
Persia Presages of great wars.
for that he accounted the five years truce to have been broken by Doria,
who ^ad taken certain places from him in Afric, held by Dragut, which he had
manned with Spanish Garrisons: ^o, that all these things being exactly
considered, were presages of great wars.

These accidents did greatly displease the Venetians, and by so much the more,
as they were in hope to prolong the truce for a longer time, Soliman being
come to Constantinople, being willing to show how desirous he was to continue
friend to the Venetians, sent a Chiaus to Venice, to acquaint them with his
return The Turk sends an Ambassador to Venice.
from Persia, and with his happy success, ex^olling (according to the manner
of that nation) all his exploits done there, saying, That in regard he found
the Persians stronger then he expected, his attempts had not succeeded to his
desire. The Senate, being desirous still to enterteine Solimans friendship,
resolved to do the like by him, and to send an Ambassador to his Port;
whereupon Catherin Zene was appointed to that end, who although he was four
score and four years of Catherin Zene (...) sent Am^assador to the Turk.
age, did not refuse to undertake so long and tedious a journey for the service
of his coun^rey: His Embassage was to great purpose, for by his wisdom he
caused to be trodden under foot the complaints which the Turks made for the
death of Saba R^is, so often reiterated, whereupon, Soliman promised that it
should never more be remembered.

In this manner was the year 1550. spent, famous of it self over all
Christendom, An. 1550.
it being the year of Iubilee, but it was more noted by the publication of
the Council of Trent, whither speedily from all places diverse Prelates began
to come: then there happened a great dearth of corn, which was in a manner
general, A (...) (...).
but greater in Italy then in other places: whereby it behooued Princes to open
their treasures for the relief of their poor subjects, and in particular the
Signiory of Venice, who providing with singular bounty and affection for the
necessity of the people of the City, and other their subjects, gave great
gifts to such as brought come to Venice, to provoke those of foreign
countries to

The year following 1551. did open great wars over all Italy, whereof the
An. 1551.
Pope by his (...), rather then of malice, was the chief Author, who by little
and little falling from his first resolution, did publish monitories against
Octanio Farnese, (of whom not long before himself had taken upon him the
defense and tuition) accusing and cursing the French Kings protection of the
city of Parma, although that (according to the common report) when he was
made The Pope not * thinking there on, causes great wars in Italy.
acquainted therewith, he seemed to allow it, or at least in no sort to
contradict it. He did not consider how that by his ordinary reuiling of the
French and the Farneses, he did enforce them to league themselves more strictly
together, and to augment their forces, which he having no means to resist, in
that he had not provided in time, was enforced to have recourse to the
Emperor, who for the very self same matter of Parma was displeased with him.

He was by little and little fallen into these inconveniences, by the craft of
the the Imperials, (unknown to him,) his own servants, in regard of their
particular profit, not caring to let him know the truth, giving credit to the
dissimulation of other men, and enterteining him in the mean time with vain
suspicions: whereby, without knowing it, he had in a manner given over his
neutrallity, and had given occasion of disturbing that peace, for which he had
so much sought to purchase fame and glory. The Venetians had often dealt with
his Holiness for the appeasi^g of these troubles, foreseeing the long and
dangerous war that might proceed from them, happening then in a bad time for
Italy, in regard of Solimans Proposition of an agreement about Parma.
to give him the Duchy of Camerin and Nepi in recompense of Parma, the which
should remain to the Church, whereof he forthwith advertised the Emperor,
assuring him that the Venetians council had made him to resolve thereon: the
Pope supposing that the Emperor would easily condescend to that agreement, as
well because it was reasonable, as for fear likewise, that by refusing it, he

It was thought that the Emperor was willing of himself to have granted it,
Who hindered the Emperor from allowing of that agreement.
but that he was altered by his servants and officers, and especially by Don
Diego de Mendoza his Ambassador at Rome, and by Don Ferrant de Gonzaga Governor
of the State of Milan, showing therein (as it was openly spoken) their
particular hatred to the Ferneses. But the Pope perceiving that it did not
please the Emperor, and not daring for fear of his forces to displease him,
fell to his former resolution, to pursue the Farneses by Arms, who being
already strictly allied to Farneses, and the Emperor to the Pope, it increased
in such sort, as the Pope entering into some distrust of the Emperors deseignes
and actions, detesting openly his officers manner of proceedings, repented for
what he had done, and sought occasions to withdraw himself from him:
Whereupon he determined to send his nephew Ascanio de la Cornia to the French
King, to persuade him to lay down Arms, and to consent to some agreement, by
putting him in mind of the difficulty of his enterprise, defending a City so
far off from his kingdom: not long after, he sent The Pope seeks means
of agreement with the (...) King.
Achilles de Grassis to Venice, whose coming, although it seemed to be only
for to advance the common good. Now Ascanio being returned from France,
reported that the King had used many goodly speeches, and seemed willing of
agreement, and had likewise caused Octauio to give consent that Parma should
return to the Church, provided that the Emperor would do the like by the
Castles and strong Towns which he held upon the Parmesan; and that he would
not withdraw his forces from Parma, till such time as he were well assured,
that it should never more return under the Emperors power: Whereupon sundry
difficulties arising, all men perceived that the proposition tended only to
The war continues in Italy.
draw the business out in length, and to weaken the affairs of war, rather
then to any firm peace: so as at last, al their care on either side, was to
strengthen

The King still sent troops into Italy under the command of the Duke of Neuers
and other Captains, causing Pietro Strossi to make an other levy of soldiers
in Mirandola. The Pope and the Emperor did the like, so as those two Armies,
Ecclesiastical and Imperial, being joined together, amounted well near to
fifteen thousand footmen, with great numbers of horse, of whom Don Ferrant
Strossi his policy to victual Parma.
de Gonzaga was General: but Strossi his wit and diligence was to be
admired, who on a sudden going forth of Mirandola, entered upon the Bolognois,
scouring and wasting the Country with such terror, as the Pope beginning to
stand in doubt not only of Bolognia, but likewise of Rauenna and other places
Strossi taking advantage, did with great speed march toward the Parmesan, and
entered with great numbers of footmen, and store of victuals into Parma; in
regard whereof, the assailants being out of hope to take it of a long time,
did perceive that the war would long continue.

The Venetians in the mean time looking warily to all matters, and not willing
by any means to depend on any but on themselves, determined to leuy four
thousand foot, and five hundred light horse, with whom having increased the
garrisons of their frontier towns, and caused most of their best Captains to
The Duke of Florence takes the Emperors party.
Emperor, did openly favor his party both with men and money, not with any
intent to feed this fire, which he would willingly have seen quenched, but
because he would not have him think sinisterly of him: for he likewise, with
the other Princes of Italy, did not allow of the behavior of the Emperors
officers, nor yet of his desiegnes, suspecting them very much, and especially
in regard of a new Castle which he had lately built in Sienna, which was
commonly termed, Il Ceppo della Toscana.

As for the Duke of Ferrara, although as a vassal to the Church, it behooued
The Duke of Ferrara craves advice of the Venetians how to behave himself in
those troubles in Italy.
the Duke being greatly moved, sent Ieronimo Serafino his Ambassador to
Venice, to crave (as he said) the Senates advise, after what manner he should
behave himself in so miserable a time, resolving to follow their council, and
especially in their neutrallity: but finding himself too weak of himself to
do it, he feared, unless he were relieved, to be enforced, for the
conservation of his own State, to join himself with some one or other, and
to deal otherwise

This demand was thought to be very suspicious and full of cunning, they
supposing that the French went about by this means to sound their meaning, the
better to draw them to some confederacy, or at least to discover somewhat of
their interior purposes: whereupon the Senate was of opinion to answer him in
general terms. Now it had above all things desired the peace of Italy, and
that to those ends it had used al possible means with the Pope, and others
besides, according as it had seen occasion: but (...) nothing prevailed
therein, they were at least resolved to keep themselves in peace and in their
ancient neutrality, and the better and more honorably to do it, and with
greater assurance, other men being armed, they thought it ^it to arm; and by
providing for that which A discre^t answer of the Venetians to the Duke of
Ferrar^.
concerned them, had together taken care for the preservation of the Dukes
state, in regard of the particular affection they did bear him, and for their
own interest likewise, being in manner inseparable with his by reason of the
near neighborhood Lodouico Alemani being sent to Genoa, had under sundry
pretenses attempted to raise his faction there, and craved in the Kings name,
that it might please the Genouois to lend him their haven, for his fleet to lie
in safety, where he might land those troops which he intended to send into
Italy. Now the Cardinal Tournon being at the same time at Venice, whither he
came from Rome, upon the Popes commandment that all the French Cardinals
should leave the City, King Henry wrote unto him that he should in his name
expose to the Prince and Octauio, and to defend his cause, That he thought he
should perform: a Instructions sent by the French King to the Cardinal
Tournon to be propounded to the Venetian Senate.
noble part, and worthy a great Prince, and which in particular ought to be
pleasing to the Princes of Italy, to defend an Italian Prince, weak, and
unjustly oppressed by the violence of other men, who had cast himself into his
arms and protection: that he could hardly be persuaded that the Pope would
hinder the defense and preservation of his own vassal with an other man's
arms and aid, seeing he himself was able to give him small relief: and that
being so defended he could least of all believe that the other Italian Princes
would cross him in going The Senates answer to the Cardinal* Tourno^
Germany being come to it: but when his Holiness should be assured that other
men would aid him, it was not then to be doubted but that he would embrace
some other resolution; seeing that to quit the Emperors friendship in such a
case might rightly be termed, a setting of himself at liberty. The Senate gave
the King thanks and did highly commend his generous deseigne of defending
Octa^io ^arnese excepted, whom he might be assured did favor him, but
resolving to declare himself afterward more openly against the Emperor,
having sent other forces into Piedmont, he did vnlookt^ for cause diverse
places to be assailed which were kept by the Imperialls, some of which he
took, he did at the same time proclaim war by sea, commanding the Prior of
Capua brother to Pietro (...) Admiral of the French Galleys, that scouring the
seas he should fight with the Emperors vessels: whereby it happened within a
while after, that Doria with his Galleys conducting Maximillian King of Boheme
and his wife from Barcelona to Genoa, he hardly escaped the French fleet, yet
nevertheless some of his vessels that lod'g behind were taken and brought to
Marseilles. But the Kings treaty with Duke Maurice of Saxony, Albert Marquis of
Brandenbourg, and other Princes, and The German Princes treat with the
French King against the Emperor.
free Cities of Germany, was of fa^re greater importance, all these being
merueilously distasted of the Emperor, though upon sundry occasions, some
being not able to digest the wrong done to the Landgraue, whom the Emperor
kept prisoner contrary to his promise, and others, being provoked against the
Emperor, for matters of Religion.

King Henry resolving upon this league, and having imparted it to Giouan
Capello the Venetians Ambassador resident with his Majesty, he did assure him
that he would in person go into Germany, earnestly entreating him to follow
him thither, to the end, (as it was supposed) that he might have occasion to
practice The Pope by his Legate goes about to att^ne the Emperor and the
French King.
he had raised in Christendom, and whose success being different, himself
was to beat a part in it, determined to send two Cardinals to those Princes,
as Legates from the sea Apostolic, to weet, Verale to the French King, and
Carpi to the Emperor, to exhort them to lay by all hatred and malice, and all
desire of making any more war one upon another: how that the taking of
Tripoli, and diverse other great warlike preparations of the Turks for
Christendom, ought to excite them to firm peace and friendship.

But the flame was already grown so great, as all his exhortations could not
quench it, although the French King for his part gave some hope thereof, and
Tournon to Rome, to prosecute the treaty of accord, and that the Venetian
Senate was entreated to have an hand therein: yet, all men might perceive that
he was more disposed to war then to peace, and that all his practices tended
to draw the Pope to his party, and to make him a companion in the war which he
intended against the Emperor, who on the other side, suspecting these treaties
of peace, had re-enforced his army that lay at the siege of Parma, thinking
that it would greatly blemish his reputation, if during these practices, they
should surprise and take him unprovided. The Pope on the other side, being in
great doubt and fear for that he was disioyned from the Emperor, and
uncertain of the friendship of the French, knew not what to resolve Consistory
very bitter speeches against against the French King, detesting sundry of his
actions, and especially his alliance and friendship with the Turks, so as the
King being out of hope to have him for his friend, dismissed his Legate from
his Court, and called home the Lord of Terms his Ambassador at Rome, The King
inci^ed against the (...) (...) bids annates.
threatening both the Pope and the whole Roman Court; forbidding his subjects
to send any more to Rome for Bulls concerning benefices, saying, That it was
against reason to make war on his kingdom with his own money.

At the same time a very great and mighty Turkish Fleet departed forth of the
Haven of Constantinople, commanded by Sinan Bascha, and Rusten the vizier
Bascha with diverse other Captains of authority and experience. Upon report A
great Tur^ish fleet at Sea.
thereof, the Senate did augment the number of their forces with seven and
forty Galleis, as being uncertain what way the Turks would take, and Stefano
Tepulo was for the second time chosen General. But the Turkish Fleet sailed
peaceably through the Channel of Corfou, and held on it course toward Sicely,
where the Bascha was desirous to know of the Viceroy, what account the Emperor
The course held by the Turkish ^leet at Sea.
made of restoring the towns which Doria had taken in Affricke the year
before, and being answered that he did mean to keep them, to take away
those places of retreats from Pirates, who did ordinarily scour those seas, he
landed great numbers of soldiers, who took and sacked the City of Augusta,
carrying away with him from that Seacoast great number of prisoners, whom they

This is all which the Turks did at sea, but at land on the parts of Hungary
and Transiluania, the Christians were strongest, for King Ferdinand by the
help of Giouan Battista Gastalda, Sforza Palauicin, and other his Captains,
made himself master of all Transiluania, and of the County and City of
Temisuar: the which lands although they belonged to young King Stephen, and to
the widow Queen his mother, were neuer-the-lesse under Solimans protection,
who The Turke^ make war in Hungary and Transiluania
first sent the Bas^ha of Buda and after him the Beglerbey of Grecia, with
great numbers of horse to drive Ferdinands troops from thence, but all their
attempts were for that time to no purpose. A certain Friar, called George, who
served the young King, did by his authority and good council much further that
enterprise, Ferdinand, and in recompense thereof, to take the Duchy of Opelia,
he promising her to give his Daughter in marriage to the King her son, so
soon F^rdinand does (...) enjoy (...).
as he should be of age: so that Ferdinands soldiers having fortified
themselves in Transiluania and Temisuar, could not be driven from thence by
the Turkish succors that came thither afterward, who being compelled by the
extremity of winter, did wholly give over the enterprise, and returned with
small credit and reputation.

In regard of the self same commodity of winter, all exployts of war ceased
in Italy, notwithstanding, that Parma and Miranda were still beseeged without
any further progression.

The year following 1552. the Emperor Charles and Ferdinand his brother were
threatened with great wars, whereby they were to defend their own States and
dominions. All Germany in a manner was banded against Charles, the Almaines
having resolved in a Diet to drive him by force forth of all Germany, and to
elect a new Emperor, because he (as they said) had done diverse things to the
prejudice of the Empire, and against the liberty of Germany. King Ferdinand All
Germany is band^d against the Emperor and his brother Fer^inand.
was likewise greatly perplexed, by reason of the great warlike preparation
which Soliman made to enuade Hungary and Transiluania, the which he knew not
how to resist, despairing of all aid from the Emperor his brother, as well for
that he was busied elsewhere, as also in regard of the discontent betwixt
them, because Ferdinand would not quit the succession of the Empire to Philip
son to the Soliman, by offering to pay him an Ferdinand to free himself from
war wi^h the Turk offere^h to pay him tribute.
other yearly tribute of thirty thousand Ducats for Transiluania, as he
already did for those lands which he possessed in Hungary.

In the mean time, the better to assure himself against the rebellions and
commotions which were then made, and all intelligences which the Turks might
have upon those newly conquered countries, he caused good guard to be kept,
and that all such as went and came too and fro, should be narrowly observed:
whereby he discovered that Friar George, who at his entreaty had been made
Bishop of Varadine, and afterward Cardinal, being spurd forward by new
ambition, Solimans protection: this Friar George the C^rdinall is murdered.
being verified, he determined to put him to death, and having given charge
thereof to Sforza Palauician be with one more entered on a day into the
Cardinals Chamber to entreat him to sign a passe-port, and whilst he was
subscribing it, both of them fell upon him and slew him.

The news thereof being brought to Rome, the Pope, and the whole College of
Cardinals were greatly offended with it, whereupon King Ferdinand, with all
those who had been consenting to his death, were excommunicated: but the King
offering to justify himself, and to prove, that if he had not dyed all
Christendom

Now the report of Solimans great warlike preparations at Constantinople, The
Venetians preparations when they heard how the Turks armed.
which were making ready against the Spring tiime, did hold all men in doubt;
because they did not certainly know for what place that Army was destined, nor
what Solimans desiegnes therein were. It more troubled the Venetians then any
else, in regard of the great expenses and perplexities of mind which the
coming forth of those fleetes from Constantinople had procured them, causing
them stillto be well provided: therefore they chose Stephano Tepulo for their
Gerall the third time, they did re-enforce their Garrisons in the Islands and
other sea

The end of the fifth Book of the sixth Decade.
The Contents of the sixth Book of
THE French Kings great Army where he was in person to back the Protestants of
Germany against the Emperor. The French take the City of Me^z. The Protestants
great forces. The French King over runs the Country of Luxembourg. The
Prince of Edward the sixth King of England. The election of Pope Paul the
fourth, of the family of Caraffa. Charles the fifth, of his two Sisters, and of
Mary Queen of England. Peace betwixt the French King and the King of Spain.
The death of Henry the second French King. The death of Pope Paul the fourth.
The Creation of Pope Pius the 4. The Cardinal Caraffa with Charles the ninth
French King. Strife betwixt the French and Spanish Ambassadors in the Council,
is appeased by the Pope. A strange matter happening at Rome. And lastly the
death of the Emperor Ferdinand.

The sixth Book of the sixth Decad of the History of Venice.
ALL these great warlike preparations made by the Turks, could not cause the
Christian Princes to make peace among themselves, but on the contrary it seemed
that the French King was more provoked thereby to molest the Emperor, whilst
he saw him busied in answering the Turkish forces. For continuing in his
determination to pass

Having then assembled forty thousand footmen of sundry nations, and four
thousand horse, he marched toward the country of Lorraine, whither the
Constable of Montmorencie being already gone before, had seized on the City
of Metz is taken by the French.
Metz, an Imperial city, which was governed by the Bishop and some principal
Mary, sister to the Emperor, from hindering his deseignes, or till the
consederate German Princes should set forward, who had already begun their
enterprise prosperously, the City of Ausbourg being at their devotion, and
passing speedily forwards without delay, through the Duke of Bauarias country,
had greatly amazed the Emperor and King Ferdinand, who were then at Ispruch,
so, as they presently resolved to retire to some place of safety: but being
afterward encouraged, and having fortified certain narrow passages of the
Mountains, through which the enemies were to pass unto them,

The French King being advertised of the Emperors amazement, with that of
Ferdinand his brother, and of their enemies progression, thought it best not to
let slip the occasion offered, the Emperor being weak both in courage and
sorces: Whereupon he resolved to march toward the river Rhine, to encourage
their confederates, and to favor their enterprise, intending likewise to pass
on The French King comes as far as the R^ine in favor of the Pr^testant
Princes.
farther if need should be. But being come to the rivers side, he received
news that made him turn back again: for the Confederates thinking themselves
strong enough to expel the Emperor, and desiring to keep foreign sorces
forth of their countries, for fear of receiving some discommodine thereby,
Maurice should write to the King, how that they had already agreed with the
Emperor, whereby they had obtained their desire, and that there remained
nothing more for them to do, but to thank him most heartily for the great
pleasure he had done them, for the which all Germany should owe a perpetual
bond and remembrance to the Croune of France. These news did trouble the King,
who saw his hope frustrate besides the (...) and expenses of such a journey:
yet nevertheless being unwilling to keep his troops idle he marched toward
the Duchy of Luxembourg, where he conquered (...) the (...) of ^bourg.
diverse places of importance, and among others, the Castle of Monualier,
accounted the key of that country, in which the Count Man^felt was taken, who
was Governor thereof for the Emperor. Then propounding to himself other
important deseignes, he determined to fashion himself in some sort to the Pope
that he might disioyne him from the Emperor, whereby he obtained at last, that
for Parma and Mirandola, there should be betwixt the Sea Apostolic, and the
The Prince of (...) (...) (...) (...).


During these practices the Prince of Salerno came to the Kings Camp, who
propounding unto him the enterprise of Naples, his Majesty did willingly harken
unto it, entering into discourse with him what forces would be sufficient, and
what means were to be used for the execution of that enterprise: for which the
Prince having made great offers to the King and promised diverse matters,
grounded chiefly upon the peoples desire to shake of the Spanish yoke, and to
cast themselves betwixt his arms, the King concluded that he should be the
chief of The enterprise of (...) propounded to the King.
that enterprise.

This Prince leaving the Realm of Naples by reason of some contention Don
Pedro de Toledo the Viceroy, and for hatred to the Emperor, because he
maintained his enemy against him, came to Padua, where for a time he remained,
and then determining to be revenged of his wrongs and of the small account the
Emperor made of him, he resolved to go into France: but he was desirous first
to pass by Venice to confer with the Senators concerning his deseignes, that
he might the better inform the King of their meaning, conferring the
proposition that he intended to make unto him. And being brought unto the
Senate, he began with a long and eloquen^ speech, to set forth the occasion
which then offered it self to them, for the recovery of those The Prince of
Salerno his proposition to the Venetian Senate.
Towns and havens which they had in former times possessed on the coast of But
what greater commodity, (said he) can be hoped for, then that which now
offers it self? And what greater trouble and vexation of mind can there
happen unto the Emperor, then that where-in he is presently wrapped by the
wars of Germany, and by the preparations wherewith the Turk threatens his
brother Ferdinand? But above all other things the mature judgment and wisdom
of the Venetian Senate, ought to be well advised, and not to suffer the
Neopolitans, destitute of all aid and succor, to cast themselves headlong by
constraint and necessity into a wretched resolution, not only hurtful to
themselves but much more to others, by having recourse to Solimans protection
who was upon the point of sending a very mighty army into the field they being
determined so to do for their last refuge. All these reasons and remonstrances
The Senotes answers to the Prince of Sa^.
would not prevail with the Senators, none amongst them being of opinion to
accept their offers, whereupon the Prince was dismissed, with this answer,
That they did much lament the discommodity of the time, and particularly Genius
which had ever waited upon him in all his actions with wonderful The Pace of
ch^usa is taken by the Protestants.
prosperity. Duke Maurice and the other Confederates holding on their way
toward Ispruch, and being come to the pace of Chiusa near to Fussen, (which
was strong and narrow), in the conservation whereof the Imperialls had placed
their cheifest hope by stopping the enemies passage) they forced and took it,
opening themselves thereby a way to march to Ispruch without any contradiction.
The Emperor, and his brother Ferdinand about midnight receiving news of the
loss of this place, hauiug but five hundred horse with them, did suddenly
leave Ispruch, went toward Persenon, and from thence into the County of
Tiroll: then having inteligence that the enemies were at Ispruch meaning to
march on farther they again ^ourneyed through sharp and steep mountains,
and tarried in no place till they came to Villac, where they continued in great
fear

His majesty had by so much more given credit (as men are easily drawn to be
leeue that which they desire or fear) to these reports, in regard of the
pursuites and practizes of the Prince of Salerno; so, as being councelled
whilst he Dominico Morosin, who in quality of Ambassador had still attended
upon him, he did commend it, and highly thanked

His majesty then perceiving that in his greatest desaster the Spanish footmen
whom he expected were not arrived turned all his thoughts upon peace: and to
to this end, the Confederate Princes holding a Diet at Possonia, King Ferdinand
went thither in person to treat of the conditions of peace: But the
Protestants desiting to make use of the time, to abase the Emperors authority
and to preserve the liberty and privileges of the Princes and free Cities of
Germany, made very unreasonable demands: where upon the Emperor, sometimes
being enforced by necessity, and so many miseries, did for their satistaction
grant their demands, and at other times again, recalling his usual courrage
and invincible constancy, he said that he would rather endure all hazards of
Fortune, then grant things unworthy of himself and his Imperial dignity. In the
end standing firm for the matter of Religion, not to innouate any thing in the
Cities, which had accepted the interim, nor like wise to submit to the decrees
of the new Diets, that which Peace betw^xt the Emperor and German Princes.
appertained to the prerogatives and authority of the Empire, he condescended,
The Prince of Salerno ^neth to Venite from the king.
the King, made new and more earnest practizes, to draw the Commonwealth into
a league for that purpose: They declared whatsoever they thought might incite
the Senate to hate the Emperor, and on the contrary they forgot nothing which

My Lords do you not perceive, that it lies not in your power to divert The
Oration of Selua the Frech Kings Ambassador to the Venetian Senate*
the King from this enterprise, he being wholly inclined thereunto, either
alone, or in your or others company, and whatsoever your resolution is, these
Princes are to strive together for their fortune* to which side soever it shall
incline, it is to be feared that your newtrality will not be able to defend
your State, and that

These reasons were great in show, but being nearly examined, it was perceived
that they were not well grounded having no firm foundation: and therefore
after that the Senate had maturely considered the matter, as well that which
concerned their newtrallity, as the time of year already far spent, and
unfit for any The Senats answer to the Prince of Salerne and the French
Ambassador.
great enterprise either by Sea or Land, they concluded with a general consent
to answer the Prince, and the French Ambassador, thus. That the Senate did
infinitely thank the King and Prince, for their love and affection toward the
proffit of the Commonwealth; and that it would perpetually remember it: but the
Venetians having for many years been at peace with all Princes, they thought
it not a fit thing to break it upon no occasion: that in any other matter the
Senate

After this answer the Prince continuing his propositions, did in the City of
Chioggia assemble diverse of the French faction, to determine with them on
fittest The enterprise of Naples being found very difficul^ is re^ by the King.
means for the enterprise of Naples. There met the two Cardinals, Ferrara,
and Tournon, the Lord of Terms the Kings Lieutenant in Italy, Selua the Kings
Ambassador at Venice, The Duke of Somma, with other Dukes of the realm of
Naples, and certain other Lords, unto whom the Prince having represented the
business very easy, the Assembly did not so find it, in regard of diverse
great and evident difficulties: the which having like-wise been well examined
by the King,

Whithin a while after, matters beginning to turn and change, the French King
was aduertized how that the Almans had forsaken his alliance, and were banded
against him, because he had seized upon three Imperial cities, Metz, Thou,
and Verdun: that Queen Mary having raised an army of Flemmings had beseeged
Hesdin: and how that his own army on the contrary did daily decay, by reason
The Almanis band themselves against the French King concerning Metz Thou, and
Verdun.
of the contagious sickness which was crept into it: whereby he was enforced
to leave the contry of Luxembourg and by breaking off the corse of his
victories

The Marquis Albert of Brandenbourg, who in the beginning held the kings party,
changing his mind, turned with his forces to the Emperors side, so as by
example, diverse of the chefest of Germany did the like, who at the first had
made show to favor the King: after-wards they fell at ods with him, because he
would not grant their demands, which were altogether unreasonable.

The Emperor being moved by these new accidents, resolved without any Siennois
being not able to endure the over cruel and severe government of the offer,
for which diverse secret practizes had been already made in France was
willingly entertained, and commandment was forthwith given to certain foot
companies of the Kings that lay at Parma and Miranda to go thither, and
prosently after, the Lord of Sansac went thither to encourage the people, to
whose aid other forces being brought by the Count Pettillan, the Spaniards
were driven forth of the town, their fort rased, and diverse other indignities
were committed (such force has the peoples liberty not being restrained by
laws or power of the Magistrate) to the disgrace and contempt of the Emperor,
they tore in pieces his Ensigns, brake his privileges, and trod his arms
under their feet, the which did make the matter more odious, and did the more
incense the Emperor The Emperor s^ndeth the Vicero^ of Naples against Sienna.
nor to suffer the French to have an other place of retreat in Italy, did
command Don Petro of Toledo, Viceroy of Naples, to march speedily into Tuscany
with five thousand Almaine and Spanish footmen, seeing that the Realm of
Naples was in no danger to be enuaded, and that he should attempt to reduce
Sienna under his obedience.

It was supposed that the deseignes of the French, succeeding prosperously,
would greatly hurt the Emperor. For although the French did publicly say that
they had taken the defense of the city upon them, to free it from the tyranny
and oppression of the Spaniards, and to restore it to her former liberty and
The Kings demand t^ the Siennois.
whereupon the French King craved of the Siennois, that in recompense of their
liberty they would declare themselves friends to his friends and enemies to his
enemies. Now the Viceroy being desirous to execute the Emperors commandment,
having obtained passage through the Churches territories (the Pope saying that
he had given him leave, by reason he had no means to hinder him) entered with
his army upon the Siennois territory, and spoiling whatsoever he met The
Viceroy of Naples spoileth the country of the Siennois.
Imperials would have spent much time in winning them; wherein the Viceroy
being very wilful, beseeged Montalcina, because if that fort should hold out,
Sienna being well provided of all things would be in less danger. But the
Siennois doubt to be severely punished by the Emperor if he should take their
city, did mighily encourage them to their own defense, together with the hope
to be soon rid from the Imperial army, by reason of the Turkish and French
forces, which were to come into the Realm of Naples.

The Venetians had done all they could to quench this fire kindled in Italy,
Mustapha Bifo scouring their seas, entered the Adriatricke Gulphe with diverse
Fusts, spoiling and robbing whatsoever he met with upon the coast of Dalmatia,
Cristofero Canalis Admiral of the Gulphe went forth to meet him with certain
Galleys, and incountring with him, he did bravely assail him, and having sunk
all his vessels, he took this Mustapha, and struck off his head upon the side
of his Galley.

Thus ended the year 1552. the ensuing year was full of war as well in
Tuscany, An. 1552.
as in Piedmond and Picardy, the Emperor making great preparations of Petro
Zene being chief of the council of forty, communicated to the council of
Ten, that it was necessary to revive the remembrance and execution of the
last will and testament of the Cardinal Zene, who in his time, having been
very The council of ^enne reuiueth the memory and execution of the l^st will
and testament of the Cardinal Zene.
rich, had left a goodly and honorable Legacy of a yearly rent of two thousand
one hundred Ducats, to the Prince, Signory, and Senate, to foreign
Ambassadors, to the Clergy, and diverse others, as is more at large mentioned in
his testament, on condition that all of them should be present at the service
yearly celebrated in the month of May in Saint Marks Church by his
appointment: the which being granted did procure great magnificence to the
memory of that great Prelat, and gave much content to the whole family.

At the same time great troubles arose in England by the death of young King The
death of Edward the sixth King of England.
Edward the sixth, whom his sister Mary succeeded in that Kingdom.

Prince Donato in the mean time, after that he had repaired and embellished
the Ducall palace, after the same manner as it is to be seen at this day, and
by his example animated diverse Senators to do the like, departed forth of this
life to the great grief of all men, in the seventh year and sixth month of
his principallity, and lies buried in Saint Mary's of Serui.

MARC-ANTONIO the eighty Duke.





MARC-ANTONIO TREVISAN son to that Dominico Treuisan who was so renowned for
his great service done to his country, succeeded him after the accustomed
manner: He was a man of such integrity and holiness of life, as they had much
to do to persuade him to accept the dignity; for being a good man and brought
up from his youth in all simplicity, he knew not what ambition did mean. At
the last being enforced by his friends, he consented to their pleasure, with as
great humillity and modesty as could be desired; so, as being feared and
honored of every one, he maintained justice without any parciallity. He found
the Republike at peace both at home and abroad, by the The Duke of Florence
sends forces against the Siennois.
with foreign Princes, continuing still Newters.

In the mean time, Cosmo Duke of Florence having declared himself against the
Siennois, sent Giouan Giacomo de Medicis, Marquis of Marignan, with Italian and
Spanish forces to assail them. The French King being incensed there at
commanded Pietro Strossi his Lieutenant General in Italy to beseege the city
of Florence to use means to take it, and to restore it to her former liberty,
expelling the Duke: but the Marquis preventing Strossi came with his forces
unlooked for in the night to assail the city of Sienna, and having at his
first arrival given i^ upon one of the Gates, the alarm was so hot, as every
man ran thither, whereby he was repulsed and enforced to retire, but with no
loss of courage, for in his retreat he seized on a fort builded with in a
Harquebuze shot from the walls, which the Lord of Terms had caused to be made
there for the defense of the city, and fortifying himself therein, he could
not be driven thence by any means Siennois, or Strossi could use, who upon the
report thereof came speedily to Sienna, where for the safety of the city he
caused an other fort to be built, betwixt that of the enemies and the Gate,
forth of which they did usually come to skirmish.

Strossi after that, marching into the field with certain troops, surprised
Rodolfo Baillon and Ascania de la Corn who were going upon an enterprise
against Chiusi, whom he put to rout, slew Baillon, and sent Ascanio prisoner to
the King, who did ransomlesse set him at liberty.

Thus passed this year 1553. which was full of wars in sundry places, the
An. 1553.
next ensuing was not exempted from it, and yet the Venetians were no way
touched there with being spectators of other men's games, they themselves having
no hand therein, though war was very near them as well in Tuscany, as in
Parma and Mirandola, and afterward in the Isle of Corse against the Geneuois
the Emperors partisans. In this manner did the city of Venice enjoy an assured
peace on every side, when on a morning Prince Treuisan being at Mass in the
Hall of the Heads, died suddenly of a faintness that took him, proceeding
(according to the common report) from to much abstinence, having governed
eleven months and seven and twenty days, he lies buried in the Church of
the Saints John and Paul.



FRANCISCO VENIERI the eighty one Duke.





FRANCISCO VENIERI a man of sixty four years old was upon the eleventh of June
chosen in his steed. The Republike likewise was in his time at peace, whilst
fires of war flamed in all places near unto them, and that no Prince or
commonwealth of Italy but felt the misery thereof, the arms of the French and
the Imperials ranging every where abroad.

In this sort was the year 1554. spent, which in sundry An. 1554.
places was full of war, desolation, fires, smoke and ashes: in the year
following An. 1555. The death of Pope Julius he third.
diverse alterations of State were seen. For first, Pope Julius the third
deceased on the three and twentieth day of March, whom the Cardinal Marcello
Ceruin succeeding, who was a Tuscan by Nation, death within a while after
buried both his name and memory.

Giouan Pietro Caraffa a Neapolitan, called in former times the Cardinal
Theatin, The election of Pope Paul the fourth.
was chosen in his place, who being termed Paul the fourth, did at his entrance
put all men in great hope of a good reformation in the Church, and of a
general peace, to which he being not able to induce the Emperor and French
King, war began to kindle more then before. Sienna after a long seege did,
through want of Victuals, yield to the Imperials, and yet upon honorable
composition which

The Emperor Charles at the same time bending under the burden of worldly
affairs, and being discontented to see that great good fortune which had ever
accompanied him in all his haughty enterprises, to give place to that of the
French King or else being touched with some remorse of conscience for having
been the The Emperor Charles resigneth all his States to his son Philip, and
to his brother Ferdinand
occasion of so much bloodshed in Christendom, in regard of the length of the
sad precedent wars, sent for his son Philip forth of England to Bruxels,
and resolving to quit the Empire, his own Kingdoms, and honors of this
world, did by authentical letters of the five and twentieth of October, resign
unto him all his Lands and Signories, enioyning all his Estates and subjects to
acknowledge him their true and lawful King, determining to withdraw himself
(as he afterward Ferdinand his brother, and recommended him by letters to all
the Princes and Potentates of Germany.

Philip then according to his fathers earnest exhortation, seemed very much to
Truce granted and soon broken
incline to peace, but in regard of the great difficulties which were found
therein on either side, truce was granted for five years, that in the mean
time they might have leisure to conclude a peace, but this truce likewise was
as soon broken as concluded, being supposed to have been but a false bait to
delay the provisions of the French in Piedmont, whilst the Duke of Alba should
set forward, whereupon war began again more hotly then before, to the
great grief of Venieri being An. 1556.
ill disposed of his person, and ordinarily sick, departed forth of this
mortal life, having grouerned two years, one month, and one and twenty days,
and is buried in Saint Sauiors Church.



LORENZO PRIVLI the eighty two Duke.





THE Senate being afterward assembled, according to the usual manner, did in
his stead elect Lorenzo Priuli, a man wise and learned. At the beginning of his
principallity the plague began to show it self, which within a while after
ceased by the diligence and industry of Petro Mosto the Senator, deputed at La
Sanita. The pestilence was followed by a dearth and want of victuals,
proceeding from a suspicion that the sickness still continued, by means
whereof strangers did no more bring any thing to the city. The Pope an enemy to
the Spaniards.


At the same time Pope Paul the fourth a bad friend to the Spaniards, did
imprison in Castle Saint Angelo, the Cardinal Santa Fior, Camillo Colonna,
Iuliano Caesaren* and the Abbot of Bresegna, all of them enemies to the house
of France, for secret assemblles which they made in Rome in the houses of
Marc-Antonio Colonna and that Cardinal Marc-Antonio escaping went to the King
of Spain, who presently commanded the Duke of Alua to relieve them.

This Duke being Viceroy of Naples, was grieved to see the Pope openly to
pursue the Roman Lords Spaines partisans, and being desirous to obey the King
his Masters commandment, marched into the field, and took from the Pope The
Duke of Alua takes diverse towns from the Pope.
near to Rome, Agnane, Pila^tina, Segna, Tiuoli, and last of all Ostia,
whereby he did cut off victuals from the Romans, he on the side, and the
Colonnessi on the other keeping the Pope in this manner shut up within the
circuit of his wailes.

The Pope made means to the French King, sending the Cardinal Carassa his
Nephew unto him his Majesty wrote to the Marshall Stossi who then lay in
Tuscany to march thitherwards and to expect aid which the Duke of Guise should
bring him. His Holiness di^ likewise send to Venice to move the Senate to The
Venetians being entreated by the Pope use means to pacify the Duke of Alua.
aid him. The Senators being grieved for the Popes troubles, and desyring to
have him at quiet, s^rit Phaebe Capello, a very wise and discreet Secretary to
the Duke of Alua, to pacify the matter if it were possible.

Philip King of Spain in the mean time perceiving this war to be backed by
the French, and that thereby it was likely to prove more dangerous in regard
of the intelligences and partiallities which they had in Italy, did receive
Duke Octauio of Parma into favor, restoring to him the city of Placentia and
all Octauio Farneze (...) (...) his Duchy.
other places nere adjoining which he had seized: in regard whereof, this Duke
embraced the Spanish party, to the Popes great discontent, who said, that a
Prince feudatary of the Church, as he was, ought not to make an accord with his
enemies without his leave, whereupon, he caused him to be cited to Rome,
together with the Cardinal Farneze his brother.

The Duke of Guise about the same time came from France into Italy, which was
at the beginning of the year 1557. with fifteen thousand footmen, eight An.
1557. The Duke of Guise comes into Italy.
hundred men at arms, and twelve hundred light horse, to aid the Pope against
Strossi, Monluc and others, (who by the Kings commandment were gonne before to
Rome with six hundred horse and five thousand foot) joined themselves.

Upon the report of the arrival of these forces, the Duke of Alua had retired
himself to the frontiers of the Realm of Naples, by his retreat opening a way
to Rome for the Duke of Guise, who presently went thither, upon hope to find
great forces ready there, according to the accord concluded betwixt the Pope,
the King, and the Duke of Ferrara, but finding none at all there, he went into
La Marca, where the Marquis of Montebel came unto him with the Churches forces,
Caraffa had promised to the King, and because the French army for want of pay
did daily decrease, an^ on the contrary, that of the Duke of Alua did increase:
whereupon, the Duke of Guise returning to La Marca, and afterward going to
Rome to talk with the Pope, perceiving the small means his Holiness had to
make war, and the great pursuit made by the Duke of Alua, he aduized him to
harken unto peace and agreement with the Spaniard, resolving to return into
France. For at Rome he received letters from the King bearing news of the
loss of the battle of Saint Laurence, and of the taking of Saint The loss
of the battle of Saint Lawrence, and the town of Saint Quintins.
Quintins by the Spaniards, with commandment presently to return into

During this war against the Pope, The Venetians and Cosmo Duke of Florence,
had solicited King Philip and the Duke of Alua, to make an accord with his
Holiness, either of them answered that they had not taken arms to take from
him any thing that was his, but only to defend the Realm of Naples* and that
they had made war in an enemies country to defend their own subjects; and
therefore so soon as his Holiness should leave his confederacy with The
Spaniards demands upon the treaty of peace with the Pope.
the French, and the resolution of making himself master of the Realm of
Naples, they would yield him the obedience due to the sovereign pastor of
Christendom, and would restore whatsoever they had taken from him during that
war: to which the Pope giving ear, the Cardinal Caraffa with certain
others went to the Duke of Alua to treat of peace, the which was easily granted
with restitution Peace betwixt the Pope and Spaniards.
on all sides of places taken in the war, the Duke of Ferrara being therein
comprehended.

The Senate to mediate this agreement, sent Marc-Antonio de Franceschis
thither, who was Secretary to the Commonwealth, a very wise and discreet man,
who stirred not from thence till the final conclusion thereof. In the

Within a while after the two sons of Soliman, Selim and Bajazet, took arms
against one an other in Asia, and because the father did most favor the
VVarres betwixt Solimans two soones.
elder brother Selim, the other was enforced to have recourse to Tamas King of
Persia, who in hatred to Soliman did willingly aid him, and giving him great
forces, the two brethren joined their battle, which continuing a day and a
night, Selim was victor, his brother being fled from the battle hurt, and
more then forty thousand Mahometans one either side slain in the place.

The Senate on the other side being still desirous to continue their ancient
customs and alliances, sent Giouan Capello Knight, and Bernardo Nouagera
Ambassadors to the Emperor Ferdinand to congratulate his promotion to the
Empire (as has been said) and Paulo Tepulo to King Philip.

This was at the latter end of the year: the next, 1558. bred great wars
both An. 1558.
in France, Piedmont and Tuscany, together with the death of Princes and
Princesses. For so soon as the Duke of Guise returned into France, he
executed The taking of Calais.
the enterprise of Calais, a long time before determined of, and reduced under
the Kings subjection the country of Oye, and all the forts which the English
held there: the Duke of Neuers on the other side took diverse places in the
country of Luxembourg, as Herbemont, the forts of Iamoigne, Chygni, Rossignoll,
Villeneufe and diverse others.

This happy success did change the French men's sorrow into gladness (their
hearts still panting for that red and bloody battle of Saint Lawrence) and
Francis Daulphin of Viennois mar^ieth the Queen of Scots.
chiefly at Court, where the joy was doubled, in regard of the marriage of
Francis Mary Steward Queen and Inheretrix of Scotland, daughter to James the
fifth and Mary of Lorraine, daughter to Claude Duke of Guise, and that of
Charles Duke of Lorraine, with Claude the younger daughter of France. This joy
was accompanied with an other, by reason of the taking of The French take
Thyonuille
Thyonuille, which after a long battery of five and thirty great pieces of
ordnance, was yielded upon composition. Great preparations for war being
after this manner daily made, Almighty God took pity on the people and raised
up Mediators of peace betwixt those two great Kings, the which at that time
took noeffect, in regard of the great difficulties which were presented. But
the death of Charles the fifth happening in Spain, and that of his two sisters,
Flenor Queen Dowager of France, and Queen Mary Dowager of Hungary, who
accompanied him, Mary Queen of England died soon after, which procured the
accomplishment of the peace, turning the bitterness of the precedent wars
into a pleasing sweetness of accord, by means of the alliances made the year
following 1559. An. 1559.
For as the Commissioners of both Kings did treat together, the death of
Charles the fifth happening in September, and that of Queen Mary of England in
November, altered the place and time of that conclusion.

Peace was concluded in the castle of Cambresis, by means of the marriages
Peace conclud^ betwixt the (...) and Spanish Kings.
of Philip with Elizabeth, eldest daughter to King Henry, and of Philibert
Emanuel Marguerite the Kings only sister, who tendered back to the Spaniard
whatsoever he had taken from him, and to the Duke, Sauoy and Piedmont, and to
the Geneuois Corsica. But whilst the nuptials of the Kings daughter and sister
were celebrated at Paris with all sports and delights that might be imagined,
this pleasant Commedy was turned into a mournful and lamentable tragedy, by
King Henry's death, who being at tilt stricken into the eye with a splinter of
a Lance, died, the eleventh day after his hurt.

But to return to the Venetians, great numbers of pirates did at the same time
scour the Adriattick sea, and by their usual spoils and incursions did great
harm on the sea coast of Dalmatia and Histria. Matteo Bembo, a discreet person
their behalf, Bembo being incensed thereat, not regarding the peace which the
Venetians had with Soliman, discharged his Cannons upon the cities walls where
The Pirates pursued by Bembo save ^hemselues in Durazzo.
some of the inhabitants were slain and yet he could not seize on the Pirates.
The Turk took this battery and manner of proceeding in very bad part, and
determined to revenge it: the Venetians, considering the losses and harm that
might arise if they should break peace with so potent a Lord, did appease him
both by presents and excuses, banishing Bembo from their State, being not able
to apprehend him, that they might give him an exemplary punishment, which did
the more cool and appease Soliman. On the other side by the death of Mary
Queen of England Elizabeth her sister, obtained the crown. To Henry the
second succeeded Francis the second Daulphin of Viennois his eldest son of
the age of sixteen years. At the same time died Pope Paul the fourth, who
being extremely hated of the Roman people, as well for the behavior of his
Nephews, as for The death of Pope Paul the fourth.
the Inquisition which he had established in Rome, before he had scarce given
up the ghost, the people arose, and being led by the chiefest of those that
been injured by him, ran to the palace of the Inquisition, from whence with
their swords having driven the Monks, they opened the prisons and set all the
prisoners at liberty: the like did they to all the other prisons in Rome, then
they went to the Capitol, where finding the brazen Statue which the Romans had
erected in honor A Popular commotion in Rome.
of the Pope at the beginning of his papacy in regard of the good offices he

The Venetians sent their Ambassadors to the new French King to congratulate
(according to their manner) his coming to the crown. Nicolo de Pont Venetian
Ambassadors to the French King.
Doctor and Knight, and Bernardo Nouagera were appointed to that end: and
within a while after the Prince falling sick deceased, to the grief of all
men, in regard of his integrity and learning: he was buried in Saint Dominikes
Church in the monument of his ancestors. Then by the example of former times,
they chose Ieronimo Priuli brother to the deceased Duke, a man very famous and
of great Majesty.

IERONIMO DE PRIVLI the 83. Duke.



AT the beginning of his government, Giouan Angelo de The creation of Pope Pius
the fourth.
Medicis a Milanois, brother to the late Marquis of Marignan was chosen Pope to
the great contentment of all the Romans, taking upon him the name of Pius the
fourth, which was at the latter end of the year 1559. who to make his actions
conformable to his name, pardoned the people of Rome the commotion and mutiny
made by them against his predecessor: then seeing all Christendom at peace, he
took order that the general Charles and Alphonso Caraffi Cardinals, the Duke
of Palliano brother to Charles, and two others of their nere kinsmen, who,
their process having been made, and considered by Judges deputed to that end,
being found guilty of sundry bad crimes, the Cardinal Charles was strangled in
Castle Saint Angelo, and forthwith buried, the Duke of The Cardinal Carassa
and three of his kinsmen are put to death.
Palliano with his other kinsmen were beheaded in the tower of Nona, and shown
Alphonso as least culpable, was sent home to his own house by means of a
pecuniary amends which he paid, and the office of Chamberlain was taken from
him. The death of Andre Doria.


About the same time died that famous Prince Andrew Doria, being four score
and thirteen years of age, famous as well for the great enterprises he
executed, as for restoring the city of Genoa, his native country, to the
liberty it enjoys at this day.

The Venetians in the mean time being unwilling to be surprised, if they The
Venetians send Ambassadors to the Pope.
should happen to be enforced to take arms, received into their pay Sforza
Palauicin Marquis Cortemajor a very famous captain: then they sent Ieronimo
Grimani, Ieronimo Zene, and Marc-Antonio de Mulla Ambassadors to Pope Pius the
4* an inward friend to the Commonwealth, who entertained them very lovingly:
and having given them audience in the Chamber of Kings, he did greatly commend
the Republike, promising to favor and augment it with all his power, who being
desirous to root out heresies, which on every side troubled the Catholic The
ouerture of the council of Trent.
Religion, did by his brief cause the General council to be published at
Trent in the Octaues of Easter of the year following, exhorting the Prelates to
come thither and Christian Princes either to come or send their Ambassadors.

In this manner ended the year 1560. wherein Francis the second French An.
1560. Charles the ninth French King.
King deceased, and Charles Maximillian Duke of Orleance his brother succeeded
Charles the ninth.

In this mean time the ouerture of the council still continued at Trent,
whither the Pope sent seven of the chief of the College of Cardinals famous
both for learning and good life, namely, Hercules Gonzaga of Mantua, Ieronimo
Seripand The Cardinal^ sent by the Pope to the the council.
the Neapolitan, Giouan Moron of Milan, Stanislaus Hosius a Polander, Lodouico
Simonete a Milanois, Mar^-Sitic a German, and Bernardo Nauigera a Venetian. The
Emperor likewise sent his Ambassadors thither, who were Sigismond Thuonius
Archbishop of Trent, and Antony Muglitius of Morauia, Archbishop Regnard
Ferrier a very learned man, and well seen in the tongues, and Lewis of Saint
Gelais, Lord of Lansac, Knight of honor to the Queen the Kings mother. For
Philip King of Spain there was Claudio Fernandes Earl of Lunel a very noble
person: and for the King of Poland Valentine Herbutus a Polonois.

The Venetians sent thither Nicolo de Ponte, and Matteo Dandulo, men much
renowned for their singular learning and knowledge in many matters: they were
accompanied by Antonio Milledonna the Secretary, a man of so rare and excellent
a wi^, as being employed in some actions in that holy assembly, he made him
self to be admired of all men.

Toward the latter end of the same year the last Session of the General
Council was held at Trent, and about the beginning of the year following,
that which had there been concluded, was sollemnly published, and sent to Rome
to Pope Pius the fourth, who in the open consistory of Cardinals accepted and
ratified it, commanding it to be received over all Christendom.

At this council were present, diverse great Prelates of the Venetians State,
The Venetian (...), that were present at the council of ^rent.
all borne at Venice, namely, Bernardo Nauagera Cardinal, and Legate in the
council, in stead of Seripand who died there, Giouan Treuisan Patriarch of
Venice, Daniele Barbaro chosen Patriarch of Aquileia, Pi^tro Land Archbishop
of Candie, Marco Cornare Archbishop of Spalatra, Philippo Moceniga Archbishop
of Cyprus, Antonio Coceo Archbishop of Corfou, and afterward clarke of the
Chamber, Lodouico Pisani the Bishop of Padua and afterward Cardinal, Georgio
Cornare, Bishop of Treuiso, Iulio Contaren Bishop of Bellun, Tomaso, Bishop of
Cap-(...), Giouan Francisco Commendune Bishop of Zant and Cesalonia, and
afterward Cardinal, Pietro Barbarico Bishop of Cursoles, Pietro Contaren
Dominico Bolano Bishop of Bressia, Federico Cornare, Bishop of Bergamo, Andre
Moceniga, Bishop of Himosia, Ier^nimo Treui^an Bishop of Verona, Ieronimo
Ragazzone Bishop of Famagosta, Matteo de Priuli, Bishop of Vincenza, ^rancisco
Contaren, chosen Bishop of Baffus, Giouan Del^ino Bishop of Torcelles, and
Ieronimo Vielmo, Bishop of Citta-noua, all men of singular knowledge, and
admirable learning.

At the beginning of the council there arose a controversy (which did greatly
trouble the Pope) betwixt the Ambassadors of France and Spain, about
precedence, each of those Kings being desirous to have their Ambassadors to
take the chiefest place next to the Emperors Ambassador: King Philip sent
word to the Pope, that his pleasure was to have the chief place assigned
Charles protested against it, saying, That if they went about to do him that
wrong to take from him the place and rank which his predecessors had ever
held, as well in regard of their nobillity and antiquity, as for the great
benifits which the Church of Rome had received from them, he would not only
call home his Ambassadors, but himself, together with his whole Kingdom,
would depart from the obedience of the sea Apostolic.

The Pope to prevent the inconveniences that might arise thereby, did decree,
The Pope end^ the controtronersie bet^ixt the Ambassadors of France and Spain.
should keep his usual rank and place, and that he of Spain (to give some
satisfaction likewise to that King) should sit in the midst of the Cardinals
below the Priests, and above the Deacons, by means whereof the whole matter
was pacified.

About the same time there happened a very strange accident at Rome, the like
whereof had never before been seen, which was thus: certain young A strange
accident at Rome.
men of very good place, being provoked by a vision, which they said they had
received from Angels, how that to the Pope then living an other divine it
suddenly come to pass, not tarrying till the Pope should die his natural
death, resolved to dispatch and kill him, whilst (as his manner was) he
should give audience, and one of their number called Benedetto Accolto took
upon him to strike him, as he should read a supplication that he would
present unto him, but when it came to the execution, so great fear and
amazement seized on him, as he withdrew himself all trembling, whereupon, one
of the conspirators fearing least that they should be discovered, went
presently to the Pope and opened the whole complot to him, so as they were all
apprehended, and publicly executed.

In other places great numbers of pirates scoured the Adriattick seas, so that
The Venetians chase away the Pirates.
nothing could escape their hands, coming even as far as Chioggia. The
Venetians disdayning these incursions, sent Christofero Canalis against them,
who departing cheerfully from Venice with four Galleys, did so narrowly
pursue them, as he took part of them, whom he forthwith hanged, and chased
away the rest, so as by that means the navigations was assured.

Toward the latter end of this year the Emperor Ferdinand died, whom his
Maximil^an Emperor in (...) fathers stead.
son Maximilian, before crowned King of the Romans, succeeded, who so soon

The end of the sixth Book of the sixth Decade.
The Contents of the seventh Book of the
THE great hurt caused by the Inquisition after the manner of Spain. The
Venetians being solicited by Pope Pius the fourth to Pius the fourth with the
election of Pope Pius the fifth. The death of Soliman before Zighet, which is
concealed by Mahomet Bascha. Selim succeeds Soliman. The ceremony which is
used in bringing Ambassadors into the presence of the great Selims resolution
to enuade the Isle of Cyprus.



The seventh Book of the sixth Decade of the History of Uenice.
THe Pope being desirous at the beginning of the year 1565. to An. 1565.
pluckvp by the roots al heresies forth of Italy, and to diue into the very
secret thoughts of men, fearing least that Province should The great harm with
the Inquisiti^n does after the manner of Spain.
embrace heresies like others, did throw it headlong into very great and
difficult Labirinths, which had almost caused an intestine war in the
country. For he procured King Philip to establish the Inquisition after the
manner of Spain in Milan, namely this sharp and cruel inquisition, by which
the convicted do loose both lives and goods, to the great hinderance and
undoing of their heirs.

Now King Phillip having written to the Senate of Milan that his pleasure was
to have the Inquisition of Spain received into the City, all the People began
The Senate of Milans answer to the King of Spain concerning the Inquisition.
to mutine, and take arms against the Spanish officers that went about to
introduce it: which the Senate of Milan perceiving made answer to him that
brought the Kings commandment, that they were ready to obey whatsoever his
Majesty should please to command, and that they would take order to have his
will performed in every point: yet never the less they were not of opinion to
have that Phillips determination, who reuoking his Edict, did greatly assure
and confirm the Milanois.

The Pope perceiving that his deseigne had taken none effect at Milan as he de
The Venetian^ answer to the Pope.
sired, he did by letters exhort the Venetians thereunto, entreated, and in a
manner went about to enforce them to embrace that nouelty. The Venetians being
wise and discreet, after they had maturely considered the business, together
withthe great danger they were like to incur, if they should permit such
cruelty to take place in their Towns and Cities (in regard that the Realm of
Naples for the self same matter, had in a manner revolted from the Emperor,
and the Milanois had bruely impugned it,) they being unwilling openly to seem
to deny the Pope, nor likewise to grant his request so dangerous unto them,
delayed as

But his Nuncio still urging them more and more to grant the Popes demand, the
Senate was assembled for that business, where after sundry opinions had been
propounded, they dilligently considered the discomodities which might arise
unto them by means of the Popes wrath and indignation, if they should refuse
him, who being already not very well affected to the Commonwealth, would be the
more enflamed against them: On the other side they did represent before their
eyes, how that the wretchedest of al others was a civil and domestic war,
whereby the Republic did weaken her owneforces, which were sooner raised, then
pacified.

Therefore the Senate, all this being well examined, made the Pope an answer
The Death of Pope Piu^ quar^us, and the election of Peus quintus
children, guiltlesle of that crime of their fathers successions, seeing that
they had Cities very zealous of Catholic Religion, which had no need of such
great rigor and justice: yet they would take order, that those who should be
convicted of Heresy should abjure their errors, or else, should be punished
with death according to the manner of their Justice.

About the latter end of this year dyed Pope Pius Qu^rtus in the sixth year
of his Papacy, unto whom succeeded, at the beginning of the year 1566. Friar
The death of Soliman before Zighet.
Michaell Giseleo of the order of Saint Dominick, called the Cardinal
Alexandrine, Pius Quintus

Soliman lying at the seege of Zighet, and being enraged to see a handful of
Christans so bravely to resist the great numbers of his soldiers, this disdain
and rage did so alter him, as it brought him to a flixe, which killed him on
the fifth day of September: but his death was in such sort concealed by Mahomet
Bascha, who next him was the chiefest man in the Army, as the Turks knew it
not, fearing (as it was likely) that the news of the great Lords death, would
be the cause of the ruin of the whole Army, Selim his son succeeded him in
the Otoman Empire.

But to return to the Venetians, of whom our meaning is chiefly to speak,
certain months after that this new Emperor of Turks was installed in his
Empire, and that from all parts Ambassadors were sent unto him to congratulate
The Venetians send Ambassa dors to Selim the new Emperor.
his happy coming to the Crown, they appointed Marin Caballo, a nobleman, and
excellently well seen in the knowledge of diverse things, being both learned
and rich, to go and rejoice with him likewise in the Common wealths name
Soliman: the which that he might obtain with more ease, he took along with
him the presents which Ambassadors were wont for to carry to the new Emperors.
But whilst he prepared for his journey, it happened, that one called John
Miches a Jew by nation, a great favorite of Selims, a man of an evil
disposition, and who had turned Turk, for a certain wonderful policy, did
continually solicit Selim against the Duke of Necsia, (one of the Islands
Ciclades, descended from the race of Crispes, and was the one and twentieth
Duke of that Island) to bereave him of his Prnicipallity, hoping (as it came to
pass) that he being driven thence, easily

This Duke being advertised of the practices which were wrought against him,
went to Constantinople to justify his cause, where, knowing that the favor
and friendship of the great Lords Counselors is bestowed on such as give most
for A mischeuous practice of a reuoulted Jew.
it, he car^ied with him fifteen thousand Crowns to bestow among them, hoping
by that money to win those of the Council to his side, but at his arrival
the laid hands on him, and being committed to prison, he lost at one time both
his money, and all the wealth he had.

At last being set at liberty as innocent, and having committed no fault at
all, he could never afterward recover his principallity, so as being reduced
to extreme

By this time Marin Caballo, who was appointed by the Senate (as has been
said) to go Ambassador to Selim, was ready, who departed from Venice, and with
a fair and gentle wind sailed toward Constantinople, where at his first
arrival he treated (according to the use) with the chief of the great Lords
Council: (for no stranger is admitted to speak with the Emperor, till such
time as his demand be determined and concluded by them) but he had much to do
to obtain Selim the new Emperorrefused to confirm their aliance, which was
only to draw greater gifts from them, which they did: for the Ambassador
having given them many other great presents he did at length procure the
Counselors, to consent to the conditlons The Ceremony of bringing Ambassadors
to the great Lord
of peace and freindship: then he was brought in by the Captain of the Port,
and led by the Arms to kiss the Emperors hand, the like did diverse young
Gentlemen which had accompanied the Ambassador: but they were led in another
fashion: for two Turks held each of them by the arms, and brought them as
prisoners, who did not Kiss the Emperors hand, but his knees, that done, they
returned, and went backward, their faces being still turned toward the
Emperor. Selims Chamber, but only the Ambassador, who spoke breefely unto him
in this manner.

As much grief (most gracious Emperor (as our Venetian Commonwealth, highly
affected to the Ottomans, has received by the death of Soliman that glorious
The Venetian Ambassador^ ^on to the Empepor.
and most wise Emperor, even so much joy and contentment has it, to understand
that the divine power has raised you to such a dignity and placed you in the
throne belonging to the famous and mostiust family of the Ottomans. For it is
most certain that the soul of Soliman does at this present glory, not only
for that it did so much surpass all men in good hap and glory for high
enterprises, in wisdom and knowledge of diverse things, for being meek and
gentle to the humble, liberal to his friends, and faithful to his allies; but
much more for leaving you his son behind him, far more excellent then
himself. Our Republic then being moved by these reasons, does continually
pray unto Almighty God for your health and prosperity.

The Ambassador having ended his speech, Selim swore a sollemne oath, and
ratifyed S^lim ratisieth the Venetians alliance.
Selims oath was thus, I swear and promise by the eternal God creator of
Heaven and Earth, by the souls of the Seauenty Prophets, by mine own soul,
and those of all mine Ancestors, to observe from point to point all the
rightes of alliance and freindship maintained until this present, and to keep
them sacred and inviolable, in the same manner as they are confirmed by my
seal. Selim as the Ambassador was taking his leave, answered him in few words
badly polished, but yet full of all courtesy and humanity.

Gaballus departing from the great Lords Palace, and mounting his horse, was
The form of the great Lords oath.
conducted by the Ianissaries (unto whom before he had audience he had given
Terra Sigillata; Balsamum, and diverse other precious things; sometimes likewise
they do use to feast and banquet one an other.

At the same time such numbers of Pirates, did scour the seacoasts of
Dalmatia, as men could not live safly in their own houses they did not only rob
those whom they encountered at Sea after the manner of Pirates, but did likewise
come on shore, putting all to fire and sword, killing old men and young
Children: carrying away The (...) do pur^e the (...) of Pirates.
with them Men, Women and Cattail. The Venetians were not able to endure that
insolency, ^ut did on a sudden arm forty Galleys under the command of
Hermolao Tepulo, whereof these Pirates being aduertized, departed speedily
from thence, and left the Province in quiet. In the mean time Ieronimo Priuli
dyed, having governed eight years, eleven months and four days, and was
honorably buried in Saint Dominicks Church in the monument of his Ancestors.

PIETRO LOREDANO the 84. Duke.





PIETRO LOREDANO, a renowned and excellent Senator, was chosen in his steed on
the 26. of November, all men hoping that his government would procure great
commodity to the The Arcenall of Uenice, burnt.
commonwealth, and so ended the year 1567. Not long after the Arcenall of
Venice was set on fire, which was fearful for the noyce it made, it being
heard many miles off: after which followed an intolerable dearth, so as for
the peoples reliese they were enforced to employ the munitions which were
reserved for the fleetes.

These two inconveniences happening one after an other in the ci^ty, did
provoke the Turk to make an attempt upon the Isle of Cyprus, being urged
thereunto by John Miches, who of a Jew being become Turk, could do much with
Selim (as has been said). This man, the better to persuade him to the
enterprise of Cyprus, did acquaint him with the advertisement which he had
received from the Jews at Venice, how the Arcenall had been burned on the
third day of September 1569. where all the munitions had been for the most
part spoiled The first motion of the enterprise of Cyprus for the Turk.
and lost, together with the great dearth which had followed that loss, where
with the city was still afflicted.

Selim who long before then had been desirous to seize upon that Island, and

He having along time debated these reasons with himself, did at last resolve
to communicate the matters to his Baschas. And departing from Constantinople
Selim com^ the enterprise of (...) ^o bes (...) as.
in the month of November, the third year of his Empire with his chief
Baschas to ride on hunting, (the Turks term it the council on horse back)
he began to acquaint them with that enterprise.

Mahomet as Vizier Bascha began cunningly to diswade him from it, as well for
The council of Mahomet the Vizier Bascha.
the love he did bear to Christians, as for the great profit which he
ordinarily received from the Venetians, telling him that upon what occasion
soever he was moved to take arms, either for Religion, Empire, or for glory,
he ought by no means to break with the Venetians, whose friendship had been
ever proffitable for their nation: That he ought rather to attempt to relieve
the Moors of Granado, Mahomet the Ottaman Emperors were seated, not to abandon
the defense of those, who by an holy and constant resolution had never forsaken
the Mohammedan religion: That it was like wise necessary for the power and safty
of his Empire, and for the glory which Selim seemed so much to desite, not to
suffer any one Potentare to grow too great, but presently to abase those which
might make head against the power of the Ottamans, such as was that of the king
of Spain, which though it would be a difficult enterprise, would
neuer-the-lesse be full of glory and great hope. Therefore he besought him to
acknowledge and make good use of that great occasion which God offered him, to
preserve the

The other Baschas Piali and Mustapha, did with no less vehemence then Mahamet
The opinion of the other Basc^as contrary to that of Mahomet.
had done maintain the contrary, for they not only envying him, but having
declared themselves his open enemies, did ever cross his deseignes and
councels, and did more earnestly embrace this business, knowing that the great
Lord did affect it, and highly extolling his deseigns, they hoped to win his
favor, and to disgrace him that councelled the contrary: Likewise, they thought
that by councelling him to what he was addicted, that they themselves should be
employed in The reasons of the two Baschas contrary to M^homet.
Princes uncertain and badly grounded, as they had known by experience: that
the Isle of Cyprus being far from Venice was not easily to be relieved, and
easy to be enuaded by them, by reason of their near neighborhood: that it
was a most rich and excellent Island, and very commodious for all his other
states, and (...) in a place, which might much assure his subjects navigations
upon those Seas.

Selim lent a willing ear to those two, because they were of his opinion, and
Mahomets credit was thereby much diminished, and his speech greatly suspected,
Selim Selim resolves to invade the Isle of Cyprus
promised to go in person, with such a will and resolution as all men thought
that the very first year of his Empire he would have undertaken this war if
other lets had not detained him. For after Solimans death he found the Empire
much wasted, by reason of his fathers continual wars both at Malta, Zighet
and in other places, where he had lost great numbers of Soldiers and spent much
treasure: besides, his army was ill provided of all necessaries, which it
behooued him to renew by rest and time, and with all to repair his fleet; all
which being done there was no more likelihood that it would be any longer
deferred.

The Venetians were speedily aduertized of all these things, by Mark Antonio
Barbaro their Baily in Constantinople, a very wise and discreet man, who at
that time did many great and good services to the Commonwealth. But these
things at the first seemed unto them impossible, so as the Senators could
hardly be drawn to believe it, for when motion was made of making provisions
for the nauall army they answered that it behooued them to proceed discreetly
therein, and not to prouo^e Selim, who peradventure had never thought on such a
matter, which would rather hasten the danger then prevent it.

The end of the seventh Book of the sixth Decade.
The Contents of the eighth Book of the sixth Decad.
THE Senate are certainly advertised of the Turks enterprise upon Cyprus. A
Cypriot practices treason over the whole Island. The Venetians implore the
aid of all Christian Princes. The Pope soliciteth all Christian Princes, in
the Venetians behalf. The Venetians solicit the King of Persia to make war
on Selim. The Turks great preparations for the war of Cyprus. Selim by the
persuasion of Bascha Mahomet, sends a defiance to the Venetians, unless they
quit the Isle of Cyprus. The small entertainment given to the Chians of the
great Lord. The Venetians provisions and preparations for the war of Cyprus.
The Popes Proposition to prevent the delay of the union of the Armies.
Mark-Antonio Colonna, General of the Popes Army, in title of Gonfalonier of
the Church. The enterprise of the Marquerites is broken off, by reason of the
bad access to the place. The union of the Armies of the Pope, King Philip of
Spain, and the Venetians. Mustapha, General of the enterprise of Cyprus. The
Turkish Army landeth in Cyprus. The small forces which were in the whole
Island. The enemies come and encampe before Nicotia. The situation of the City
of Nicotia. Those of Famagosta will not suffer Baillon to go to Nicotia, who
was sent for thither. And lastly the Prayers and Processions of those of
Nicotia.

The eight Book of the sixth Decad of the History of Uenice.
ANTONIO BARBARO Bailey in Constantinople having The Senate are certainly
advertised of the Turks enterprise upon Cyprus*
last thither upon the first day of January 1570. whereby he advertised them,
not of the common report, but of the certain resolution made in the Council
of the great Turk, concerning the enterprise of Cyprus, although the Baschas
did constantly affirm the contrary, using all means to keep it secret. For
the Bailey seeming to believe nothing of the matter, dealt with the Turks, and
chiefly with Ibrahim their Dragoman, who was one of the Vizier Baschas
Domestics,

The Senate by these so often reiterated intelligences, desiring speedily to
redeem The Venetians preparation for the war of Cyprus.
the time which they had lost, began to provide all things necessary for a long
war: Whereupon they suddenly resolved to send troops of soldiers in
Garrison into Cyprus, commanding all the Governors of the Island, to take
special care for the guard thereof, and to prepare for their own defense,
exhorting the people to be loyal to them, and the Gentlemen which were
feudatories, to make provision of armor and horse, as they were bound to do.

They did likewise speedily provide for the other Sea-townes of their
dominions, sending men of authority to command their chief Castles. They made
great leuies of footmen in sundry places of Italy, and took into their pay the
Francisco Duodo their Admiral, a man much esteemed for his valor and skill at
Sea, and fourscore captains for the light Galleys, who were of the chiefest
Gentlemen of the City, and best experienced in marine matters. Pietro Troni
was made Captain of the armed ships, Ieronimo Zene Procurator of Saint Mark
was declared General of all that fleet, having been chosen to that office two
years before, no occasion being offered them to send forth their fleet to
Sea, and he by that means having not executed his place, put them in
execution, whereupon they consulted how to employ those forces: some thinking
it fit to send forth Galleys toward the Leuant, which lying in the havens of
Candy should be ever ready in all occasions, which the time, and the enemies
attempts should present: saying, That by so doing they should encourage their
subjects, and increase their reputation, and might besides breed diverse doubts
in the enemies minds, which might for a time delay their journey, they not
determining to hazard themselves forth of the straight of Gallipolis, but with
all their forces joined together, especially when they should understand of any
that were able to stay them. But opposition was made against this opinion, some
saying, That the danger was greater* then the assurance which that advise

I will not forget to observe by the way, how that some few months before
Selim resolved on that seege, some of his council seeking by all means to
surprise that Kingdom, began to consult by what treachery and deceit they

Now as the way of treachery was the safest, it seemed likewise unto them the
easiest: for if any town of Cyprus should be taken in that manner, it was a
very easy matter in regard of the near neighborhood, not only to keep it,
but likewise Treason practi zed by a Cipriot.
to seize on others, by reason of the great and ordinary quarrels and
dissentions a mong the Cypriots. For the execution of this deseigne, one
Diasorinus seemed unto them avery fit Instrument. He was by nation a Cipriot,
by nature subtle and cunning, a great Courtier, and one that had much credit
among the Cypriots. Scander, Governor of the higher Misia; sent letters full
of courteous complements, with whom by little and little he began to enter
into a league of freindship, sending oftentimes letters and presents one to
an other.

After familiar conversation by letters, Diasorinus being won through fair and
goodly promises by the Governor gave consent to betray his Country, and to
that end, wrote to Scander, as often as any fit occasion was offered, sometimes
in the Greek tongue, and at other times in Charactery: The Characters were
small animalls, as flies, ants, spiders, butterflies and such like.

But because Gods will was not to have the Cypriots as yet to fall into that
misery, they began to suspect Diasorinus, in regard of the frequent sending
of Treason is dis covered and the Author ex^cuted.
letters and presents betwixt them, whereupon, they found means to interrupt
some of his letters which they finding to be written in Caracters with the
figures of these animalls, they forthwith supposed that there was some secret
in them which they would not have all the world accquainted with.

Diasorinus was presently apprehended, his letters laid before him and being
loath to confess any thing he was put to the tortures which made him to
confess that not only himself, but diverse others of the chief of the Island,
drawn by the goodly promises of Scander, and wearied likewise with the
Venetian Government, unto whom they would not give place either for nobility or
fot wealth, had conspired and determined to receive the Turks into the Island:
whereupon he with his other accomplices were put to death.

Now to return to the Senates determination concerning the resisting of the
Turkish Army: they resolved to place strong and sufficient Garrisons in the
Castles of Cyprus, speedily to send thither the necessary aid; and being ready
to choose a Commander to conduct those forces, Eugenio Singlitico Count of
Roccas a Gentleman of Ciprus, (who at the same time being Lieftenant General
of the Army of the firm land, did for the most part continue at Venice) did
Supplies of one thousand men sent into Cyprus.
freely offer himself to aid his Country at such a need and to serve his
Prince; whereupon having a speedy dispatch he embarked himself with a thousand
footmen, the Senate having first made him General of all the Cauallery in the
Island. Ieronimo Martinenga, Captain of the men at arms, did likewise freely
make offer ^o raise within a few days upon other princes states two thousand
footmen to conduct them to the releese of Famagosta, and to remain there with
them The voluntary offer of Ieronimo Martinenga.
for the defense of the City: the which he having in a short space done to
his great honor, and brought them to Venice, to imbarke them in the vessels
appointed for that purpose, he would first show them in arms to the people in
the The death of Martinenga.
market place of Saint Mark, who took great pleasure to beehold them, which
being done, they sailed toward Cyprus, but their Captain falling sick at Sea,
dyed within a few days after, for want of looking to, who was mightily
bewailed, and being carried into Ciprus was buried in Famagosta in S. Sophias
Church.

The Senate being desirous to implore the aid of all Christian Princes, sent
The Venetians implore the aid of Christian Princes.
word to their Ambassadors residing in their Courts, that they should acquaint
them with the cause, which at that time did only concern themselves, but
would

First of all they made means to the Pope, as well to draw some succors from
him, as that he by his authority should dispose other Princes to send them
supplies. Micaele Suriana was at the same time Ambassador for the Commonwealth
at Rome, who augmenting the Popes good will and disposition by sundry reasons,
Reasons propounded to the Pope to (...) him to relieve them.
did chiefly set before his eyes, the manifest danger which threatened other
Christian Realms, and especially the Churches territories, if the Venetian
State, which all men thought to be the Bulwark of Christendom should be
overthrown and ruined.

By these reasons and diverse others, the Pope being drawn to defend the
Venetians, he seemed to be very zealously affected to the cause, and desirous
to provide for the necessity of that war, and to aid the Commonwealth; yet
nevertheless, excusing himself for that he was not able to do what he
would, he bewailed the misery of his time, wherein the Sea Apostolic by
sundry accidents was very bare of means, and especially by reason of the
troubles in France, which threatening the city of Auignon, had constrained him
to be at great expenses: whereupon although it was often propounded in the
Consistory to embrace the Venetians defense, and to aid them; and that the
proposition was approved by the College of Cardinals, yet nevertheless, it
took no great effect: at the make a mighty fleet, able to resist that of the
Turks, and to disapoint their first attempts: And in the mean time to make a
league with the same King and other Christian Princes, whereby all their forces
might continually be joined together, to make head against the enemies
greatness. The Ambassador Suriana acquainted the Senate with his Holiness
proposition, who entreated them to accept thereof, and to refer the whole
business to him; that he would manage it as the common Father, with great
affection, to the good of all Christendom, and to their own particular desire
and profit; the which the Senate very willingly did.

The Pope for the beginning of this Treaty sent Lodouico de Torres, Clarke of
the Apostolic Chamber, into Spain to King Philip, to dispose him to join his
Setim Ottoman the common enemy, unto whom having related, from the Pope, as
well the public interest of all Christendom, The Pope sends to exhort the
Catholic King to join in that war against the Turk.
as his own particular, he found his Majesty ready and well inclined to do
that whereunto his Holiness exhorted him, referring nevertheless his final
answer till his arrival at Civil, (for he was then at Corduba, at the
assembly of the Estates of Castill) but upon Torres reply, that nothing would
so much hinder that business as long delay; he granted him, that his own
Galleys, with those of his Pentioners and Confederates, which amounted to the
number of sixty five, besides those of Spain, who by reason of the troubles of
Ganado continued upon Giouan Andre Doria their Admiral to obey the Popes
commandment, concerning the time and means to join them with the Venetians,
that they might afterward sail into the Leuant: He did likewise obtain a
Commission to the Viceroy of Naples, and Sicill, to permit the Venetians to
furnish themselves forth of these countries with corn sufficient for the
fleet: but as concerning the entering into the league, he answered, That it
craved a larger and more mature deliberation for which he The King of Spains
answer to the Popes content.
referred him till some other time: yet nevertheless within a while after his
coming to Civil, he concluded it of his own peoper motion.

The Venetians had enjoined Sigismond de Caualli their Ambassador with the
Catholic King, to aid and further the Treaty of Torres, who having well and
Leonardo Donato was sent thither in his place, who dealt so with the King, as
he continued him in that good desire and inclination.

Torres, having dispatched his business in Spain, did for the same purpose
make a journey into Portugal, having first obtained letters of recommendation
from the Kings mother, who lay then at Madrill. Sebastian the first of that
name was at the same time King of Portugal, being seauenteene years old,
bred and brought up in Christian piety under the government of D. Luigi
Genzabeil a Iesuist, a man very famous and of great authority near the King,
by whose means the Pope presumed to obtain of that Prince whatsoever he was
able to Torres having requested this King to send the ten Galleys, which were
usually ready armed in that Kingdom, that they being joined with the King of
Spaynes might altogether sail into Sicily. The King showed great love and
reverence to the Sea Apostolic, and seeming to be desirous to satisfy his
Holiness demand, in a matter so holy, just and honorable, did to his great
grief excuse himself for that he could not accomplish his good desire;
saying, that his Galleys were at the same time unready and disarmed by reason
of the contagious sickness which had the year before been at Lisbone, and
that it would be impossible to make them ready upon a sudden, Torres journey
into Portugal was to no purpose.

During this negotiating in Spain, Giouani Michaele being the Venetians
Ambassador with the Emperor, a man of singular understanding and well seen The
Venetiansolicit the Em peror to the same effect.
in affairs of importance, had already motioned the matter to the Emperor,
telling him that the occasion was now offered which he had so often desired in
their discourses together, how he might fearlesse enuade the Turkish States
whilst they being busied at Sea might not have leisure to succor them: and
therefore he should not delay it till they had ended their war and assured
their Sea coasts at which time it was to be feared that they being freed from
all other care, would seek to enlarge their Empire, by his loss and ruin: as
for the small safety in the truce with them their Example might give him
sufficient testimony thereof, Selim having broken it with them, and infringed
his, oath upon none occasion, The Emperors answer to the Venetian Ambassador.
but only through a covetous desire to rule over the whole world. The Emperor
gave a willing care to these remonstrances, with a ready answer, that he would
never be wanting to the wealth and commodity of Christendom, but that he was
desirous to see, how the King of Poland, the Muscouit, with other Christian
Princes, and especially the King of Spain would carry themselves there-in,
unto whom he woold send an express messenger into Spain to know his mind.

As for Charles the ninth the French King, the Pope used all the means he
could by his Nuncio to draw him into the league, exhorting him to favor and
further it with all his power, notwithstanding all the domestic wars and
broiles The Pope (...) the French King to have ^n band in this war.
which had for certain years molested his Kingdom; if not with his forces
yet atleast with his name and authority; the which the King seeming not to be
able to satisfy, and being likewise unwilling to neglect the authority and
exhortation of his Holiness, he said, in manner of delay that he would see
what others would do, who were more mighty, and free from all other letts; for
he had at the same time sharp war in his Realm, where not long before the
battle of Mon^contour, was fought betwixt his brother the Duke of Aniou, his
Lieuetenant General, and the Photestants, of whom the Duke of Aniou gat the
victory: But the Queen Mother who had the entier government and managing of
affairs, making a more open excuse, alleged, That the condition of other
Princes was not like to that of The answer of the King and the Queen his mother
to the Pope.
her son, because that others treated of continuing war against their
enemies

Yet nevertheless the King and Queen, gave loving and kind speeches to the
Venetian Ambassador residing in their Court, and besides diverse offers made to
the Senate from them, by their Ambassador resident at Venice, the King did
expressly send thither one of his Gentlemen to offer to the Signory that which
the condition and misery of the time would permit his Kingdom, troubled with
such gre^uous accidents, namely to be a mean to divert that war, and to
compose The French Kings offer to the Venetians
that controversy with the great Lord; making use in that manner of that Henry
his father, he would use means to preserve it, the which he supposed would
for that time be to purpose, and redound to the profit of the Venetians, his
ancient, and great freindes.

The Senate did not think those offers of any force at that time, the
preparations for war being very foreward on both sides, fearing least by an
uncertain hope of peace the minds of other Princes, who were already much
animated to war would be so ftened: The Italian Princes were much disposed to
this league, as the Dukes of Vrbin, Sauoy, Florence, and Ferrara, who did all
of them offer

Tamas King of Persia was solicited to take arms and to revenge the old and
new wrongs received from the Ottomans, and to this end (...) Alessandri a
Citizen of Venice was sent thither, who having dwelt a long time at
Constantinople could speak diverse languages. He being come to Casbin The
Venetians solicit the King of Persia to make war upon Selim.
where the King of Persia lay, was by means of certain Armenian Merchants
brought in by night, according to the manner of the Country, although it was in
the summer time, before Sultan Caydar Mirisi the Kings third son, who was at
the same time his Lieuetenant, with whom having a long time discoursed
concerning his coming ^hither, and telling him what great warlike preparations
Selim made against the Venetians, together with the great provisions of al
Christian Princes to fight with him, he entreated him in the name of the
Senate to make use of such an occasion, and to make war upon the Turks in
Asia, whilst the towns there should be unfurnished of Garrisons by reason of
the war of Cyprus.

Caydar lending a willing care to this discourse, did dilligently crave to be
informed of the whole mattter, not promising him any thing, but to procure him
audience of the King his father. But Alessandri perceiving that they used many
delays therein, being advised and assisted by Coza Ali a merchant of Tauris,
unto whom (he coming with him from Venice) the business had been recommended,
he began to deal with the great Chancellor of the Kingdom, who after diverse
ordinances, made a free answer, That his King was a very wise and discreet The
Chanceller of Persia his answer concerning the Emperors demand.
Prince, who knowing that in a matter of so great importance it was necessary
to proceed very maturely, he would first see the success of the league,
whereupon

Alessandri having received this answer, and perceiving that he could not be
admitted to speak with the King, left Persia: for he plainly discerned that
Tamas, being very old, was altogether adicted to peace, and avoided all
occasions which might cause the Turks to suspect that he had any intelligence
with Christians against him

Such were the Venetians preparations, such their resolution, and thus did they
treat with foreign Princes, that being united together they might oppose
themselves against that Common enemy: at what time the Turks began to use
hostile actions, and stayed diverse Venetian Merchants with their goods who
traded

Whilst the Venetians were busied in their preparations, the Turks at
Constantinople did hasten the provision of all necessaries for their journey,
they did The Turks preparations for the war of Cyprus.
in their Arcenall build new Galleys, trimmed the old ones, cast new pieces of
Ordnance: enroll great numbers of Pioners in Grecia, made huge proportions
Selim continuing his resolution to go in person with the army, they prepared
an infinite number of vessels called Mahonnes, and Palanderias, and made great
provisions of all things, according to the custom of that nation whenso-euer
their great Lord does go unto the Army.

But the Baschaes, Mustapha, and Piali, with diverse others of the Council unto
whom the enterprise of Ciprus was committed, consulting afterward on what
course were best to be held in that war, and there being some contrariety
found in their opinions, some stay was made of the business.

In the mean time, the Venetian Baily that lay at Constantinople, being
acquainted with all these proceedings, took great care how he might advertise
the Senate thereof; to write he durst not, fearing least his letters would be
intercepted, as some of his had already been, whereupon, knowing that the
Bascha Mahomet was ever against this enterprise, he did hope by his means to
obtain The Baylies remonstrance to the Bascha Mahomet.
his desire: He did by Ibrahim acquaint the Bascha, and afterward himself by
word of mouth, how-ill beseeming it was for the Majesty and generosity of so
great a Prince, to invade those on a sudaine and unlooked for, who upon his word
and oath, thought themselves safe and firm, as though when time and occasion
should be offered, he could want forces to employ against them, for the
recovery of that which he might justly think did belong unto him, against
whom he ought first to proceed by way of Justice, and next by force, using
first gentle means, before he did take Arms. The Bascha being moved by
these reasons, Selim s^ndeth a d^fiance to Uenice unless they surrender the
Realm of of Cyprus.
persuaded the great Lord, to send some of his servants to Venice, to demand
Selim allowed. Cubat Chiaus was appointed to that end, who some two years
before had been at Venice upon other business: the Bailey under this coulor,
took occasion to send one of his servants to accompany the Chiaus, to conduct
him safely through the Venetians territories, and to cause this negotiation to
be the more esteemed, He determined to send Lodoutco Bonriey, his Secretary,
whom he thoroughly instructed with all matters; he did likewise obtain leave
of the Bascha to send his young son Lodouico to Venice, fearing least he
should miscarry among those Barbarians, in such wretched times.

This proposition to send to Venice, did occasion an other good, for there was
Bonriccy, and two Dragomans, they decreed that without any other ceremony, he
should have private audience; where he coming into the Senate, and being
placed in the usual seat, upon the Princes right hand, he went and kissed
his Gown, and after diverse reuerences, he presented The Chiaus presents
Selims letters.
a pursse of cloth of gold Tissue, wherein according to the custom of that
Selims letters were, and said: Most excellent Prince, this is a Letter from my
Lord, when you are acquainted with his demand, I expect to have an answer:
Whereunto the Prince answering that it should be so, and the Chiaus standing
still, perplexed in mind, because no other speech was used to him, added.

My Lords, Mahomet the Vizier Bascha has commanded me to tell you, that he
is very sorry, that an occasion is offered, that he must needs break off from
you, having ever sought by all means to continue your friend: but complaints
coming so often to the Port, and from so many places, of the unfriendly
dealings of the officers belonging to this State, and especially of the kind
entertainment and reception given to the Western Pirates in Cyprus, who this
very

The Chiaus having delivered his message, the Prince told him, that the Senate
The Senate^ answer to the (...)
had resolved on an answer, the which should be read unto him, that he might
the better understand and know their intention: Whereupon he commanded Antonio
Milladonna, Secretary to the Council of Ten, to read it, which in effect was
thus. That the Senate did greatly marvel, that his Lord being no way by them
provoked, nor upon any just cause, would violate and enfringe that oath, by
which he had so solemnly confirmed the peace, and took for a pretense to make
war upon them, that they should give away a kingdom which the commonwealth
had for many years lawfully and peaceably enjoyed; the which he might be
well assured that they would never part from; but seeing he was determined to
proceed against them after that manner, the Venetian Senate would not fail to
defend that which did belong unto it, hoping by so much more to be the better
able to do it, by how much the justice of their

The beginning of those letters was stuffed with sundry complaints against the
The contents of (...) letters.
Venetians, for that they had disquieted the ancient bounds of Dalmatia, which
by conuention, made with his predecessors, had been established betwixt both
the one and other Empire: that contrary to the old and new agreement, the
Admiralls of the Venetian Galleys h^d put diverse Turkish Pirates to death,
after that they had taken them alive in fight; but especially for that the
Western Pirates were welcome into the Isle of Cyprus, who did continually
disquiet his neighbor Mahomet, by whose favor the Ottoman Family had obtained
so great an Empire, to be victorious in that enterprise.

The Senate made this answer to these letters. That the Venetians had ever
Ott^man Emperors, and contemned The Senates answer to (...) letters.
all other respects whatsoever, by refusing all occasions whereof they might
have made good use to their own profit: because that above all other things
they thought it fit and beseeming a Prince, carefully to keep his promise, and
they being desirous to avoid all suspicion of so great an infamy, had
dissembled and buried in silence, diverse wrongs done unto them, because they
would not be the first desturbers of the peace: But now perceiving that upon
no occasion, war is denounced against them, at such a time as they least
expected it, they would not refuse it, for the defense of their own, and in
particular for the defense of the Realm of Cyprus, the which as their
Aucestors had enjoyed it

War being in this sort denounced against the Venetians, and by them
entertained, the Senate made a decree to sell diverse public possessions, to
accept of sundry loanes of money, to the great profit of those that brought
them, and The Venetians great preparations.
in a word to use all means to gather great sums of money together: whereupon
for this purpose the number of the ^rocurators of Saint Mark was augmented,
which is the cheef dignity next to the Duke, bestowing it upon those that
should lend twenty thou^and Ducats: to the Commonwealth: they did likewise
permit

The surcease of arms had continued for a while till the return of Cubat, and
the end of his negotiation, but being come to Raguza, the answer which he
brought was soon divulged, whereupon the soldiers that lay in the parts near
adjoining, not tarrying for any others commandment being assembled in great
VV^r opened in a^ (...).
numbers, did not only waste and spoil the champaine country of Albania and
Dalmatia which was subject to the Venetians, but went and encamped before
Dulcina and Antiuari, who finding them to be manned with strong Garrisons and
having no ordnance to batter them, they were enforced to retire.

Now the Chiaus being returned to Constantinople, and the Senates answer being
known, all men did greatly wonder at it: for the Turks having seen in Selim
did not so much wonder as he did scorn and disdain, accounting himself
highly wronged and contemned in his own person, because that the usual
ceremonies and entertainments done to Ambassadors had been denied to Cubat,
and for that they had not sent an express messenger to him with their answer,
but had contrary to their promise, detained the Secretary Bonricci at Venice.
In regard whereof his pleasure was, being so councelled by Mahomet, to have
Cubat come into his presence, and particularly to relate the Venetians speeches
and entertainment given unto him, together with their preparations Selim is
greatly discontented for the small respect and entertainment given to his C^ians.
for war: which he understanding from his mouth, was some times amazed at the
report of the Republikes forces, repenting him in a manner of his
determination, and on a sudden he would enter into rage and choler, being
thereunto provoked by his own pride, and by the flattery of his counselors:
whereupon, he placed gards about the Baylies house, that he should not go
abroad, commanding the Bashas of Cairo and Aleppo to do the like to the
Venetian Consuls of Alexandria and Syria yet they were afterward set at
liberty, on condition they should not depart nor convey their merchandise forth
of the Turks Dominions.

LODOVICO MOCENIGO the 85. Duke.





IN the mean time Prince Loredan died at Venice, and Lodouico Mocenigo was
chosen in his place, to the peoples great joy and unusual applauds, presuming
that they had a Prince, who was wise, discreet, and a lover of the poor, and
would constantly oppose himself against all those perils and dangers which did
then threaten the Commonwealth.

The Sena^e after this election having acquainted all Christian Princes with
the coming of the Chiaus to Venice, together with their answer, went about to
continue the former motions of the league. Therefore for the greater
recommendation of the matter, they resolved to send an express Ambassador to
the Emperor, and to that end they appointed Giacomo Sourance, a man of great
The Venetians (...) Ambassador to the E^peror to solicit him to enter into the
le^gue.
authority and reputation, who had a long time dealt for the Commonwealth in
Princes Courts; the Senate thinking it necessary, first to solicit that Prince,
who already began to grow could in the business, to the end that by his
example other Princes might be drawn into that union for Christendom.

Being come to the Emperors Court, he found that he did allege sundry
difficulties, The Emperors answer to the Venetian Ambassador.
seemed to be glad of his coming, either for his own excuse or else because
he desired to have an express Ambassador to come from the Signory about that
matter, to the end he might be present at the Imperial Diet which he
determined within a while after to hold at Spire, and he supposed that his
presence would be the occasion of propounding and concluding so great and
important a matter.

As for the Spanish Court there was no speech of the league, that King having
Estuniga his Ambassador and to the Cardinals (...) and Pacheco, but the Popes
Nuncio and the Venetian Ambassador made earnest request, that the King would
command Doria, that so soon The Venetian* propositions in the ^ourt of S^aine,
with the difficulties alleadgea there^pon.
as he should bring those Galleys, which he had appointed him into those seas;
to go presently and join with the Venetians fleet, concerning which
proposition those of the Kings Council made sundry difficulties, some times
alleging that it was against reason that the Admiral of the Kings Galleys
should obey the Venetians Admiral: then they made show to suspect that the
Venetians went about to make use both of the appearance and name of those forces
to treat with more advantage with the Turks; and therefore they concluded that
the treaty

Now at Rome, whither the treaty of the league had been sent back (as has
The Popes proposition to a^ delay.
been said) the Pope perceiving that to particularize the conditions thereof,
would breed a very hurtful delay, he propounded, that seeing the King of
Spain and the Venetians were agreed to make that union, that without any more
delay, they should publish the league, being made in the same manner as in the
year 37. and that in the mean time their forces should join together, to
inuit other Princes to declare themselves, and thereby to affright the enemies.

During these practizes the General Zanne departed from Venice about the
beginning of April, and went to Zara, which was the Rendezuous of all the
fleet, The fl^et receives great discommodity by their abode at Z^ra.
did endure there sundry discommodities, and many of them grew sick, by means
whereof the Galleys were badly furnished with soldiers and mariners: yet
nevertheless so soon as the Senate heard news from Rome that the King had
commanded Doria to join with the Venetian nauall army, it wrote to the
General, that leaving four Galleys for the guard of the Gulphe, under the
command of one of the captains that had at any time been an Admiral, he
should

According to this commandment Zanne departed from Zara the twelfth day of
July and sailed to Liesna, where he found six great Galleys, and certain
ships which he joined to his fleet, and from thence, he went directly to
Corfou. At the same time, twelve Galleys were in the Popes name armed at Ancona
to be sent to the Venetian fleet at Corfou. For, after sundry propositions made
in open consistory concerning the aid which the Church might afford the
Venetians The Pope armeth twelve Galli^s whereof Colonna is made General.
in that war, it was concluded that twelve Galleys should be armed by the
sea Apostolic, but rigged by the Venetians. The Pope committed them to Marc
Antonio Colonna duke of Palliano with title of General to the Church in that
war against the Infidels.

The Venetians seemed to approve the Popes choice and wrote to him about
Colonna sent letters to Venice, wherein he gratified their love and good will
toward him, which he promised in all points to answer to the honor and
service of the Commonwealth.

The Turks on the other side so soon as the Venetian fleet was gonne from
Zara, began to spoil and waste Dalmatia, with great troops of horse and
foot, where they took some castles. Now the Venetian General being come to
Corfou with three score and ten light Galleys (for the great Galleys and
Ships stayed by the way) he began to consult what was best to be done (in
the council, by the Senates appointment, besides the General who had two
voices both the Prouidators of the army and Sforza Palauicin were present) all
men Marco Quirin Admiral of the Gulphe, and next because they had no certain
intelligence of the deseignes of the Turkish fleet; for it would have been a
very rash attempt with half the forces to have hazarded the whole fortune of
that w^rre on the incertaine event of one fight, seeing that by a little
temporizing they might more commodiously assure the estate of that action.

And lastly because the sickness which first began at Zara, by reason of the
The cause which s^aied the (...) at C^rfou.
increased, as great numbers daily died, whereby many Galleys were empty of
men: this was the chief cause of the delay, and the captains took great care
how to make new leauies of men to furnish the fleet: To this end, commandment
was sent to the Governors of Zant and Cephalonia to raise the speediest and
greatest supplies that they possibly could.

In the mean time because the soldiers should not grow idle, the General
resolved to send them to beseege the castle of Marguerits, a place of it self
nothing famous, but very necessary for the obtaining of other conquests, in
which action it was thought fit to employ them, till such time as the Galleys
of the Sforza Palauicin General of the Venetian troops, who departing from
Corfou with eight and forty Galleys, commanded by the Prouidator Celsi, with
five thousand foot and four great pieces of ordnance, arrived by day break
in the Haven of Nista opposite to it, where he speedily landed his soldiers,
and willed them to march on a sudden to assail the enemies, thereby hoping
with ease to surprise them and to seize upon the place, and to this purpose, he
sent certain Harquebuziers before, and himself followed after with the
residue of his forces: but having marched a great while through narrow and The
enterprise of the (...) broken off in (...) of the d^fficulty thereof.
difficult ways, they did from far descry the ca^tle which they went to
surprise, (...) having well considered al matters and finding things to be
otherwise then they had been reported, thought it against reason, to hazard
those troops which were destined to greater atchiuements, and therefore on a
sudden he turned back again, although the Prouidator was of a contrary
opinion, and countermanding the Harguebuziers that he had sent before, he
marched back to the Haven of Nista and returned to Corfou.

At the same time Marco Quirini came with his Galleys from Candy to Corfou,
having by the way taken the fort of Brazza de Menia, which the Turks held. He
was presently commanded to go with twenty Galleys and scour the Islands of the
Archipelago: whereupon, he sailed to the Isle of Andros one of the renowned
Cic^ades. Within a while after, the General Zanne received commandment from
the Senate to sail with his forces farther up into the Leuant, and by
assayling some of the enemies towns to divert them from the invasion of
Cyprus. Quirin with his Galleys met him, and within two days after he arrived
in the Isle of Candy anchor^d in the Gulf Anfialea, which at this day
mariners call the Haven of Suda. The The Venetian fleet (...) (...) by the
Senats commandment.
General being there desirous to make speedy provision of whatsoever the fleet
needed, found great difficulties in it, chiefly in recovering suffitient
numbers of men to supply the places of them that were dead, whereupon, he
sailed with forty Galleys to Candace the chief city of the Island, the sooner
by his presence to hasten the necessary provisions, leaving both the
Prouidators and Palauicin in the haven of Suda with four score Galleys,
enioyning them to leauy men from all parts.

Now after that the fleet was sufficiently furnished with soldiers, mariners
and other necessaries, they vnproffitably spent the time and the best season of
the year, expecting the Popes and Spanish Galleys, the which, according to the
Venetians directions, being joined together, were to meet them in Candy. At the
last, toward the latter end of August, Mar^-Antonio Colonna the Churches
General, The (...) of the Pope, King of Spain and V^netians join together.
and Gio^an Andrea Doria, the Catholic Kings, being arrived, the Venetian
(...) was merueilous joyful of their coming: The General and fleet went
forth of the Haven of Suda to welcome them, where according to the manner they
saluted with volies of shot; then all of them entering together into the haven,
made no long abode there, but after some propositions made, the whole fleet
retired

Whilst the Christian fleet had spent much time in preparing and uniting it
self together, the Turks with greater celerity had assembled all their
forces, and being mighty at sea, had without any difficulty, prosperously
pursued their enterprise, the which was more speedily performed, because that
Selim, who said that he would in person go to the army changed his
determination and resolved to remain at Constantinople, by the advice of
Mahomet and Mustapha, Mustapha, General of the enterprise of Cyprus.
to whose authority and council all the other Bashas condescended. Selim then
tarrying at Constantinople made Mustapha his Lieutenant General in that Piali,
Admiral of the Galleys. Piali within a while after departing from
Constantinople with fifty five Galleys and certain other vessels, Mustapha set
sail with like number, unto whom for an extraordinary favor the great Lord
had given the Imperial Galley to transport him, which is of extraordinary
greatness and most sumptuously decked, in which the great Turk embarketh
himself when he goes forth on any enterprise. They anchored first at
Negrepo^t, then at Rhodes, where having intelligence that the Venetian fleet
lay at Zara, and could not depart from thence by reason of ficknesse and other
impediments, and that they had no news at all of the Spanish fleet: the Turks
being out of fear Piali made an attempt to take the fort of Tina, which is an
Island in the farthest part of the Archipelago, belonging to the Venetians, and
coming unlooked for in a morning to that Island thinking to surprise it, it
was discovered at sea by Ieronimo Paruta a Venetian Gentleman Governor of the
Island, a valiant and discreet person, who of a long time having feated their
arrival, he made provisions of all necessaries for defense. He perceiving
the enemies for to bend their course thitherward, shot off a warning piece to
aduertize those of the Island that were abroad in the country, that they should
quickly retire into the castle, which being done in time, they prepared
themselves to withstand the Barbarians assaults, which were very cruel, not
only once, but twice and thrice, in every of which, they were bravely
repulsed, with great loss of their men, and were enforced to discampe, The
Tuk^s re^ from Tina.
after that they had with incredible fury wasted the whole Island, burned the
Country houses, ruined Churches, and slaughtered all the cattaile that were in
that Island.

From Tina Piali went to Rhodes, where all their fleet lay which amounted The
number of the Turkish fleet.
to more then two hundred armed vessels, accounting an hundred and fifty
Galleys, together with Fusts and Galeo^s, but in the great fleet were certain
Mahonnes, which are like to great Galleys, not altogether so big as a
Gallion, six ships, and great numbers of other vessels commonly called
Caramuscolini, and some fifty Palandaries to transport horse.

This fleet bending it direct course toward Cyprus was discried near to Baffo
1570.
on the first day of July in the year 1570. which scoured all the coast from
Limissa as far as the Promontory commonly called the Cape of the Cat: then
landing part of their forces they burned and spoiled the sea coasts, taking The
Turk^sh fleet landed.
many prisoners: the next day pursuing their journey, they went to Salines,
where finding no resistance, they vnship't their ordnance, and the rest of the
soldiers who presently fortified their camp with deep trenches and strong
Rampires, from whence they afterward wasted and spoiled the country near
adjoining. Then marching to Leucata, nine miles from Salines they did easily
make themselves Mustaph^ by (...) (...) to win the Cy^.
Masters of the country and people, unto whom Mustaphaa gave great gifts and
goodly promises to draw on others, and especially those of the mountains,

In the mean time they dispatched four score Galleys and diverse flat bottomed
vessels to Tripoli, and to the River of Caramania, there to raise other horse
and foot for^es, which arriving in Cyprus, made up the number (as most authors
write) of fifty thousand foot, five and twenty hundred horse, three thousand
Pioners, with great numbers of horse of carriage and thirty pieces of great
ordnance with an hundred and fifty Falconets.

There were no suffitient Garrisons in the whole Island able to resist these
forces: for the ordinary Garrison was but two thousand Italian foot men, and
some thousand others sent from the firm land, with Martinengos two thousand

Things being thus, and suffitient forces wanting to repulse ^o mighty an
enemy, for the cauallery was to weak for to hinder his landing, and the
infantery not suffitient to defend for any long time the two chief fortes
which they held, Nicotia and Fa^agosta, and for to guard the mountains and
other passages of the Island he being landed: therefore they resolved
espetially to

Astor Baillone who by Martinengos death was General of all the forces in
Astor Baillone General in Cyprus.
the Island, in the absence of the Prouidator (for Lorenzo Bembo died, not long
before) and other Venetian Magistrates, called a council, where the chief
offices and command in that war were distributed to sundry Cypriot Gentlemen,
of honorable rank, as well for their wealth as nobillity, but smally
experienced in martial matters. The Count Roccas was made Lieutenant to
Baillone, Giacomo de Nores Count of Tripoli, Master of the ordnance, Gio^an
Singlit^co captain of the Cypriot cauallery, Giouan Sosomene, captain of the
Pioners, Scipio Caraffa, and Pietro Paulo Singlitico captains of the foot, who
were appointed to guard the strong places of the mountains, and others were
appointed to other places.

They did likewise conclude in that council to attempt to hinder the enemies

The Turkish captains being unwilling to loose time resolved to assail one
of the two chiefest fortes of the Island. Piali was of opinion, to beseege
Famagosta Piali is of opinion to beseege Famagosta first.
first, hoping quickly to take it, and that it being taken, Nicotia would of
necessity yield, which had many unprofitable eaters within the circuit of her
walls, which being seated far from sea, in the midst of a champaine
country, possessed by great numbers of enemies, could not be relieved, nor
without new provision long hold out the seege: that Famagosta was no great
fort, but weak, and so defective as it would never endure one only battery,
and that they within it were not many, or so bold and valliant as to sustain
any assault.

Mustapha maintained the contrary, saying, that the reputation of so great an
Mustapha mainte^neth the contrary and his opinion is followed.
army as theirs, ought not to be blemished by attempting any mean enterprise,
thereby to increase the enemies courage, and diminish their own: That the
Geneuois for four score and ten years had held Famagosta, at the same time
as the Kings of the family of Lusignan commanded the Island, whereby might be
gathered, that the taking of that city, would be of no great importance for
the winning of the whole Kingdom. That the Nobillity, and very many of the
people were retired into Nicotia, that all the wealth and munition of the whole
Island was there, so as that only exploit being well performed would end all
the rest, and their first attempt give end to all their deseignes.

These reasons forcible in themselves and strengthened by the reputation

Nicolo Dandulo was at the same time Governor of the city, a man to weak to
undergo that burden, which not desert but opinion had laid on him: yet to
whom long experience had rather given abillity to execute, then nature to
direct. The sodainnesse of the danger had increased his fear, and his fear
the danger, for, at the arrival of the enemies army, the trenches were
unfinished, and the soldiers disordered, and the city vnvictualled.

Now whilst those in Nicosia, being encompassed with many miseries, were
busied in furnishing the city with necessaries, and inconsulting by what means
The enemies are encamped before (...).
to srustrate the enemies deseignes, they were so tedious in their resolutions,
in regard they had no eminent Commander able to decide the controversies which
arose from diversity of opinion, that the Turks had time to pitch their tents,
to plant their ordnance, and likewise for to fortify their camp, which

This City is seated in the midst of the champaine, in an wholesome
temperate air: it has great store of water, and the soil is very fruitful:
In former The sytuation of the city of Nicotia.
times it was nine miles in compass about, but the Venetians being desirous
to fortify it, reduced it to three: it is proportioned like a star

Howsoever, the City rather was unfurnished of a skillful Commander, and brave
men, then of fortification. There were ten thousand footmen in the city,
amongst whom were fifteen hundred Italians and the rest were native Cypriots,
namely three thousand Cernedes, two thousand five hundred of the city, two
thousand new men enroled in the towns and villages of Cyprus, that

They likewise sent to Famagosta for to entreat Baillone to come thither with
some certain troops to command the city: but those of Famagosta having no
superfluous forces, and being uncertain whether the enemy changing his
determination would on a sudden come and assail them, did constantlo deny the
Nicotians request, not suffering the aid they required, nor the captain to
go forth of their city: upon this refusal Baillone likewise excused his
departure, adding that Martinengas soldiers by wanting a captain, said that
they would obey none but him, so that his departure might breed some great
disorder and confusion in the City. Moreover, there was store of ordnance
Giouan Discord among the commanders in the city.
Sosomene, as many more were come to the city; nevertheless, for all this
great multitude of people, the captains being divided amongst themselves,
this so necessary fortification was left imperfect, which did much weaken the
forces within it.

On the contrary side, there was in the enemies camp such agreement, and
obedience toward the captains, as all military actions were speedily
executed. Mustapha a courageous person and a great soldier, besides the rank
which he then held, had great credit and authority amongst the soldiers, in
regard of the fame Mustapha his great credit among the soldiers.
and reputation he had purchased for his command in Selims army before he was
Emperor, when he made war on his brother Achomat, all men attributing the
unexpected victory which ensued, to his only valor and prowess: and
therefore the soldiers being accustomed to martial deeds, travail and
danger, were grown much more active and valliant, having their captains
valor for their object, together with the hope of great reward if they were
victorious.

His army was reported to be very strong, but his chief force were six
thousand Ianissaries, and four thousand Spaches (these are horsemen, never
out of pay, which some time when need is, fight on foot) all valliant men and
bred up in war: Therefore by how much those of the city wanted human aid
against such forces, by so much greater was their recourse unto God. For, day
Prayers and Processions in Nicotia.
and night prayers were made in private Houses and Churches, and sollemne
Francisco Contaren Bishop of Baffa.

He at that time was chief amongst the Clergy in that city (for Philippo
Moce^igo Archbishop of Nicotia was then at Venice) did not cease to aid and
assist the people as if he had been their own pastor, and having on a time
assembled the chief of the town, in Saint Sophias Church, he gave them a
brief and learned exhortation befitting the time, from whence they departed so
well satisfied and resolved, as they did put one an other in good hope and
comfort of a fortunate issue of that war, and did

The end of the eight Book of the sixth Decade.
The Contents of the ninth Book of the
THE Turks beseege the City of Nicotia, with their furious battery. The taking
of the Bulwark Constance, whereof ensued the Cities loss. The Barbarous
cruelties Doria having intelligence of the loss of Nicotia, returns home into
his country. Many towns subjects to the Turks yield to the Venetians. The
Popes exhortation for the conclusion of the league. The difficulties which
arose in the conclusion Mahomet Basha propounds a treaty of peace to the
Venetians. The Venetians are doubtful and uncertain either for peace or
war. The Emperor opposes himself against the title which the Pope had given
to the Duke of Florence. The Pope and Spaniards seek to the Venetians, least
they should make an agreement with the Turk. The league is concluded and
signed, with the Articles thereof. Don John of Austria is made General of the
league. The means which the Venetians used to get Selim promised to himself
after the taking of Nicotia. The enemies are defeated in Candy. The Turks
spoil and waste the Islands of Zant and Cephalonia. And lastly the conditions
of peace propounded to the Venetians by Mahomet Basha.

The ninth Book of the sixth Decade of the History of Uenice.
THe enemy without any empediment being come before Nicosia, sent certain
horse to make incursions near to the city, to draw those within it forth to
skirmish; the Italians would gladly have sallied, but at first the Governor
would not suffer them; yet being overcome by the importunities of all the
captains, he permitted Caesar of Vincenza, Lieutenant of the Those of Nicosia
mak^ certa^ne sall^es.
Count Roccas, to sallie with certain horse, which being few in number could
not Andre Cortese, was taken by the enemy, and being brought before the Basha,
he presently commanded his head to be cut off.

The enemies afterward without any empediment did build a fort on Saint Marines
mount; some four hundred and forty paces from the city: for although the
beseeged used all means to frustrate the enemies deseigne toward the
curtains of Podocatera and Caraffa (for so were those Bulwarks called, by the
name of those Gentlemen that had particular command in the building of them)
and The Turks build three for^es near to the city.
the enemy, who wrought day and night, from executing his enterprise; who not
satisfying himself with that one fort, did on a sudden build three more in
three other several places, the one upon a little hill at Saint Georges, the
second opposite to the Bulwarks Constancia and Podocatera, on a little rising,
called Margueri^s Mount, and the third on the top of the Mount Mantia, hoping
with these fortes to batter the Bulwarks, curtains, and houses of the city.

They did afterward make deep and broad trenches which they brought unto The
enemies fierce battery.
the ditch of the old walls and placed courts of guard in them, which could not
be hurt by the cities ordnance: then, for four days space, without
intermission, A fierce assault giu^n ^o four bulwarks at one time.
they determined to assault at once, in which for a long time both sides fought
valliantly, but in the end the Turks were with with great loss repulsed.

Mustapha wondering and raging thereat, being almost out of hope to take the
City, solicited and animated his soldiers, to go once again to mount the
city walls should be made Sangiacks, and if any Bascha dyed, he that should
first enter the city, should succeed in that dignity.

The soldiers being thus encouraged, the assault was resolved on: The next
day early in the morning the Turks marching by day break in great silence to
An assault given to the Bulwark Constantia.
the same Bulwarks, assailed the besieged on a sudden and unlooked for,
hoping thereby with more ease to obtain the victory, (as indeed it did). For
the Turks finding those that had the guard of the Bulwark Constantia half a
sleep, and The Turk^s take the Balwarke Constantia.
mounting furiously the Parapet, gave them no time nor leisure to make any
defense, who being drowned in slumber and fear, forgot to retire into the
City.

The great opinion which the besieged had conceived of the arrival of supplies
from the Commonwealth of Venice, which they so much desired, made them
believe, that the noise which they had heard the night before, whilst the
Turks were preparing for the mornings assault, was a token of the enemies
discamping; in regard whereof, and because they were oppressed with long
watchings, and intolerable labors, they had securely disarmed themselves, and
fell to rest: The Turks then in this confusion entering pell mell with the
Christians into the last rampires, there arose a great cry, accompanied with
fear and amazement, whereupon, many betook themselves to open flight.

The Count Roccas quarter was near to the Bulwark, who by the sudden The
Con^t Roccas slain.
matters brought, and himself being shot into the head with an Harquebuze,
fell down dead, whereupon all those, that by his arrival had taken courage,
and began by little and little to make head, leaving the defense of the walls,
ran home to their houses to provide for the safty of their wives and children.
Pietro Pisani and Bernardino Polano Captain of Salma, coming thither in have,
could not by their authority and example stay the disordered runne-awayes;
among whom Polano thrusting himself, and going about to hold them back by
force, was together Pisani perceiving his fellow to be slain, did with the
rest retire to the market place, whither from all parts the poor inhabitants
came, who were not yet pursued by the Turks, who having taken the Bulwark
Constantia, would before they went on any farther, make themselves masters of
All the Bulwark (...) taken.
all the rest, in which the Italian footmen did still fight bravely with the
enemy: but in the end when they perceived their strong places to be lost, and
that they were at once assailed in front and on their backs, being unable to
make any longer resistance, they abandoned the walls, and making themselves way
through the midst of the enemies, they retired to the market place, where they
made head for a time, until that the Basha of Aleppo arrived, who entering the
town at the The Cit^y of Nicosia is taken.
to the Palace; whither the Governor, Bishop Contaren, and many of the chief
Citizens had already escaped, those which could not enter, running up and
down here and there through the streets, were presently either slain or
taken prisoners.

They within the Palace having received the Baschas word for the safety of
their lives, so soon as they had opened the gates, the Turks presently run
in upon them, who were able to make no resistance being unarmed, where they
were all murdered: therein, the Governor, Bishop, and common people running
one self same fortune.

That being done, and the Turks freed from farther trouble, they ran
confusedly The City is sacked.
and without Enseignes about the city, sacking houses, spoiling and ruining
Churches, dishonouring wives, rauishing virgins, and putting all to the edge of
the sword, without distinction of age or condition, so as that day, twenty
thousand persons dyed by the hands of the Turks: and those whom the cruel
enemy left alive, rather to reserve them for some miserable punishment, then
for any compassion toward them, were bound in chains, and haled to prison
over the The number of the dead.
dead bodies of their friends and kinsfolk. In this manner did this City in
one day, taste the extremest of calamity, which for a long time had lived in
great pomp and magnificence, nay rather in all excess and dissoluteness,
serving for

The Turks did afterward with ease become Lords of the rest of the Island,
Famagosta excepted. For the other towns following the victors fortune, did
Cyprus yields to the Turks, Famagosta excepted.
presently yield, and Cerina likewise as readily as the rest, notwithstanding
that Giouan Maria Mudazzo Captain of the Castle, and Captain Alphonso Palazza
being entreated by those of Famagosta, had determined to hold out and bravely
to desend it. Those of the mountains did the like, Scipio Caraffa, Paulo
Singlitico, with diverse other Gentlemen, and some Greek Priests, and great
numbers Mustapha, unto whom they swear fealty and aleageance; so that the
Venetians possessed nothing in the Island but only Famagosta, whither Mustapha
determined to march, leaving 4000. footmen for the guard of Nicotia.

Mustapha, having taken order for Nicotia, marched toward Famagosta with his
whole army, and encamped at the village Pomodama, three miles from the City,
causing his Turkish horse to make daily incursions to the very gates, who bore
the heads of the chiefest Nicotians upon their lances points, to daunt the
soldiers, and to divert them from their resolution in susteining the siege:
he did afterward draw nearer to the City, making great trenches: but those
within Georges, Perispola, and at the Crane tower, which nevertheless, did
afterward do them great hurt, for they therein spent above fifty thousand
pound weight of powder, which since then they wanted.

Now because winter drew near, an unfit season for a siege, which they
perceived would prove long and difficult, and that it behooued him besides to
strengthen his Galleys, by reason of the intelligence he received of the
uniting of the Christian fleet; Mustapha being unwilling to enterprise any
thing, that might John Sosomene, who had been taken at Nicotia to go to
Famagosta, upon his own word, to procure money to pay his ransom, that he
might exhort them to a voluntary yielding, and to tell them that they could by
no means hold out long. But the Captains, Magistrates, and people of
Famagosta, resolving to defend it to the last man, would in no sort listen to
his discourse, but instead of entreating the Senate to quit that city to the
enemy, they humbly besought it to send them aid: and the better to acquaint it
with what they needed, they resolved to send Nicolo Donato to Venice, with two
Galleys, and with him Ieronimo Ragazzone, the

But it is now time to return to the Christian fleet, which departing as has
been said forth of the Haven of Suda was come to Sithy, where the Captains
began to consult what was best to be done. Propositions were made by some of
them to enuade some places belonging to the Ottoman Empire, and thereby enforce
the enemies to leave Ciprus to come to the reskew of his own, affirming Sund^y
opinions of the Capta^nes o^ ^he Christian fleet.
it to be the surest means to frustrate the enemies deseignes. The General
Zanne was of a contrary opinion, persuading them to sail directly to Cyprus,
alleging how that the fleet was chiefly destined for the defen^e of that
Kingdom, which by directing their course elsewhere could not be preserved
from the danger which threatened it: That the only remedy was to go and fight
with the enemies fleet, because that upon report of their coming, the Turks
would be enforced to quit the land enterprise and to retire to their navy for
the The General is o^ op^nion ^o meet with the enemy and sight with him.
with those of the Pope and King of Spain, would presently leave Cyprus, not
to fight, but to return to Constantinople: and that thereby they might find
means to encounter them by the way, and fight with them with great advantage:
for though they were Inferior to the enemies in number of men and vessels,
they were nevertheless without all doubt in goodness of shipping, and
magnanimity and courage superior to them; being besides fresh and lusty,
whereas the enemies could not but be much wearied and wasted with their
exploits done since

These reasons being strong and forcible were approved by every one, as
agreeable to the Senates decree, namely to leave all other enterprises and to
intend the voyage of Cyprus already resolved, whereupon the fleeet departed
from Candy the eighteenth day of September to sail thitherward.

The whole fleet consisted of an hundred and fourscore light Galleys, namely
an The Number of the Christian fleet.
hundred and four and twenty of the Venetians, twelve of the Popes, and five
and forty of the Catholic King: and besides all these, twelve great galleys,
and fourteen Venetian men of war, with great numbers of other vessels of
burden, which carried Munitions and other necessaries. In the whole Navy
there were fifteen thousand mercenarie footmen, besides great numbers of
voluntaries, Castel-rosso, which is seated on a rock, opposite to Caramania,
some hundred and fifty miles from Cyprus, where by reason of night that stole
upon them, and a tempest that arose, they were enforced to land in the Havens
of Vathi and Calamita, where the same night they received sorrowful news of
the loss of Nicotia.

This did greatly trouble the whole fleet, whereupon the next day a Council
Doria hearing of the loss of Nicotia, is desirous ^o return home.
was called, to determine what was to be done. Such as from the beginning
Doria did openly protest, that he would return home, and said, That he came
from Candy, with an intent to relieve Nicotia, which being lost, the cause of
his journey ceased, and that he knew none other reason sufficient to expose
them to the hazard of a bataile, which in regard of the loss of that City was
much more to be well considered: because that the enemies being then free from
land actions, and grown more proud and insolent by means of the victory,
would be embarked in their Vessels, not alone to repulse but to assail us;
adding hereunto, the unfitness of the season, winter drawing on, and the long
iourny they were yet to make before they should arrive at their wished Haven,
and also his particular charge of preserving his fleet which was committed unto
him by the Catholic King.

These reasons making him resolute in his opinion, he could not be diuerted
from The General and Prouidator use reason to Doria to perswa^e him (...).
it by the General Zanne, nor by the Prouidator Veniero, who being already
embarked Dorias refusal to go on any farther, the General Zanne to his great
greese was enforced to permit it.

The Christian fleet then departing from Castell-rosso, and coming all of
Doria returns home.
them to Scarpanto into the Haven Tristano, Doria on a sudden took his leave
directing his course to wards Puglia, and from thence into Sicily, his only
care being to retire safely into his Country.

Colonna and Zanne being desirous to exploit some worthy enterprise, remained
still together. But having intelligence that Piali, with a great number of well
armed Galleys was come from Cyprus to overtake them, and finding themselves to
weak for resistance, they weighed ankors and sailed into Candy to the Haven of
Canea, not without danger of being assailed by the Turkish fleet, which having
notice of the Christians departure sailed speedily to the I Will of Stamp alia:
and Piali determining to go to Candy, i^ hope to find some assured booties on
those

At the same time certain Towns of Albania which were subject to the Turk
did rise against them, and being desirous to shake off their slavish yoke, they
sent to request the Venetian Magistrates their nearest neighbors, to send them
supplies of men and arms a suring them that at the first sight of their
Euseignesthey would speedily come unto them and become their subjects, and for
a sure testimony Diverse places subject to the Turk yield to the Venetians
Boyan, called at this day the country of Drina, and other places belonging to
the Marcouichians, did submit themselves to the Venetians, so that the
Governors of Antiuari, Dulcigna, and Budua, did in the name of the Venetian
Commonwealth, receive the oath of allegiance of more then an hundred towns and
villages. The Christians of Zara were in arms, not so much in hope to make any
new conquest, as to repulse the enemies, and to free the country from their
continual incursions: But there was no memorable matter done, in regard both

In the mean time, the renewing of the league was treated at Rome, whither so
soon as ample commissions were brought from Spain and Venice to their Agents
and Ambassadors for the conclusion thereof, the Pope having called them before
him began to exhort them all to enter into league against the common enemy,
telling them that the cause was common, (although that in respect of present
loss it did more nearly concern the Venetians), in regard the quarrel was
betwixt Christians and Infidells, and that if his own presence should be
necessary, The Popes ^x-hortation for the conclusion of the league.
his age should not hinder him from the journey: That he would entreat,
solicit, and admonish the Emperor and all other Christian Princes to enter
into the league, for which he promised continually to pray unto God that it
might please him to grant it victory over his enemies.

The Ambassadors and Cardinals seemed to be greatly moved by this
exhortation, giving his Holiness many thanks for it, each of them promising to
proceed

The Pope had appointed five of the greatest and noblest Cardinals of the Long
(...) used in the conclusion of the league.
College to be present in the name of the Sea Apostolic at the treaty of the
Alexandrine his Nephew, Moron, Cesis, Grassi, and Aldobrandino, betwixt whom
and the two Spanish Cardinals, with the two Ambassadors of Spain and Venice,
the treaty having been begun to be decided, they presently fell into sundry
difficulties: for every of them aiming to have the league concluded to his own
particular profit, propounded very strange matters, as it often happens in
such cases: But the Pope who proceeded therein very sincerely, his aim being
only for the good of all Christendom. went about sometimes to moderate the
excessive demands of the Spaniards; protesting that if they did not presently
conclude it, to revoke all power and authority granted to their King to leuy
money: Then turning his speech to the Venetians, he exhorted them to

The Cardinals likewise that were his Holiness Commissioners, speaking now to
the one and then to the other, did all they might for the ending of the
business, but especially Cardinal Moron, a man well experienced in the
managing of most important affairs, and very eloquent, who allowing the
propositions of the Venetians Ambassador, as those which tended to the
universal good, went about to draw the Kings Ambassadors from their own
private interest, and to make them capable of truth which having done by a very
eloquent remonstrance, and they The Spaniards idle excuses.
unable to make any reasolable answer, fell to new excuse, saying that they
would

The Spaniards added to the former difficulties which they had propounded, That
the Venetians should be bound on pain of Ecclesiastical Censures to observe
in every point that which should be resolved on in the league, as though they
had suspected the Venetians loyalty, which had like to have broken off the The
difficulties propounded by the Spaniards.
whole business: They did moreover strive about a General to command the Army,
the Spaniards arrogantly craving not only to appoint a General (which was
freely granted) but a Lieftenant, who in his absence should have the same

The Senate being highly displeased there with did expressly send a new
Ambassador to Rome to acquaint the Pope with their earnest desire to see the
league concluded, together with their firm resolution to continue the war.
Giouan Sorance was deputed to this end, who coming to Rome, and finding the
same difficulties, his arrival and speed could do no greater good, so as to
all men's grief time was unprofitably spent, which rather craved the execution
of matters already resolved, then consultation about new.

The league was at the same time propounded in the Emperors Court, where it had
no better success for the Emperor under sundry coullors having spent The
Emperor (...) to enter into the (...).
many months before he would give any certain resolution, being still
desirous to gain time did in the end declare, That having Truce with Selim for
eight year s, three of which were hardly expired it would be against his honor
not to

The Senate having notice of the Emperors resolution and perceiving that it was
to no purpose any longer to entertain an Ambassador there, called him home,
the like they did to Antonio Tepulo appointed for the same purpose to go into
Poland, who so soon as they understood the Emperors resolution they sent back
for when he was half way on his journey being assured that although the
Polanders were a warlike nation and enemy to the Turk, yet they

Now to return to the fleet, the Venetian General came to the haven of Cania
as has been said, as well in regard he was to near his enemies and far
from The Venetian (...) resol^ (...) (...) to Fama^.
his friends, as for theseason of the year unfit for marine actions, thinking
it folly then to go to relieve Famagosta, whither for that time he only
resolved to send sixteen hundred footmen in three ships, with twelve Galleys
for their conuoy, upon intelligence he had received how that eight Turkish
Galleys lay at ankor not far from thence, to keep all relief from it. The
Prouidator Venieri made entreaty that for more assurance, ^ee should send
thither as many The Marquis Rangon (...) (...) b^s excuse.
which being not effected by reason of sundry impediments, Venicri in regard
thereof, or rather in regard of the indisposition of his person, remained in
Candy.

The Marquis Rangon Palauicin was chosen to command those new supplies, but
absolutely refusing to go thither, said, That he came to go unto Famagosta,
if that Baillone were not there, or else unto Nicotia, but the one being lost
and Baillone remaining in Famagosta, he was quit of his promise^ but this
excuse seeming unworthy for so great a soldier, espetially Lodouieo Martinenga
(...) supplies t^ Fa^.
Lodouieo Martinenga Captain of the men at Arms and then Governor of Cania,
was elected in his stead Captain General of those supplies, who freely
accepted that charge.

This being done, the General thought it fit, for the ease of the Island to
depart thence, and leaving Qutrini in Candy, with the Galleys of the Island,
and three great Galleys, he sailed with the rest of the fleet to Corsou,
being by the way by a terrible tempest driven into the Haven Vatica. There he
waited for the Senates commandment to know what he should do, either to stay
there, or else (as himself advised) to pass on farther into Dalmatia, there
to t^imme his Galleys, and furnish the fleet, with many things which it wanted.

Colonna preparing for his departure to Italy, was by reason of foul weather
enforced to carry a whole month in the Haven of Casopa, from whence tired with
long stay, he set sail, and in his journey incountred many misfortunes.
Collonna ^peth two great dangers as (...) returned kemeward.
himself hardly escaping into the Galley of Francisco Troni, the which not
long after being by the same tempest driven on sho are, was there beaten in
pieces: but the weather waxing fair, he arrived at Zara, having escaped two
wonderful and notable dangers: from whence he wrote to the Senate,
acquainting it with that late accident; then he directed his course toward
Ancona, and from thence rode post to Rome, to yield an account to the Pope of
his journey.

The General Zanne within a while after fell sick, as well by reason of the
great travails he had sustained, as with grief of mind: Whereupon he
besought Sebastiano Venieri is made General in Zanne bis steed.
the Senate to give him leave to come home to provide for his health, which
being granted, Sebastiano Veniere was chosen in his steed, who remained in
Candie; he was speedily commanded to sail from thence with two Galleys to
Corsou to take charge of the fleet, the which by the Senates Decree was to
Winter there, and to be furnished with all necessaries. And the Senate fearing
least Venieri should be gone to Cyprus before he could receive his
Commission, it determined to create a Prouidator General at Sea, who in
Venieri his absence, should have as ample authority as the General, and when
Venieri should be in the Army, to hold the chief place next him. Augustino
Barbarico, a man of singular wisdom and integrity of life, was by a general
consent chosen, on whom it seemed the Commonwealth might safely rely and
build upon.

In this manner, and with such success, ended the first year of this war,
begun with greater resolution then success. Now the unhappy loss of
Nicosia, with other events, clean contrary to all men's hopes, greatly
perplexed the Senate: so as upon sundry occasions, it was much distracted. For
on the one side, the earnest desire to recover their reputation, and to be
revenged for injuries received, did provoke them to renew the war in fiercer
manner then before, and to make new proof of their fortune and valor: but on
the

Besides, the great difficulties which hindered the conclusion of the league,
the bad presage and ill success of so unfortunate and unlucky a beginning of
war, and the confluence of so many adversities, did take away from the minds
of the most generous, all hope of any future success.

The Senators being thus irresolute a very fit occasion was offered them with
their honors to negotiate a Peace. For the Bascha Mahomet still desiring to
compose this war in friendly manner, was willing to renew the motion of
peace, the success of that war in no sort liking him, for if, it should
prove unfortunate it would increase the danger of their Empire, if prosperous
the authority and reputation of his enemy Mustapha.

Mahomet then being moooued by these reasons did oftentimes discourse with The
Bascha Mahomet reuiueth the trea ty of peace.
the Venetian Baily concerning the treaty of peace which was broken off, going
about to draw from him whether he had any commission to deal therein: at the

The Bascha in speaking here of told him that his Lord was vexed thereat, and
Ibraim used the like speech to the Baily, wishing him to incite the Senate to
send a messenger of purpose to Constantinople, to the end that under color of
this treaty concerning Merchandise, some means of a General Agreement might
be propounded.

The Baily upon this assurance, and by the Baschas permission dispatched his
own steward with one of the Dragomans to carry letters to Venice, which the
Bascheas self had dictated to him concerning the affairs of Merchants,
acquainting them afterward more particularly what he had done, and with the

Grassinan a Frenchman departed at the same time from Constantinople, having
been Agent for the most Christian King there; who arriving at Venice, told the
Senate that the Bascha had used diverse speeches to him concerning the treaty of
peace, and that he brought letters from the great Lord and the Bascha to his
King to that end, knowing very well that they would not take it in bad part
that the most Christian King, as friend to both sides, should mediate such an
agreement.

Although the Senators did sum what suspect these propositions, fearing, that
they were rather made to delay the preparations for war, then to lay down
The Venetians great doubts and perplexities.
following.

The Venetians on the contrary fearing that they should not be able to repulse
the first attempts of that mighty Army, which the Turks were said to have
prepared, and which was ready to march, had very earnestly written to the Pope,
The Venetians request to the Pope.
how that by his Council they had embraced war, dismissed the Chiaus from
Venice, and contemned all other means of agreement propounded oftentimes by
their Bailey: that they had likewise by his advise and council, so long waited
for the Spanish Galleys, as in the end, their aid was more in name then in
effect: and yet they had ever showed themselves ready to conclude a league
suitable to his intention, and to the present need of all Christendom. But all
these increaties and pursutes did not produce such effects as the time
required: For the Pope being of himself well disposed, and wholly inclining
to the general good, knowing that the Venetians were agreeable to his will,
confessed that their request was just and honest, exhorted them to continue
steadfast, and not to give place to these first accidents of war. And yet, hi^
Holiness being ouer-credulous, and suffering himself to be carried

The Venetians were likewise much grieved to see the Pope at that time
entangled The Emperor will not allow of the Popes new (...) given to the Duke
of Florence.
in other affairs: for the Emperors Ambassadors protested, that unless he
did revoke and disanull the new title which he had bestowed on the Duke of
Florence, their Master should be enforced to maintain his own dignity, with
that of the Empire, by all means possible: The Pope though by Nature timorous,
would not for all that retract that which he knew he might Pompeo de
Castello, and Giouan Aldobrandino, who being Pentioners to the Venetians, had
in their name enrolled footmen in the Churches territories, whereby all men
thought that Italy would fall into a dangerous war. This made the Senate
resolve to send the Secretary Formenti to Rome, to appease

These troubles caused the Venetians to welcome the arrival of these men from
Constantinople, and likewise upon so fair an occasion carefully to The
Venetians resolve to ^arken to peace.
think on the treaty of peace, because they daily saw their hopes more and
more to decline, and the cause to cease for which they had first neglected it.
They determined then to hearken to the treaty of peace, and so much the more
willingly as it was offered from the Turks: nevertheless, because they would
not seem too greedy of it, nor inuit the Turks thereby to infringe it upon
The Articles of peace propounded by the Venetians.
every trifle, without motioning peace at that time, they gave Commission to
Giacomo Ragasson, a man well experienced in such businesses, to go to
Constantinople, to treat of the enlargement of prisoners, and restitution of
Merchants goods taken on either side: and besides, the Council of Ten gave
him another secret Commission to give to the Bailey, which in effect was, that
if of recovering the Realm of Cyprus, in paying some great tribute to the
Turk for it, or else that they might still keep the Cirty of Famagosta, or by
quitting it to the great Lord, to have some other State elsewhere in
counter-change, and also for the restoring of their ancient confines of Albania
and Dalmatia. They did impart as much to Ragasson, and gave him power to speak
thereof, if the Turk, who had first craved to have one sent thither of purpose
(for the Bailey was imprisoned) if for any other respects they should refuse to
treat with him.

Ragasson his departure from Veniee to Constantinople, was presently diuulged
in the Courts of Princes, but they assured them (as indeed it was so) that

The Pope having a share in this suspicion, and beginning to shake off his
fear The Pope and Spaniards seek to the Venetians to conclude the league.
of the Emperors arms, did hotly revive the Treaty of the League, being
thereunto provoked by the Spaniards, and determined to send Marc-Antonio
Colonna to Venice, who being wise and pollitick, and very gracious with the
Venetians,

Colonna being come to Venice, and oftentimes brought into the Senate, did
use all good means and offers, to persuade them to embrace the league,
laboring to let them see how profitable it was for the Commonwealth, and how
that his desire to serve at once the Pope his natural Prince, the Catholic
King, unto whom he had vowed and dedicated his service, and them selves
likewise, unto whom, in respect of the trust they had reposed in him, he was
Colonnas remonstrance to the Venetian Seuate.
no less bound then to any other whatsoever, did make him more earnest in that
business, being not able to bridle his love, nor conceal that which

Colonnas authority and cloquence was of force to have persuaded the greatest
part of the Senate to this confederacy, but the importance of the business,
the experience of the former years success, the quality of the general
propositions, and they uncertain, and the hope that the Treaty of peace might
have more prosperous success, held the Senators in suspense: whereupon, The
Senates answer to Colonna.
by a Decree of Senate, Colonna was answered in general terms, how

At the last, time pressing them to make a speedy resolution, and Colonna
having received new instructions from Rome, whereby all matters were granted
them, concerning their forces, time when to employ them, and likewise for the
increase of the number of their Galleys for the first year; the Pope did
besides particularly promise to permit them for five years space to leuy three
tenths upon the Clergy of their State: these things being considered by the
Senate on the one side, and the practices of peace on the other, by the
commissions given to the Bailey and Ragasson, made the Senators very doubtful,
Peace and War being at their own choice and liking: whereupon the Senators
in opinion; the first (which was Paulo Tepulo, a man very famous, and much
T^pulos opinion (...) to war.
practiced in the government o^ the Commonwealth,) said, That without relying
on Mahomets goodly propositions, which rather tended to deceive and ^ull them a
sleep, then benefit them, they ought without longer delay, to embrace the
league, in regard the conclusion there of was certain, and the events
Ba^oario is of a contrary opinion.
of the Treaty of Peace most uncertain. Andrea Badoario, a man of equal
authority, was of a contrary opinion, saying, That seeing they had motioned
peace, and had to those ends given ample Commissions and instructions, they
could do no less then expect an answer, and not make such have, or rather
precipitate themselves into the conclusion clean contrary. Both of them were
attentively heard, and their reasons did in such sort move the Senators, as
they War is resolved at Veniee.
unhappy events of war had blotted them, they all on a sudden altered their
opinions, and resolved to send ample power and authority to their Ambassadors
at Rome, in their name to conclude the league, and presently gave Colonna a
pleasing answer, who suddenly returned to Rome, where the Pope having notice
of their resolution, called the Ambassadors of the Catholic King and Venetians
The league against the Turk concluded.
into the Consistory, where causing the Datary to read the Articles, agreed
upon betwixt them, he was the first that swore (laying his hand upon his
breast) strictly to observe them: The Cardinal Pacheco likewise swore in the
behalf of Granuell being gone to Naples) the Ambassador of the same King did
the like, and those of the Venetian Commonwealth in their Princes name swore
on the Evangelists.

Then the Pope commanded, that the next day after divine service was sollemnly
celebrated, and the Procession ended in Saint Peter's Church, it should be
published, not withstanding that the Venetian Ambassadors were of opinion to
defer the publication thereof, till the Emperor were acquainted therewith,
that his intention mightbeeknowne.

The particular Articles of the league were these: Betwixt Pope Pius Quintus,
The Articles of the league.
prom sing for the Sea Apostolic and his successors, with the consent of the
whole College of Cardinals, Philip the Catholic King, and the Duke and
Senate of Venice, aleague and perpetual confederacy has been made, to abate
and ouer-throw the Turks power, who of late have with a mighty Army, enuaded
the Realm of Cyprus, a country very commodious for the conquest of the Holy
land. That the Confederates forces shall consist of two hundred light Galleys,
one hundred ships of war, fifty thousand footmen, Italians, Spaniards and
Almaines, four thousand five hundred horse, with Artillery and Munition
proportionable to such forces: all which shall be employed, as well for
defense of the Confederates states, as to assail the enemies, and particularly

That the King likewise shall be bound to aid the Venetians, whenever they
will enterprise any thing in their Gulf against the common enemy, on this
condition nevertheless, if he which shall crave this aid, have far greater
forces ready. That all the Confederates shall be reciprocally obliged to
defend the States of any one of them whom the Turks shall enuade, and in
particular the Cities and other places belonging to the Church.

That for the expense of war, the Catholic King shall pay the one half; and
the other moyery being divided into three parts, the Venetians shall pay two,
and the Pope the third: they shall be bound to give the Pope twelve Galleys
ready rig'd, and munitioned, which his Holiness shall man for the service of
the league. That generally each of the Confederates shall be bound to
contribute Don ^ohn de Austria General of the Army.
was presently named) to wit, Don John de Austria, and in his absence
Marc-Antonio Colonna with the same authority, though at the same time, he
retain the Maximilian of Austria the elect Emperor, the most Christian King,
and the King of Portugal, to enter into this confederacy, when they should
think it fit, and to all other Christian Princes likewise, that had a desire
to enter into it. There was no particular mention made of places which should
be conquered, for that was referred to be disposed off in the same manner, as
in the league of the year 1537. wherein was expressly mentioned, If any strife
should arise betwixt the Confederates, the Pope as Vmpier and Judge should
decide it, without any breaking off, or prejudice to the confederacy, or
stop to the execution of matters by it established.

These Articles (as has been said) being sworn to and signed by the
Ambassadors, Some particular treaties.
that is above mentioned, till the year following, it was agreed upon in
another writing a part, wherein the above mentioned matters were not
particularly specified, that the same year in the month of May, four score
Galleys, and twenty ships of war, should meet at Ottranto to join with the
Venetian fleet, not comprehending in that number those of the Pope, Duke of
Sauoy, and Knights of Malra.

During these treaties of peace and league, the Venetians with a general
consent, Supply sent to Famagosta.
hope of all fortunate success. Marc. Antonio Quirini being chosen for this
purpose, departed from Candy with four ships to carry supplies thither, for
whose conuoy twelve galleys were appointed. He being come near to Famagosta,
caused his ships to sail somewhat before in the enemies view which were in
Constantia, himself keeping toward the land: So soon as the enemies descryed
these ships, they sent forth seven Galleys to inuest them, which being
perceived by Quirini, he suddenly advanced with his Galleys, to get betwixt
them and home.

But the Turks, having discovered the Venetians galleis, and altering their
purpose Flight of the enemies Galleys.
from offending others to save themselves, did speedily make to the shore from
whence they came, so that they had time by help of those of the camp, who in
great troops came to their aid, to escape to land, and forsaking their galleis,
some of them were sunk by Quirinis ordnance, who perceiving some signs of a
future tempest gave speedy commandment that the ships should be ^owed into
the Haven, that he might safely land his supplies consisting of sixteen
hundred foot, with great store of munition and victuals, which did much
encourage those of the city, who infinitely commended his care and diligence;
and whilst he remained there, he took a ship of the enemies and some other
smaller vessels laden The Venetians (...) the (...) at Gambella.
with munitions and victuals which were going to the Turkish army, and having
intelligence that the Turks had builded certain fortes at the Rock of
Gambella, he sailed thither with his Galleys, and on a sudden razed them.

These things being fortunately performed, Quirini supposing his longer stay
there to be to small purpose did on the sixteenth day of February 1571. arrive
More aid sent to Famagosta.
sent two other ships thither with eight hundred footmen and great store of
munition, under the command of Honoreo Scoto, with letters to the inhabitants
full of hearty affection, highly commending their constant loyalty, entreating
them still to persist in their own defense and by no means to rely upon the
word or promise of those Barbarous infidels: The like letters in effect were
written to Baillone, wherein his valor was much commended, as worthy of his
Ancestors, and the love which himself and predecessors had ever borne to the
Commonwealth, promising highly to recompense him.

When these last supplies arrived at Famagosta, they made up the whole number
The number of soldiers in Famogosta.
of four thousand Italian footmen, eight hundred of the Islanders which are
termed Legionaries, and three thousand Citizens and country people, with two
hundred Albaneses.

At the same time the rebellion of the Albaneses against the Turks did still
continue, The (...) re^bel against the (...).
diverse of the countries of Ducagina, Pedana, Ematia and Sadrina, coming daily
to make sundry offers to the Agents of the Commonwealth, whereupon, the
Prouidator Celsi was commanded to sail to Catharra with ten Galleys, but
Celsi falling sick by the way, Nicolo Suriano, who was Lieutenant of the
Gulphe, was commanded to take that charge upon him, and with four Galleys to
enter into Scatar, or Alexia which the chief of the Albaneses had propounded.
Suriano having continued certain days in those confines, perceived very well
that the deeds were not answerable to their words, and that it was in vain to
make any attempt upon the enemies territories without suffitient forces for
that purpose: the Senate nevertheless being unwilling to omit any thing which
it knew might avail the Common wealth, chose Giacomo Malatesta for Governor
General in Albania, who coming to Catharra was desirous to make incursions
into the enemies country, where having taken a great booty, and heedlesly
returning

In regard of the great expenses which the Venetians were to furnish, which
would monthly amount to three hundred thousand Ducats, the Senate sought Prince
Mocenigo his remonstrance to the great counc^ll.
by all means to raise money; whereupon it again increased the number of the
Procurators of Saint Mark, they likewise sold the pastures and void grounds,
and the pawnes and pledges of La Zecca were opened upon sundry conditions.
Prince Moceniga in that and all other matters showed himself very careful and
vigilant to make speedy provisions of all necessaries; and being present on a
time every man according to his power and means, saying that they could never
do it in a time more convenient, and thereby should not only preserve their
wealth, but their honor, children and lives, all which would be exposed to
great danger i^ the insolent enemy should prove victorious.

His words being pronounced with much earnestness did greatly move those of
the assembly, and encouraged them boldly to continue that war, with hope of
better success, whereupon, whatsoever was requisite for the furnishing of the
Navy, or for provision of victuals, and money, which is the strongest sinew of
war, was presently determined and concluded.

Whilst the Venetians were thus busied in their preparations, the Turks on
Selim had received such content for the taking of Nicotia, the news whereof
was brought to him by Mustaphas son, together with many ri^ch presents, as
he was desirous all other things laid aside to intend only the ending of
that enterprise, notwithstanding the great report which was made of the
Christian fleet, the which after the conquest of Cyprus he promised to him
self to defeat, and then presently to become Lord of all the Islands
belonging to the Venetians, most commodious (as he said) to open a passage to
the city of Rome, chief of the Roman Empire and belonging to him as to the
greatest Emperor, and of a long time promised by their Prophets to the Ottoman
family.

Selim ruminating on these vain and idle thoughts commanded his fleet, that
so soon as Cyprus should be furnished with suffi^ient supplies, then to fight
with that of the Christians, and afterward pursue other enterprises as
occasion should be offered. And according to his own proiects he sent twenty
Galleys from Constantinople under the command of Caiacelebey, who by the way
meeting with the Galleys of Chios and Rhodes, sailed altogether toward Cyprus,
to keep out all relief from Famagosta. After his departure from
Constantinople thirty other Galleys came to him, and being come to Finica to
leauy soldiers, he went from thence into Cypras, where making some aboade, he
sent his Galleys in the mean time to Tripoli, to take in new supplies and
munitions: then Ar^mat there with twenty Galleys, ten Mohannes or flat
bottomed boats to transport horse, five ships, with many other vessels for the
guard of the Island, himself taking four and fitry Galleys with him, and went
to meet Portau, ne^ly made a Basha in Pialis stead, who being come from
Constantinople, and by the way joining the Galleys of Naples in Romagnia and
Miteline with his forces, was with an hundred Galleys at ^astel rosso, the
Rendezuous of the whole fleet, whither within a while after Vluzz^li came from
Argiers with twenty of his own Galleys, and diverse other vessels belonging to
Pirates, and not long after, Hassan son to Barbarossa came thither likewise
with twenty Galleys.

The whole Turkish fleet being in this sort united, to the number of two
hundred The number of the Turkish fl^et.
and fifty sail, went directly to the Isle of Candy and entered into the Haven
of Suda, and sailing afterward toward Cania, it landed great troops of
soldiers near to the city, who presently falling to booty, did put al to fire
and sword. Against these the Prouidator of Cania sent great numbers of
soldiers of the cities Garrison with diverse of Quirtni's Galleys which were
then in the Haven, who enforced the enemies to retire, and our men being
presently backed by three hundred The Turks are put to ^outin Candy.
Corsicans conducted by Colonel Justinian, the enemies were put to rout and
with great slaughter beaten to their Galleys, not daring to assault the castle.
The enemies fleet departing from Candy, where it had done infinite harm,
sailed The Turks waste the Islands of Zant and Cephalonia.
trimmed their Galleys, they made incursions into the Isles of Zant and
Cephalonia, and the inhabitants being retired into the fortes, all the villages
and country houses were burned, and the whole country wasted.

The Turk being not satisfied with setting forth a fleet, had likewise raised
a land army, under the command of Achmat Basha, determining to enuade the
Venetians both by sea and land, in regard the treaty of peace was wholly broken
off, and no hope of agreement left. For so soon as Ragasson came to
Constantinople, the Turks hoping by accord to obtain that which they could
hardly get by arms, he was together with the Baily brought before Mahomet the
Vizier Basha, who began highly to extol the power of the Ottoman Empire, and
to relate the great Lords deseignes against the States of the Venetian
Commonwealth, who resolved to enuade them by sea and land; That Selims intent
was to propound peace on very hard conditions, nevertheless he would find
Bash is Mah^mets proposition to the Venetian Bailey.
means to moderate that great severity, provided likewise that they would
consent to what he should tell them, which in effect was, that the Baily
should persuade the Senate freely to surrender to Zelim the entire possession
of Cyprus, as a State justly belonging to the Ottoman Empire.

The Baily perceiving thereby that the treaty of peace could not be continued
to the honor of the Commonwealth, advised Ragasson to leave Constantinople
(which he did) the other business concerning merchants remaining likewise
imperfect, which once was concluded, but presently revoked, by reason of some
false reports brought from Syria and Alexandria, so that Ragassons journey

The end of the ninth Book of the sixth Decade.
The Contents of the tenth Book of the
THE Spaniards absolutely tell the Pope and Venetians that they will not join
their forces till Don John's arrival. The great progression of the Turkish
fleet. The John and the Spanish forces. The Turkish army before Famagosta.
Marc-Antonio Bragadino Governor of Famagosta. The enemies at one time batter
the city in five several places. Mustapha his perfidious cruelty; His impiety
against the dead. The union of the Christian fleet, with the number of the
vessels. The Christian fleet resolves to fight with the Turks. The famous
battle of Lepanto, where the Turkish fleet is defeated and put to rout. The
number of the dead on both sides, with the number of the enemies vessels that
were taken. The great joy at Venice for news of the victory. Don John retireth
to Messina. The Venetians take the fort of Marguerites. The Christians
enterprise upon Saint Maur is bootles. And lastly MarcAntonio Colonna his
magnificent entry at Rome.

The tenth Book of the sixth Decade of the History of Uenice.
THE Confederates nauall army which should have met at Ottranto in May, there
to have joined altogether, came not thither at the latter end of June, neither
was there any tidings of it. The conclusion of the league hanging in suspense,
and the Venetians fearing that they should not be strong enough of themselves,
to encounter and repulse the enemies fleet, which was reported to be far
greater then those of the former year, determined The Venetians expect the
^onfederates * fleets.
to set forth threescore Galleys of the best in all the fleet at Candy, to
employ them for the relief of Cyprus, or other places as need should be, to
hinder the enemies navigations upon those seas, and to cut off the rereward of
the Turkish Galleys which should lagge behind the fleet, and in a word to take
hold on all occasions which time should offer. Such was the State of the
Venetian fleet for that time, the greatest part whereof remaining at Corfou,
did daily expect the arrival of the Spanish Armada.

The Pope and Venetians made earnest request that the Galleys of Naples and
Sicily which were ready might go to Ottranto, but the Spaniards would not
John's arrival. The Turks on the other side having intelligence that the
forces of the Christian Princes were not yet united, departing from Candy did
boldly sail forwards, the great Lord having commanded them to seek out the
Christian fleet and fight with it, and in the mean time to waste all places
by the way belonging to the Venetian State. The General Venieri having
intelligence of the enemies course and deseignes, What (...) the General
Uenieri to sa^l to Messina.
and knowing that nothing could hinder them from passing forward, resolved to
sail with the fleet to Messina, fearing (as it was very likely) that if the
enemies fleet should come nearer to Corfou, his own Galleys would be exposed
to sundry perils and and dangers, and if the Turks should come and lie betwixt
The league is published at Venice.


Whilst these determinations were made abroad the league on the second day of
July was with great solemnity and concourse of people published at Venice,
after the celebration of Mass in Saint Marks Church by Don Guzman de Silua
Ambassador for the Catholic King, in the presence of the Duke, Senate, Princes
Ambassadors, and great numbers of Prelates, who together with the whole Clergy
going afterward through the city in Precession, came into the great
Marketplace which was ritchly hung with tapistry and other costly ornaments,
whither so soon as the Prince came to the usual place where proclamations are

The league being in this sort published, they hastened the preparations
already begun, and solicited other Princes to enter into it, that they might
the better increase their forces. Whereupon the Pope determined for that
purpose to send his Nephew the Cardinal Alexandrine into Portugal, supposing
The Pope (...) the King of Portugal to enter into the leagu.
that the forces and territories of that King would be fit to afford aid and
reputation to the league, he being Lord of many armed vessels, and his
countries of the Indies confying upon the Turkish Empire: in respect whereof
the Senate likewise resolved that Antonio Tepulo then Ambassador in Spain
should to the same end go to the King of Portugal to be there in the name of
the Commonwealth at such time as the Popes Legate should treat of that

The Venetians, the league being thus concluded, were so bent to war, upon
hope to increase their forces by the assistance of other Princes, as they would
not harken to any discourse of peace* for the most Christian King having
dispatched the Bishop of Aix to Constantinople, chiefly to negociate some
accord, and he coming to Venice acquainted them with the zeal and affection
of his King toward the good and proffit of the Commonwealth, together with
his Commission to procure peace betwixt the Turks and them; The Senate thanked
him, and without giving farther ear to his propositions called in the The
Uenetia^s will not hear o^ peace.
Confederates Ambassadors that they might hear his message; this they did

The Turkish fleet in the mean time came still forward into the Venetian
Gulphe, none daring to oppose it: on the other side the Sangiacs of Scopo,
Durazzo and Ducagina, taking five thousand men, ten cannons and many other
less pieces with them, came near to Dulcigna, having enforced the country The
Turks come before Dulcigna.
people to quit the straight passages which they guarded, whereupon the
inhabitants resolved to abandon the city and to retire to Catharra: but Nicolo
Suriana, and Sciarra Martinenga coming with newforces, did confirm and
encourage them to defend their city, although it were not strong either by art

The enemy being encamped before it, after that he had made a battery and a
reasonable breach, the Ianissaries prepared for the assault, whereupon
Martinenga being out of all hope to hold out long without sresh supplies did
speedily send for the French men which he had brought thither, with whom for a
time they valliantly defended it: but the enemies fleer approaching, and
Suriana in that respect being with his Galleys enforced for to quit those
seas, all the inhabitants and soldiers being affrighted, and wholly
despayring to hold the town any longer, craved a parley, the battery hau^ng
continued for the space of twelve days, and the accord was made with the Basha
Dulc^gna yields to the Turks in composition, which is badly observed.
to depart with their lives and goods, with promise to give them four ships,
to transport those to Ragusa that were willing to depart, and good
entertainment to such as would still remain there, and that the soldiers
might depart with their arms and ensigns.

The city was delivered to the Turks, though that the conditions were
afterward badlie observed, because that since then, some contention either
true or feigned arising thereupon betwixt Pertau and Achmat Bashas who were
come to that seege, they took occasion to deal cruelly with those poor
wretches, who relying on their word had submitted to them, for they caused all
the inhabitants in a manner to be imprisoned, and did put diverse valliant
Martinenga, and some few other of the chiefest, who were safely conducted to
Rag^sa.

Dulcigna being taken, the enemies fleet sailed toward Antiuari, where the
inhabitants were much daunted with their neighbors misfortune, though they
feared not the fleet, the City being four miles from sea. The Governor
having intelligence of the enemies approach, did without waiting for their
coming, send the Cities keys to the Bascha by some of the p^incipall
townsmen, in regard whereof he was afterward by the Senate condemned to
perpetual banishment.

In the mean time, news being brought to Venice, how that the enemies with a
mighty fleet were come into their Gulphe, the whole City was much terrified,
especially when it understood, how that in all places where they came, Lodouico
Grimani, with certain foot companies, and furnished with expert Gunners: they
afterward gave Vincento Mor^sin, one of the chief Senators charge of all the
Fortifications along the shore, with six other Gentlemen of the order of
Senators to assist him, namely Daniele venieri, Marco Iustiniano, Ieronimo
Contareni, Francesco Mith^ele, Lorenzo Souranze, and Andrea Bernardo.

Those men caused a mighty Iron chain to be drawn from the aforesaid corpse
du Guard in diverse places of the city, and in a word omitted nothing which
was necessary for the preservation and defense thereof.

But it was known within a while after, that all these speedy preparations
were altogether unnecessary: For Vluzzali, Admiral of that fleet, after The
enemies fleet (...) forth of the Gulf of Vinice.
that he had wasted, (as has been said) the Isles of Lisena, and Cursoles,
went back again to join with the Basha, who with the residue of the fleet,

Whereupon he departed thence, and sailed to la Valona, where having
reenforced his Army with diverse troops, brought to him by the Sangiack of
Bossina, and sent forth certain Galleys, truly to discover the estate of the
Confederate nauall Army, he bent his course toward Corfou; and coming to
Paxu, he sent first to view Mandracchia, and the Galleys going unto Butintro,
the Captains coasted up and down the I^land, and heedfully

In the mean time, diverse soldiers which were in the Fusts going on shore to
get pillage, fell into an Ambuscado of certain troops of horse The Christians
surprise some of the enemies by ambuscad^.
belonging to the ga^rison of the City under the commmand of Captain George
Mormori, by whom all the enemies were either ^laine or taken, and among others
Cassan, surnamed Baffa, a Renegado of Candy, a man very famous, not so much for
his experience in marine matters, as for his notatable crue^ty.

In the end, the whole fleet drew near to the Island, and yet as they passed
had seized on the passages of the mountains being to weak to hinder their
passage, Phillippo Rancone with four hundred footmen guarded the Town, part of
his forces were Greeks and the rest Italians, who perceiving the enemies great
numbers, began to retire toward the plain, where finding other supplies
sent The Turks come before (...).
from the Castle, he made a stand, and caused the Turks that followed him to
do the like:

But the day following, greater numbers being landed, together with six
hundred horse which they had taken in at Butrinto, they gave an assault to the
Castle Saint Angelo, and finding it to be a far difficulter enterprise then
they had immagined, gave it over: but being desirous before their departure to
leave some token of their barbarous cruelty behind them, they burnt many
Country

The Venetians did with great greese endure all these miseries and calamities,
still trusting to the aid of the league, and yet they received not thereby the
profit and commodity which they had hoped for, for which to their great loss
they had altered their former deseignes, and in a manner engaged their forces:
because that a decree being made that the Galleys of Candy should sail
toward Messina, there to join with those Confederates, they were doubtful of
the success of Famagosta, having received no news whether it had been
relieved John's arrival, was an idle Spectator of all those wrongs and
outrages which the enemies had done unto them and yet durst not set fore-word
to take revenge.

Therefore they resolved to show unto the Pope, how that by his means they The
Venetians complaints to the Pope.
had entered into that war, and had refused all means of Agreement, therein
to obey the authority of the Sea Apostolic, and not to seem likewise to
distrust other Christian Princes, that they for their parts had
notwithstanding all expenses and dangers provided what soever was necessary for
the union; and, they did not see that the Confederates effects were
correspondent to their diligence and industry: so as that league which had
been made for the honor and glory

These complaints being propounded to the Pope who found them very just and
reasonable, he speedily dispatched a Post to Don John, writing by him to his
Nephew the Cardinal Alexandrine, who was in Spain, earnestly to (...) that
business according to his former instructions.

The Legate Alexandrine was honorably entertained by the Catholic King, who in
smooth terms accquainted them with his ernest desire therein to satisfy the
Pope, having determined for that purpose, that Don John with the Spanish The
King of Spains answer to the ^ardinall Alexandrine.
Galleys should go and spend the winter in Sicily, thereby to be readier to
execute that which should be concluded at Rome. And although he had often by
letters in former time exhorted the Emperor to enter into that union, he would
expressly never the less send Don Pedro Fassardo to him, to entreat him from
him to condescend thereunto

He being come to the Emperors Court found him very doubtful: for he The
Emperor is doubtful.
received many messages and letters from the Bascha of Buda who exhorted him to
observe the peace, promising him fair and Kingly neighborhood and freindship:
on the other side he had Intelligence of the Turks warlike preparations, who
remaining till then at Scopia held all men in suspense to what place he
determined to bend his course: in the end he resolved to send the accustomed
tribute to Constantinople, being assured that it could in no sort hinder the
league, nor keep himself from entering into it, when time should serve,
whereas The Emperors resolution.
on the contrary, by delaying it any longer he might receive some great loss;
because that Selim doubting his love and good meaning, might assail him on a
sudden.

These things did greatly trouble the Venetians, who knew very well that peace
with the Turks, in the warlike and mighty Northern Provinces, would greatly
prejudice the league, and precipitate the state of the Commonwealth into
greater danger: in regard whereof the Pope and the Catholic Kings Agents,
propounded to the Emperor, that they would give him out of the Confederate
forces, twenty thousand foot, and four thousand horse, to enuade the enemies

The Emperors Ambassador resident at Rome, had oftentimes assured them, that
the Emperor wanted no good will to war on the Turk, but means; and The
leagues offer to the Emperor.
therefore if the Confederate Princes would promise him aid, he would without
all doubt enter into the league; and that all Germany being at last provoked by
necessity and shame, would join in that war and by their example, Poland and
Muscouy would do the like.

Neuer-the-lesse, all these offers were vain and to no purpose, because that
John, who departing from Cathalognia with seven and twenty Galleys and five
thousand Spanish foote-men, did at last arrive on the last day of July at
Genoa, where making short stay, leaving Doria with twelve Galleys, to make
provisions for the fleet, himself went to Naples, where he was entertained
with great magnificence, and received the standard of General for the league
which the Pope sent him: and within a while after leaving thirty Galleys to
conuoy the ships, he went with the The arrival of Don John with the Spanish
forces.


He was accompanied by many great Lords of Spain, namely by Don Bernardin de
Requesens great commendador of Castill, Don Aluares de Bassan Marquis of Santa
Cruz, Don ^uan de Cardona, Earl of Piega, Antonio Doria, Carlo d'Analos Duke
of Sessa, Ferranti Loffra, and the Marquis of Treuic, who for Nobillity, and
the Kings favor, were very famous: These were of Don John's Council for war.

Now so soon as Don John arrived at Genoa he dispatched Micaele de Moncada the
Kings counceller to Venice, to acquaint them with his coming and to The offers
of Don John to the Venetians.
gratify the Senate for the good opinion it had conceived of him, and to
promise that he would in such sort manage all matters, as they should not be
deceived in him: being very desirous speedily to execute some notable
enterprise upon the enemies.

These news, pleasing to all men, did awaken their former hope. The Turk then
departing with his whole fleet (as has been said) from Corfou returned to
Butintro, where remaining for a time to receive some intelligence of the
Christian fleet, and a new commission from Constantinople, he went
after-wards to Preueze, where the Bascha received certain news of the taking
of Famagosta, and a particular commission to go and seek the Christian fleet

The Turks after the taking of Nicosia had deferd the seege of Famagosta, by
reason of winter and other discommodities, unfitting for a seege: but so soon
as it drew near toward the spring, they speedily provided all necessaries for
it, as ordnance, munition, and other warlike engines, which were sent to them
from Syria and Caramania: fifty thousand Turks came thither like-wise, many of
whom took no pay, but only served in hope of booty, the Bascha having
craftily given forth, that the spoil of Famagosta would be far ritcher then
that of Nicosia.

The enemies army being thus provided, and strengthened, did about the midst
of April approach the city, having brought fifteen pieces of battery from The
enemies army before ^amagosta.
and the other at Percipola: Then on the five and twentieth of the said month
they made platformes whereon to plant the ordnance, with deep and broad
trenches for the Harguebusiers, so close together as it was impossible to anoy
them, having ordinarily (but espetially in the night) forty thousand pioners at
work.

The enemies intent being discovered, they of the town began to rampire up all
places which they thought the enemy would batter: there was ever a strong guard
on the way covered with the counter-scarpe, for the better defense thereof, The
care of those within the City for their ^ortifications.
and they raised new flanquers; they did afterward on that side of the wall
which

Marke-Antonio Bragadino was Governor of the City, who together with Astor
Baillone did carefully provide what-so-euer was necessary without any confusion
at all, being a man that well knew what did belong to his place. Antonio
Bragadino lay in the Castle raising new flanquers to defend that side of the
Arsenall. The Knight Goita was Master of the ordnance, who being slain in a
skirmish, the Governor gave his company to Nestor Martinenga. More-ouer, three
Captains were appointed, to take charge of the fire-workes, each of them
having twenty soldiers under his command, chosen out of all the companies, to
bestow those fires when need should be, all the ordnance was brought to those

Besides, they made diverse sallies to molest those abroad, and to hinder their
works. At the last they cleared the city of all unprofitable eaters, which
were The number of serviceable men in the city
in number eight thousand persons, who retired into the villages, the Turks
doing them no harm: The rest of the people being numbered amounted to the sum
of seven thousand serviceable men, namely three thousand five hundred Italian
foot, and the rest Greeks.

Bragadini daily perceiving the dangers to increase by reason of the enemies
Bragadins exhortations to his soldiers.
approaches, exhorted and encouraged his soldiors, telling them that the time
was Ottaman Empire, in so just a quarrel as theirs was, and to cast away all
fear, hoping only that God, who is the giver of victories, would give them
good and fortunate success.

This speech caused every man to encourage his fellow cheerely to entertain
labor and danger. Three hundred of the beseeged with sword and target,
accompanied with as many Italian Harquebusiers made a salley, who at first did
put the enemies to flight, but at last were so rougly charged, as in their
retreat they lost thirty of their men, whereupon it was concluded to make noe
more sallies.

The enemies being by little and little come to the top of the
counterscarpe, The enemies (...) five batteries at one time.
and having ended their fortes which were ten in number, began the battery
with three score and four cannons, among the which were four Baliliscos of an
exceeding bigness did beat the Gate (...), even to the Arsenall.

They began to batter it in five several places at once; the one at the
Tower of the Arsenall on which five Canon from the fort of the Rock continually
played, the other against the curtain without the Arsenall which was battered
by eleven pieces; the third was out of another Fort with eleven Cannons upon
the Tower of Andrazzi, and two Caualiers above it: the fourth played upon S.
Napes great Tower with the four Basilisks; and the last was against the Gate
Lemissa battered from six fortes with three and thirty Cannons, where the
General Mustapha The dil^gent care of the Captains of the City.*
was in person. At first they began rather to batter the fortifications of the
Cities Ordnance, then to ruin the walls, by reason that it did much anoy
them; whereupon the beseeged, so soon as the enemy had begun the Battery,
quartered themselves under the wall where they continued till the end: Bragadin
kept the tower Andrazzi, Baillone that of St. Nape, and Tepulo that of
Campo-santo, that they might be present at every action, to reward the valliant
and rebuke cowards. The charge of the Ordnance was committed to Lodouico
Martinenga, and six other Captains were appointed under him to command the
Canoniers and to furnish them with what they wanted.

Captain Francesco Bogone commanded the Tower of the great Caualier of Every
Captains charge.
the Arsenall: Pietro el Conte lay at the Courtaine of the Caualier Del Volti,
and at the Tower of Campo-santo, Nestor Martinenga had charge of the Caualier
of Campo*santo, of that of Andrazzi and of the Curtain as far at Saint Napes
tower, together with that Curtain which lies near the Gate Lemissa: Horati^
Valatri had the guard of the Rauelin and Curtain toward the Bulwark, Robert
Maluezzi commanded the Caualier of Lemissa which was more anoied then all the
rest.

Besides, so soon as the battery began, Bragadint commanded wine, cheese,
and poudered flesh to be carried to the Italian and Greek soldiers and Gunners
upon the walls, so as the soldiers spent but two Venetian souls a day in bread,
and were paid every thirty days. The beseeged did for ten days space make
so The (...) m^ke a counter battery.
furious a counter-battery, as they made fifteen of the enemies pieces of
Ordinance They want pou^er.
vain.

The Famagostans being thus careful a Fregate arrived from Candy on the 29.
day of May, which encouraged and told them that they should speedily be
relieved. The enemies in the mean time having by force and great slaughter of
their men won the Counterscarpe, did begin to dig down the earth near
to the wall of the Counterscarpe, which the beseeged did day and night

The enemies being come so near the walls began in sundry places to undermine,
whereupon the beseeged make countermines the charge where*of was committed to
the Knight Maggio, they threw fire works upon the enemies, which did greatly
an^y them; some of these mines did no good, the rest took The Toure of the
(...) (...) by a mine.
effect, as that at the Tower of the Arsenall, which with great noise brake the
wall which was of a wonderful thickness, and threw more then the one half of
it to the ground, carrying with it part of the Paraper.

This breach caused great numbers of Turks with their Ensigns to mount it.
Pietro el Conte with his company had the guard there, who did bravely at first
sustain their assaults, whither other Captains with their companies coming
to second him; the ^urkes were roughly repulsed, the assault having continued
above five hours. The enemies are repulsed from the breach.


The beseeged in this action lost above an hundred and threescore men, and
many were wounded there. Marco Criuellatore and the Knight Maggio did
afterward in all parts, where they perceived mines to be made, make places of
refuge well flanqued with barrells full of moist earth, and sackes full of
straw, the Greeks for that purpose bringing willingly what-so-euer they
wanted, for the

These reparations were to very great purpose because that the shot lighting on
no solid substance did no other harm then carry away with it some of those
sackes, and others being presently put in their place, the breach was still
stopped up. The enemies, pursuing their former deseigns, gave fire to the mine of
the raueling of the Rock, which made a very great breach; whereupon, The
Turks in the presence of the General Mustapha, give a furious assault and are
repulsed.
they presently gave a furious assault, Mustapha looking upon and encouraging
them. Count Hercules Martinenga and his company did bravely with-stand them,
till the other Captains came thither, and then the enemies were repulsed with

The enemies being by these means, and by the singular valor of the beseeged,
so often repulsed, and out of hope that way to take the City, began to build
other forts nearer to it, from whence they might with more ease beat down The
great labor and trouble of the beseeged.
the defendants fortifications and safe places of retreat, and taken from
themselves all impediment: and having to this end built seven ^orts, they
planted great

The Turks at last perceuing that breaches of the mines were not suffi^ient to
open their passage, fell to undermining the walls, so as they reduced the
Rauelin to so small a space, as the beseeged were enforced to give themselves
scope with An assault given ^n four sundry places ^t one time.
boords and other matter. Then the Knight Maggio perceauing that of necessity
they were to abandon the Rauelin, being no longer able to keep it, he made a
mine there, that he might quit it to the enemies great loss,

Mustapha perceauing that the wall might be mounted in sundry places, resolved
at one time to give an assalt in four several places, namely at the Rauelin
at Saint Napes tower, at that of Andruzzi, and at the Curtain and tower of the
Arsenall; in all which they fought continually for six hours space, in three
of which the enemies were bravely repulsed, but the fourth, which was the
Rauelin, was of set purpose forsaken, to the great hurt both of the Turks and
Christians. For, it being assalted those within it being not able with their
arms to stir up and down, by reason of the small room, and going about to
retire as it had bin already determined, the enemies mingled themselves among
them, whereupon, fire being given to the mine, it blew up a thousand of the
enemies, and two Mustapha himself was present at every assault, where he
encourraged his soldiers, rebuked some, and promised rewards to others
according to their deserts. The Rauelin being lost there was no more betwixt
the assaillants and the beseeged then the thickenesse of the places of retreat,
made (as has been said) with tuns and sacks full of earth, and straw, so,
that those of the camp, and the (...) ^oldiers, did often times talk together
according to the manner of war, the Turks flouting and bragging, and the
Christians deriding their vani^y, and amid their jests the enemies brought ^om
Christian slaves they had in their Camp to propound to them some particular
agreement^, as they had already o^tentimes done by letters to the Governor and
people ^yed to arrows, which were never answered nor any consent given to come
to parley.

The Turks perceiving that their cunning tricks were to no purpose, did
again turn to force, and came to a new assault by means of the Rauelin which
they had already won, where on both sides was a brave fight, but most of all
to the honor and reputation of the beseeged, for, valou^ous and bra^e Baillone
^he volour of the (...) in (...) the (...).
being more courageous in deeds then words, encouraging his Soldiors in the
foremost ranks, did himself take from a Turkish Enseigne-bea^er, an Enseigne
wherein the Arms of the Venetian Common wealth was painted, which they had
won at the taking of Nicosia, and Lodouico M^rtinenga (...) the other side,
who had the guard of that quarter, oftentimes refreshing his men in the fight,
putting new in their stead that were hurt or tired, still exhorting them to do
worthily, did that day purchase the fame and reputation of a discreet and
valiant Captain.

This attempt of the enemies, having no good success, they invented another
Another inuen tion o^ the enemies to take the Cit^y.
way, yet unpracticed, ^hey did cast a great heap of wood called ^eglia which

Notwithstanding all these discommodities, labors and troubles, these valiant
men did still continue the defense of their City, determining to hold out
even to the last Man: but all things fai^ing, saving hope and courage, and all
manner of victuals being very scarce, they having already eaten asses, horse,
dogs, catts and having no more bread nor corn to make any, drincking nothing
but water, perceiving besides that three other mines were making toward the
Cauallier of The estate of the beseeged (...) them to yield.
relating the want and misery whereunto they were reduced, they besought him,
in regard they had freely exposed their lives and means to maintain the City
under the obedience of the Commonwealth, that he would by yielding on
honorable conditions, preserve the honor of their Wives and Children, which
would be exposed eauen as a Prey unto the enemies, if they should enter by
force.

Upon this Petition of the People, the Magistrates and chief Captains
consulted what was best to be done, their opinions being very different: for
some The Captains s^ndry opinions.
the enemies, and with their blood by dying to revenge their death: That they
could not believe that the Turks would observe and perform any accord they
should make with them, perceiving that necessity had rather induced them
thereunto then any free motion, that their yielding would wrong and impair the
honor and reputation which till then they had gotten. Others on the contrary
said, That it did not beseem them, unto whom the guard and conservation of
that City had been committed, to show themselves more cruel toward the
inhabitants, then the very Turks, because that there was nothing more
certain, knowing that if their soldiers should once enter by force; it would
then be to late to hold them back: besides, as it was not the part of a
valliant man basely to yield for fear of death, in like manner to lose his
life rashly and unprofitably, proceeded rather from foolish obstinacy then from
magnanimity. These reasons with diverse others being alleged to the same
purpose, did after a long consultation prevail, and they resolved to yield on
honorable composition. In this manner on the first day of August, after sundry
treaties it was concluded, by means The beseeged resolve to yield on
composition
of an Italian enseigne which was prisoner in the camp, that there should be
truce; and upon giving of hostages on either side, began to treat of the
particularities of acord for the city. Hercules Martinenga, and Matteo C^lti,
a Citizen of Famagosta, Mustapha his Lieutenant, and the Lieutenant to the Aga
or Captain of the Ianissaries, (...) given on both sides.
whom Baillone with certain horse and two hundred Harquebusiers went to
receive at the gate, our men were like-wise honorably entertained by the
enemies, Mustapha his Son coming forth to meet them, with great numbers of
horse and foot, who brought them to his father, who having entertained them,
bestowed on them two rich gowns imbrodered with gold, and then sent them to
lodge in the Aga's Pauillon.

It is a thing to be wondered at that those in the City which had sustained so
great labor, misery and calamities, in sted of rejoicing for that their
troubles The arti^les of the (...).
do the like, and those that would tarry behind should have assurance given
them to enjoy their goods and to live in their Christian Religion. These
Articles were in one day propounded, signed and granted, and countersigned by
Mustapha with his own hand: whereupon for the execution thereof, forty
Vessels of all sorts Braga^ini having acquainted Mustapha, entreated him that
for the performance of his own promise, and observation of the articles, he
would command the soldiors to cease from farther violence, and to send Mustapha
his seigned courtesy
more ships to embarke the remainder of the Christian soldiers. Nest^r
Martinenga was sent on this message to the Bascha, who courteously entertained
him, and Bragadini and to confer with him, as with a valliant and noble
Captain, of whom himself had made trial.

Bragadini giving credit to these sugared words, leaving Tepulo in the city,
did the ending of the same day, being accompanied with Baillone Martinenga and
Bragadin (...) to Mustapha his tent.
Quirini, go to the Baschas tent, attended on by sundry Captains, and Greek
Gentlemen all on horse back, with some forty Harquebusiers on foot. Bragadini
rod foremost under a crimson Vmbrella or Canopie, clothed in purple, wearing his
usual robe of Magistrate, who being come to the Baschas Pauillion, left their
weapons at the door, and being entered were courteously entertained Mustapha,
who caused them to sit down, where after they had discoursed on sundry
matters, the Bascha dissembling that which he had already determined in his
mind thought it time to put it in execution, and the better to bring it to
pass, he craved caution for the vessels he lent them, whereunto Brag^dini
having made answer, that no such thing was mentioned in the Articles, and that
therefore they were not tied there unto, and besides, he had no man there with
him whom he could leave behind for that purpose. Mustapha pointing to Quirini,
said, let this man be a pledge, Bragadin constantly maintained the contrary,
and told him that he could not justly detained any of them: the Bascha waxing
impatient, and being no longer able to master his choler, did fiercely thunder
many injurious speeches against them, accusing them that they had during the
tru^e contrary to the law of arms put diverse of his Turks to death, whom
they had taken prisoners, (which was most false) and rising from his sta^e,
commanded them all presently to be manaclcd: then thrusting them forth of his
tent, he caused his soldiers Mustapha his (...) ^cliy.
to murder Baillone, Martinenga, Quirini and all the rest before Bragadins
face, who was reserved to a greater torture, having before his death endured
many marterdomes, they caused him twice or thrice to offer his neck, as though
he would have cut off his head, which he most courragiously presented to them,
they would not at that time put him to death, but did only cut off his nose
and ears.

Count Hercules who had been sent as an hostage, being like-wise manacled, was
hid by Mustaphas Eunuch till his Masters fury was past, whose slave he became
after-wards. All the Christian soldiors were presently taken and bound, not
distrusting any such perfidious cruelty. Those which were already shipped had no
better usage, for being dispoyled of their goods, they were all made
Gallieslaues.

Two days after, Mustapha entered the City, where he commanded Tepulo to be
brought forth of prison whether he had committed him, and presently to be
hanged at the yards arm of a Gallie: Then causing Bragadin who was wounded and
dismembered to be brought before him, he loaded him, (though he were weak and
feeble) with two baskets full of earth, the one before, and the other behind,
and willed him to carry them to the breach, making him to kiss the ground as
often More then barbarous cruelty.
as he passed by him: then sending him to the Haven into a Gallie of R^odes he
caused him to be bound in a chare, with a crown at his feet, and in that
manner to be hoisted up to the maineyard of the Gallie, that he might be the
better discerned by the slaves and Christian soldiors that were in the Haven,
at the last, Bascha with his perfidious cruelty and perjury, having his heart
still lifted up to God, beseeching him to give him grace to die constantly for
his holy faith and religion, and then so soon as the executioners with their
bloody knives were come as far as his naule, his blessed soul leaving his
frail earthly mansion flew up to heaven. His skin was presently stuffed with
straw, and carried round about the city; then it was hung at the yard arm of
a Galleor, and carried all along the coast of Syria, in his return toward
Constantinople, proudly and vainegloriously showing it to the whole world: the
body was cut in four quarters, and

It was not certainly known why Mustapha used such barbarous cruelty: some
said, that he having taken the spoil from the soldiors which he had promised
them, went about to satisfy them by the punishment of a few, in revenge of the
great multitude which he had lost at the seege: others say, that he being
provoked by their obstinate holding out, and for that he had lost some of his
dear friends at that seege, whom he loved, had sworn to be revenged. There
be like-wise which say, that Mustapha was of so choleric a nature, as being
once moved, he would for the time be like a mad man, and that he was provoked
Bragadini and the rest to come to his Pauilion attended by troops of soldiers,
and in such stately manner, as though he had been a conqueror and not
conquered. But this occasion being to idle of it self to cause him to commit
such cruel and barbarous actions is not very credible; for he being moved by
his own wicked and diuilish disposition, did use like cruelty toward the
dead. For coming into the Cathedral Church of S. Great impiety against the
dead.
Nicholas, he caused the toombs and monuments to be opened, and the bones of
the dead to be thrown here and there, he overthrew Altars, and Images, with
other brutish and cruel actions, for which his own soldiers did much condemn
him. Having in this manner conquered the city, he presently caused the Dikes
to be cleansed, the forts that were abroad to be razed, the trenches to be
filled, and whatsoever within the walls had been ruined to be rampierd up
again, so as in

The Basha having left the Bey of Rhodes Governor there departed from Cyprus
on the twenty fourth of September, and returned victorious and triumphant The
Bascha returns to Constantinople.
to Constantinople where with great joy he was welcomed by all men,
notwithstanding that his victory was bought at a dear rate: for in that war
he lost above fifty thousand men, and among others many excellent Captains,
and great numbers of his best soldiers. But now to return to the Christian
fleet.

THe triumuirate Admirals D. John, Sebastiano Venieri and Mare Antonio Colonna,
The uniting of the Confederate fleet.
meeting after some delay all at Messina in Sicily, after joyful and mutual
gratulation of their so happy and desired conuention, leaving those Ceremonies,
they proceeded to the more essential parts of the business. They first
privately consulted how to employ those forces to some honorable and commodious
end, that the success of the war might counterpoize the charge and
expectation. This Council consisted of some few of the most select and eminent
of the Army, both for authority and judgment, as principally D. John General,
Sebastiano Venieri the Venetian Admiral, Marc Antoni^ Colonna, the Popes
Admiral, Bernardino de Requesens Great Comendador of Castile and Lieutenant
General of the Army, and Augustino Barbarico Prouidator General of the
Venetian fleet.

The proposition was whether they should seek to oppress the enemy by maine
battle, or defend their own territories, wherein, various opinion
interchangeably The Advice of D. Bernardino de Requesens for fighting or not
fighting with the enemy.
uttered, Bernardino de Requesens, D. John's Oracle, being invited by the rest,
with clear voice, grave countenance, and significant gesture said thus.

Your Highness (most excellent Prince) in commanding mine opinion before these
more sufficient, observes the order of feasts, where the coursest meats are
tasted first. My Council may perhaps be less pleasing, yet as wholesome as some
other. The question is whether we shall assault the enemy by sea, or keep him
from infesting us by land. This will best be resolved when we have made true
discovery and comparrison of his forces and our own. If we be stronger, it is
more navy. In the mean time it will be a degree of our victory to limit and stop
the course of theirs. This, most excellent General is mine opinion, to which I
am not yet so wedded, but that any cleerer judgment may divorce me.

This was of some cooler tempers heard with applause, but of the noble Venieri
and Barbarico, not without disdain, which yet was modestly oppugned by
Barbarico as follows.

I deny not (most excellent General, and you my noble Lords) but that this
Barbarico (...) speec^ pe^swading to fight.
speech of D. Bernardino de Requesens is inritched and strengthened with
forcible argument: wherein if there yet be any defect, it proceeds not from to
little judgment, gratis. They have found the Christian markets dear, nay
happily their victories may beget ours, breeding in them not animosity, but
security and presumption, ever their own traitor. Was this fleet built and
Caesar in you to have the patience not to fight. Make have then Illustrious
Prince to reap this mature and fruitful victory with your sword.

This was the sense of his speech which the speakers reputation and graceful
delivery gave more life and strength to. It was afterward more amply and
methodically confirmed by Cornia a Spaniard. The sympathy between whose
tongue, and the Generals ear farthered perhaps his resolution to fight,
willing that so noble a council might be rather attributed to one of that
nation then to Barbarico. Cornia his speech was in effect this.

There are three motives (most magnificent General) which without imputation
Cornia his speech confirming Batbaricos.
of fear, or omission of duty, may induce a Commander to decline battle.
First, disproportion between the benefit of victory, and prejudice of
overthrow on either part. In this respect, the Duke of Alua did politickly
abstain from incountring the Guyse in Naples, where the French could loose but
their army, but the Spaniard his army and Kingdom of Naples.

Secondly if he foresee an easier, cheaper, and safer means to dissolve the
adverse army, then by battle. Thus did your Highness father Charles the
fifth, of sacred memory, break the neck of the Protestants army in Germany.

Lastly the inequallity of strength. He being the weaker and likely to miscary
in the attempt, whereof there are so many Presidents that we need allege
none. But neither of these can be applied to divert us from battle, wherein
if we prevail we recover our own again, and happily Greece for forbearance.
If fighting valliantly we be overcome, yet shall we in the conflict so far
weaken and maine the adverse fleet, that we shall sooner arm a defensive navy,
then he an offensive, and easilier secure our own then he make any farther
impression on it.

Touching protraction. The winter will in deed dissolve his fleet, but so, that
it will bud forth again the next spring; perhaps grow greater and get the
start of our navy. His being united by nation, ours by combination.

Touching inequallity of force, it is probable we exceed them more in men then
they us in vessels. For he must needs consuine many men in taking so many
strong towns and forts, and employ many in keeping them. Neither are the ska^s
of the late pestilence yet healed among them; Therefore my advise is, the
Galleys of Candy being come, that you hasten to Corfou, by which they must
needs pass,

Don John after this serious consultation concluded to assail the Turkish
fleet and attempt to intercept their haruests of Cyprus, and other Maritime
parts of Christendom ere they should house it. Therefore departing from
Messina on the 17. of September, being at sea, he composed his Galleys to that
form of battle he meant to observe in fight: so marshalling and exercizing
them before, that every squadron might know his place, and every Galley his
squadron, and be able to transform themselves into all figures, without
confusion, when occasion should Gill Andrada with three other Venetian Galleys
to Corfou, to make certain discovery of the Turkish fleet, of which three,
that of Cater^no Maripietro presently returned to conduct Paulo Vrsino and the
Colonel (...) to the Navy, bringing news that The Turkish fleet in the Gulf
of Lepanto.
the Turkish fleet had passed along in view of Zant, and were entered into the
Gulf of Lepanto.

Hereupon, though with much difficulty, by reason of contrary winds, they put
to sea, and the seventeenth of September arrived at Corfou: from whence the
Giouan Andrea Doria being by the General commanded to survey the army, finding
some Venetian Galleys not complete in men, distributed amongst them certain
companies of Spanish and Italian soldiers, whereof Mutius Tortona commanded
one band. He a man of a turbulent insociable nature being upon some occasion
aboard Calergo the Candiot fell at difference with some of the company,
proceeding from words to blows. Venieri not far off, informed of the tumult,
sent first one of his captains, who, not prevailing, An accident which had
like to have bred great mi^chiefe.
was seconded by the Admiral of Venieri his squadron, who over confidently
interposing himself in the quarrel became a sharer amongst them of Venieri
interpreting an intolerable contempt of his authority, jealous rather of the
States dignity then his own, commanded Mutio and his Enseigne to be
apprehended, and according to martial severity in case of mutiny presently
hanged at the yard arm of the same Galley to deter others from like
insolence.

This private spark of dissension had like to have kindled a general flame
through the whole army and have turned their swords, now drawn against the
common enemy, upon their own bosoms. For the General naturally partial to
the Spanish, and perhaps envious of Venieros Authority, as his Corriuall in
honor, considered only the severity of the punishment but not the capitalnesse

Don John complained that his authority was more contemned by Venieri then
Venieri by Tortona, for which if the council of war gave him nothonorable
Don John (...) (...) against Venieri.
satisfaction, he would take it himself, and teach him that though he
respected the honor of the Venetian Estate, he would not neglect his own. To
these coals the friends of Tortona and maligners of Venieri (a very base
office) served as bellows.

Venieri on the other part protesting that he did it not to blemish the
reputation Venieri his answer to them.
of the General, but to preserve his own and prevent the sudden contagion of
the mutiny, desired Don John, would make his reason, not his affection judge of
it, and consider the party executed not as a Spaniard but mutineere. Affirmed
that if the General should take this just, though severe execution, as an
occasion

Colonna Admiral of the Popes Galleys, a man worthy so eminent place, wisely
foreseeing what this might grow to, as a man equally beloved and loving both
parts, nobly used his intercession to suppress, or at least co^pound the
strife* Chiefly importuning Don John, in whom he found greater obstinacy of
discontent and estrangement, telling him the act was just, though sudden, like
the occasion, and that suddenness necessary in dangers of so swift extention,
as having once

These petswations, strong but not bitter, delivered by a friend, though for a
reputed enemy, moved him to abstain from the effects of choler, though not
to extinguish it. So that distasted of Venieri, he communicated al important
deseig nes and consulted with Barbarico.

From hence they held on their course to Cephalonia, according to their former
resolution, and on the sourth of October passing the Channel of Viscarda, on
the fifth they anchored in the vale of Alexandria. Where Gyll Andrada, and
Giuan Baptista Contareni brought letters from Paulo Contareni, Prouidator of
Zant, confirming their intelligence of the Turkish fleet. Hereupon by vnisent
John commanded the decks to be cleared, chests stowed, those cabins which might
be impediment to the valliant taken down, the rest that might be receptacles
to cowards locked up, leaving neither excuse for his men nor advantage for his
enemies. And as he prepared all essential so he neglected no imaginary or
opinionate part of defense or offense. Therefore knowing that strength was the
beauty of an army, but bravery the Enseigne of that strength, his men were
armed ritchly, and his Galleys suitable to his men, both carrying the badge of
triumph, and a face of victory, displaying magnanimity

And now, that he might husband the small remainder of time of the utmost
minute, he caused victuals to be proportioned to his men moderately not
superfluously, far from the swynish custom of some northerly nations, who as
if wine were the nursse of valor as oil to a lamp, against any sea fight
knock the heads out of their barrels, and drink the wit out of their own
heads and so reele aboard, some times stumbling upon victory but never upon
honor, which must ever be derived from virtue, not vice. This noble tempera^e
captain understood drunkenness could not be the fountain of resolution, and
therefore distributed so much to his soldiers as might strengthen their
bodies, not weaken their judgments, and breed courage in them, not rage; which
with more speed then ceremony ended, the Heroic General, with countenance and
habit becoming such a place and person, descended into his Barge, in which he
passed through the fleet, being arranged in form following.

It consisted of four distinct parts principal, viz. Two wings, the maine
battle, The order and form of the chr^stian battle.
and a reservation of succors. In the right wing were contained three and fifty
Galleys, whereof Giouan Andrea Doria was Admiral, bearing in his maine top a
green flag. The lest wing was composed of an equal number of Galleys
commanded by Augustino Barbarico with a yellow flagge on the starboord side of
his top. In the maine battle were included three score and one Galleys
wherein Don John the General was himself, distinguished by a sky-colloured
flag. The two wings and the maine battle were one hundred sixty seven Galleys
strong, so placed that the two wings carried forwards the body with equal
pace, one not forsaking the other: yet between all three was there suffitient
distance Aluarez de Bassan Marquis of Santa Cruz bearing a white flagge in his
poope, conducted the reseruations of succor, consisting of thirty eight
Galleys, out of which were deducted eight, commanded by Don Iuan de Cardona,
precursor of the whole fleet, who running twenty or five and twenty miles
before the rest, by swift Fregats, signified unto the General whatsoever was
necessary to be known in their discovery, with commandment when they descried
the Turkish Navy to retire and impe themselves Cardona into the Right.

The Galeasses and Argozies were half a mile before the Galleys, two before
the right wing, two before the left, and two before the middle battle, every
Galeasse a mile from each other: the first were commanded by Ambrosio and
Antonio Bragadini, the second by Iacomo Guori, and Antonio Duodi, the third by
Andrea Pisar^, and Pietro Pisano. The use of these greater vessels (being
fortified with plenty of ordnance and lined with multitude of small shot) was to
receive the first fury of the enemies fleet passing by, that being weakened
and disordered by them, the next charge might be more safe and easy.

And in respect they were huge and unwieldy vessels unapt for oars, every
Galeasse Antonio Duodi was towed by the general and Colonna. The Galeasse of
Iacomo Guori by Sebastian Venieri and Christ ofero Lieni. The Galeasse, of
Ambrosio Bragadino by Augustine Barbarigo. The Galeasse of Antonio Bragadini by
Antonio Canali. The Galeasse of Andrea Pisaro by the Prior of Messina. The
Galeasse of Pietro Pisano by Gionan Andrea Doria. The general like the heart
in the midst of a body was seated in the midst of the battle, guarded on
the right side by Marc: Antonio Colonna the Popes Admiral, and on the left by
Sebastian Vinieri the Venetians high Admiral. Colonna was flanked by the
Admiral of the Geneuois, whereof Hector Spinola was captain, associated

Venieri was flanked with the Admiral of Sauoy, commanded by Lie^y,
accompanied with the Prince of Vrbin.

A stern the General, Colonna and Venieri were backed with a Galley named the
Prince of Spain, and an other belonging to the great Commendador of Castile.

The right side of the maine battle opposite to the wing was strengthened by
the Admiral Galley of Malta commanded by the Prior of Messina. The left side
was guarded by a Galley called the captain of Petro Lomelino, commanded by
Paulo Iordano Orsino.

In the right wing John de Cardona seconded Giouan Andrea Doria. In the left
wing Augustino Barbarico was supported on one handby Marco Quirini, and on the
other by Canali. Yet was the whole fleet though distinct in order so intermix^

The particular names of every Galley, his place and captain of the Christian
fleet may be found in this Catalogue.
These Galleys and captains went before the fleet for discouerey.
Galleys. Captains. 1. The Saint Magdalen of Venice. Marco Contareni. 2. The
Sun of Venice. Vincento Quirini. 3. The Admiral of Sicily. 4. The
Vice Admiral of Sicily. Iuan de Cardona Admiral of the Sicillian fleet. 5.
The Admiral. David Imperiali. 6. The Ioannica of Sicill. 7. Saint Caterina of
Venice. Marco Cigognia. 8. Our Lady of Venice. Petro Francesco Maripietro. The
Galleys and captains of the left wing.
Galleys. Captains. 1. The Admiral of Venice. Augustino Barbarigo Prouidator
General of the Venetian fleet. 2. The Vice Admiral of Venice. Antonio Canalis
an other Prouidator likewise of the Venetian fleet. 3. The Fortune of Venice.
Andrea Barbarico. 4. The Atcher of Naples. Martino Pyrola. 5. The Trebble hand
of Venice. Georgio Barbarico. 6. The double Dolphin of Candy. Francesco Zeno.
7. The Lion and Phoenix of Cania. Francesco Mengano. 8. Saint Nicolas of
Cherso. Colanes Drafi. 9. The Victory of Naples. Octauio Roccardi. 10. The
Lomelina. Augustino Coneuali. 11. The Elengina of the Popes. Fabio Valciati
knight. 12. The Lady of Cania. Philippo Polani. 13. The Seahorse of Candy.
Antonio de Cubellis. 14. The double Lion of Candy. Nicolo Fratello. Before
these went Ambrosio Bragadino with his Galeasse. 15. The Lion of Istria.
Dominico de Tucco. 16. The Cross of Cephalonia. Marco Cimera. 17. The Saint
Virginia of Cephania. Christofero Crissa. 18. The Lion of Candy. Francisco
Bonaccio. 19. The Christ of Candy. Andrea Cornelio. 20. The Angel of Candy.
Giouan Angelo. 21. The Piramis of Candy. Francesco Buono. 22. The Lady of Candy
with the Armed-horse. Antonio Eudomeniano. 23. The Christ raised again of
Venice. Simone Gora. 24. The lesser Christ raised again of Venice. Frederico
Renieri. 25. The Christ of Corfou. Christofero Condocollo. 26. The Christ
raised again of Cania. Georgio Calerga. 27. The Christ of Venice. Bartholomeo
Donato. 28. The Christ raised again of Vegia. 29. The Retimana. Nicolo
Auonali. 30. The Christ of Candy. Giouan Cornelio. 31. The Christ raised
again of Cania. Francesco Zancaruolo. 32. The Rodus of Cania. Francesco
Molino. 33. The S. Euphemia of Brescia. Horatio Fisogna. 34. The Lady Marquis
of Doria. Francesco Sphedra. 35. The fortune of Andrew. Giouan Lodouico Belui.
3^. The Arm of Cania. Micaele Vizamano. 37. The Seahorse of Venice. Antonio
Canali. 38. The Christ of Cania. Daniele Calefattio. 39. The Arm of Venice.
Nicolo Lipomano. 40. Our Lady of Zant. Nicolo Modono. 41. The Christ raised
again. Francesco Zancaruolo. 42. Our Lady of Venice. Marc-Antonio Pisano. 43.
God the father in Trinity. Giouan Contareni. 44. The flame of Naples. Iuan
Cueua. 45. The Saint John of Naples. Garcia Vargaro. 46. The envy of Naples.
Torribio Acaueso. 47. The valliant of Naples. Micaele Quixada. 48. The Sancta
Iacobea of Naples. Monseratto Guardiola. 49. The Saint Nicolaico of Naples.
Christofero Mongiua. 50. The Christ raised again of Venice. Giouan Baptista
Quirini. 51. The Angel of Venice. Vnfredo Iustiniano. 52. The Saint Dorotea of
Venice. Paulo Nani. 53. The Admiral of Venice. Marc-Antonio Quirini Prouidator
of the Venetian Navy. In the maine battle were these captains and Galleys.
Galleys. Captains. 1. The Admiral of Lomelina. Paulo Iordano Orsino, Admiral
of that fleet. 2. The Master Lomelina. Petro Baptista Lomelino. 3. The Admiral
Bandinella. Bandinello Saulo vice admiral of that fleet. 4. The Master of
Genoa. Pallerano. 5. The Toscano of the Popes. Metello Caracciolla knight. 6.
The Seaman of Vincenza. Iacomo Dressano. 7. Our Lady of Venice. Giouan Zeno.
8. The Saint Ieronimo of Lesina. Giouan Balzi. 9. The Saint Ioannica of Venice.
Giouan Antonio Colleoneo. 10. The S. Alexa^drica of Bergamo Georgio De Aeste
Admiral. 11. The Admiral Marina. Ieronimo Canali. 12. The Logge of Venice.
Bertuccio Contareni. 13. The Mongibello of Venice. Francisco Dandolo. 14. The
Virgin of Candy. Cypriano Marini. 15. The tempera^ce of Giouan Andrea Doria.
Vincentio Pascalic. Roccano Fuluio. 16. The good fortune of Naples 17. The
castle of Spain. Baccia Pisano. 18. The victory of the Popes. 19. The Piramis.
Marc-Antonio of Saint Vliana. 20. The Christ of Venice. Ieronimo Contareni.
21. The Saint Francis of Spain. Christofero Guasches. 22. The peace of the
Popes. Iacomo Antonio (...). 23. The Pearl of Giouan Andrea Doria. Giouan
Baptista Spinola. 24. The wheel serpentine of Venice. Gabriele Canali. 25. The
Piramis of Venice. Francesco Buono. 26. The Palm of Venice. Ieronimo Venieri.
27. The Admiral of Gyl. Andrada. Bernardo Cinoguerra. 28. The Granado of
Spain. Paulo Boteino. 29. The Admiral of Genoa. Hector Spinola accompanied
with the Prince of Parma. 30. The Admiral of Venice. Sebastiano Venieri
Admiral of the Venetian fleet. 31. The Galley Royal. Don John of Austria
General. 32. The Admiral of the great Commendador. 33. The Popes Admiral.
Marc-Antonio Colonna. 34. The Admiral of Sauoy. The Lord Lieny accompanied with
the Prince of Vrbin. 35. The Grifonia of the Popes. Alessandro Negroni. 36. The
St. Theodora of Venice. Theodoro Balbi. 37. The Mendoca of Naples. Martino de
Caide. 38. The mountain of Cania. Alessandro Vizamano. 39. The Saint John
Baptista of Venice. Giouan Mocenigo. 40. The victory of Giouan Andrea Doria.
Philippo Doria. 41. The Pisana of the Popes. Hercole Lotta. 42. The Figuera of
Spain. Diego Lopes de Diglia. 43. The Christ of Venice. Georgio Pisano. 44.
The Saint John of Venice. Daniele Moro. 45. The Florence of the Popes. Tomaso
de Medici. 46. The George of Naples. Eugenio de Vargas. 47. The Master of
Naples. Francisco Benauides. 48. The Moon of Spain. Emanuele Aquilar. 49. The
Passara of Venice. Lodouico Pasqualigo 50. The Lion of Venice. Pietro Pisano.
51. The S. Jerome of Venice. Gasparo Mari Pietro. 52. The Admiral of Grimaldi.
Georgio Grimaldi Admiral. 53. The Master of David Imperiali. Nicolo Lucano.
54. The S. Christopher of Venice. Alessandro Contareni. 55. The Judith of Zant.
Marino Sicuro. 56. The Larmelina of Candy. Pietro Gradonico. 57. The middle
Moon of Venice. Valerio Valeresso. 58. The Doria of Giouan Andrea Doria.
Iacomo Casali. 59. The order of Saint Peter. Santabio. 60. The order of Saint
John. Lodouico Tessera. 61. The Admiral of Malta. The Prior of Messina
Admiral. The Right wing.
Galleys. Captains. 1. The Admiral of Sicill. D. Iuan de Cardona Admiral. 2.
The Piedmontan of Sauoy. Octauio Moreto. 3. The Admiral of Nicola Doria.
Pandolpho Polidoro. 4. The Force of Venice. Reniere Zeno. 5. The Queen of
Candy. Giouan Barbarico. 6. The Nino of Venice. Paulo Polani. 7. The Christ
raised again of Venice. Benedetto Sorance. 8. The Armed man of Retima. Andrea
Calergo. 9. The Eagle of Retima. Andrea Calergo. 10. The Palm of Cania. Iacomo
Medio. 11. The Angel of Corfou. Stellio Carchiopulo. 12. The Saint Ioannica
Arbera. Giouan de Domeni. 13. The Lady Frauica. Lodouico Cypico. 14. The ship
of Venice. Antonio Pasqualigo. 15. Our Lady of Candy. Marco Fescarini. 16. The
Christ of Crema. Francesco Forneri. 17. The Saint Vittoria of Crema.
Euangelisto Zorlano. 18. The Master of Grimaldi. Lorenzo Trecchia. 19. The
master of Marini. Antonio Cornili. 20. The Margaret of Sauoy. Battaglino. 21.
The Diana of Genoa. Giouan Georgio Lasagna. 22. The Gingana of Naples. Gabriele
Medino. 23. The moon of Naples. Iulio Rubbi. 24. The fortune of Naples. Diego
Madra^. 25. The hope of Naples. Pietro Busto. 26. The Fury of Lomelina. Iacomo
Chiappio. 27. The Master of Lomelina. Georgio Greco. 28. The Negrona. Nicolo
Constano. 29. The bastard Negrona. Lorenzo de Turri. 30. The fire of Candy.
Antonio Buono. 31. The Eagle of Candy. Ieronimo Georgio. 32. The S. Christopher
of Venice. Andrea Trono 33. The Christ of Venice. Marco Antonio Lando. 34. The
Hope of Candy. Ieronimo Contareni. 35. The Royalty of Padua. Patara Buzacarino.
36. The Saint Iosefica of Venice. Francesco Oseda. 37. The Resolute of Naples.
Giouan Caraffa. 38. The Sicilia of Sicilia. Francisco Amadea. 39. The Master
of Nicola Doria. Iulio Centaurio. 40. The Eagle of Corfou. Pietro Buono. 41.
The S. Trisonica of Catarra. Ieronimo Bazanteo. 42. The Tower of Vincenza.
Lodouico de Portu. 43. The S. Mary of the Popes. Pandolfo Strozzi Knight. 44.
The S. Ioannica of the Popes. Angelo Bifalio Knight. 45. The Master of
Nigroni. Lodouico Gamba.. 46. The Admiral of Nigroni. Giouan Ambrofio Nigroni.
47. The Monarca of John Andrew. Nicolo Garibaldo. 48. The Hand-maide of John
Andrew. Nicolo Imperiali. 49. The Admiral of Giouan Andrea. Giouan Andrea
Doria. The Reservation for succor, placed behind as a Guard, are these
Captains and Galleys.
Galleys. Captains. 1. The Saint Ioannica of Sicily. 2. The Buccana. Giouan
Pietro Morilo. 3. The Leena of Naples. Pietro de Lagia. 4. The Constancy of
Naples. Pietro de Lagia. 5. The Marchesa of Naples. Iuan Machado. 6. The S.
Barbera of Naples. Iuan Ascaleo. 7. The S. Andrea of Naples. Iuan Rufio de
Valasques. 8. The S. Caterino of Naples. Iuan Rufio de Valasques. 9. The S.
Bartilmeo of Naples. 10. The S. Angelo of Naples. Iuan de Ripe Melino. 11. The
Terrana of Naples. Marco Molino. 12. The Christ of Venice. Giouan Loredano. 13.
The double hand of Venice. Aluarez de Bassan Marquis de Sancta Cruz. 14. The
Admiral of Naples. 15. The Faith of Venice. Giouan Baptista Contareni. 16. The
Pillar of Venice. Catarina Mali Pietro 17. The Magdalen of Venice. Lodouico
Bulbi. 18. The Lady of Venice. Giouan Bembo 19. The Menidus of Venice. Filippo
Leo. 20. The Hope of Venice. Giouan Baptista Benedetto. 21. Saint Peter of
Venice. Pietro Badoario 22. Saint George of Sabenica. Christofero Lachico. 23.
The Saint Michael of Venice. Georgio Cochio. 24. The Sibilla of Venice. Daniele
Trono. 25. The Crane of Spain. Luigi de Hereda. 26. The Admiral of Vaschedo.
Vaschedo Coronado. 27. The Suprana of the Popes. Antonio de Ascoli. 28. The
Occasion of Spain. 29. The Master of the Popes. 30. The fair wether of the
Popes.

THe General descending (as has been said) into his Barge, passed through his
fleet, taking a short but exact view of the form of his battles, and by
brief, but effectual speech, breathed courage into his men. His Oration was
to this purpose.

Brave, invincible spirits, whom gracious Heaven has held worthy to be her
Don John's Oration to his soldiors.
Champions: to whom the Angels will not be idle spectators, but actors and
assistants in this sacred Tragedy. Nature I know has given you the strongest
temper of valor, and Devotion set so keen an edge on that temper, as I need
not whet by any farther encouragement. Only let me tell you, you now have
fair occasion to vnsheath and use it. Let Victory set such a gloss on it, as
no rust of forgetfulness may ever eat out. Now bring this dark half Moon,
which seeks to eclips the bright sun of heaven, to such a waine as shall
never fill again. Let her not any longer usurp domination of the Sea. Our
enemies execed us in numbers, made up of ciphers and shadows of men, but let
us excel them in resolution, triumph over women, We are to share the whole
wealth of nature: the earth to the suruiuors, heaven to the martirs. Even the
scarres of the wounded willbe beautiful because honorable, who would
ingratefully refuse to bleed for that loving God which has not refused to dye
for him. Courage therefore divine Champions, forget not that some of ye are
Romans, and which is more all Christians.

This speech was every where answered with applausiue and hopeful
conclamations. In which resolution we will leave them a while, to view the
countenance of the adverse Navy. The Turks in the mean time used
circumspection and providence nothing barbarous. For having intelligence by
spies, fugitives, and Mehemet Bey was dismissed with 60. Galleys to Aspropicio
a neighbor City to bring from thence competent supplies of victual and men,
in which business he used such celerity that in short time he returned,
bringing with him plenty of victual and munition besides ten thousand
Ianizaries two thousand ordinary soldiers and two thousand voluntaries, with
which multitude and false supposition of our paucity they were not so
confirmed, but that they stood possessed of a certain fatal ominous misdeeming
the event. In which respect the high Admiral Ali Bascha, though by his own
inclination and his masters command he stood resolute to fight, called a
General Council Partau Bascha General of the land forces earnestly oppugned
it, on the contrary part Hassan Bascha son to Barbarossa sometime Viceroy of
Algier a young man yet of great spirit and worthy so noble a father whose
magnanimity he seemed to inherit, licensed to speak with brave countenance and
apt gesture spoke The speech of Hassan Bascha perswadi^g to fight.
as follows.

Most excelse and victorious Prince, the Turkish Nation has ever so nobly
behaved it self that it is a question whether their fortune has bred their
greatness or their valor commanded their fortune. Once it may be affirmed
that if our stars have favored us, we have not forsaken our selves, nor
shamed them, but Alexander never stood more then we, in need of new worlds:
which if these prying inquisitiue Christians had not discovered to us, our
valor ere long would want work. Yet let us not seem so glutted and cloyed
with conquest as to refuse to accept this one triumph more. This by Sea
wilserue to counterpoize that other balance of land victories. Let us fill both
the hands of our Emperor, one with spoils of the land, the other of the Sea.
These feeble tired Christians have been but our Porters. They are now ready to
deliver it. Let

This speech uttered by a man whose performance had ever heretofore been
correspondent to so confident a persuasion, not only encouraged but inflamed
many of the hearers, whereof Vluzzali General of the forces of Barbary could
not contain himself, but with many earnest and pregnant arguments aue^r'd
the same: alleging besides the opportunity, the necessity of obtaining the
great Lords command. Caiabeg the Sanzach of Smitna ecchoed Vluzzali.

Yet many the grauer and aduiseder Captains dissented from this more hot
then deliberate determination, especially Mehemet Bey the Sanzach of Negropont
which if not eloquently, yet truly demonstrated the danger of fight as
follows.

I am sorry (magnificent Alli) that at this time the Council of Illustrious
Mehemet Bey bis speech, dissweding from fight.
Hassan, is rather to be admired and applauded for greatness, then followed
for soundness, fitter to set our tongues on work then hands: I mean to be
answered then executed. It is most true, in raising the Ottoman Empire, that
the Turkish valor has ever guided their fortune: but as true, their wisdom
has directed their valor, else had they never created this world of their
greatness out of nothing, or made it of Attomes and so slender principles.
They have not by poasting to the end of their desires lamed or tired the means
that carried them, but by going softlier, have gone farther. Greatness is
steep and high, not to be ascended but by leisure. Those that strive to rise
violently fall Tamberlan. One Kingdom is a sufficient croppe for one year.
After that rate we may soon beggar Christendom, and perfect the Turkish
Monarchy. As we have won Cyprus, and may keep it, so we may lose both
that and ourselves too, in seeking to get more. If you conceive the Christian^
have come so far, but with resolution to fight, or to fight, but with
probabillity of preuayling, you must think them either fools or cowards. But
if after so familiar and long hostillity, ouer-vallewing our selves, hinder us
not to know them, we must needs confess their swords and wits as sharp as
ours. Not their Pusillanimity, but division has ruined them; and our
multitudes rather

This speech was highly approved of Partau Bascha, Siroch, and Carabey. Yet
fate, and their Emperors express command, urged publicly by Vluzzali, so
far carried them against their own judgments, that they resolved not only
to hazard

The eight of October very early in the morning, hoping unexpectedly to have
They first kend the Christian Navy clear of the Cruzulares, which had somewhat
disordered them. And seeing Andrea Doria stand to sea-ward, vainly imagined
he had fled, as upon the like reason the Christians were deluded with the like
conceit of them, which opinion as it begat contempt of the adverse part, so it
bred confidence in themselves. The place where the fleetes met, served aptly to
fight, but not to fly. The Gulf being in circuit not above two hundred and
fifty miles, immured with rocks, shores, and Islands so thick, that to fly,
threatened well nigh as much danger as to stay. On the North, they were shut in
by part of Albania, extending from Saint Maura to Lepanto four score miles. On
the East they were embarred by Morea stretching seauenty miles from the mouth
of the Tornezzo. On the south the Isle of Zant opposed it self. 25. miles in
length. the west was closed up by Cephalonia and Saint Maura, the one being,
40. the other 15. miles long on that coast. On the coast of Albania, scarce a
mile from the maine, were the Rocks Cruzalares of an equal bigness, but the
less the more dangerous. Here again the Christian fleet before concealed by
interposition of headlands bewrayed truly her own greatness, which though
inferior to the Turks, yet exceeding their expectation did somewhat shake
their former resolution: yet hope, shame, and which was more then both,
necessity, spurring them forwards, they approached in form following.

They divided their fleet which consisted of two hundred and seauenty vessels,
The order of the Turkish, flect.
Galleys, Galeots and Foists, into four battles, correspondent to that of
the Christians. In the middle battle was the high Admiral Ali Bascha, and
therein were contained four score and ten Galleys, in the midst of whom, in
a rich and well fortisied Galley was he himself, flanqued on the right side
with Partau Bascha, and on the left with the Treasurer of the Navy, who were
likewise assisted each of them by three Admirals. The right wing consisted of
fifty Galleys, where of Mehemet Siroch had the charge. The left wing included
ninety Galleys, conducted by Vluzzali. The Reservation for supplies was a
mixture of ten Galleys and twenty Foists, commanded by Amurat Dragut Raise. He
himself in a beautiful and well armed Galley, sometime Admiral of
Constantinople. And not only the wind but the Sun seemed now to bandy
against them, for having with too much light blinded the Christian Navy, at the
instant of joining battle, removed that prejudice to the Turks. And the
wind as if awakened, and come to do service to the God who made it, breathed
a gentle gale from the West, which aptly served to carry the mists of the water
and smoke of the Ordnance upon the Turks, whose battles contained these
particular Captains with their Galleys.

The Turks divided their fleet
The right wing.
1. The first was the Admiral of Mehemet Siroch Governor of Alexandria. 2. The
second Galley of Alexandria, was governed by Caras Tubat. All these had Galleys
of Alexandria.
3. Bagly Saraf. 4. Giafer Chiagey. 5. Osmanan Celebin. 6. Pe^usio Reis. 7.
Bink Cusapogli. 8. Osman Occan. 9. Driuis Aga. 10. Bajazet Siman, 11. Osman
Ali. 12. Deli Aga. 13. Dardagan Bardanbely, 14. Casli Cuian. 15. Iufuf Aga. 16.
Iusuf Magar. 17. Calafact Cheder. 18 Mustafa Genouell, 19. Dermigy Pery. 20.
Mat Assan.
21. Cheder Aga. 22. Soliman Bey. 23. Hibraim. Their Galleys were of
Constantinople.
24. Saban. 25. Caiacelebin, 26. Cheder Siman. 27. The Son of Cara Mustafa.
Their Galleys were of Tripoli in Barbary.
28. Iuran Saba. 29. David Iusuf, 30. Solac Raise. 31. Arnaut Ferrat. 32. Iuzel
Memy.
33. Schender Selim, 34. Lumag Iusuf. 35. Bardach Celebni, 36. Bagdat Asau. 37.
Guzel Allibi. 38. Brusali Piry. 39. Rodle Ali. 40. Aga Bascha with the Admiral
of Constantinople, These commanded over Galleys of Despotado, in old time
Aetolia.
41. Sinaman Mustafa. 42. Giegiore Ali, 43. Amurates Reis, 44. Calepi Memy. 45.
Marul Mustafa. 46. Heder Lumet, 47. Sinaman Deruis, 48. Meminey Durmis. 49.
Algagias Sinan, 50. Adagi Rustan, 51. Chingeuey Musata, 52. Iusuf Celebni, 53.
Tufer Mustafa.
54. Ali a Genowese and Pyrate Captain of small Galleys. 55. Megil Reis with a
small Galeasse, 56. Mehemet Bey, with the Admiral Galley of Negroponto.
The Battle had these Captains and Galleys.
With Galleys of Rhodes.
1. Assam Bey the Governor of Rhodes, 2. Deli Chiafer the warden of Rhodes, 3.
Occi Raise, 4. Postunag Ogli, 5. Calefact Ogli, 6. Gazizy Reis, 7. Dromus Reis
with an Admiral Galley of Constantinople: 8. Herbercy, 9. Caragias Raise,
10. Ocean Raise, 11. Deli Piry, with Galleys of Constantinople.
12 Giafer Aga. 13. Bachian Raise, 14. Coz Ali, 15. Colach Raise, 16. Oluz Raise.
17. Assan Bassa, son to Barbarossa.
Their Galleys were of Naples in Romagnia.
18. Caruf Raise. 19. Alman Raise, 20. Gungli Ogli, 21. Arnaut Celebin, 22. Magar
Ali, 23. Giafer Celebni, 24. Deli Celebni, 25. Deli Assan. 26. Caraperi Aga.
27. Sinan Raise 28. Carau Mustafa. 29. Sali Arauar. 30. Preuil Aga captain of
Naples in Albania.
with Galleys of Mittilene.
31. Balahzi Ogli. 32. Bararzi Mustafa. 33. Sinan Baly, 34. Agdadi Raise.
35. Two sons of Ali, in a Galley of Constantinople. 36. Osman Raise in an
Admiral of Constantinople. with Galleys of Mitilene.
37. Deli Iusuf 38. Ferat Baly, 39. Cuiacelebin. 40. Bagdar Raise. 41. Haluagi
Mustafa.
42. Giaur Alli Mustafa, Admiral of small Galleys. 43. Caracoza with Galleys
of Valona. 44. Mamatre Saderbey Governor of Mittilene. 45. Aly Bascha high
Admiral of the fleet, in a Galley Royal. 46. Portau Bassa, general by land
with an Admiral Galley. 47. Mustafa Esdey Treasurer, 48. Marmari Raise. 49.
Alcicgoli, 50. Caras Deli. 51. Ferat Ceragli. 52, Tramontan Raise, with an
Admiral of Constantinople, with Galleys of Constantinople.
53. Sulimun Celebni. 54. Deli Ibraim. 55. Murat Corossaa, 56. Denur Bali, 57.
Caby Heit, 58. Murrat Trasy Scribe of the Arsenall, 59. Peruis Sinam, 60.
Dardagan Bali, 61. Giafer Caran, 62. Deruis Sach.
63. Curbaly. 64. Giafer Aga, the captain of Tripoliin Barbary, These Galleys
were of Tripoli,
65. Carau Hamat, 66. Rustan Cialmagi, 67. Durmis Ogli, 68. Schender Dernigi,
69. Maumet Alis.
These Galleys were of Calipolis.
70. Afis Cluega Governor of Callipolis, 71. Selim Siach, 72. Heder Baschi, 73.
Sicun Mustafa, 74. Salu Rius, 75. Dely Ischender,
76. The Lord of Marue with an Admiral Galley of Constantinople. Their Galleys
also were of Callipolis,
77. Peruis Lahumagi, 78. Hasuf Bali, 79, Siran Bardachi, 80. Iusuf Cinigi,
81. Piri Begogli, with an Admiral Galley of Constantinople. with Galleys of
Constantinople:
82. Deli Osmun, 83. Piry Sinan, 84. Demir Celebni, 85. Deruis Hidir, 86. Sinan
Mustafa, 87. Hasirgy Raise. 88. Ascy Ogli. 89. Caias Saraf, 90. Agadi Ahameth,
91. Osman Sehet. 92. Deruis Celebin, 93. Giafer Raise, 94. Dardagan the Governor
of the Arsenall.

The left wing.
1. The first was an Admiral, whereof was Captain Carau Hozias, With Galleys
of Natolia.
2. Catalus a Pirate, 3. Chiazell Sinam. 4. Chior Mehemet. 5. Hignau Mustafa.
6. Cademly Mustapha, 7. Vschiufli Memy. 8. Carau Morat. 9. Passa Deruis, 10.
Iagli Osman. 11. Pisman Raise. 12. Tasciuis Sisman. 13. Iesil Hogli.
14. Cara Cialibina, Captain of small Galleys. They had small Galleys, and did
obey Cara Cialibin,
15. Suizi Memy. 16. Magli Raise. 17 Osey Assan. 18. Cumigi Hasuf.
These two had Galleys of Constantinople*
19. Cadeh Sidir, 20. Osman Raise,
21. Caraperi a Pirate, and also Captain of small Galleys. These had small
Galleys, and were commanded by Caraperi their Captain,
22. Iulio Peruis, 23. Calobodan Soliman, 24. Iachuli Mamat, 25. Sayr Giafer,
26. Chior Memy,
27. Chiusuel Giafer, with a Galley of Constantinople, 28. Ramazzan, 19. Calemy
Memi, 30. Giesman Ferrat, 31. Hiupris Assan, 32. Zambal Murat. 33. Sarmasach
Raise, 34. Tunis Suliman, 35. Calepi Iusuf. 36. Techedel Assan. 37. Cyan Memij.
38. Osman Bagli, 39. Caragial with the Admiral Galley of Algeirs. 40. Caraman
Ali. 41. Alman. 42. Sinam Celebni. 43. Agdagi Mustafa. 44. Daglias Ali, 45.
Seith. 46. Perius Selmi. These had small and also some common Galleys of Algier.
47. Murat Deruis, 48. Hes Ogli. 49. Machazer Ali. 50. Ioias Osman. 51. Sali
Deli.
52. Nasut Fachir, with a Galley of Constantinople. Their Galleys were of
Negroponto.
53. Gymongy Mustafa. 54. Rustan Cinigi, 55. Bali. 56. David Ali. 57. Sit^au
Raise. 58. Carum Hidir. 59. Magar Ferrat, 60. Arnaut Alis, 61. Natis Raise, 62.
Curmur Rhodo, 63. Cos Cluagin, 64. Clusly Memi.
65. Caram Bey with the Admiral of the sons of Vluzzali. They had small
Galleys of Valona.
66. Deli Murar, 67. Abazar Raise, 68. Scin Schiander. 69. Alman Balli, 70.
Assan Suumbar, 71. Seit Aga, 72. Assan Sinam, 73. Cumy Falagan, 74. Osman
Gynder.
Their Galleys were of Suriasaro.
75. Dermar Bey. 76. Iusuf Alis. 77. Caran Alman. 78. Murat Biassan. 79.
Carabiney governor of Suriasaro.
80. Calau Bastagi. 81. Carabi. 82. Giafer Hedi. 83. Ferrat. These Galleys were
of Constantinople.
84. Memy Beogli. 85. Osman Piry. 86. Piry Raise.
These Galleys were of Constantinople.
87. Casam Raise. 88. Talatagi Raise. 89. Rus Celebin. 90. Tutur Ali.
91. Vluzzali King of Algier with an Admiral Galley.
The Battle of Succors.
1. Was an Admiral Galley of Constantinople governed by Amurat Dragat Raise.
These were Fusts.
2. Caram Casli. 3. Hassam Raise.
4. Abdula Reis, and that was a little Galley. These were also Foists.
5. Aligau Assan. 6. Cus Ali. 7. Ginzel Ali. 8. Curtat Celebin.
9. Deley Bey. 10. Saudagi Memi, this was also a Foist. 11. Dardagno Reis, and
he had an Admiral of Constantinople. 12. Deli Dorni, and he had a Galley. 13.
Cuidar Memi the Governor of the Isle of Scio. 14. Shetagi Osman. These had
Foists.
15. Haeder. 16. Delius Heder. 17. Armat Merny. 18. Susan Reis. 19. Gyafer Bey.
20. Cabil Sinam, his was a Foist. These were Foists.
21. Amurat Reis. 22. Sariogi Grafer 33. Mor Ali.
24. Piali Murat and this was a small Galley. These were Foists.
25. Caragiali Raise. 26. Murat Alias. 27. Iumez Alias. 28. Assan Sinan a Galley
of Constantinople. 29. Bostagi Murat a Foist. 30. Deli Suliman, this was an
Admiral Galley of Constantinople.

All things thus disposed of, Ali Basha, ritchly clothed and armed after the
Turkish manner, in the poope of his Galley, thus spoke to the Captains and
Commanders of the navy there assembled to receive direction.

MOst Heroic Captains, and Invincible Ianizars, the scourge of the Christian,
Ali Basha his speech of encouragement to his captaine^ and soldiers at the
in^ant of battle.
and right hand of the Ottoman Empire, we have here to fore taken pains Caesar
in the West, Alexander in the East, making the rising and setting of the Sun
the confines of the Turkish Empire. Come on them, let us fill the sea with
their bodies, our Galleys with their wealth, our selves with honor and felicity
of both.

The Christians having in all respects provided for so great an attempt, as The
memorable battle of Lepanto.
far as human wisdom or strength extended, considering this fleet to be
their Arc, God himself being interessed in the controversy, ceased not with
humble but importunate invocation to implore the aid of Heaven, which by their
Priests and Churchmen was confidently promised, Their devotions concluded, and
both battles now facing each other, the charge sounded by a cannon from Ali
the Turkish Admiral, and answered by one from each wing, with barbarous
clamors, after their custom, which they think awakens the courage of their
own, and amazeth and terrifieth their enemies, swiftly made toward the
Christian fleet, Venieri backed his Galley with two other of Giouan Loretano
and Catarini Malipietro. Colonna did the like with two other. And now being
within distance of their ordnance, the Turks passing by the Galeasses were
unexpectedly torn by their great shot, which brake forth on all sides like
thunder and lightning out of some dark cloud: they being high and close,
infinitely spoiled the naked Turks and Rowers, and made as it were that breach
at which the Christian fleet entered. For it disordered them then when they had
no time to reform themselves. In which confusion yet desperately passing the
Galeasses, they ran upon a sharper point of danger. For the wind resisting
the swiftness of their approach, stayed and set them up as dead marks to the
Christian ordnance, which had more certain aim at them lying still, then in
motion and course. Besides, it did benight them with smoke, augmenting the
terror of those invisible mischiefs which they felt, but could not see to shun
or reueng. Christ whom they blasphemed. Here men fallne ouer-boord wanted
Galleys, here Galleys emptied of their companies, wanted men, and floted like
dead bodies without soul, which Mehemet Siroch, now finding himself a truer
Prophet then he desired, observing, withdrew himself from the body of the
fleet thinking to circumuent the Christian Syroch, Augustino Barbarico
interposed his squadron, wherewith he shut up his passage, the easlier by
reason of a Promontary called Mahanguli extending it self on that part. Marino
Contareni resolute to be a sharer with his uncle Barbarico both in honor and
danger, followed and united himself to that squadron, betwixt whom a cruel
fight was maintained on both sides. The Turkish left wing commanded by
Vluzzali, and confronting our right was very near to have joined with Doria,
who considering himself inferior in number of Galleys (he having but fifty,
his enemy ninty) urged it not. Vluzzali balancing with the fortune of the
Christian his own odds of strength, Doria after some suspense stood out to
seaward with certain of his Galleys a mile from the remainder.

In the mean time, Don John, Colonna and Venieri the confederate Admirals in
exact order incountred the middle battle of the enemy, exchanging in the
approach three or four vollies of great shot, with much disadvantage to the
Turks. The Christian vessels being snugge and stooping from the ordnance of
the Turks higher Galleys, and many of their pieces choked with Christians
bullets casually shot into their mouths and there sticking. Which difficulties
bred rather fury then despair in them, and induced them with violence of oars
to make have to grapple, that there fighting hand to hand, the difference might
Siroch perceiving himself not only frustrated by interposition of Barbaricos
squadron, but distressed by the irresistable force of it, persisted in fight,
to save his honor though not life, using his utmost encouragements to revive
the languishing hope of his men, wherein by speech, but more by example, he so
far prevailed, that desperation supplying the want of resolution, they had
now recovered, Barbarico and Ciconta; Barbarico whilst with invincible courage
he still ran to the weakest part, like the vital spirits in the body, was
unfortunately and mortally wounded by a fatal Turkish arrow in the left eye,
himself being in deed not only the eye but the very heart of his squadron. He
falling down, gave demonstration that the life blood of an army runs in the
veins of the Commander. His own men shrunk back, the Turks intruded and
pressed in his Galley, which had been then taken, but that Frederico Nani and
Siluio Porcia came in to her reskew. These heroic gentlemen growing up like
Hidraes heads in the room of Barbarico, repeld the Turks and recovered the
former hope of victory. Porcia received a wound in his thigh, the honorable
badge of his valor.

In an other part, Ciconia oppressed with multitude of Turkish Galleys, was as I
Siroch environed with danger and mischief on all sides, having no means to
satisfy his desire of revenge on al, desperately ran upon Giouan Contareni
(whose kinsman was before not idely slain) with such violence, that he had
almost stem'd his Galley; which he obstinatly perseuering to board, was there
mortally wounded; as before in judgment, so now in valor having manifested
himself a complete and absolute soldier. He falling, Barbarico had with the
Christians: his men slain, wounded and dismayed left their decks naked to
their thronging enemies, who rushing in, were like to have made the Galley a
common sepulcher to both; For she, being shot between wind and water was now
ready to sink. The Turks leaped ouer-boord, hoping by swimming to find the
land more merciful to them then the water. Siroch was taken, not quite dead,
but his wounds serched, and found incurable, in pity, not cruelty he was
dispatched. His death, though it were dearly bought, was a mortal wound to
the Turks whole Navy. For those that were before busied with his encounter,
this right wing, or arm, now cut off, converted their forces, though much
enfeebled, against other

Now the two Generals, Don John and Ali Basha meeting like two furious
Currents, began so cruel a fight in the midst of both fleets that the rest
seemed but spectators to them two. The Galleys incircling them were the
Theater, these two the Stage. Contrariety of Religion, emulation of honor,
anger, hope, and fear producing admirable effects in both. While the Basha
made violent impression on the prow of Don John's Galley, she by others was
likely to have been entered on the poope, which seen was prevented by those
that backed her, who John, wherein he so far prevailed, that he compelled him
to bring out of hold his fresh reseruations, to exchange place with his wounded
and wearied men upon the hatches, which strange and unexpected supply as it
were newborn out of the womb of the Galley to defend their mother, bred
amazement, and by amazement hastened the destruction of the fainting Turks. The
Basha shot in the head, his Galley soon yielded; himself being yet alive
presented to D. John, had his head struck off, which, mounted on the point of
a pike, he held up in public demonstration of victory, a grateful object
signification easily interpreted. Now they all fly, but so confusedly, that
while they shun the pursuit of one Galley, they fall foul upon an other.
Besides, Marco Quirini and Antonio Canali intercepted many of the Galleys
flying, and men swimming to the shore. In this memorable fight many notable
captains on either side were taken and slain, whose distinct Catalogue ensues
at the end of the battle, not yet absolutely ended. For Vluzzali foreseeing
now to late this general overthrow, studied how he might in some measure
reueng what he could not prevent; therefore houering alooffe from the fleet to
expect some straglers of the Christian Navy, at last found opportunity to cut
off certain Venetian Galleys which at first had followed Doria, but now
desirous to have been sharers in so noble Doria wheeling about to assail him
abaft, knowing it dangerous for him to persevere in fight where his own force
would continually decrease, and his Adversaries be augmented, by confluence of
reskew from all parts of the army, executing his most mischief upon those
Venetians, he with sail and oars stood off to sea, towing after him the
Galleys of Pietro Bua of Corfou, of the Prior of Messina, and Lodouico Cipico
of Trahu, Benedetto Soranza, mortally wounded and oppressed by multitude,
fighting valliantly to the last was slain, and his Galley taken. But so, that
such getting in conclusion proved their loss. For many of the enemies
thronging into the Galley, either Vluzzali, who alone gave all three battles
some taste of his diuilish rage. Notwithstanding, all those Galleys which he
had taken, were recovered, but that of Petro Bua of Corfou, in whose purchase
he had a very hard bargain. The night was his best protection, which shaddowed
him from the pursuing Christians. Who now despayring to fetch him up, whom they
could not see to follow, gave over the chase and stood back to the fleet, and
Vluzzali escaped with about thirty Galleys. Many which could not swim being
alive, as if death had taught them that skill, floted being dead. And the sea
glutted

To conclude, the insolent enemies being thus ouer-throwne, and their spoil
gathered* the next care was to cure the wounded men and repair the bruised and
torn vessels. Wherein the Commanders testified no less industry then in
preparation for the fight, and valor in it. It is hard to resolve which of the
three Admirals D. John, Venieri, or Colonna merited most applause, they all did
what could not be exceeded by any other, nor equalled but by themselves. The
former distaste twixt Don John and Venieri, as it had been prouidently pacified
by mediation of Colonna, so was it in the conquest nobly forgotten of
themselves, D. John toward the beginning of the battle being endangered by
inequallity of number, Venteri with his own danger bravely reskewed, like two
fierce mastiues iarring between and eleuating their victorious hands to
heaven, acknowledged them to be strenthened by it. Every man congratulated the
safety of his living friend, yet moderatly lamented the fate of those dead, the
sorrow of their death being dried up with joy of the cause. Those bodies which
were recovered were honorably buried: the rest detained by the sea, were yet
eternized on the shore. To repeat the noble actions of every particular man
were a labor worthy Plutarke, every life would be an history. But amongst the
most eminent shines the noble indifferency of the Marquis de Sancta Cruz, who
disposing of the reservation of succors distributed them not by his own
affection but other men's necessities, bewraying at once excellency of
judgment, courage and celerity.

Many circumstances gave luster to this victory, but nothing more then the
flight of the Christian fleet not many years before from the same place, the
infamy of the one glorifying the other and serving as a foil to it, as
shadows set forth and enlighten any bright picture. It was a pleasing
consideration to those who had been in that fugitive navy to think that after
so many years they should find their honor where they lost it. To this they
added remembrance of the like battle between Augustus Caesar and Marc-Antony
many hundred years before fought in the same place, as if destiny had made it a
stage for great actions, and this battle had been but the second part of the
first.

The total number of the dead in the Christian army were 7656. others say
Augustino Barbarico Prouidator General of the Venetians fleet, Benedetto
Soranza, Marin and Ieronimo Contareni, MarcoAntonio Land, Francesco Bicono,
Iacomo de Messa, Caterin Maripietro, Giouan Loredano, Vincento Quirini, Andrea
and Georgio Barbarici all of the degree of Senators. Of Romans, Horacio
Caraffa, Ferrante Bisballo, Virginio and Horacio of the noble family of Vrsini
in Rome. Of the Spaniards, Iuan and Bernardino de Cardona, of the knights of
Malta were many slain, amongst whom these three were most famous, Ioakin Spart
Commendador of Moguncia. To: of Hamberg Commendador of Hemmend orf, and Francis
Drost, by nation Germains. The chief men wounded were, D. John the General,
Venieri the Venetian Admiral, Paulo Iordano, Marco Molino, and Troylo Sauello,
and well nie seven thousand private men. This loss of it self great, was
lessened by comparison of the Turks, who were reported by some Authors to have
been dismembered of 29000. of their brauest soldiers slain and taken: some
affirm it less, some more. But the multitude of their Galleys taken, wracked,
and dead bodies floting on the sea (carrying with it a resemblance of the
general deluge) acknowledge it to be great. Amongst those slain, the most
eminent was Ali Basha the high Admiral General, one of great magnanimity and
worthy such a place. Mehemet Bey alias Siroch Governor of Alexandria a man of
singular judgment and valor, fighting to the last, not (as others) that he saw
not, but contemned the danger. Hassan Basha the valiant son of his
Barbarossa, and many others equally valliant, noble, and dear to the Emperor
their Master. The most welcome prisoners were Achmat and Mahomet sons of the
General Ali Mehemet Bey Governor of Euboea, and three thousand and odd vulgar
soldiers. There escaped Partau Basha who since others would not follow his
council in abstaining from fight, made use of it himself. Vluzzali a
desperate and subtle Rennegado who fought, but so always that he might fly,
and as the Parthian horsemen, did most mischief in flying. There were taken
130 vessels. Whereof 117. were Galleys, 13. Galeots. Some report, 160. some
more, some less. The escape of the rest making the number of such as were
taken uncertain. The Galley of Cleopatra was not more rich, curious or
beautiful Ali, neither did the beauty of it better become peace, then the
strength war. There was much treasure and many things of great value found in
it, which the noble General, not basely converted to his private use but
distributed to those who most deserved it. Amongst these, a Macedonian by whose
fortunate hand the Basha died was worthily the greatest sharer. And because Don
John held gold to poor a reward for such inestimable merit, he approved those
other gifts with honor, and knighted him. But the munificent Venetians
thinking this a petty remuneration, nothing equivalent to the dignity of their
state, gratified him with an annuity of 300. Ducats.

The most esteemed spoil of the Turkish fleet were the enfranchised
Christians, in number 1200. words are but mute expressals of the wretchedness
of their captivity (being at once compelled to suffer for, yet do against
their Religion) Nothing could equal it but this joy of their enlargement,
which was such as that of Jonas may be apprehended at his birth and
resurrection out of that monster. Neither was this excessive gladness confined
to their own breasts, but at their Vnfredo Iustiniano arrived at Venice with
aduertizement of victory to the Senate. Never any music so feasted their
ears as that news, no Oratory Barbarico was rather envied then lamented, they
which honored him alive, being dead welny adored him: so that sorrow was now
banished out of Venice, and confined to Constantinople.

The gratulatory Ambassadors of all neighbor Princes flocked thither,
acknowledging the Venetians their protectors and champions.

The time of the year, and weakness of their fleet and men, moved the
General D. John to desist from pursuing the victory any farther. Therefore he
proceeded to division of the spoil, which was thus proportioned.

The Popes share was.
Galleys. 21. Whereof 19. ordinary, 2. Galeots. Ordnance. 54. Whereof 9. great,
3. murderers, 42. smaller pieces. Prisoners. 881. Amongst whom were Achmat
and Mahomet the sons of the General Ali Basha. The Venetians share was.
Galleys. 44. Whereof 39. ordinary and a half, 4. Galeots and a half.
Ordnance. 131. Whereof 39. and half great, 5. murderers and an half. 86.
smaller pieces. Prisoners 1162. Of all sorts. The Spanish share was.
Galleys. 64. Whereof 58. Galleys and a half, 6. Galeots and an half.
Ordnance 214. Whereof 58. great pieces and a half, 8. great murderers and an
half. 128. smaller pieces. Prisoners 1713. Of all sorts.

The Remainder were distributed among the assistants.

The division concluded not with equallity, yet general satisfaction; the
Venetians thinking they had the more honor, though the Spaniard the more
luggage. Venieri indefatigable in doing nobly, and exasperated with the yet
smarting blow Genius he said would not envy to see it self exceeded by him,
which was not equalled by his Predecessors. This, much enflamed the
hot-aspiring mind of the youthful Prince lately fleshed, in so much that they
proceeded to consultation how they might perfect this trophei whose hardest
work (the foundation) was already laid: when the secret maligners of Venieri
having now again by his means leisure and security to oppose John from so
brave a resolution. Therefore making April the time, and Corfou the Rendezuous
of their next years conuention, they dissolved the Navy. Don John returning to
Messina.

This abrupt departure in the eye of expectation, appeared a running away, or
tergiuersation (I had almost said Apostasy) from victory, whom he seemed to
leave unkindly, desyring him to stay longer. All men grieved to see hope
pregnant and great, likely to bring forth fair issue if she had gone out her
time thus miscarry. The death of Ali by a Grecian, that miserable nation
interpreted an Omen of ensuing liberty; and in opinion manumzied, after they
found themselves thus deluded, groaned as under a new subiugation. Upon
intelligence of John would not himself, only to let his shadow (his fame)
fight for them, while he stood by. That he would do them the grace to eternize
himself by their delivery. And being certified of his return cried out that
he at once for-sooke himself and them, their liberty and his glory being the
Twins whereof he was in labor, and that it was but a little greatness which
one victory could fill. And surely had this opportunity been well improoued,
there might have been far more made of it. For though that ingenious Turk
to express the inequallity between the loss of our Cyprus and their Navy,
said, That Selim had cut off the Venetians arm, they, but his beard:
insinuating, That timber grows, but not Kingdoms; and ships might be built,
but not Islands: yet is it manifest that the chief strength of this Samson
layin this hair, and that if he had been assailed ere it grew out again,
the razor which cut his beard might have cut his throat. Thus much the Tyrant
himself unwittingly acknowledged by the intended massacre of the Christians
under him, cunningly fathered on revenge, but begot by fear. He knew captives
of the quality of fire, as dangerous as serviceable. It is true that the next
spring, his fleet (not as it might have been quite rooted out) budded forth to
his former hight: his Arsenals spawning shoales of Galleys, yet barren enough
in mariners, the eye of a fleet; without these his

But these public considerations were less potent to move D. John to
persist, then other private respects, to reduce him from this honorable
expedition. Therefore the noble Venieri, whose active untired spirit, neither
the years winter, nor his own, could be numbe, was excited, not deterred, by
his departure, so far from being ^etrograde in his course of victory that he
determined to go a step farther: and knowing that the terror of the late
ouer-throw had much shaken and made a breach in the Turkish courage, he thought
good to enter it ere time or supplies should repair it. Being in this
deliberation, Philippo Bragadino Prouidator of the Gulphe arrived with six
Galleasses and ten Galleys, and after consultation, strengthing his own fleet
with this addition, and both with his own reputation, he suddenly dispatched
Quirini, associated with many brave captains to Venieri his fame delivered up
to them; but finding it untenable they razed it.

Venieri taking this as an earnest of some farther success propounded an
expedition for Saint Maura, which many of the council of war oppugned,
alleging the strength of the place, the unaptness of the time, and
disproportion of their own powers to both; yet he full of hope and courage,
resolving, wheresoever the impediment were, it should not be in himself,
proceeded thither, and having better viewed the impregnablenesse of the place,
he thought it a part of wisdom, next the not undertaking a dangerous attempt,
speedily to lay it down, and therefore returned to Corfou.

Colonna leaving D. John (on whom all supreme and exquisite honors were
heaped) at Naples, from thence with great magnificence passed toward Rome: by
the way, all men's ears and eyes taken up and reserved soly for this object.
Every tongue being a Preface to the voluminous praises dedicated to him
afterward at Rome. Venice held the enemy at the arms end but had he ever
closed with Italy, Rome would have been shrewdly griped. This Ague offeare
thus shaking her, imagine how welcome the Physician was that cured her. To have
secured her from mischief, had been meritorious, but to return it thither
whence it came, was an infinite obligation: Arriving therefore at Rome, long
after himself, Colonna accompanied with the chief Senators and attended by
the most eminent captives, in number 160. suited rather to his fortune then
their own, very ritchly, yet in their countenances retayning a maiestick
sorrow. Thus passing through many triumphant Arches erected in his honor, he
came to the Popes place, at whose feet prostrating both himself and his
dignities, and delivering up the sons of Ali, late likely to have arrived in
a less Doria: whom he said behaved himself more like a Pirate, or newtral,
then one of the Christian party.

The end of the tenth Book of the sixth Decade.
The Contents of the first Book of the
THE farther expectation of al men after the famous victory of Lepanto. The
Venetians preparation against the spring. The Emperor being solicited by the
Pope and Venetians to enter into the league refuses it. The French King, Kings
of Portugal and Poland do the Pius the fifth, with the creation of Pope
Gregory the thirteenth. Don John his allegations for his stay at Messina.
Souranza coming thither solicits Don John to depart and unite himself to the
Venetian fleet. The cause of Don John's delay. Souranza brings supplies to
Corfou. Iealozies betwixt the French and Spaniards by reason of the troubles of
Flanders, with the French Kings complaint against the Duke of Alua. The
Spaniards Vluzzali General of the Turkish fleet puts to sea. The Senats
resolution perceiving the delays of the Spaniards: Don John certifieth
Marc-Antonio Colonna of his departure: The Christian fleet notwithstanding
leaves Corfou: Vluzzali determines to fight with the Christian fleet: The
Christians resolve to assail the Turks: The enemies alter their purpose and
refuse battle: The death of Sigismond King of Poland: The Venetian General
intending to give battle

The first Book of the seventh Decad of the History of Uenice.
THE victory of the confederate Princes over the Turks, who by their fortunate
success had till then made themselves terrible to all nations, had begot such
expectation and hope in most men, as they supposed a fit occasion was now
offered to revenge all former wrongs: and that the Ottoman Empire forsaken of
her late felicity would be overthrown by the power of Christian Princes;
persuading themselves that the only report of the arrival of the Christian
fleet was sufficient to open a way to gallant enterprises Small hope in the
revolt of the Turks subjects.
them, nor to hope on the peoples revolt who commonly are wont to produce
clean contrary effects, and especially in the Ottoman Empire, where subjects
are poor and needy, wanting commanders, arms and means, so that their
commotions The Uene^ians preparations against the spring.


The Venetians upon these considerations were careful to make new warlike
preparations, to augment the number of their Galleys, to refresh their army
with new soldiers, and generally to provide whatsoever should be necessary,
that they might speedily send their fleet into the Leuant against the Turks.

But Christian Princes (shutting their eyes in regard of their own particular
affections) did not apprehend the fit occasion offered to abate the power of so
great and terrible an enemy, and in a manner envying one an other they
discoursed Pedro Fassardo to him, still persisting in his usual delays, and
irresolutnesse, alleged new but greater difficulties, and wanting will, was
very glad to entertain any excuse to free himself from it: therefore he
demanded to have ready money given him The Emperors excuses to free himself
from entering into the league.
instead of those foot forces which they offered, and sufficient caution for
it in some free towns of Germany, adding farther that he would be assured of
the tribute, and already made choice of a messenger to carry it to
Constantinople. Charl^s the French King on the other side, solicited by the
Pope, not to be wanting to all Christendom in such an expedition, answered
that he would first understand the Emperors resolution, and so soon as his
forces were ready, he would not fail speedily to send his aid to join with
the land-troupes of Germany, under the conduct of his brother the Duke of
Aniou, but that he neither could, nor ought, to suffer his sea-forces (far
inferior to those of Spain) to join with them.

At the same time the Cardinal Alexandrine having executed his commission in
Spain, was by the Popes commandment gone in Portugal, from whence Antonio
Tepulo having accomplished his Ambassadge into Spain, went thither likewise,
verily persuading himself that the news of the late victory would the easier
have induced that King to embrace the league, wherein a very honorable place
was reserved for him, the Confederates fortunate success inuiting him
thereunto, together with his own interest, that the unbridled greatness of
the Turks might be abated, whom (not without The King of Portugals answer to
the Cardinal, and Venetians.
draw any other promise from him, then this, That he would the next year send
four thousand footmen to the service of the league, and join some few of his
own vessels to the Confederates fleet, the which he could not then do,
because that certain French Protestants of Rochell, did ordinarily make
incursions upon his territories and sea coasts, whereby he was enforced
continually to entertain certain armed vessels, to resist them and the Moors
of Fesse, and of this by letters he certified the Senate.

Tepulo in the end, because his Embassage should not be fruitless, told him,
The King of Portugals promises.
to acquaint the Persians, sworn enemies to the Turks, with the union of the
Christian Princes, with their late victory against Selim, and with their
deseignes, and afterward by sending certain numbers of Portugal
Harguebuziers from the red sea, unto the confines of the Turkish Empire, to
keep them busied in sundry places, or at least to amaze and hold them in
suspense. The king promised so to do, adding thereunto that they should stop
their commerce from Ormus and Bazzana, and the transportation of metal through
the Persian seas, which abundantly was brought to them from China.

The King likewise gave means to the Cardinal Alexandrine, to convey certain
Breefes to the Persian King, Prester John, and some other Kings of Arabia
written unto them by the Pope, wherein he solicited them to take arms against
the Turks, the which letters took none effect, nor were ever answered.

The Pope likewise solicited the King of Poland, with whom at the same time the
Cardinal Commendon remained, who promised to draw that King into The Pope
soli^ the King of Poland.
the league, in regard of sundry accidents which happened, besides the victory,
the Turks meaning to be revenged on the Polakes, for that they had favored
the Valachian, to the prejudice of the Ottoman Empire, and for that purpose had
in hostile manner entered Prussia, Padolia, and Russia. But the King falling was
coming from Constantinople to their Court, to treat about that contention, all the Popes endeavor and authority could not make it sort to any good effect.

After this manner were matters handled in the Court of Christian Princes, who
seemed already to decline from their former hope, and knew, that for the
abating of the Turkish power the Sea-forces were not sufficient, but that a
mighty land-Army was needful: and that therefore it especially imported them
to have the Emperor to enter into the league, all men holding it for certain,
that Poland, Musco^y, and the other northern Provinces, apt to take Arms
against the Turks, would presently yield to the authority of the Empire: this
being considered by the enemies they used all means to preserve the Emperor
Maximilians friendship, thinking the danger, which threatened them, not to be
small, if all Germany

Therefore Mahomet Bascha had written to the Emperor, and had particularly
Bascha Mahomet soliciteth the Emperor.
acquainted him with the battle, making the overthrow far less then indeed
it was, and the power of the Ottoman Empire very great, requesting him not to
break the truce for other men's pleasures, but to preserve his inuiolate
freindship with Selim; which being once known, would continue for ever. But
that which did herein most trouble the Pope and Venetians and made them to
fear, The Pope and Venetians doubt.
was, their suspicion, that the Spaniards would not show themselves so ready to
pursue the course of the victory, as the importancy of the cause did require:
because that diverse of the Catholic Kings courtiers murmured against D. John
for Requ^sens who went to be Governor of Milan, they inferd therevppon, that
the Catholic King would not have D. John attempt ought without his advise and
Council.

Now the greatest let then found in pursuing this war of the Leuant, was, the
bad success of the affairs of Flanders, where they daily grew from bad to
Leonardo Contaren the Venetians Ambassador with D. John, did solicit this
union and shipping of the soldiers, all his pursuites were in vain. The
Venetians alone, not loosing time, spared neither cost nor labor, but sought
to make use of the victory, and with great speed trimd their Galleys, augmented
their number, made new leuies of soldiers to complete their army, that it might
speedily be ready to sail into the Leuant. And because that D. John and the
Spaniards had entertained some distaste of the General Venieri (as has been
already said) the Iacomo Poscarini their General who at that time was
Prouidator General in Dalmatia, who having notice that he was elected, and
receiving the Common wealths standerd from Lodouico Grimani who succeeded him
in Dalmatia, he departed from Zara on the first day of April with nine Galleys
and went to Cor^ou, where taking charge of the fleet, which at that time
consisted of 40. Galleys, he made a General review, and sent for great numbers
of footmen under diverse Captains from Brindisi, he stored the Galleys with
victuals, armor, munitions and all other necessaries: this being done, the
General Venieri with some Galleys retired into the Gulf, there to execute
some Noble enterprise, if occasion were offered. (...) Turks (...) of the
Christians before the battle.


This in effect is all that was done by the Christian Princes. The Turks after
the battaills loss, were by so much more aflicted, as inured to victory, they
could not entertain conceit of contrary success, and contemning the Christian
forces, they came rather to spoil then to fight: but this unexpected overthrow
made them more circumspect. whereupon Selim who then lay at Constantinople,
fearing ^least some innovation might happen at Constantinople, presently went
thither and showed himself to the people, dissembling as much as in him lay,
his discontent and fear. The Baschas nevertheless were very careful to
provide all necessaries for the army, so as it seemed they were in hope to
reform their former error, and to recover their lost reputation: they repaired
their old Galleys, built new, enrolled great numbers of Mariners, sent for
soldiers forth of the Provinces to come to Constantinople, so that using
industry and speed to the hurt and wonder of the Christians, Carassali
departing forth of the straight of Gallipolis with threescore armed vessels,
began to scour the Seaes, and to wast Vluzzali prepared a great fleet: for
they had determined being once united to pass on, and to invade the Isle of
Candy; or else face the Venetians Navy, frustrate their deseignes, and assure
the Seas belonging to the Ottoman Empire. These provisions and the Confederates
delays and irresolutions, had much imboldened the Turks, and although in the
beginning they had sundry times conferred with the Venetian Baily concerning
peace, and seemed to be very desirous of it, they nevertheless delayed the
certain resolution thereof till the arrival of the Bishop of Aix Ambassador
to the most Christian King, whom they knew at that time to be come from Venice
toward Constantinople upon important affairs, supposing that he brought The
(...) of peace beoken.
some particular commission with him concerning that business, and that by his
mediation together with his Kings authority, they might the easier establish
and conclude some honorable agreement: but the condition of matters being
afterward changed when they came to treat on particulars, they propounded very
unjust Articles, being desirous to make peace as though they had been
victorious not vanquished, menacing the Venetians with loss and destruction:
The Confederates nevertheless being no whit moved by these nor other geeat
mischeefs, went very slowly to work, as though the enemies had been wholly
defeated, that they had no more cause to fight, and as if at their own pleasure
they might have enjoyed the fruit of the Vlctory. All men did wonder at these
delays, and differently Rumors diu^lged by the Spaniard.
in secret but openly assist the Flemmings who determined to invade the
territories of the Catholic King; that to this end, they prepared fifty
ships of war at Rochell, which should be commanded by Phillippo Strozzi:
and elsewhere other stirrs and rumors of war were reported to be current in the
Realm of Navarre.

These so important and dangerous reports, held the Spaniards in suspense, and
would not suffer them to employ their sea*forces, in which their greatest hope
consisted) in foreign enterprises, fearing not to have them again at their
need, for the defense of their own territories Many alleged other reasons The
Spaniards fear least the Uenetians make peace with the Turks
that if the Venetians should suspect that the Conederates went about to
forsake them, it would enforce them to make use of the present time, and to
agree with the Turks: a matter which would greatly prejudice the Spaniards,
who resolving for to continue perpetual enemies unto the Turks would alone
be constrained to make head against the forces of so great a

After this manner did the Spaniards at the same time bear themselves, not
bewraying their inward intentions, but temporizing in conclusion did nothing.
In the mean time Pius Quintus dyed generally lamented, a man of great
Sanctimony (...) of Pius Quintus.
and zealous of the common good of Christendom, the only instrument of the
preservation and augmentation of the league.

These news flying to Venice, the Senate presently by letters solicited the
The Venetians solicit the Cardinals in the (...) of the (...).
College of Cardinals, not to suffer the league, which his late Holiness had
cherisht, to dye with him, knowing how mortal delay was to it, and how
prejudicial the dissolution, to the common good: the College resolved to
continue the preparation for war, and instantly committed the ma^naging of
the business unto the former Commissioners, who then presently (...) in hand
with it.

The Papacy was not long vacant, for the same day the Conclaue elected H^go
Boncompagno Cardinal of Saint Sixtus, a Bolognesse and doctor of the laws long
resident and very famous in the Court of Rome intituling himself Gregory 13.

His Coronation solemnized he confirmed the league in the former condition but
concerning the conuention of the fleetes there arose many delays and
difficulties: for D. John only seeking procrastination, grew scrupulous of his
departure, saying his commission extended no farther, but every day expected a
more ample, where with he hoped ere long to satisfy them: by this means was
the great preparation of the Venetian frustrate, and D. John perseuering in
these protractions, wrote to the General Foscarini that his only stay was for
the Duke of Sessa, who if he came not uery speedily, himself resolved without
him Collonna, because his expectation of the Florentine Galleys, made him delay
his joining with the fleet. The Senate had enjoined the General Foscarini not
to attempt any particular enterprise till the Spanish Galleys were arrived,
^erst he thereby should hinder the common cause of the league, The enterprise
upon Castelno ^o propounded to the Senate.


At the same time Sciara Martinenga of Bressia a man famous for his martial
experience, and Governor General of Albania propounded the enterprise upon
Castelnouo to the Senate, a matter greatly desired by the Venetians, not so
much for facillity of conquest, the town being small and badly inhabited, as

The Senate in some sort desirous to let the enemies feel the fury of their
Arms committed this attempt to Martinenga, who told them that he had already
sufficiently viewed the place, and that the execution thereof was easy. He
embarked himself and five thousand footmen at Chioggia, among whom were many
Frenchmen, gallant fellows and good soldiers, he directed his course toward
the Gulf of Catharra, carrying with him a commission from the Council of
Ten to the General Venieri to aid and asist him in that enterprise, whom
me^ting by ^he way near to Sisena they sailed together toward the mouth of
the The attempt upon Castelnouo in vain.
Gulf, where landing their soldiers and attempting to surprise the Town, the
alarm was so whot over the whole Country, as multitudes of Turks coming to
defend it, Martinenga and the General were enforced to quitt the enterprise
and to retreat, the one to Zara, and the other with his French forces to
Catharra,

After this manner did the Christians affairs languish, and were nothing
answerable to the reputation which the late victory had gotten them, their
fleets and soldiers remaining idle at Corfou and Messina, being spectators of
the enemies insulting braues at sea, their number and victuals daily
diminishing D. John still remaining at Messina and using his former delays,
did infinitely discontent the Foscaren, who sometimes determined of him self to
attempt somewhat upon the enemy, but at last making a virtue of necessity and
knowing his own forces alone to weak for any great enterprise, he was
enforced to spend the time in expectation of the confederates arrival. And yet
he did by all means avoid any occasion that might discontent the Spaniards,
or give them cause of any suspicion, that they might have no lawful cause to
be wanting to the common cause.

Foscarini being thus perplexed, thought it best to send the Prouidator Soranza
to Messina, who was newly come from Candy, hoping that by his wisdom and
discretion, Don John being put in mind of his former honor, might be speedily
Soranza is honorably enterteined by Don John at Messina.
induced to depart. Souranza departed from Corfou with twenty five Galleys,
having foul weather all the way: at last arriving at Messina, he was
honorably entertained by Marc-Antonio Colonna, excusing himself and imputing
it to the tempest, that he had not met him farther at sea: they both went to
Don John's His Remonstrance to D. John.
presence, who with all honorable courtesy welcomed him, seeming highly
contented with his coming: Soranza began to acquaint him with the cause of his
arrival, together with the state of matters, and incredible desire of all men
to see him at Corfou: he informed him of the great number of Galleys, soldiers,
abondance of victuals and munitions, where with two and twenty ships were
laden: that they only wanted the conuention of the fleets, which they all
desired in so important an action: in regard whereof he was sent to acquaint
him with the stare of the Venetians navy, and to wait upon him to Corfou. That
the Venetian Captains, Marc-Antonie Colonna, did in the Popes name second
Soranza, telling him how much his Holiness

Don John seemed not to distaste this motion, excusing his delay by sundry
impediments happened, promising ever after to use all possible speed, and to take
order for the present rigging of an hundred Galleys which should be manned with
The Spanish delays.
forty thousand footmen of several nations. But the effects were not
answerable to his words, for at that time there were but three score Galleys in
the haven of Messina: and of those which the Duke of Sessa was to bring from
Spain, there was no news at all: Besides, the old soldiers refused to go any
farther, unless they might receive certain months pay which was due unto
them for their former service. Yet they daily fed the Venetian Prouidator with
sundry hopes

In these delays did they waste time, and half June was spent without any
exploit upon the enemy, or any certain hope or resolution what to do: his
Holiness so licitations being therein of no more force then that of the
Venetians: for the Pope having often by letters, and lately by his express
messenger the Bishop of Odiscalca hastened Don John: he went about to satisfy
him with good words, and fair promises, so far, as the navy was blessed by his
Holiness Nuncio, processions The true cause of Don John's delay.
and prayers appointed to be made, and a day prefixed taken for their departure.

In the end, D. John knowing no more how to excuse his delay, being on every
side solicited to depart, the Marquis of Santa Cruz, arriving with the Galleys
of Naples, and Don Iuan de Cardona with those of Sicill, his own Admiral
Galley being likewise ready, was constrained to discover the truth of the
mattetr, which was, that he had received express commandment from Spain,
not ^o carry the fleet into the Leuant, by reason of the Kings doubt of the
Fren^h, which had restrained his commission and forces in a place from whence
he might easily depart (if need should be) to defend the territories of the
Spanish King.

Souranza understanding the true cause of D. John's delay, and perceiving his
own earnest soliciting to be in vain thought it fit before his departure, at
leastwise to try if for the honor of the league he would lend him part of his
navy, which being joined to the Venetians at Corfou, might preserve the glory
and reputation which it had formerly won: yet because he would not be seen
in it himself, Collonna to demand it, whereupon the Council being often
assembled, they at last resolved to lend him 22. Galleys and 5000. foot: but
because many of them were to be drawn from the Garrisons of Calabria; their
departure was yet longer delayed. G^lles Andrada Knight of Malta had command of
the Galleys as General to the King, and Vincento Tuttauila Count of Sarna
comman^ded D. John leadett the Venetians 22. Galleys.
the soldiers.

With these Galleys and those of the Church, 13. in number, eleven of the Duke
of Florence, and two of Michaele Bonello brother to Cardinal Alexandrine, the
Prouidator Souranza returned to Corfou, and by the way Marc-Antonio Collonna,
displayed the enseigne of the league, and held the place of General.

The Intention of the Spaniards published, it was every where reported that the
whole force of the league would not for that year make any expedition into the
Leuant: and yet the Spanish Ambassador at Rome had intelligence that
notwithstanding the affairs of Flanders a journey might be made into the east,
and therefore that his Kings Galleys should direct their course to Affrike, and
likewise to relieve Sicily- Muleassen King of Tunis his pursuit with D. John to
excite him to this enterprise, was caufe that al men believed this report: and
yet men's discourses were different for though the war of Flanders was not
new, the accidents were so, which enforced the Catholic King to have a care of
the preservation of Nassau having at the beginning of the year taken Mons in
Henault, and not long after the City of Valenciennes, his whole forces
consisting of foreign soldiers and for the most part French, this bred great
distrust and iealouzie betwixt the two mighty Kings of France and Spain, so as
the Duke of Alua, then Governor of the Low-Contries, did speedily aduertize
his master thereof, the like did he to the Pope and Venetians, amplifiing the
matter more then needed, wherewith Cardinal Granuell and the Spannish
Ambassador that were at Rome, wrote speedily to D John, willing him not to
depart from Messina, all Spain being in alarm, which did likewise put some
jealous distrust in the

Upon a rumor spread abroad that the Duke of Alua should publicly say, that
he accounted war to beee open betwixt Spain and France, the most Christian
King was moved thereat, and made many complaints by his Ambassadors not only
at Rome and Venice, but in Spain also, being partly grieved that his chief
officers did affirm so important a matter; the which as himself detested, he
supposed others would do the like: in part like-wise going about to justify
his own actions, from which it seemed that the Duke of Aluas suspicion

The Christian King affirmed, that those French which had followed the Count
Nassau at the taking of Valenciennes, were indeed his subjects, but all of them
of the Protestant faction, and by consequent disobedient rebels to the Crown
of France: that he had ever been greatly grieved for the troubles in
Flanders, as one that in his own kingdom had too much experience of subjects
rebellion, and whose part it was to root out, and not by such examples to
cherish the boldness of vass^ls against their Prince; being as desirous of
the wealth of Christendom as any other living, although his own particular
troubles would not at that time permit him to show it in effect: and seeing
with his own forces he could not assist them, his meaning was not to hinder
the good intent of others: that he had some armed vessels ready, not to assail
or offend any one, but only for the safety of his own seas infested by
Pirates: the number of his vessels being

These or such like discourses did the French Kings Ambassadors by their
masters The French King ^orhideth his subi^cts to go into Flan^ers.
commandment use in Spain, Rome, and Venice: and to give the greater credit
unto them, they were by Edict every where published, with a prohibition to all
French men, on grievous penalties, not to pass with their arms into Flanders:
and not satisfied here-with, his most Christian Majesty, seemed at the same
time to incline to the league, whereupon, the Cardinal Lorraine, by his
commandment, did often confer with the Venetian Ambassador, resident in his
Court concerning that business, whom he went about to persuade, that the
French King was wholly bent to procure the peace of Christendom, with a

All this notwithstanding, the Spaniards were no better satsfied then before,
saying, That the French did but this to coulor their practices, and to open
themselves a way to assail the Catholic Kings territories in sundry places:
That R^asont alleged by the Protestants to moou^ the French King to war.
they had certain notice, how that the King of Navarre, and the Admiral
Coligni, did openly urge the most Christian King to undertake that war, whom
he must needs please, in regard of his own particularinterest, the chief
Lords and Princes of his Court, mainteining that France would never be at
quiet, unless the King did resolve upon some foreign enterprise, wherein to
employ both Catholics and Protestants, and among others, that of Flanders
seemed the easiest The Spaniards are jealous of the French men's actions.
without all question the Queen of England would willingly have a share, in
regard of her distaste of the Catholic King: That the marshall ot Montmorency
went into England to none other end, then to conclude the League with the
English, and that both of them together being freed from other troubles, might
the easlier enuade the Netherlands: Besides, that the French Kings league with
the Turk, made them to suspect, that he went about to procure the Turks Army
to enuade the Catholic King, as they had done in former times, especially
seeing it was reported that the Turk had given the city of Tunis to the
French

The Pope being greatly moved at these delays, as well for the common
interest of Christendom, as his own reputation, which he accounted to be
much blemished, in that he at his first coming to the Papacy having freely
confirmed the league, the Navy should now become idle and unprofitable, or else
be employed to any other end, which the King of Spain could not do, it being
set forth at the Clergies cost, by permission and authority of the Sea
Apostolic, only against the Turks. This caused his Holiness to send new
messengers to D. John, to command him speedily to depart and join with the
Venetians fleet: and on the other, he councelled the Venetians to dispatch
speedy Ambassadors to the

His Holiness sent his Nuncios for that purpose, Antonio Maria Saluiati Bishop
of Saint Peposito the French King, and Nicolo Ormaneti Bishop of Padua to the
King of Spain. The Emperor likewise used means to atone these two Kings,
being moved thereunto by sundry particular respects of his own: but the
Venetians more then any showed themselves earnest and ready in this business
as well in regard of their own interest, as for that they were loath to give
the Pope any cause to suspect, that by not stirring in so important a deseigne,
their minds were turned to peace, and thereby to distaste him of the league.

They then according to his commandment chose two Ambassadors, namely,
Ambassadors (...) from Venice, to France and Spain.
Giouan Micaele for France, and Antonio Tepulo for Spain, who made have to
those Michaele being come into France did briefly acquaint the King with the
Senates desire to see a firm and assured peace established betwixt Christian
Princes, that being afterward united, they might turn their forces upon the
common enemy: he told him that the Venetians were much discontented with the
rebellions of Flanders, and with the iealozies which thereupon arose betwixt
his Majesty and the Catholic King, which if they should have lasted, could not
but have procured great hurt to Christendom: but by how much the matter was
great and important of it self, by so much the less could the Senate be
induced The Venetian Ambassadors discourse to the French Kin^
to believe it, being well acquainted with his Majesty's discreet love and
affection to the common good: And because the perswations of those, who are
enemies to

The King gave a willing ear to this discourse, saying that the Senate was in
no The French Kings answer to the Venetian Ambassador.
sort deceived of his exceeding love toward their Commonweal, and least of
all, in beleening that he was desirous of the wealth and advancement of
Christendom: that the troubles of Flanders had never pleased him, that he had
used all possible means, to keep his subjects from being adherents or
supporters of those Rebels: but that the condition of those times, and the
present wretched estate of his Kingdom would not permit him to tame the
insolency of some that loved innovation; who were not to be wondered at, if
after they had raised troubles in his own Realm, went about to do the like
in his neighbors Dominions: that it had never been by his consent; for that
would have hurt the Catholic King, and done no good to France, but on the
contrary, would have procured new The mother Queen of France written to the
Pope.
the affairs of the Kingdom, desirous to preserve peace, would needs with her
own hand write to his Holiness to assure him of her willingness in all
things to follow his advise and council* and that if her son the King had
raised forces, it was not don with an intent to hurt any but only to serve and
defend himself from

The Catholic King on the other side, before Tepulo his arrival at his Court,
resolved to write to Don John, That all other respects laid aside, he should
make have with his Galleys to join with the Venetians and with them to sail
into the Leuant, being hereunto moved by intelligence of the French Kings
affection toward him, or else, for that he did not much fear his power,
having recovered Valenciennes, or because he would not so much honor the
French, as to have it said, that for fear of them he had given over so
important an enterprise, as that The Catholic King^s resolution before the
Ambassadors ariual.
against the Turks, or (that which is most like to be true) because, as became
a wise and virtuous Prince, he would in no sort omit that whereunto he was
obliged by the league: but whatsoever it were that caused this resolution it is
certain that it proceeded from his own proper motion, and that he did write
so to Don John, before he acquainted his council therewith, fearing least they
should propound some difficulties, which might have diuerted him from it as in
former times.

Antonio Tepulo in the mean time being come into Spain and aduertized of
Tepulo his suit to the King of Spain.
the Kings determination, did not speak any thing of the French iealozies or
uniting of the Nauies, but only entreated the King to permit D. John, in regard
the time of year was almost past for sea-affaires to winter in the Leuant,
moved thereunto by sundry reasons which much imported the Venetian
Commonwealth. The King nevertheless alleging many reasons to the contrary,
would not grant his request, either of his own proper motion as being
unwilling to hazard too much on fortune, or else being so advised by such as
were not greatly affected to the league. Now, whilst the confederate fleet
went slowly forward, the great and mighty Turkish navy scoured the sea. For
Vluzzali being made General Carazzati, had with great speed rig'd and manned an
hundred others, with all which, departing in great pomp and magnificence from
Constantinople, he had already past the Straight of Gallipolis and came forward
intending to wast and spoil the Isle of Candy, and other places belonging to
the Venetians, according as he should have intelligence of the progression of
the Christian fleet: certain news being at that time brought to Venice of the
stay and delays of the Spanish fleet, which did much discontent them, and made
them wonder that the Spaniards, who at first had been so desirous of the
league, should after such a fortunate and unhoped for success (fearing some
uncertain and remote dangers) wholly deprive themselves of the present and
assured The senates resolution when they perceived the Spanish delays:
write to General. Foscaren that without any longer expectation of the
conuention of the fleets, so soon as the Prouidator Souranza should return to
Corfou, he should put to sea, to encourage their subjects, and assure their
own territories, and proceeding warily, to embrace such occasions as God should
offer him, for the honor and profit of the Commonwealth. Foscarin receiving
this commandment and tired with his idle abode there, so soon as the
Prouidator Souranza and Colonna came to Corfou, propounded the departure of the
navy into the Leuant, whereunto all Colonna his ^duice.
men consenting, they began to consult about their journey. But Antonio Colonna
John with the residue of the fleet would shortly meet them: yet though the
Popes subject, and servant to the King of Spain, he was resolved to spend his
life in that enterprise, it importing the Venetians particular service, whom
he knew were more interessed in that war then any other.

General Foscarani replied, that the State was well acquainted with the Pope
General Foscarini his answer to Colonna.
and Catholic Kings love, and they of the States affection and inclination to
the league, as the proceeding herein testified: but Colonnas virtue, zeal to
the common good of Christendom, and particular affection to the Venetian
Commonwealth, was not only manifested to themselves, but to the whole world, by
so many noble services in advancement of the league: yet himself could not
choose but lament, that so many fair occasions presented, they had not
embraced them as they deserved. But since it was fruitless to call back time
past, and they not able to remove the impediments detayning D. John in Sicely,
the only remedy hereof is to redeem delays past with present expedition, and
to set forward against the enemy inferior to themselves both in number and
valor. And seeing it has pleased the divine providence (conducting human
actions in bywayes to us unknown) that the confederate fleeet should be thus
disioyned, let us see if we can set upon them divided, which they would shun
if we were united: If we can enforce them to retire, it will be much to us to
have in this sort Colonna approved the opinion of Foscarin, confirming
Colonna's opinion concerning the setting forward toward the ^mies. G^l.
Andrada his opinion.
it by many arguments: not-with-standing he advised him to conduct the Galies
and Galeots altogether, the Ponents then serving them fitly for their course.

Gil Andrada stood newtrall betwixt these opinions, only saying they ought to
proceed circumspectly, and not without necessity or advantage hazard so
important an attempt, adding that further inteligence was requisite, by which
they were to direct their proceeding but highly commended the council of
Colonna for carrying all their force united and well furnished, not exposing
themselves

Thus resolving to leave Corfou, the fleet consisted of six score and six
Galies, six Galliasses and twenty ships, and in every Galley an hundred and
twenty Soldiers; it was divided into three battles; in the main lay the
three Generals with five and forty Galleys: the rest were equaly distributed
into two wings, the Prouidator Souranza conducting the right, and Canalis the
left, reserving place in the vantguard for the Galleys of Candy hourly
expected, each squadron towed two Galeasses, and part of the shipping, so
disposed, that when need required they might aff^ont the Galleis, yet not to
fight without those vessels. The Don John certifies the Venetians that be
will shortly be with them.
fleet being ready to depart, a Fregate from Palermo came to the Venetian
General, Placido Ragazz^n, certifiyng him that a Galley from Spain was come
to D. John at Messina, bringing commandatory letters from the King that he
should without any more delay join his whole fleet with that of the Venetians:
This was afterward confirmed by D. John's own letters, written to MarcAntony
Collonna. Although these news were pleasing to every man, yet did they The
fleet departs notwithstanding.
not hinder the resolved departure of the fleet: For upon the 28. of July the
three Generals left the Gamonisses, where they had tarried for the Prouidator
Canalis who was gonne to Ottranto with sixteen Galleys, to take in three
thousand foot, under the command of Collonell Horatio Aquanina, son to the
Duke of Atria: which at their arrival were distributed among the fleet. Before
their departure Giouan Mocenig^ with his Galley was despatch't to Candy to
acquaint them with the coming of the Christian fleet, and to make discovery of
the enemies, of whom no news could be heard. The fleet then under sail, the
Prouidator Quirini returning from Candy with 30. Galleis, came to it at the
entrance of the Channel Viscarda, from whence with a fair wind (though the
towing of the greater vessels did hinder the way) they held on their course to
Zant, where having no news of the enemies, and enforced to spend two days
there, in raking in fresh water, they sent forth 3 other Galleys to discover.
vidz. those of Angelo (...), Philipo Leone, Venetians, and that of Romegas a

Vluzzali at that time an^ored under the Castle of Maluesia with 200* Galleys,
and many other lesser Vessels, having intelligence that the Christian fleet
^ought him, which dis-vnited he thought durst not have departed from Corfou,
and therefore had sent certain Galleys toward the Promontory of Mal^a, whom
he (...) called back, and stayed in this place to receive more certain news
of the enemies.

And being truly aduertized that it made toward him, and that already it was
come as far as Cerigo in number of small vessels it was inferior to his, but
superior in greater, he determined to put to sea and encounter them. And
calling unto him the chief Commanders of his fleet, he encouraged them to
battle, telling them how fair an occasion was offered to purchase immortal
glory and credit with their great Lord by breaking the Christian small fleet,
which was so audacious to come and seek them, thinking thereby to avoid the
spoil of Candy: that his meaning was to leave the haven, to order his navy,
and to fight with the daring Christians: this said, he confirmed his words with
show of performance, Suriana and Romegas returned to the fleet at Cerigo,
bringing certain news that Vluzzali lay in the haven of Maluesia with 200,
sail: Heerevppon, the three Generals considering that it would redound to
their dishonor not to fight with the enemies being so near, determined with
one consent to sail to the Cape of Malea, and to offer the enemies battle.
According to this resolution the whole fleet went to the head of Cerigo called
Dragoniera, (...) the nearest place to the Cape of Malea, from whence they
might view the enemies countenance, and entertain any offered occasion. There
early in a morning on the seventh of August the watch discovered The
Christians descry the Tur kish fleet.
the Turkish navy, sailing toward the Channel of Cerigo, which being but
ten miles from our fleet they verily supposed that it was coming directly to
us ward to fight: the three Generals commanded the enseignes to be displayed,
trompets sounded and disposed all things in readiness for the fight: the fleet
being thus arranged left the Dragonieras, and made toward the Cape of Malea,
to be in a more commodious place to offer battle to the enemies, who at first
made show to accept it, but when the Turks came nearer they alterd their course
and went to the Har^es Island which is a rock near to the Promontory from
whence they came I know not whether they did it for fear or else because
Vluzzali had no, commission nor intent to fight, but only made a show thereof
to Vluzzali like a skillful Seaman made that retreat to get a westerly wind,
which at that time of year is wont to blow in those quarters, that he might
afterward by the advantage thereof inuest our navy: which being prevented by
the Christian Captains, and a southeast wind arrising Vluzzali was enforced to
alter his determination, and being come to the point of the Isse of Cerigo
toward the west, he thwarted the Channel which lies betwixt the Hearts Island,
and that of Cerigo, and shut in that large space of Sea of ten miles, and
turning his prowes, toward the Christian fleet, he divided his navy into three
great squadrons, consisting of equal number of vessels, and there attended
them. Both fleets were resolved, the one not to fight The number of the
Christian and (...) (...).
well armed Galleys, the rest were lesser vessels (...) among them. That of
the Christians exceeded not the number of 127. light Galleys, but they had six
Galeasses, and 22. ships of war excellently armed. Both these fleets for
many respects Vluzzali meaning nothing less then to fight, yet fearing by open
flight to dishonor his great master, and (...) (...) increase the Christian
glory* like a polli^que captain, made show of that (...) (...), for seeming
(...) to (...) he did (...) the (...) and still keeping the prowes of his
Galleys upon them by little and little he gave back; and by the approach of
night, and by a warlike stratagem which he used Ul^zzalies policy.
(for he sent one Galley bearing a lantern a contrary way, to make them
think that he followed with the rest) he escaped at his pleasure. About the
same The death of Sigismond King of Poland.
time Sigismond King of Poland dyed without issue male, whereupon Charles the
French King desirous to procure that Crown for his brother the Duke of Anio^,
sent his Ambassadors thither. But to return to the enemies. They were descried
the next morning sailing toward the arm of Meina. Our men having kept at Sea
al night sailed to Cerigo, enforced to take in fresh water, and to refresh
their tired rowers, where continuing all that day and a pecce of the next,
spies The Christians fl^et des^rieth that of the Turks.
brought word that they had discovered the enemies not far from thence,
whervppon they speedily embarked their soldiers and went to meet them: but
their labor being fruitless, they lay all night at Sea in order of battle,
and the next day which was the tenth of August by day break they discried them
at the Cape of Matapan, lying with the poopes of their Galleys to land-ward.
Vluzzali perceiving that the Christians had discovered him, shot off certain
warning pieces to call his men aboard, and ordered all things for battle. The
Christians approaching the Turks came forth of the Haven with their fleet
divided into three battles, whereof the lest wing was a great way extended to
the Sea, the right Vluzzali himself, coming on fair and softly, sometime
purposely stearing his course to draw the Christian Gall^es from the Galeasses
and ships. The Turk fearing nothing more then the Galeasses, commanded both
his wings to fetch a great compass about, the one toward the right, and the
other toward the left, aloof from the Galeasses and ships, which being
prevented by the Christians, by turning their wings likewise in manner of a
Crescent, their main battle fronted that of the Turks. The wings of the
Turks fleet being thus divided from their battle seemed very aduantageous
for the Christians: which General Foscarini (ready to lay hold on any fair
occasion) perceiving, requested Collonna and Andrada, that not tarrying for the
ships and Galeasses, they would with him upon the sudden assail the
Collonna and Andrada said, that it was dangerous so to do, for fear of
drawing the enemies three battles upon them at once, being not able to resist
them without the help of the Galeasses and ships, and that therefore without
those vessels they would by no means hazard the fortune of the battle. The
wings of the Christians in turning about to confront those of the enemy, were
somewhat disordred, which the Turks perceiving went about with certain
Souranza noting, went against them with four Galleys, and made a fierce fight,
in the midst whereof, fearing to be enclosed with forty of their Galleys making
toward him, he was presently relieved by 20. Galleys and two of the Galeasses,
whose murdering shot made such hauock among them, as in a small time 18. of
their Galleys were rent and torn, The Turks retire from the Christian fleet.
whereat the Turks being amazed returned as though they had rather fled then
retreated. One of Souranzaes Galleys was shot through in this fight, himself
returning again to his Squadron. The Christians had determined not to join
battle without their Galeasses and tall ships, which Vluzzali well
understood, as well by the fugitives and his own spies, as by their manner of
sailing. And he Vluzzali perceiving that he had done enough for that time, both
for the allaying of the Christian heat, and encouragement of his own soldiers,
in seemly order as one not afraid, sailed with his whole fleet together to
Corona. And the Christians retired to Cerigo.

The end of the first Book of the seventh Decade.
The Contents of the second Book of the seventh Decad.
VLVZZALI determines to assaill Don John ere he should come to the fleet.
Difficulties made by those of the Christian Navy to meet with Don John to free
him from that encounter. Don John with the Spanish forces comes to Corfou. The
resolution of the Confederate Captains. Vluzzali resolves not to fight with
the Confederats. Those of the league resolve to assaill the town and Castle of
Modon. The Confederate Vluzzali after the retreat of the Christian fleet
returns to Constantinople. Don John returns to Naples, and Collonna goes
into Spain. The Venetians complain to te Pope of the mean proceeding of the
Spanish fleet. The State of Dalmatia during the war. A fort builded by the
Turks at Catharr a is raized by the Venetians. Conference of peace with the
Venetian Bailey at Constantinople. Peace or war is propounded in the council
of Ten. The Princes Mocenigo was concerning that subject. The causes moving
the Senate to condescend to peace. Peace is made betwixt the Venetians and
Turks. And lastly the Articles thereof.



of the History of Uenice.
WHILST the Christian fleet remained at Cerigo, it had intelligence Vluzzali
determines to assai^ls D. John.
that Vluzzali had taken one of our F^egats which had acquainted him how that
Don John was coming to the fleet, whereupon he prepared to meet him.
Colonna and Gly Andrada being moved at these news, propounded, that all other
matters being laid aside, they were to depart thence with ^ proposition made
(...) (...) wit^ and secur^ D. John.
the greatest number of Galleys to meet with Don John and free him from that
danger. This council was rejected by the Venetian Captains, saying, that to
eschew an uncertain danger, they exposed the fleet, and all the force of the
confederats to a manifest peril; seeing that the great vessels could not
sail from Cerigo by reason of a contrary wind, nor yet remain there in
safety, the Galleys being reduced to a smaler number with sundry other
alegations, which were not allowed by Colonna nor Andrada: for they thought that
they might safely carry away an hundred Galleys with them to Zant, and at one
time John's arrival, and yet send the great vessels to Candy which was an
easy matter to be done, they saying that this was the best adui^e for the
easy conuention of the confederate fleet.

Whilst this important business was unresolved, a Fregat opportunely arrived
from Don John aduertizing them that he could not depart from Messina till the
first of August. Though this news did clear the former difficulties among the
Captains, yet did it not wipe out discontent from their minds: for they
like-wise understood, that Don John had no meaning when he should arrive to go
Difficultie^ arising about the meeting of Don John.
far with his Galleys, but by letters expressly commanded the Admirall^, to
come and meet him; which by reason of contrary winds especially, they being to
carry John's command: but it being an impossibillity to carry the great vessels
with them, they determined first to leave them safely in Candy, and from thence
to direct their course to Zant. Neuer-the-lesse this resolution was not
afterward affected, by reason of new intelligence of the enemies fleet, which
was descried not far from the Cape of Malea, which verily persuaded them that
they were going to intercept D. John, whereupon the Christian fleet dislodged,
and went to the arm of Meina from whence Vluzzali John but receiving a new
commandment to come to him to Cephalonia, they were enforced to leave the
great vessels there, though in great danger to be taken by the enemies, who
upon the least inckling thereof would not have failed to return to seize on
them: which being likely to happen, some of the chief of the Spanish fleet
were of opinion, that seeing it was an hard matter Quirini sale conducts the
great vessels to the fleet.
to secure them, to send back to have them burnt; But General Foscarin
detesting this council, sent the Prouidator Quirini thither with five and
twenty Gailies to saf^-conduct them to the fleet.

From Cephalonia they went to Corfou, whither Don John was come on the ninth of
August with fifty five Galleys, thirty three ships, and fifteen thousand
footmen, who though at first he could hardly dissemble his discontent, for
that they had not waited his coming, but had like to have enforced him for
want of sufficient forces to have gone alone into the leuant, and to remain
idle at Corfou, The number of the confederate fleet.
there, were more then sufficient, for, united, they amounted to the number of
a hundred ninty four Galleys, eight Galleasses, besides forty five ships, to
weet thirty Spanish and fifteen Venetians. All these Vessels before their
departure from the Gomenisses were drawn into form of battle: The three
Generals The order of the Confederates fleet.
lay in the maine with 62. Galleys; the Marquis Santa Cruz conducted the right
wing, and the Prouidator Souranza the left, and in each wing were fifty two
Galleys: Petro Iustiniano General of Malta commanded the vantgard with six
Galeasses, Iuan de Cardona and Nicolo Donato led the rereward with twenty two
Galleys: Don Rodrigo de Mendoca, and Adriano Bragadino had charge of the
ships, determining neuer-the-lesse to carry them to Zant, and there to

These news did greatly rejoice the whole fleet: thinking that a fit occasion
was offered to overthrow the enemies, presuming that the Turks having
inteligence of the conuention of the Confederate fleet, much superior to theirs
in John's Counselors did afterward make use of these reasons to impair the
credit of their former intelligence, confirmed by many evident signs: where
upon by giving too great authority to those The Confederates error.
men, their departure was delaied, to the great prejudice of the enterprise,
and yet every man consest, that the only hope of happiness consisted in the
speedy execution thereof, not giving the enemies any time to fly or unite
themselves because a sudden and unlooked for assault would more terrify and
disorder them.

The Captains then presently determined to set forward, and sailing on their
so long delaied, and the fleet went so slowly for ward, as when by day break
it should have been at Sapienza it was (...) come to Prodaua, where being
discried by those of the Castle of Nauarin, the Turks that were their had time
to The enemies (...) to Modon.
retire in safety to Modon, passing along in the view of our Navy, which
seeing them come forth, and doubting that Vluzzali would offer them battle,
ordered all their squadrons, and after some small stay, our vant-gard set
forward, and coming near to the enemies, discharged their ordnance upon them,
to draw them to fight: but the Turks having noe such intent, and finding no
advantage, retired under the protection of the Castle of Modon. After the
enemies retreat there arose Ul^zzali in^ not to fight.
was flanqued with great store of ordnance, where upon the General knowing
that the enemy could not be enforced to fight, determined to retire to Sapienza
and to enter the Haven, the two wings being gone before. Vluzzali perceiving the
Confederates retreat, came forth with fifty Galleis to assail our Vantgard
which lag'd behind; but so soon as Don John espied him, giving signal to the
fight he (...) his prowes toward the enemies: Vluzzali who came not forth to
fight, perceauing our battles ranged, on a sudden returned from whence he
came doing it very adui^edly, as well because night approached, as by reason of
a

The next morrow the sea being calm, the Confederate fleet went to the Gulf
of Coron to take in water at the mouth of the river Pamisus, some four miles
from Coron, and to conuoy those that went for water (it being in the enemies
country,) they landed certain foote-men, conducted by Francisco Andriana camp
Master, to intercept whom, and for the guard of Coron Vluzzali had sent
thither a thousand five hundred Ianizars, and two hundred horse, with whom they
often (...), among whom the valor and prowess of Charles of Lorraine Charles
of Lorraine Duke of Mayen in the (...) fleet.
Duke of Mayenne, did show it self, who at that time accompanied with diverse

Our men having warred returned to the Galleys, and before their departure
bestowed certain cannon shot upon the forte of Coron, and sailing near to the
Isle of Cuprare passed along in the enemies view, divided into three
battaillons one after another, because the place was very narrow, and came
again to the South-East side of Sapienza, coming to an anko^ right over
against Modon. But all men perceiving that to tarry long in that place, hoping
to draw the enemies forth to fight, was but lost time, and very dangerous, the
Venetian General made a proposition to land ten thousand foot, to seize on
the hill at the point of the Channel, from whence it was most likely to annoy
the enemy Vluzzali; who would not vnman his Galleys for fear of greater
danger, the enemy being so near him.

The Spaniards rejected this proposition, saying, that they ought not to weaken
the fleet by vnshipping such multitudes, espetially the enemy bing so near,
whereupon Foscare^ perceiving all his propositions to be crossed, and considering
that ere long the fleet would be dissolved without any notable exploit,
resolved, that in a matter of so great consequence, where hope of good success
was greater then the danger, to hazard the entering of the Channel of Modon,
and thereto assail the enemies: this being by him like-wise propounded, he
offered to expose himself shot, seated on an high place far from thence: our
men lying there, the enemies fleet was as it were beseeged beneath Modon, so as
it could not return to Constantinople, but endured much scarcity, and was in
danger of shipwreck, and that which was worse, it could not come forth but our
men might at their pleasure (...) of the Turkish fleet.
fight with it.

The Turks in the mean time sent diverse Harquebusiers that knew the ways,
who coming up by the mountains near to Nauarin, attempted to anoy and hinder
our men from taking in water. Heerevppon we landed five thousand foot under
the command of Paul Iordano Vrsino, who repulsing the enemies secured the
Country, whereby matters were brought to such a pass, as there was Giouan
Moceniga was presently sent unto Zant to fetch them to

In the mean time Ioseffo Bonello the Florentine made an engine, by joining
four Galleys together, on which were planted ten Cannons, fortified with
Parapets, wherewith to approach and batter the Castle of Modon, and at the same
time to secure the passage of the other Galleys, which being by this engine
defended A vain and unprofitable engine
from the enemies ordnance, might enter the Channel and come to the assault.
But so soon as it was finished, they perceived many defaults in it, which made
it unserviceable: for first, they could not guide it on the water, next,
thewaight of the burden and ordnance was likely to sink it, neither could
they make it ankorable by reason of the Seas great depth: but the greatest
difficulty

That which most tormented the Venetians, and frustrated their hope, was a
rumor spread through the fleet that the Spaniards victuals would not long hold
out, who said, that in regard thereof, it behooued them to provide for their
departure and being desirous to leave some token of victory behind them, which
might encourage

The Castle of Nauarin in old time called Pila, is seated on a mountain top,
The situation of the Castle of Nauarine.
which extending toward the South-east, makes the Haven like to a semicircle,
and is stronger by situation, then art: This, the Turks carefully guarded, for
the commodiousnesse of the haven, lying in the very heart of Morea. There are
two ways leading to the Castle, that on the left hand, is not far from the
Sea, the other behind it toward the firm land, lies by a lake not far from
thence, and is very narrow and hidden.

The Prince of Parma had charge of this enterprise, who landing two thousand
Spanish and Italian foot and ten pieces of battery, took the open, and plain
way to cut off supplies from the enemies: but he either neglected or knew not
the other narrow secret way: Iuan di (...), and Morett^ the Calabrois went
afterward to make good the passage: but they were on a sudden assailed by
great number of enemies, and with great difficulty came off.

By this means above two thousand Turks came to relieve the Castle, who
being masters of that narrow passage, did at their pleasures, not only put
in The Turks coming to relieve the castle do much anoy the Christians.
what supplies they thought good, but had leisure to seize on certain high
places, commanding the ways, from whence with their small shot they still
annoyed our men, busied in planting the Ordnance, lying open also at the same
time to the Castles shot, so that in three days they could hardly plant two
Canons, and the danger more and more increased, the soldiers wanting rampires
to defend themselves; and the enemies numbers still augmented, with whom to
their own great Don John and his faction daily amplifying, said, That of
necessity they were to depart.

And yet it seemed strange and incredible to most men, that the Spanish Navy
coming lately from Sicily with so many ships, which is the Magazin or Granary
of Italy, should in so short time want bread: or if it were true, that scarcity
might easily have been supplied, by sending to Tarento for certain vessels
laden with Biscuit, which the Spaniards themselves reported they had left there.

The Venetian General, that he might cut of all occasion of the Spaniards
departure, offered Don John part of his own Store, earnestly entreating him to
accept his offer, telling him that the rest of his Navy might be easily
supplied by those vessels before mentioned. It is not certainly known why the
Spaniard refused this courtesy, who stopped their ears against all reasonable
persuasions which might delay their departure: which they only intending,
discamped from before Nauarin, leaving a safe and open way for Vluzzali to
conduct his fleet to Constantinople, and the Honor to be accounted a
skillfull and valiant Captain. The Confederats discamp^ from before Nauarin.
Yet Don John did what he could to cause General Foscarin and the Venetians to
consent and be well pleased with his departure, assuring him of his earnest
desire Don John's excuses.
fleet into the West: and that though he now wanted opportunity, he hoped the
next year to recompense that, which necessity had enforced him to loose.

The Venetian General perceiving his resolution, consented thereunto, because
he would not give an occasion to the enemies to think that the league was
broken, as also for that he knew himself alone too weak to attempt any great
matter. Yet, when our men thought least of it, they were more likely then
Vluzzali with three score of his Gallyes, came forth of the channel of Modon,
to rescue those that were in fight, and to secure others which he had sent to
scour the seas. So soon as Don John saw Vluzzali, he commanded the
Prouidator Souranza, to meet him with a certain number of Galleys, to hinder
his coming on any farther, and the Marquis of Santa Cruz, Canalis with their
Squadrons, to charge the enemies with five and twenty Galleys, who discrying
our fleet, left the ship, and betook themselves to flight.

When Vluzzali saw the Prouidator coming toward him he made a stand, but at
last turning his prowes, without any farther delay, he retired under the Castle
of Modon, being still pursued by our Galleys, who being come near to the
town, bestowed diverse Cannon bullets on it.

The Galleys, which fought with the ship, being light and able to make way,
escaped with ease, one excepted, commanded by the Sanzach of Mitelene, nephew
to the famous Barbarossa, who fighting longer then any of the rest, and his
slaves in hope of liberty rowing slowly, was taken by the Marquis of Sancta
Crux: but night approaching, they gave over farther pursuit.

Then D. John sounded the retreat and commanded every one to return into

Vluzzali after the Confederates departure, freed from all hindrances in his
journey, did without any order put to Sea and came unto the Cape of Mal^a,
Tluzzali returns to Constantinople.
where by reason of a contrary northern wind he was enforced to continue
certain days: but in the end having a fair Gale, he sailed to Constantinople
with an hundred Galleys, where he was with all honor entertained, the Turks
openly term ing themselves Conquerors, for that they had defended Morea and
their other territories, dared (as they said) the Christians oftentimes to
battle, and lastly driven them forth of their dominions, secured the Sea, and
made it nauigable.

The Confederates in the mean time arrived at Corfou the twentieth day of
October, who though their fleet were augmented with thirteen Galleys, and The
Cousede rate fleet coms to Corfou.
certain ships laden with wheat brought by the Duke of Sessa and John Andrew
Doria, did nevertheless continue their former difficulties, and delays: for
diverse enterprises were daily propounded in the Council, without any resolution
at al, and among others that of Saint Maura, whereunto D. John* seemed to
incline: but the Duke of Sessa by his authority dashed it, saying that the time
of year was The Spaniards desirous to return into the west.
unfit to beseege towns, or to be at Sea with fleets in an enemies Country.
The Spaniards in this manner rejected all enterprises, determining to return
into the west after that the Confederates Fleetes had been united for the
space of fifty days.

D. John first went to Messina and there lest part of his Galleys he carried
the rest to Naples where he dismissed his Italian footmen, and sent the
Spaniards and Almaines Don John goes to Naples.
to Garrison. Collonna by the Kings commandment went into Spain; to yield an
account to his Majesty of mataers past, and with him to consult on the next
years war, where he so wisely and nobly behaved himself as he got much (...)
to pain.
honor and reputation. The Galleys of the Pope, King of Spain, and Venetians,
remained idle at Corfou, lying rigged all winter, that they might be ready at
the spring to set forward against the enemies.

This was the success of the year 1572. nothing answerable to the great hope
which all men had conceived of abating the pride and insolency of the Ottoman
Empire, whereupon so soon as the Confederates were gone home the inhabitants
of Morea who had made insurrections in the Christians behalf, and expected

The Venetians made great complaints to the Pope of the Spaniards delays, The
Venetians complain to the Pope.
and slow resolutions, but especially of their unseasonable departure from
before Nauarin: they were made by a sollemne Ambassade; sent, according to
their custom, to offer their obedience to his Holiness in the States name.
The Pope in their behalf presently sent Giouan Claudio Gonzaga his
Chamberlain to D. John, to persuade him to tarry there where he was and to
expect a Commission from Spain to return to winter in the Leuant, the Pope
hoping easily to obtain so much of the King of Spain, seeing that the
troubles of Flanders were brought to some good pass: whereupon his Holiness
did expressly send the Lord of Lansan into Spain, whose labor was fruitless,
for the Catholic King, John, not-with-standing the Popes entreaties, well
acquainted with the Kings pleasure, pursued his journey into the West.

In the mean time General Venieri, old and sickely, by reason of his former
Venieri his ho^ noroble entertainment and welcome at Uenice.
travails, obtaining leave of the Senate, returned to Venice, with same and
glory great numbers of Senators going to meet him with the Bucentauro as far
as Saint Anthonies Church, which is the very farthest part of the City, where
he was honorably entertained and welcomed according unto his merit.

During the enterprises in the Leuant, Dalmatia was not altogether freed from
war: for though there was no form of an army there, yet the Turkish
Cauallery, (...)
of the neighbor Governments, wasted and spoiled the Country doing much hurt to
the Venetians subjects, whereupon the Stradiots and foot troops of the
Garrisons did often sally to stop their incursions: yet the Turks and
Venetians were of one opinion, that to make any great war in Dalmatia would
not be to much purpose, the Turks fearing if they should send any great Army
into that Province, they might give the Emperor occasion of suspicion, and
cause him to embrace the Confederates party, and to make war in Hungary.

The Venetians of the other side bending all their deseignes on the Leuant,
thought that the success of the affairs of Dalmatia and Albania depended
wholly on the war, knowing very well they could do little good there, by
reason of the strong Garrisons which the enemy ordinarily kept in those
Contries: as also for that they having, by the industry of Lodouico Grimani,
and Iulio Pompeio, won the town of Macarsca of some importance, by reason of
the trade of Merchants, and fortefied it, had been within a while after
enforced to abandon the same, being to weak to defend it against such huge
numbers of enemies. The like success had the conquest of the fort of Clissa.

Nevertheless the Turks omitted no opportunity to anoy the Venetians: and The
Turks build a fort against Catarin.
the mouth of the Channel, but the Venetians did still hinder their work,
till the arrival of a Turkish Sanzach with great forces, who finished it
within three miles of Castel-nouo. The Senate aduertized thereof, and moved
with the danger, threatening the City of Catarra, wrote to General Foscarini
that he should send forces to raze that fort. He, though it were in the midst
of winter, did nevertheless send the Prouidator Souranza thither with two and
twenty Galleys and Paulo Vrsino, Pompeo Collonna, Moretta the Calabrois and
other famous Captains with 4000. foot, with whom Nicholo Suriana Captain of
the Gulf joined by the way with four Galleys. All these vessels arriving at
Ianissa, they landed the soldiers; part of them went with Pompeo Colonna to
seize on a hill not far off, to stop the passage of those which should come
from Castelnouo to relieve the Fort, and the rest went with Nicholo Gambara, to
a certain place near at hand, whither some companies of soldiers of the
Garrison of Catarra were to come, with other forces assembled by Zacharia
Salmone Prouidator of the City: After this Souranza entering the Channel with
18. of his best Galleys, his Squadron going foremost, passed along beyond the
fort, from whence though they made many shot upon the fleet, yet did they no
great hurt to it, which went and lay in a safe and commodious place to batter
it by land and Sea.

It was 150 paces square every way, without any flankers, but so built, as The
Uenetians take the sort.
their battery, and within a while the soldiers went to the assault with
ladders, which the enemies for a time defended, but being at last enforced to
quit the place, the Venetians took it.

There were found in it diverse small pieces of ordnance and 18. great pieces,
which the Prouidator presently sent to Venice, and by a mine overthrew the fort
They ruin it by a mine.
to the foundations, which being speedily done, and leaving a sufficient
Garrison

The Venetians, not meaning wholly to depend on fortune, did speedily place
strong Garrisons in the Castles and forts of the Island, and sent many
foot-companies thither, in the mean time earnestly soliciting the Pope to
augment the force of the league, and that it would please him to assist them
with certain sums of money toward their great expense, putting him in mind
how that his Predecessors, had in former times upon less occasion given leave
to sell Churchpossessions. His Holiness not altogether granting their demands,
did permit 100000. Ducats belonging unto the tenthes of the Clergy under their
Dominions.

At the same time diverse Conferences had been held at Constantinople
concerning Motion of Peace at Constantinople with the Vene tian Baily.
Venetian Baily there: the Vizier Bascha seemed then, more then ever, desirous
of it, whose authority and reputation had been much augmented since the
battle; whereupon contrary to the opinion of others, he dissuaded the great
Lord from war. He thought it then a fit time to motion it, whilst Selim
danted with the unlooked for loss of the battle seemed to incline to peace:
and that the Venetians likewise upon some advantage might wish for it.

This inclination of Mahomet once known, the people, who by reason of the
discomodities of war did greatly desire it, bruted it abroad over the City,
that Selim, induced him to permit it for to be motioned unto the Baily Mahomet
thereupon, began freely to confer with him, making use therein of the help
of Ori^bey the chief Dragoman, and Rabi Solomon a Jewish Physician, who being
familiar in the house of the Vizier Bascha, were often employed in affairs of
great importance.

The Bailey having advertised the Senate hereof, it seemed not greatly to like
The Senate at first makes no great account of peace.
of the motion, desiring rather to continue war; provoked thereunto on hope
of better success, making account that their late victory would give greater
reputation to the Confederate forces: Yet when they considered how many notable
opportunities they had lost, and spent much time unprofitably, they were
willing to change their opinions, and wi^h new resolution to lend an ear to
these

In this Council the Senators were at first of various opinions. For many of
Peace is propounded in the Council of Ten.
them were possessed with their former hot inclination to war, by reason of
the promises of Christian Princes, who doubting this treaty, did then more then
ever, promise to assist the league: Whereupon Lorenzo de Priuli sent Ambassador
into Spain instead of Leonardo Donato, Secretary Perez, and Doctor Velasco,
who at that time managed the most important affairs of that Court, visited him
The Spaniards conference with the Venetian Ambassador.
more then ordinary, making such impression in the new Ambassador, as
themselves Don John on the other side had promised to join with the Venetians,
with the only force of Italy, not tarrying for that of Spain. The Emperor
likewise, The Emperor seeks to hinder peace.
who by no offers could till then be diuerted from his resolution, suspecting
only that the Venetians had an intent to make peace with the Turk, told the
Venetian Ambassador resident in his Court, that he would join with the league.
These new offers caused the Venetians to proceed slowly in the treaty of peace
already Mocenigo, ever inclining more to peace then to the league, assembling
on a time the Council of Ten, spoke to them in this manner. Prince Mocenigo
his oration to the council of Ten.


When at first we determined to take arms for our own defense, and with a
generous courage embraced war against Selim, I do not think it was done with
intent to continue it long, but only to make proof of fortune, to manifest
the valor of our own Commonwealth, the strength of Christian Princes, and to
purchase to our own State and all Christendom greater safety against the
power of that insolent common enemy. It is certain that war is ordained for
peace, and that the end of our dangerous travails is quiet and safety. I now
suppose that experience of matters happened at that time, may more then
sufficiently instruct us

Our Galleys have been a long time idle at Corfou, expecting the Confederate
supplies: and then when we hoped most, that all difficulties being taken away,
our forces would join, and set forwards against the enemy, we were enforced to
leave our Islands as their prey, and to call home our fleet, with greater
blemish to our reputation, and expense of lost time, then the uniting of our
forces would have profited us: and lastly, when fortune has offered us many
unhoped for fair occasions, to ouer-throw our enemies, we have been
constrained to omit them, being forsaken by our friends, who unseasonably
dislodged from the Haven of Nauarin, with no honorable, but a very preiudicious
resolution. But what need

Shall we still then continue in the same error, and ground the conservation
of the State, and the whole fortune of our affairs, on uncertain foundations,
and hopes which have so often deceived us? Questionless, it was a generous
resolution, not to grant the insolent demands of Selim, constantly to maintain
the cause of Christendom, in no sort to degenerate from our Ancestors, who
have ever bravely pursued those enterprises, by which they hoped to purchase
greatness and glory to their Commonwealth* but now, when we have
courageously taken arms, and with fortunate success won the battle,
hoping

If we consider the quality of our forces and State, we shall easily
perceive, that there is nothing more hurtful or ill beseeming it, then to draw
the war out in length. Because that our affairs do still impair, the
leagues forces depending on sundry councels, and many times on contrary
respects, and although Since we cannot protect our State by war, why should
we not by peace; we know that the Bascha Mahomet, always inclining to amity,
has used their late overthrows as inducements to draw his master to
entertain milder conditions. If we now reject his offer, he may perhaps reject
us hereafter. Who could have immagined that the Turks out of the wracks and
ashes of their last Fleet, could so suddenly have raised another, and with it
not only secure themselves, but invade us? what cleerer demonstration can we
have of their Potency, or more insallible prediction of the wars event? if
after overthrow they could do all this, what might we expect after victory? I
would entreat those which stand for war

These infirmities the enemy discovering, he will grow more insolent, and be
so far from offering that he will not accept any conditions of peace. It is
policy therefore, my noble Lords, since we have not reaped the fruit of
victory, to provide that we undergo not the calamities of overthrow, that the
expense of so

Let us then embrace this means of our safety; God in whose protection this
State has ever been, has used this scourge of war to discipline, not wound
us, and will at his leisure open some unexpected way of farther happiness.

The Princes speech together with his authority was of great force: whereupon
The Senates resolution to peace.
the Senate sent presently a new commission to the Baily to revive the treaty
Causes moving the Senate to embrace peace.
did news from Flanders, where by reason of new rebellions, and aid, which the
Germans were ready to send them, all places were in uproar, in regard whereof
the Spaniards had turned all their deseignes thither: moreover, the Senate at
the same time had intelligence that a Chiaus from Constantinople arrived at the
Emperors Court, whom, (though it was afterward known that his coming was
Concerning Moldauia) they suspected came to crave passage for the Turkish army
which was said to be coming into Frioul. The Bishop of Aix Ambassador for the
French King at Constantinople.


These aduertizements did cool their heat who were yet willing to continue
the league, so as with general consent every one inclined to the treaty of
peace: The Bishop of Aix, Ambassador for the French King, was presently
accquainted with this determination, he was lately returned from Constantinople
to Venice, where he received a new Commission from his King, to return to the
great Lords Port, and in his name to further this treaty, whereunto his
Master had often advised the Venetians to hearken.

The Bailey having intelligence of the Senates determination, was commanded so
soon as the French Ambassador should arrive at Constantinople, to confer
with him concerning the treaty of peace, and as occasion should be offered, to
make use of his Kings mediation and authority. The Turk in the mean time
having notice, that the Bishop was to return to Constantinople, presently
suspected that he brought new conditions of peace more aduantagious for them,
whereupon, their former treaties with the Baily were by little and little
neglected, Selim, telling him that all things were ready; that it was neither
profitable nor honorable at that time, to speak of any accord; whereby the
state of the treaty grew every day from bad to worse, the Turks propounding
very unreasonable conditions, thereby manifesting how careless they were of
peace: Therefore they The Turks deal roughly with the Venetian Bailey.
committed the Bailey to straighter keeping, muring up the windows of his house,
placing strong guards about it, handling him very roughly, thinking thereby to
Orimber and Solomon, therefore he renewed his treaty with the Bailey, and after
Peace concluded betwixt the Turks and Venetians.
sundry propositions and answers from both sides, peace at last was concluded
about mid March, whereby confirming all articles contained in the old
Commission, saving that the castle of Siponto, which the Venetians yet held,
should be surrendered to the Turks.

As for other towns of Albania and Sclauonia with their confines and
territories possessed before the war, should remain unto those, who then held
them: that all merchants goods should be restored on both sides; and that the
Venetians beside should be bound for three years space, to send an 100000.
Ducats Articles of peace.
made most account of. Peace in this sort being concluded and signed by Selim,
the Bailey dispatched his son Francesco to Venice, who arrived there on the
fifteenth of April, where it was presently published.

The end of the second Book of the seventh Decade.
The Contents of the third Book of the
POpe Gregory is displeased for that the Venetians made peace with the Turk.
The King of Spain is highly pleased therewith: The Pope being satisfied by an
Ambassador sent Henry Duke of Aniou is chosen King of Poland, and goes thither:
Don John's voyage into Affrike where he takes Tunis. The death of Selim the
Turkish Emperor. The death of Charles the ninth French King. The King of
Polands secret departure toward France. Great triumphs made at Venice at the
reception of Henry King of France and Poland. Amurath the Turkish Emperor
enuades the Empires territories: Amurath confirms peace with the Venetians. A
great plague at Venice, with the Prince and Senates vow to appease Gods wrath:
Great charity of Cardinal Borromeo. The laws of Venice are reformed, and a
new order taken for the government of matters. The Pope sends a golden Rose to
the Venetian Duke: The Venetians decree concerning the Citizens particular
expenses. The Venetians solicited by the Persians against the Turk will not
agree to it. Contention betwixt the Venetians and knights of Malta. The death
of Pope Gregory the thirteenth, and creation of Sixtus the fifth: A Duchess
is

The third Book of the seventh Decad of the History of Uenice.
PEACE being published, men did differently censure thereof, measuring it by
their own particular affection: Many, had regard to their own interest, and
others, perseuering in their former hope, that war would have procured much
good to Christendom, did tax the Venetians for making peace: Sundry opinions
concerning the Venetians peace.
but grauer and more judicious spirits, measured future things by

The Catholic King, knowing by experience how much it imports Princes The
King of Spain i^ not discontented with the Venetians.
to desire the preservation of their own States, did with great judgment

Many discoursing why the Spaniards did so modestly carry themselves therein,
said, that in accusing the Venetians, they feared to urge them to justify
their own cause, and to tax the actions of some of the confederates the
precedent

Now the Pope continuing his displeasure, the Venetians did not show themselves
The Venetians send an express Ambassador to the Pope.
stubborn, but determined to send an express Ambassador to Rome, honorably
and reverently to appease and dispose him to receive their iustifications.
Nicolo de Ponte was chosen, a man of great years and authority, and at that
time Procurator of Saint Mark. He being arrived at Rome and having audience,
acquainted his Holiness with the just occasions which had The Ambassadors
excuses to the Pope.
moved the Signory to accept the Turks offered peace: He told him that all
their seacoasts were in very great danger by reason of the enemies mighty
preparations, the Venetians friends and Confederates delaying their aid, that
the burden and expense of that war had for three years space been very
grievous to them and their subjects, who were able to undergo it no longer:
That the Venetians so long as hope of happy success did comfort them in their
miseries, had contributed more then they were tied toward the expense of
war, but all fair occasions being omitted, they saw no reason to continue it
any longer: And seeing that the Commonwealth perceived by many experiences,
that it could not preserve it self by any better means then peace, his
Holiness ought not to take it in bad part, if fitting it self to time, it
sought means to temporize with so potent an enemy, thereby to employ the
remainder of her forces in some more prosperous action for the advancement of
Christendom, and service of Paul the third, perceiving that they had in vain
taken arms against Soliman, did himself advise the Venetians to peace, the
league being then as now. That the Senate for diverse reasons did not impart
this their deseigne to any of the confederates, proceeding therein by the rule
of State, and by the same which the Catholic King, a very wise Prince, had
used: who at that time when he detained his fleet did not acquaint the
Venetians with the cause.

These reasons did somewhat satisfy the Pope, who began more mildly to treat
with the Venetian Ambassadors. The Senate in the mean time had speedily
dispatched Francesco Barbaro to Constantinople, to carry news of their consent
Andrea Badoario, appointed to go thither as Ambassador, should be ready to
depart to Selim for the sollemn confirmation of the Articles, and with the
usual presents.

Barbaro made great have as befitted the importancy of the business, and in
14. days arrived at Constantinople which was at the beginning of May: his
arrival was very grateful, because that the Turks having daily intelligence
of the warlike preparations made at Messina, began to suspect that the
Venetians had cunningly made this treaty to delay their warlike provisions,
that they might with more ease surprise them unawares, and that which confirmed
them in this opinion was, because they had no notice of the coming of a
Venetian Ambassador. Mahomet with sundry difficulties having till then deferred
it to take away all occasions that might frustrate peace.

At last toward mid June, the Bashas Vluzzali and Piali went to sea with an
hundred The Turkish fleet depa^teth from Constantinople.
and fifty Galleys, thirty Foists, and ten Mahonnes, and sailed to Negropont,
where they made some abode, expecting the issue of the treaty of peace: and
Piali having intelligence from the Sanzhac of Chersega that the Ambassador and
the new Baily were arrived in Dalmatia and on their way toward Constantinople,
did with the whole fleet sail to Modon, and hearing that peace was established

The Venetians being aduertized that the Turkish fleet was abroad, and that
they intended not to observe the peace, and what themselves had done was
interpreted as a color to deceive, were possessed with the same iealozies as
the Turks; whereupon notwithstanding the Ambassador was already in Dalmatia,
the event of his Embassage was held very doubtful; and a decree being made
that General Foscar^ni leaving six Galleys at Corfou should bring the rest of
the fleet to Zara, and vnrig it, they nevertheless deferred the execution
thereof, and sent him word to disarme only ten of the worst, and to
re-enforce the rest, which charge, sent word to the General, that he should
vnrigge his Galleys, and return home to Venice. By this time the Ambassador
Badoario arrived at Constantinople, where in few words he told Selim,, That by
how much the Prince and Venetian The Ambassadors speech to Selim.
Senate had been grieved with the breach of friendship betwixt the State and
the O^toman family; by so much more was their joy then complete, because all
controversies ended, they were now reunited as before, their subjects enjoying
peace, quiet and free traffic: hoping that peace and friendship now renewed,
would be of long continuance, which the Venetians for their parts would be very
careful to observe, entreating Selim to do the like for his part, as became a
virtuous and just Prince.

Selim made no other answer, but briefly seemed to allow that which the
Ambassador had spoken, and ratified and confirmed the Articles before concluded
with the Baylie. In this sort, after that war had continued four years,
peace was established with the Turk.

The same year 1573. in March, Henry Duke of Aniou, brother to Charles the An.
1573.
ninth French King, was elected King of Poland, that Kingdom being void by
the death of Sigismund Augustus the last of the noble family of the Ia^elons,
who had worn that crown for the space of two hundred years; and because
succession Henry Duke of Aniou chosen king of Poland.
has no place in that Realm, being an elective Kingdom, after Sigismunds
Henry notice thereof, whilst Ambassadors were making ready, to receive and
conduct him into Poland.

Italy being now freed from the dreadful Turkish war was like to have
ba^ched Troubles in the Duchy of Vrbin.
an other in her own bowels, for the Duke of Vrbin going about to lay some new
impositions upon his subjects, they denied to pay any thing but that which they
had granted to Duke Francesco Maria when he entered into the State, and
thereupon took arms, protesting nevertheless that they did it not against
their Prince, but only to defend their ancient privileges: The Duke on the
other John of Austria being at the same time in Sicily with a gallant Don John
goes into Afric.
Navy, and understanding that the Venetians had made peace with the Turks, did
by King Philips permission pass over with his forces into Afric, to ^eate
the son of Muleassem in the Kingdom of Tunis, who for his intelligence with
Christians had been expulsed by the Turks, and had honorable entertainment

Being come into Afric he landed his soldiers and in order of battle
marched to assault the City of Tunis, where no resistance being made the
Christians without any slaughter entered and sacked it: then Don John causing a
fort to be built nere to the City, placed Gabriele Serbellone the Milanois in
it with three hundred Italians, and himself with the fleet returned into
Sicily.

About the beginning of the year 1574. the Venetians having intelligence that
Selim armed at Constantinople, fearing that he would not observe peace,
suspected that he meant to enterprise upon Candy, whereupon they leauied 12000.
footmen to guard it, and rigged their fleet, making Iacomo Souranza their
Selim turning his deseignes upon Affrike to be revenged on Don John, ratified
the peace, and took from them all suspicion of being invaded by him, sent
Sinan Basha with a mighty army into Affrike to recover Tunis and raze Goletta,
the which in one month he did. Selim perceiving all things to succeed according
to his desire, intended to break his word and oath with the Venetians, and to
invade the (...) of Candy; but whilst he made his preparations, death
overthrew his unjust and proud deseignes, God so providing for the quiet and
safety of Christendom: Amurath his eldest son succeeded him in the Empire.

In the mean time Henry of Aniou entering Poland, did upon the confines in The
death of Selim Emperor of Turks.
great power and magnificence meet with the chief of the Kingdom, who
conducted him to Cracouia, where with royal solemnity he was crowned: and
whilst he busied himself with enquiring of their manner of government,
beginning by Charles, and to advise him to return into France with all
possible speed, to receive the crown, and to remove those troubles wherewith
by his brothers death she was entangled.

The King accquainted the Polanders with these news, telling them that he was
of necessity to return into France to order the affairs of that Kingdom
which were much embroiled. But the Lords which were then with him at Cracouia,
answered that his departure could not be treated of but in the General
Council of the whole Realm, who would send him so well accompanied, as he The
King of Poland returns secretly into France.
Polanders did not proceed with such celerity as his affairs required, and
that they were unwilling to let him go, resolved in secret manner to depart,
and in disguise by night leaping on horseback, himself, with three more,
went from Cracouia, and with great speed hasted toward the confines of the
Empire.

His departure was not long concealed, for the Earl of Tericenia the Kings
Chamberlain, with other Lords, coming to his chamber and finding him not
there, did presently take horse, pursuing the same way that he had taken,
meaning to stay him and bring him back, but the King made such speed as they

The King in the mean time pursuing his journey came to Vienna where the The
entertainment given to the French King at Vienna in Austii^.
Emperors sons met him, and within a while after, the Emperor himself, who
very magnificently entertained him.

From thence he sent word to the Venetians that he determined to come and see
their City. Archduke Charles accompanied him through his Country; upon the
Venetians confines, he met with a gallant troop of Noblemen who came to wait
upon him with eight hundred soldiers; the next day four of the chiefest The
Dukes of Ferrara and Neuers come with King Henry to Venice.
upon him, and entering into a Gondola, prepared for him, together with the
Dukes of Ferrara and Neuers, attended by infinite numbers of Gondolas, he came
to Murana, where the next day he was visited by the Prince and Senate with
fourteen Galleys, then being conducted to Lia, he went into the Bucentauro,
and with him the Prince and Senate, from thence with great magnificence The
French Kings magnificent reception at Uenice.
ritchly attired, with infinite numbers of Gondolas who rowed before and on
every side of the Bucentaure, which was gently towed to Venice, where the King
remaining certain days the Signory showed him all pleasures and delights that
could be imagined: and at his departure, the Prince and Senate accompanied him
three miles from the city, where taking leave of each other, the King embraced
the Prince, giving him great thanks for his royal entertainment, which he
promised never to forget, and in so saying gave him a diamond of great value
entreating him to wear it for his sake.

After his departure, whilst with his friends the Prince celebrated the day of
his election, ^ire by negligence had like to have consumed the dukes palace,
who was enforced to withdraw himself to the house of Giouan de Leg, knight,
and Procurator of Saint Mark: this fire besides the present great hurt it did
was by some

The same year died Cosmo de Medicis the first great Duke of Tuscany, a Prince
The death of Cosmo de Medicis first great Duke of Tuscany.
of rare and excellent judgment: Francesco his eldest son succeeded him.
There arose likewise great troubles in Genoa, betwixt the ancient and modern
nobillity, which continued the remainder of that year, and most part of next
1575. till that the Pope, Emperor, and King of Spain, whom they had made
vmpiers of their Troubles in Genoa appeased.
controversies, made them friends.

So soon as Amurath had possessed himself of his fathers Empire, following the
president of his Ancestors, he murdered all his brethren: and to let the An.
1575.
world see that he was a soldier, commanded Vluzzali to prepare a mighty
fleet: This did greatly trouble all Christian Princes, especially the
Venetians, who fortified all their seacoasts against the fury of this
barbarous enemy: but they were soon freed from this fear, by a great plague
and dearth at that time in Constantinople, The Venetians scare.
which enforced the new Emperor to abandon his warlike deseignes, and to seek
means to redress the misery and calamity of the chief city of his Empire
yet, to confirm men's opinions, conceived of his new enterprises, he commanded
(truce being not yet ratified with the Emperor) that his Garrisons near to
Hungary, should enter into the Empires territories to waste and burn the
country, where the Turks did not only execute many hostile and bloody actions,
but took diverse castles of the Empire, carrying away with them many Amurath,
The Turkish army in the Empires confines.
he willed him to write to his Master, that if he meant to have truce with him,
he should resolve to pay him tribute for all his dominions, otherwise, he
would in person come into his country to ruin him.

Amurath was incensed against Maximillian, because that the Polanders,
determyning to elect a new King by reason of King, Henry's departure, he was
one that laid claim to that crown: and because the house of Austria and the
Ottoman The cause why Amurath hated the Emperor.
family had of a long time hated each other, Amurath would by no means have
him for his neigbour, and therefore invaded him, to divert him from those
thoughts, sending word likewise at the same time to the Polanders, that if they
Stefano Battori Prince of Transiluania, threatening if they did not so, to waste
and spoil their country.

Whilst the Turk stood on these terms with the Emperor and Polanders,
Amurath confirms peace with the Uenetians.
he sent one of his Chiaus to Venice to promise and ratify both by word and
writing perpetual peace with them: This Embassage was entertained with
wonderful joy, they being thereby freed from great care and expense. At the
same time an exchange of prisoners, taken at the battle of Lepanto (which
were now at Rome) was granted, for Christian prisoners held by the Turk, among
whom was Serbolone, and many others of note.

Toward the latter end of this year, the pestilence which had much afflicted
the city of Trent, bewraied it self in Venice, where by reason of cold
weather, it brake not forth much that winter: but the spring following the
year 1576. it began to rage, and with the heat so increased, as there died
that year above three score and ten thousand persons: and no human remedy
appearing, the Prince and Senate had recourse to God, and meeting altogether in
Saint Marks Church, the Prince in all their names made a sollemne vow to God
to build a Church and dedicate it to the worlds Redeemer, beseeching him with
The Prince and Se^ates vow to God.
heart and mouth, that it might please him of his infinite mercy to hear them,
and to appease his wrath, by restoring them to their former health. This
gracious God heard their humble and devout prayers, and from that time the
sickness began to decrease, so that the City in March following was wholly
freed from that scourge: whereupon, a goodly Church was builded at La Zuecca,
and dedicated to the Redeemer, where now the Capuchins abide: whither the
Signory

The city of Venice was not alone infected, but diverse other towns of the
Marches of Treuiso and Lumbardy, but especially the city of Milan, where
Cardinal Great charity of a Prelat.
Borromeo, Archbishop of the place, a Prelate of holy life, spared neither his
means nor life for the relief of his flock, exposing himself without fear to
all dangers that were offered.

Things thus variably changing, Lodonico Mocenigo Duke of Venice deceassed, in
June, the year 1577. having governed eight years, he was honorably buried in
the Church of Saint John and Paul, under the great Gate, near to Loredana
Marcello his wife.

His funerals ended, all men were desirous to acknowledge the virtue and
deserts of Sebastiano Venieri, who when he was General had renouned the
Christian Commonwealth by so notable a victory; and though he had competitors,
did nevertheless merit to be preferred before them all: whereupon the forty
one being assembled (of which number himself was one) they without any
contradiction chose him Prince.

SEBASTIANO VENIERI the 86. Duke.



THIS election published, the people were very joyful of it. But that which
seemed most strange, and therewithal pleasing, was, that amongst such
multitude of all sorts of people as went to congratulate his new dignity, ten
Turks who were then in Venice, came and kissed his feet, saying aloude, This
is that invincible General, who by defeating our fleet and us, has justly
purchased to himself this deserved crown, unto whom we wish a long and happy
life. The Prince thanked them and with a liberal hand rewarded them.

Not long after, five correctors of the laws were created, who had authority
Giouan Donato, Iacomo Gussone, Francesco Venieri, Justinian Justinians, and
Lodouico Micaele, all Senators of great reputation. Then upon intelligence that
the Turk rigged certain Galleys at Narento to send into the Hadriattick Gulf
(contrary to the treaty of peace made with the Venetians) to defend his own
subjects trafficking on those seas, whom the Vscoques of Segna robbed, the
Venetians sent four well armed Galleys thither, who cleared and defended those
seas from their thefts and robberies, whereof the Turk having

The Senate perceiving that the prices of all things were excessive in Venice,
either by reason of the late sickness, or upon some other occasion; a decree
was Price set upon all wares.
made to reduce all wares to the old price appointed by the laws; and to see
it effected, five Senators were appointed, namely Marco Iustiniano, Lorenzo
Bernardo, Sebastiano Barbarico, Nicolo Quirini, and Lodouico Contareni.

Three Senators were afterward deputed to take order for the discharge and
payment of the States debts, occasioned by the last wars: the Senate was
desirous (it having been propounded by Giouan Francesco Priuli, a wise and
virtuous Senator) to pay every man his due, and to that end, they appointed the
said Francesco Priuli, Antonio Bragadini, and Iacomo Gussone.

At the same time, Haniball of Capua elected Archbishop of Ottranto came to
Venice as the Popes Nuncio, whose arrival was pleasing to the Senate, for the
memory of his dead uncle, who in former time had been Legate there, as also
because that by his coming the passage toward Romagnia was opened, which till
then had been shut up by reason of the late sickness, his presence likewise
brought content with it; for he presented the Prince with a rose of gold from
his Holiness, which is a gift which Popes are wont to bestow upon Princes
which are their greatest friends and favorites: Pope Alexander the third in the
year 1177. honored Prince Sebastian Ciani with the like gift, and the
ceremony The Pope sends a golden rose to the Venetian Prince.
of presenting it was magnificently performed in Saint Marks Church, fifteen
days after, upon the one and twentieth day of July, a public proclamation was
made, wherein the City was declared to be clear and sound from all infection:
At which publication the Prince and Senate went to visit the new Church built
in honor of our Savior at La Zuecca.

Not long after, Ormanetta Bishop of Padua being dead, the Pope bestowed that
rich Bishopric on Frederico Cornare the Bishop of Bergamo, and that of
Bergamo upon Ieronimo Ragazzone Bishop of Nouara: it did highly content the
Senate to see one of those Churches restored to the family of Cornares, who for
a long time had governed it, and the other to a house so well deserving of the
Commonwealth, Ragazzone was brother to Iacomo and Placido Ragazzoni, beloved
of the Signory for their good service done to the State.

This joy, the fate of Brescia did greatly lessen, where the plague daily
consumed multitudes: whereupon in July the Prince and Senate for three days
made sollemne precessions, praying unto God for their health. Brescia afflicted
with the plague.


The same year sundry prodigies were seen, a great Comet over all Europe, and
at Rome a globe of fire in the air like to a great tun which, arising over
Sundry prodigies seen in the air.
the gate del populo, vanished over Castle Angelo: besides a clear light was
seen in Romagnia at midnight, which notwithstanding the darkness shined so
bright as that men did as easily see to read as at noone day, these were
interpreted signs of future misery.

Not long after, news was brought to Venice of the death of D. John of Austria
Venieri oppressed with old age, and surprised with sickness (then when he
thought to celebrate the birth day of Princess Cecilia Contareni his wife, for
which Francesco Morosini his son in law a noble Gentleman prepared great
triumphs) departed this mortal life on the third of March, being generally
bewailed of the whole City having governed the Commonwealth eight months and
twenty days. The ceremonies which were wont to be made in the Church of Saint
John and Paul, were by reason of the great rain performed in Saint Marks, his
body was afterward buried in the Church of Maran. The Archduke of Austria
craved his picture of the Senate, together with his coat armor which he wore
upon the day of the battle of Lepanto, which the Senate willingly

The funeral ceremonies ended, and the Senators after the usual manner
proceeding to a new election, Nicolo de Ponte a very grave and noble Senator,
four score and eight years old, and Procurator of Saint Mark, being a
learned man which in his youth had read publicly at Venice, was chosen. In his
time the Commonwealth was peaceable, the Turk turning his force upon the
Persian.

NICOLO DE PONTE the 87. Duke.





THE same year the great Duke of Tuscany discovered a conspiracy against
himself and his brethren made by certain Florentine Gentlemen, who were
apprehended and publicly executed, and not long after I^ne of Austria his wife
died in childbed, a very virtuous Princess. The year following 1580. though
there were fierce wars both in the East, and Netherlands, men fearing that it
would likewise renew in France, the Venetians were quiet over their whole
dominions.

The second year of Prince Ponte his sovereignty, an accident happened at
Venice very pleasing to the Senate. Francesco de Medicis great Duke of Tuscany
a very potent Prince was desirous to marry for his second wife Bianca daughter
to Bartilmeo Capello a Venetian Gentleman, and to that end sent Mario Sforza to
Venice to acquaint the Senate and her father therewith. The Senate sent for
Barthelmeo and his son Vittorio whom they knighted, then adopted the great
Duchess Bianca daughter to the Venetian Signory, in the same manner as in
former time they had done Catherina Cornare Queen of Cyprus: the State then
and afterward showing great signs of joy, but chiefly upon the arrival of
Don John de Medicis the great Dukes brother, sent to Venice to conduct her to
Giouan Micaele and Antonio Tepulo were sent Ambassadors to the great Duke in
the Senates name to congratulate his marriage, and to be present at Florence at
the great Duchess coronation.

They likewise sent Marco Iustiniano Ambassador to Charles Philibert the new
Duke of Sauoy, to bewail with him the death of Emanuell his father, a great
friend to the Venetian State. And because Philip had obtained the crown of
Portugal by the death of the Cardinal King, the Senate appointed Vincento
Troni, and Ieronimo Lippomano both Knights and noble Senators, Ambassadors
Ambassadors s^nt to the King of Spain.
to his Majesty, to rejoice with him in the Senates name for his happy fortune.

Now because peace had in Venice begotten excess in the expense of private
Citizens which commonly carries sundry mischiefs along with it (for there
where frugality and parcimony has place, religion, virtue, and modesty do
flourish) a decree was made, that superfluous expense in garments, feasts and
women's lying in, should be moderated.

They abolished the use of all sorts of pearl, true or counterfeit, only
women Decrces against the Venetians superfluous expenses.
were permitted to wear a small carkanet of them about their necks: costly
skins, and furs were wholly forbidden to be worn, together with the use
of any gold or silver lace upon garments: Moreover, it was not lawful for any
Curtezan to wear any precious iem, jewels of gold or silver, or to use any
tapistry: A Decree against superfluous diet.
was made against superfluous diet, restrayning it within the bounds of
modesty: peacocks, partridge, feasant, and all dainty fish were bannished from
the tables of delicious Epicures, Iesters and Buffons from their houses. It was
likewise forbidden not to serve double mess of fish or flesh into any banquet,
and

All Governors of towns, and Judges of Provinces were likewise enjoined, not
to bestow any excessive cost in garments, household stuff or servants, because
that modesty and proportion in governors, is an assured bridle to hold back
subjects from doing evil. For, where every man is suffered to live after his
own pleasure without order of law, there of necessity must all mischief and
riot abound: for this cause the State enacted great and grievous penalties upon
the transgressors of these so holy and wholesome decrees: For it auailes not a
Commonwealth to have good laws, unless subjects do obey them, and
Magistrates see them severely executed.

Whilst the Senate were making these wholesome laws, the Persian perceiving
that he had to do with so potent an enemy as the Turk sought to weaken A
Persia^ Ambassador (...) to Veni^e.
him by busying him in more places then one, and to that end did the same
winter send an Ambassador to the Venetians, requiring that of them which they
had propounded unto him, for during the war against Ottoman, he entreated
them to enuade the Turk now that he was busied in Persia, promising so
straightly to enclose them as they should never escape from thence, thereby
hoping wholly to root out the tyrannous memory of the Ottomans who went about
to make themselves absolute monarkes of the whole world.

The Venetians dismissed this Ambassador with an ambiguous answer, as men that
had no intent to entangle themselves in a new war, without likelihood of
great advantage, and assured hope of victory. In this manner ended the

The year following 1581. Pope Gregory the thirteenth perceiving that because
Upon what occasion the Pope caused ten days to be taken from the year.
the course of the sun had not been rightly observed, the Equinoctial of
the spring had gotten ten days before the course of the sun, whereby the
feast of Easter (on which all other mouable feasts depend) was not celebrated
at the just time appointed in the primitive Church by the council of Nice,
which in congruity if it were not reformed, the holy days of winter would be
kept in summer, and those of summer in winter, he sent for the skilfullest
Astrologians of Europe to come to Rome, and commanded them after exact
calculating the course of the planets, to refer the Equinoctial of the
spring to the 21. Lodouicus Lilius a very famous Mathematician, and divulged
over all Christendom by his Holiness command.

The same year there arose some contention betwixt the Venetians and
Contention betwixt the Ven^tians and Knights of Malta.
knights of Malta, because that those knights scoured the seas to surprise the
Turks, whom sometimes they took in the Venetians seas, whereat Amurath being
incensed, sent them word that if they would not take order that his subjects
might safely pass through their seas, himself would send a mighty fleet to
secure them. The Venetians complained to the great Master of Malta, entreating
him not to permit his vessels any more to trouble the Turks on their seas: but
the Malteses making no account hereof, the Venetians took from them a ship of
war which they sent into Candy, and not long after took two Galleys from
them, which being brought to Corfou, all the Turkish slaves in them were set at
liberty, and the empty Galleys restored to the knights. The Venetians the
Gabriele Heme a Venetian Gentleman. A Uenotian Gentleman is ex^cuted to
satisfy the Turk.


This Heme in a Galley of his own had in the Archipelago fought with a Turkish
Galeot which was going from Argier to Constantinople with the vice-queene of
the same Kingdom, and a son and daughter of hers, which carried rit^h
presents to Amurath, all the Turks both men and women in it he put to the
sword setting all the Christian slaves at liberty.

Beside the execution of this gentleman, the Venetians, to appease the Turk,
were enforced to send home four hundred Turkish slaves in stead of so many
Christians which the said Heme had set at liberty, and to pay him in ready
money the sum of 800000. Ducats.

But to give this year a more pleasing farewell, the Prince of Mantua did with
great solemnity and magnificence marry one of the daughters of Francesco great
Duke of Tuscany: and Catherina Infanta of Spain was by King Philip her father

Not long after, Pope Gregory the thirteenth died in the four score and third
year of his age: his funerals ended in Saint Peter's Church, where he was
buried in a chapel which himself had built, the Cardinals entered into the
Conclaue, where after twelve days, they elected Cardinal Falix Perreti of
Montalto a Castle The creation of Pope Sixtus the fifth.
in the marches of Ancona, a Monk of Saint Francis order who took upon him
the name of Sixtus the fifth.

The same year on the fourth of June, Nicolo de Ponte the Venetian Prince,
died, being ninty four years of age, having governed seven years and odd
Mary's Church; his funerals ended, and the forty one proceeding to a new
election, Pascale Cigogna, Procurator of Saint Mark, was chosen Duke on the
eighteenth of August of the same year.

PASCALE CICOGNA the 88. Duke.



IN his time there happened a tragical act in Padua a town under the Venetian
Signory, into whose territories presently upon A Duchess i^ cruelly murdered
in Padu^.
the election of Pope Sixtus the fifth, Paulo Iordano Vrsino Duke of Brasciano
retired himself (jealous of the Pope who suspected that the Duke had put a
kinsman of his to death before his Papacy, having married his widow Victoria
Corembona a beautiful Lady) and there dyed, not without suspicion of being
poisoned, for which loss the Duchess being extremely grieved, retired with
two of her brethren to Padua, under the protection of the State of Venice,
till such time as she pleased to return home to her father at Eugubia.
Lodouico Vrsino kinsman to the deceased Duke, lay at that time in Padua, for
whose sake the Senate gave him employment in a journey into the Leuant: this
man, either of himself, or provoked by others, did on a night with diverse
armed men, go to the Duchess house, whom he cruelly murdered, together with
one of her brethren.

The report of this murder being carried to Venice, the Senate sent
Commissioners to punish the Author and accomplices of this homicide. Vrsino
having Lodouico at last perceiving The murderers are put to death.
longer resistance to be vain, yielded himself, who being imprisoned,
together with some of his accomplices, and found guilty of the Duchess murder,
himself was strangled in prison, and his adherents publicly executed.

The end of the third Book of the seventh Decade.
The Contents of the fourth Book of the
HEnry the third, French King, is slain by a Monk. Henry of Bourbon King of
Nauar is proclaimed King of France, Henry of Bourbon French King, he sends a
sollemne Embassage to Rome, where Pope Clement the eight refuses to give him
his blessing. All the Cities of France yield to Henry the fourth. The
Venetians send Ambassadors to him. Pope Clement blesses the French King. Peace
betwixt the French and Catholic Kings. The French King marries the Lady Mary
of Medicis Princess of Paul the fifth He complains to the Venetian
Ambassador against the Senates law, forbidding the Clergy to purchase lands,
or to build Churches without license. The Popes resolution upon the Venetians
refusal. He sends two Injunctions to them concerning that business, with the
Senates answer. Excommunication against the Venetians Ioyeuse to Rome. The Pope
after sundry difficulties condiscends to revoke his censures, and to give the
Cardinal Ioyeuse ample Commission to do it. The substance of the Articles
whereby the Censures were revoked. And lastly the reuocation of them by the
said Cardinal in Venice.

The fourth Book of the seventh Decad of the History of Uenice.
WHILST the Venetians, and generally all Italy enjoyed peace, France and the
Netherlands were afflicted with war: And Henry the third French King being
treacherously slain^ by a Monk, the chief of the Army as well Catholics as
Protestants, proclaimed Henry of Bourbon, King of France and Navarre, as first
Prince of the blood, and next heir to the Crown.

But to return to the Venetians unto whom our History does chiefly belong. The
year following 1590. there was a great dearth of Corn over all Italy, but
Sixtus the fifth dyed, having Pope Sixtus death, with the creation of Pope
Urban the 7.
held the Papacy five years, four months, and three days: Twenty days
after, Cardinal Giouan Baptista Castagna a Roman, was created Pope,
intitling himself Urban the seventh, putting all men in hope of an happy
government: but he enjoyed the Papacy only twelve days. After his death the
Sea was vacant above two months; in which interim, more then seven hundred
Bandetti spoiled Nicolo Creation of Pope Gregory the 14.
Sfondrato of Milan Pope, intitling himself Gregory the foureteenth.

Toward the latter end of this year, there was in Venice a Greek called Marto
Bragadino Mamagna, one that had been a Monk famous for opinion men had of
him, that he could transmute quicksilver into gold, the people were not alone
bewitched with this golden dream, but the Nobility, and some Princes of Italy,
The deceit of a Greek.
sought his friendship, hoping by his means to turn mountains into gold: but
this Impostor being no longer able to conceal his deceit, fled from Venice
into Bauaria, where the Duke discovering his cousenage, imprisoned and
condemned The Venetians are jealous of Turke^ and (...).
his request. The Venetians having carefully provided for the famine (as has
been said) were the year following 1591* much perplexed, having intelligence
that the Turk made great preparation for war. They sent forces into Candy
and to other places, confronting the enemy: but they were soon freed from The
building of the bridge of Rialto.
that fear, being advertised that the Turk did it at the request of the
French King, to infest the Spaniard, they did afterward fortify Bressia and
Bergamo, suspecting the great forces which were in the state of Milan: they did
likewise build that goodly bridge over the great Canall of the City, called
the bridge of Rialto.

In the mean time Pope Gregory the fourteenth dyed, the tenth month and The
death of Pope Gregory the 14.
tenth day of his Papacy, he was a great favorer of the French league, to
whose aid he sent forces under the command of his Nephew Hercole Sfondrato
Duke of Mont marcian at the charge of the Sea Apostolic; but after the Popes
death their pay being no more current, those troops by little and little
disbanded. The Sea was vacant thirteen days, at the end of which Cardinal
Giouan Antonio The Creation and death of Pope Innocent the 9.
Faschinetta the Bolognesse was created Pope, assuming the name of Innocent the
9. at first he seemed to favor the league of France, but his deseigns were
vain for he lived but two months and one day after he was made Pope.

The Cardinals went into the Conclaue at the beginning of the year 1592. and
elected Hipolito Cardinal Aldobrandino nominated Clement the 7. who seemed
willing to aid the French league with men and money. The Creation of Pope
Clement the 7.


At the same time Candy was miserably aflicted with the Pestilence, where in a
short space dyed twenty thousand persons: one thing is worthy to be noted, that
toward the latter end of August, when the sickness began to decrease, there
A Prodigy.
terror of the beholders run through the air as far as Spina longa, and
there fell into the Sea, where for a long time it burnt in the water, and at
last it vanished.

Now the City of Venice having been (as all men know and as we have declared
in the first book of this History) builded by those, who flying from the fury
and incursions of barbarous nations, retired into those lakes where it now
stands; and in the same manner as it began, has still daily augmented and
increased, so as till this day many famous men, learned in all arts have come
thither The Institution of the Uenetian Academy.
in that art which every man professed, and to this end nine gallant spirrits
joined together ( Pompeo Limpia de Bari, Lucius Scarannus de Brindiz, Fabio
Paulino de Vdina, Giouan Baptista Leone, Georgio Contaren of Venice, Guido
Cassono de Serauall, Theodore Angelucio de Bella forte in la Marca, Vnicentio
Galieno the Roman, Giouan Paulo Gallucio de Salles) and laid the foundation of
this virtuous work, choosing a fit place for the purpose, where continuing
their ordinary lectures the glory and reputation of this Venetian Academy
extended so far, as diverse notable men have since then come thither, whereby
it is daily much beautified and augmented.

Thus ended this year. At the beginning of the next which was 1593. though the
Venetians sought to satisfy the Turk, by keeping the Vscoques of Segna from
scouring the Adriattick Seas, yet, not relying on their perfidious promises,
being advertised that they made great preparations by land and Sea, they
re-enforced the Garrisons of Candy, which were much weakened by the late
pestilence:

The same year, Henry King of France and Navarre, after sundry battles and
overthrows of his enemies did through the instruction* of the Archbishop of
Bourges and sundry Doctos of Paris require to be reconciled Denis Abbey,
before the said Archbishop, accompanied by the Cardinal Bourbon Archbishop of
Rouen, nine Bishops, and diverse other Prelates and Religious men, protesting
to live and dye in the said Catholic religion, and to maintain it with, and
against all men: he made profession of his faith, accomplished all ceremonies
requisite in so solemn an act, and then received absolution, to the
wonderful joy and applause of the people.

Not long after this public conversion, the King sent the Duke of Neuers and A
soll^mne Am^assage from F^ance to Rome.
other Prelates to Rome, by them to present his obedience to the Pope, and to
witness his desire to imitate the example of the Kings his Predecessors, and
by his actions, like them, to merit the title and grade of the Churches eldest
son, and to entreat his Holiness to approve his conversion, and to honor
him with his blessing.

The Pope after sundry honors done to the Duke of Neuers, would not at first
endure to hear tell of the King, notwithstanding that the Duke and Prelates,
which accompanied him, assured him that his conversion was true and unfeigned,
and therefore humbly besought his Holiness to believe it, which he refusing
to do, would neither absolve the King, nor ratify that which had been done
at Saint Denis. The French in the mean time perceiving that the King had
abiured his former errors, and was become a Catholic, and afterward crowned
and anointed at Chartres with the holy oil, according to the ancient custom
of the French Kings: all rebellious cities, one after another, returned under
his obedience. The Venetians sent Ambassadors to the French King, The Venetians
send Ambassadors to the French King.
to congratulate his conversion, and to rejoice with his Majesty for his happy
success, in recovering the greatest part of his kingdom.

At the beginning of the year following 1595. Amurath the Turkish Emperor
dyed, Mahomet his eldest son succeeded him, who calling all his brethren into
his chamber, caused them to be strangled in his presence.

The Pope being advertised of the French Kings good success, who still
humbled himself to the Sea Apostolic, and had again sent David du Perron
Bishop of Eureux to Rome, to procure his absolution, was willing to grant his
request, notwithstanding many were of contrary opinions: Whereupon, coming one
The Pope bl^sseth and absolu^th the ^rench King.
Sunday morning being the eighteen of September, in his Pontificalibus into
Peter's Hall, he approved King Henry's abiuration, with all ceremonies therein
requisite, receiving him to favor, and into the bosom of the Church, with his
blessing Apostolical, inioyning him due penance: which done, Drums and
Trumpets sounded in sign of joy, and Cannons thundered from Castle Angelo, all
men rejoicing at his good fortune, (the Spanish Ambassador excepted) who in his
Masters behalf protested, that the same act could not prejudice his Kings
titles.

During these solemnities at Rome, Pascale Cicogna Duke of Venice dyed, being
four score and five years old, having governed the Commonwealth nine years,
one month, and fifteen days, he lies buried in the Church of Santa Maria de
Cruciferi.

MARIN GRIMANI the 89. Duke.





MARIN GRIMANI Knight and Procurator of Saint Mark, succeeded him, being
beloved of all men for his rare virtue The Cardinal of Florence Legate in
France.
and charity to the poor. The Pope in the mean time to confirm what he had
done to the most Christian King, sent the Cardinal of Florence his Legate into
France, who was honorably entertained at Paris, where he made some aboade;

The Venetians perceiving that the Vsicoques did not give over their robbing
the Dalmatian and Histrian seas, sent certain Galleys thither, under the
command of Giouan Bembo their General, assisted by Colonel Piercente Gabutio
and his troops, who defeated these thieves, and cleared the seas. Herein,
during peace The Venetians defeat the Vsicoques.
the Venetians sent Nicolo Donato, who succeeded Bembo, against them, together
with the same Colonel Pierconte Gibutio and his Regiment, who entered and
wasted their country, took diverse of theirs Castles, and slew many of them.

Henry the fourth French King, upon diverse just and reasonable causes, having
Henry the 4. motioneth a marriage with the Princ^sse of Florence.
obtained the Popes dispensation, to repudiate his wife the Lady Marguerite of
France, sister to the late King, and to marry an other by whom he might have
issue, craved the Lady Ma^y of Medicis, Princess of Florence, daughter to the
late Francisco great Duke of Tuscany, and Niece to Ferdinand de Medicis, now
great Duke, a Princess beside her youth, endowed with rare beauty, wisdom,
and many The Kings marriage celebrated at Florence.
whereupon so soon as it was determined and concluded, a great Lord of France
was sent thither, who in the Kings name married her at Florence, honoring her
as his masters wife: Then all things prepared for the journey of so great a
Princess toward the latter end of the year she embarked her self and train
in the great Dukes Galleys, sailing to Marseilles, where arriving, she remained
for certain days, receiving magnificent entertainment, till she might fa^ther
know the pleasure of the King her husband, who at that time made war upon the
Duke of Sauoy, for recovery of the Marquisat of Salusses, which that Duke had
seized on during the civil wars of France: His Majesty having intelligence
that the Queen his wife was arrived at Marseilles, sent word that she should
come to Lions, whither himself came in post, and consummated the marriage
begun at Florence.

Italy in the mean time was in all arm, because the Count Fuentes being by
King Philip sent Lieutenant General to Milan, made great leuies of soldiers
both Italy zealou^ of the Spaniard^.
Spaniards, Italians, Swisses and Almaines, under color of aiding the Duke of
Sauoy against the French King, if peace betwixt those Prines, t^eated of at the
Popes command by his Nephew the Cardinal Aldobrandini, took not effect.

This troubled all Italy, and especially the Venetians in regard of their
towns in Lombardy. The great Duke likewise grew jealous: whereupon, each of them
armd, Peace betwixt the French King and Duke of Sauoy
and gave order to fortify their frontiers: the l^ke did Francisco Maria Duke
of Vrbin Peace in the mean time being proclaimed at Lions betwixt the
Christian

King Philip, aduertized of this iealozy commanded Count Fuentes to disarme,
whereby al these suspicions ceased.

Not-with-standing, the Venetians sent the Colonel Pier-conte with other
Captains into Lombardy; whither like-wise by their commandment the General
Leonardo Donato was gone, together with Giouan Baptista, General of their
fantery, to fortify their frontier towns, having discovered a plot laid to
surprise Doria, yet he still retained such great numbers at Milan as might
justly cause his neighbors to fear and suspect: The Venetians likewise armed
certain Galleys and two Galeasses. The ca^se of the Venetian^ icalou si^.


Diverse causes moved the Venetians to do so, but chiefly, because Prince
Doria, by King Phillips commandment, having rigged a mighty fleet houered up
and down the mediterranean, no man knowing his deseigne: in the end he cleared
this doubt, for he sailed to Argier in Barbary, making an attempt there, which
by reason of sundry difficulties had no good success.

In the year 1602. the fort called Palma Noua by the Venetians was ended, and
is thought to be one of the goodliest in all Italy, which being inhabited,
they there began to build fair houses, and goodly Palaces, so as in a short
time they hope it will prove as populus as strong. The Senate afterward
perceiving that one of the mouths of Po, would in time choke up with
abundance of earth, the Havens of Chioggia and Malamoc, to the great prejudice
and hinderance of the City of Venice, which by that means would loose the
ordinary traffic and commerce of those Havens, caused a great trench to be
made, through which they diuerted that mouth of the River another way,

At the same time Philippo Pascalic arrived at Venice returning from his
journey against the Vsicoques, he was sent by the Senate as Prouidator*
General of Dalmatia, wherein he got great commendation, having defeated those
thieves who were afterward wholly rooted out by the Archduke. Theodoro Balbi
likewise Prouidator of the Gulphe, did put the Pirates of Barbary to flight,
who scou^ed the seas almost to Venice, from whom having taken three Galeots,
Diverse Pirates are defeated.
and set many Christian slaves at liberty, he did so terrify them, as they
durst no more come into those seas: The great Dukes Galleys had the like good
hap, which according to their custom sailing in the Archipelago to meet with
Turkish Foists, and to spoil their sea coasts, incountred the Galleys of
Rhodes, which they fought with, took some of them, and carried a rich booty to
Florence.

But not to stray far from the Venetians, the Clergy of Prague having
vehemently Francisco Zabarello, for the ^ute preferred to The Senates D^cree
against the Clergy.
sell certain ancient Church lands; The Senate made a decree, that the Church
should not appropriate unto it self rents possessed by the Layety, grounding
that decree upon a prohibition made by the Senate, in the year 1333. that no
lands should be given or bequeathed in perpetuity to Churches within the City
and Duchy of Venice: and if any were left unto them, they should be sold by a
certain time prefixed, and the money alone to be theirs: alleging for reason,
that the Clergy, who pretend themselves and goods to be exempt from all
necessary charges belonging to the Commonwealth, the number of them daily
increasing, and on the contrary, that of the Citizens still decreasing, who
serve, and

This law was variously observed till the year 1536. when it was reduced to
this form, That none of what quality soever, should give lands to the Church,
but only for two years space, in which time they should be sold: and if the
sale were not made by the Clergy, a civil Magistrate should be appointed to
do it. This being considered by the Senate, has ever since been generally
practiced over the whole Venetian state.

The year 1603. the Council of the Preguays at Venice, decreed, that no A
decree concerning building of Churches.
Venetian citizen, of what degree or quality soever, should in the City,
without the Senates consent, build any new Church, Hospital, or Monastery, not
that the Senate would wholly prohibit such buildings, but because the Prince and
Senate as Superiors would consider whether it were needful or not, there
being in the city one hundred and fifty Churches, Monasteries, Hospitalls,
and other like places of devotion. The year following 1604. the Venetians
inioying peace, war removed it self to other places, as Germany, the
Leuant, and Flanders.

In the year 1605. Pope Clement the eight falling sick on the twelfth of
February, dyed on the third of March following, having governed the sea of Rome
The death of Pope Clement the viii.
thirteen years, his body was carried to Saint Peter's Church, and buried in
the Alessandro de Medicis Cardinal of Florence, son to the illustrious
Octauio, who being Archbishop of Florence, was made Cardinal by Pope Gregory
the thirteenth, and being chosen Pope, took upon him the The election of Pope
Leo the 10. and his sudden death.
name of Leo the tenth. The Romans were very glad of his election, but their
joy lasted not long, for he dyed of a Fever, the twenty sixth day after he
was made Pope: Some thought he was poisoned, but his body being opened in the
presence of diverse Physicians, they found it otherwise, he lies buried in
Saint Peter's Church.

The Cardinals proceeding to a new election, and desirous to make haste, the
Farnese and Montalto went to Cardinal Aldobrandini, entreating him to name
three among the whole College of Cardinals ( Tuscus and Baronius excepted)
and they would choose one of the three: Whereupon, the Cardinals Clement,
Arragon, and Borgesius being named, Borgesius as best The creation of Pope
Paul the fifth.
beloved, was presently saluted Pope by way of adoration, intitling himself
Paul the fifth. This Pope descended from an ancient family in Syenna, was son
to a Roman Gentlewoman, his Father coming to dwell at Rome.

But the Venetian Clergy, notwithstanding the Senates decree, did daily more
and more augment their revenues and possessions, as well within the City as
abroad: the Senate for reducing their whole State to one conformable custom,
had before (as has been said) diuulged their law over all their dominions,
and added thereunto a prohibition, that none within their City or Signory,
under what coullor soever, should sell, give, or in any sort alienate lands to
the Clergy The Pope complains to the Venetian Ambassador.
had made a law, which prohibited the Clergy to purchase lands; adding
(though it were made upon important occasion, and by virtue of a former dedree)
yet the Cannons disanulled them both; therefore his pleasure was to have

The Ambassador did what the Pope commanded, and within a while after received
instruction and Commission from the Senate, to acquaint his Holiness with the
equity of their cause, and justice of their law, together with the Signories
power, and authority to make such decrees. The Pope, confident in his own
opinion, said aloud, That he gave him audience, only to content the Venetians,
and not to admit any of his propounded reasons or excuses: then made an other*
complaint, about the detaining of a Channon of Vincenza, and the Abbot of
Nerueze, both of them accused of notorious crimes: and within a while after The
Popes resolution upon the Venetians refusal.
an extraordinary Ambassador, by humble means to seek to divert his Holiness
from his resolution, and to induce him better to consider of the matter,
delaied the presentation of those injunctions, which the Pope took in bad
part: whereupon, Grimani lay at point of death, and that the Signory and
Senators were assembled, some of whom had received the holy Sacrament, and
others were ready to receive, the Nuncio craved audience, and presented the two
injunctions, which, notwithstanding the Dukes death happened the day following,
were not opened till after the election of the new Duke.

Prince Grimani having governed nine years and odd months, departed this
mortal life in the Christmasse holy days, in the year 1605. his funerals
ended, Leonardo Donato Knight, and Procurator of Saint Mark, was after the
(...) manner

LEONARDO DONATO the 90. Duke.





AFter his election, the two injunctions being opened, were both of one
substance, containing that his Holiness was advertised, that the Venetian
Senate had decreed diverse things contrary to the liberty of the Church, and
authority of the Sea Apostolic, and diuulged over all their Signories certain
laws particular to the City of Venice, forbidding to build Churches and
Monasteries, and to allienate secular possessions to the Clergy, without the
Senates

To this, the Senate answered on the 28. of January, the same year 1606. That
with grief and amazement it understood by his Holiness letters, that he
disliked the laws of the Venetian commonwealth, prosperously observed for The
Senates answer to the Pope.
many ages, and never till then taxed by any of his predecessors, the
reuocation whereof would ouer-throw the foundation of their State; that he
accounted The censures against the Venetians are publish^d.
same year, was published over all Rome, and hung up in the usual places,
namely on the great gates of Saint Peter's Church, Chancery, and Market place of
Campo de Fiore, by Christofero Fondut^, and Giouan Dominico de Pace, the Popes
Pursuiuant*

The Prince and Senate having intelligence what was done at Rome, to prevent
popular troubles and commotions, which might thereby arise in the towns and
cities of their jurisdiction, were desirous to acquaint all their subjects
therewith, The Venetians make a declaration upon the Popes excommunication.
and to this end, made two declarations, the one directed to all the Clergy of
their dominions, and the other to the Magistrates and officers of the State, to
stop and restrain all disorders that might arise: whereupon all that year
diverse books were written on both sides, some condemning the Venetians, others
the Pope, every man according to his own passion.

But at last this contention had like to have been decided by the sword, both
sides making great preparations for war: for the Venetians having
intelligence

It was Henry the fourth French King, who to prevent the danger and skandall
The French King mediates peace betwixt the Pope and Uenetians.
which might arise by this war, did speedily send the Cardinal Ioyeuse to
the Ioyeuse being in have dispatched from France with instructions from the
King, necessary for his negotiation, arrived at Rome on a Thursday night the
three and twentieth of March 1607. and the same evening conferred with the
Cardinals and French Ambassador about propounding this business to the Pope,
the next day after dinner, himself and the Ambassador went to see his
Holiness, unto whom the Cardinal did at large reveal the cause of his
coming: But because the Pope seemed inexorable to any entreaty of agreement
with the Venetians, till the Clergy and Jesuits were first restored to their
Churches and College (the Venetians still oppugning the Jesuits)

The Pope, desirous to know his devise, did early the next day send for them,
and then the Cardinal Ioyeuse told him, that to hope by any express treaty to
obtain of the Venetian Senate the restoration of the Fathers Jesuits, were
but to lose time, and to no purpose, but if his Holiness would give him ample
commission and authority to revoke the censures, and with it send him to
Venice; he showing

The Pope made show that he neither would nor could approve this motion,
saying, that he had engaged his promise not to abandon the Jesuits, who had
been expulsed for favoring his interdiction, unto whom he had given his word
never to be reconciled to the Venetians till they were restored, and after
sundry other allegations this second conference was to no purpose, every man
perceiving by his Holiness countenance that he was much perplexed.

The French Cardinals and other of the Kings servants, meeting to consult
Perron to go the next day after dinner to get express audience of the Pope,
and if it were possible, to induct him, to grant certain points for the
furtherance of the business.

Cardinal Perron at their entreaty, undertook the matter, and for a while
disputed Cardin^ll Perron (...) with the Pope.
with his Holiness about the restoration of the Jesuits, showing him the
danger whereunto he exposed the Church and Christian Religion for one
particular order, whose restoring was to be hoped for, though for a time
deferred: he told him that his Holiness should first re-establish his own
authority in Venice, and that once done, there was no doubt but that the
Jesuits would ere long be restored; and after many other important reasons, he
at last obtained of his Holiness, that seeing for that present he could not
prevail in the Jesuits behalf, he should let it pass and insert some clause
in the Articles, whereby it might appear to the world that he had not
neglected their restoration.

Then the Cardinal speaking of the Commission, the Pope would hardly be
drawn thereunto, supposing it to be dishonorable for the sea Apostolic,
saying The Pope grants a commission to the Ca^dinal Ioy^use.
that the re^ocation of the censures ought to be done at Rome, and not sent to
Venice; notwithstanding, the Cardinal alleging diverse reasons to the
contrary, the Pope at last consented to give the Cardinal Ioyeuse a commission
to (...) the censures, which he should carry with him to Venice, but on this
condition, to do his best for the restoration of the Jesuits, before he
disanulled the interdiction. He did also (though with some difficulty) induce
his Holiness to be pleased* that the French Ambassador resident at Rome, and
not he which lay at Venice should in the French King and Venetian Signories
name crave of him

In a word, his Holiness granted all his demands, only he seemed unwilling to
declare his intent to the Consistory, saying he supposed that he ought not to
do it publicly, because he had not yet acquainted the Cardinals therewith,
nevertheless he would resolve upon it, and the next day in the consistory
would impart it to some particular Cardinals, and the same afternoon, call
them one after an other into his chamber to take their vows in secret.

According to his resolution his Holiness having in the consistory declared
his Francesco de Castro, by which he certified the Pope, that if he stood fast
for the restoring of the Jesuits, he should obtain it, and that the Venetians
determined to make protestation, by surrending the prisoners, contrary to that
which had been concluded, and which his Holiness had promised to himself.
These false rumors did somewhat trouble the Pope who thereupon made The
Commission is given to Cardinal Ioy^use to revoke the censures at Venice.
some difficulty to proceed any fa^ther; but Cardinal Perron soliciting and
assuring him of the contrary, he delivered (according to his former
resolution) the commission to Cardinal Ioyeuse willing him to make have to
Venice.

The Spaniards being not able to cross this resolution, made suit to have
Cardinal Zapala to be joined in commission with Cardinal Ioyeuse, but their
labor was lost; and yet in other solemnities Zapala and the Spanish Ambassador
had in appearance some e^uality which the French Kings Ministers, because in
their Kings name they were sureties for the Venetian Signory, as were Cardinal
Ioyeuse and the French Ambassador for the Christian King: yet the world
accounted it but a vai^e and idle fable, for they had no such authority from
the Signory of

Cardinal Ioyeuse, together with the (...), received from his Holiness the
conditions on which the censures were to be revoked, being in number six, the
effect whereof is thus: That the two Church men prisoners, namely the Abbot
(...) Articles on which the i^terdiction was reuok^d.
of Nerueze, and the Channon of Vincenza, shall be freely given to the Pope:
That his Holiness shall revoke his censures, making a declaration thereof to
the College: That the Venetian Signory shall within a while after send an
Embassage to the Pope: That the Duke by a declaration shall certify the Clergy
of his State, that the first declaration is revoked: That the three Decrees
mentioned in the Popes interdiction, and other laws of the Signory shall
continue in their full force and power, with this prouiso, that the Senate
shall promise the French and Catholic Kings not to execute them before the
business be fully ended betwixt

Now Cardinal Ioyeuse departed from Rome with commission and Articles, The
Cardinals reception at Uenice.
and arrived at Venice, where he was honorably received and entertained, many
Senators going to meet him in the Bucentaure: Then the next day, being the
twentieth of April, one of the States Secretaries, accompanied with the
captain After what manner the prisoners were delivered.
and other officers of the prison, and for greater solemnity, with a public
Notary, brought the two prisoners to the house of the Sieur de Fresne,
Ambassador to the French King, and delivered them to him, as granted to the
Pope at the entreaty of the King his Master, without prejudice to the States
jurisdiction in such like cases, and the French Ambassador did presently
consigne them into the hands of the Cardinal Ioyeuse who was in the same
house, in the presence of the Secretary, with these words, These are the
prisoners which the Signory has granted to his Holiness, Sieur de Fresne, or
rather with his casual or voluntary omission.

Then the next morning, which was the day appointed by the Senate, the
Cardinal The manner of (...) the censures.
coming to the College, after some circumstances of the Popes fatherly

The Dukes first declaration was likewise revoked in this manner. Leonardo
Donato by the grace of God Duke of Venice etc. To the reverend Patriarchs
Archbishops, The Duke reuok^th his first declaration.
and Bishops of our State and jurisdiction of Venice, and to the Vickars,
Abbots, Priors, Rectors of parrish Churches, and all other Ecclesiastical
Prelates, greeting. Seeing it has pleased our good God to find out a way
whereby our holy Father Pope Paul the fifth has been daily informed as well
of our good meaning, as integrity of our actions and continual honor and

Therefore we thought good by our declaration to advertise you hereof, giving
you besides to understand, that whatsoever did belong hereunto, having been
faithfully performed on both parts, and the censures and interdiction removed;
the protestation likewise, which we made against them, has been and is
revoked: we being desirous that herein, and in all other our actions, the piety
and religion of our State may still more and more appear, the which we will
carefully observe, as our Predeoessors have ever done. Given in our Ducall
palace the one and twentieth of April 1607. signed Marco Ottobo^ Secretary.

The Duke having published this declaration, and by delivery of the prisoners
satisfied for his part the conditions mentioned in the accord, the Senate was
perplex^, The Senats doubt.
with a doubt of no mean consequence, which was, that the Pope for his part
having made no mention at all concerning books and writings, published in
behalf of the said decrees, nor of the authors of the said books, which are
two very important points, and which did wholly seem to break of this
reconciliation, the State doubting that the Pope by this silence and omission
had an intent to proceed afterward against the Authors of the said books by
the ordinary way of Ecclesiastical justice; and thinking it a matter against
all reason to abandon those that had done them such good and faithful service,
after mature consultation, the Senate made a very notable and honorable decree
that the Signory

The end of the fourth and last Book of the seventh Decade of the History of
Uenice.
FINIS.
A Table of the principal matters contained in the first Volume of the
History of Venice, compiled for the more easy finding out thereof by the
right course of Alphabet.
AVthors meaning whereof to treat. Fol. 1 Authors opinion concerning the Cities
foundation. 4 A very curious observation. 5 A wonderful miracle smelling
somewhat of Popery. 5 Attila defeated near Toulouse. 5 Arrian sect over all
Italy. 7 Ancient custom of marrying their daughters. 9 A great miracle at
Verona. 10 A league made with Luitprand. 12 A cruel and unworthy act. 18 A
punishment of God. 18 Ancient Malamoc ruinated. 24 Albiolans yield. 24 A very
excellent Library within the Palace. 27 A conspiracy against the Prince
discovered. 28 Alexandrines, insolent to strangers. 30 Augustus his Proverb.
30 A Sea-Armie granted to the Grecians against the Sarracens. 34 A fleet sent
against the Nare^tines. 45 A solemn oath made by the Clergy and chief
Citizens. 45 A marvelous example of fortune. 51 Ambassadors of Dalmatia,
Liburnia and Histria, come to Venice to complain of the Narentines. 55
Ambassadors offers to the Venetians. 56 Albania is a part of Illiria 56 A
divine punnishment. 65 A wondersull vision happened to Peter the Hermit. 69
Assemblies answer to Pope Urban at the council of Clermont. 71 An admirable
matter. 71 Alexis practices treachery. 72 Alexis and Beamond reconciled. 73 A
new agreement between Alexis and the Christian Princes. ibid. A new Army of
Infidels. 74 A great battle betwixt the Christians and the Infidels. ibid.
Armenia Mayor given by the French men to Palmurus. 75 A very dangerous way. 76
A luckie event for the Christians. ibid. Antioch S. Peter's first seat. 77
Abundance of victuals at the beginning of the siege. ibid. A great quarrel
between Beamond and the Earl of S. Giles. 79 Agreement made with the king of
Tripolie. ibid. A new fleet of Venetians in Syria. 85 A new Army of
Hungarians in Dalmatia. 88 A courageous act of Prince Michaeli. 93 A strange
case of a Pigeon. ibid. All the Islands of the Grecian Empire taken. 95 A new
religious Order. 97 Agreement with the Pisans. ibid. A new Army against the
Normans. 98 A sudden fire. 99 A league with William king of Sicill. 100 A
secret league betwixt the Greek Emperor, and the King of Sicill. 101 A great
fleet against the Greek Emperor. 102 A new deceit of the Greeks. ibid. An
example of great affection to a man's country. 104 All the Princes of the
Greek Empire murdered. 106 A general Council published to be holden at
Dijon. ibid. Aresolued Ambassade to Frederick in the Popes behalf. 107 At what
time the Venetian Prince began to seal with lead. 108 At what time the
Venetian Prince began to marry the Sea. ibid. Ancient manner of distributing
alms. 112 A new manner of electing the Prince. 113 A new army of Christians
for recovery of the Holy Land. 114 Agreement betwixt the Venetians and foreign
Princes. 116 Agreement with the Bandetti of Zara. 118 A great fight at the
Haven of Constantinople. 119 An assault given to the City. ibid. A discreet
answer of a young Emperor. 120 A new Greekish invention to deceive the
Christians. ibid. A new agreement betwixt the Venenetians and the Princes. 121
A decree of the Venetians about possession of the Islands. 124 A great
courtesy. 126 A new strife betwixt the Venetians and Paduans. 126 A sedition
of the Constantino politans affirming their Church not subject to Rome. 127 A
Colonie sent to Corfu. ibid. Andrew king of Hungary, chief of the voyage into
Syria. 128 A Colonie sent into Candie. 131 A new commotion in Candace. ibid.
Accord betwixt Tepulo and Sanuto. 132 A new commotion in Candie. 133 Agreement
betwixt the Venetians and Greeks. ibid. Agreement with the chief Rebels of
the Island. 135 Angelo Gradonico Governor of Candie. 136 Agreement with the
Candiots. ibid. Army of the Greeks before Constantinople. 137 Articles of the
truce betwixt the Venetians and Genoueses. ibid. Andrea Tepulo sent to aid the
Genoueses. 140 Agreement with the king of Hungary for Zara. ibid* An army at
Venice against Eccelin. 142 An assault given to Padua. 143 A noble courage of a
Prenestine. ibid. Acre taken by the Venetians. 147 A new Venetian fleet in
Syria. 151 A new Venetian army sent to Modon. 152 A new Venetian army against
the Genoueses. ibid. An usual Proverb. 155 Anconitans seek to defraud the
Venetians of their Impostes. 157 Anconitans policy to surprise the Venetians.
ibid. Anconitans send to Pope Nicholas the third. ibid. A new war with the
Patriarch of Aquileia. 158 A traitor punished. 159 Acre taken by the Infidels.
160 At what time the Christians were driven out of Syria. ibid. A popular
tumult about the creation of the Duke. ibid. Andrew king of Hungary comes to
Venice. 163 A new war with the Genoueses. ibid. A wonderful matter in the
Fennes Maeotides. 164 A strange death of one of the Generals of the Venetian
army. 165 A new army of the Venetians. 166 An enforced peace betwixt the
Venetians and the Genoueses. ibid. A detestable act of a bastard. 167 A pension
given to the woman who slew Baiamont. 169 Another opinion concerning the issue
of the conspiracy. ibid. Authors discourse on the doings of the Pope and
Dandulo. 170 A deed worthy of a General of an army. 173 A new army against
the Genoueses. ibid. Abundance of corn in the City. 174 Agreement with the
Patriarch of Aquileia. 175 A wonderful eclipse. ibid. Albert of Escalla,
recouereth Vderza. 181 A general reuiew of the army. 182 Albert of Escalla
flies. 183 Antenor laid the first foundations of Chioggia. 184 Ambassadors
sent to Venice to procure a peace. 185 A wise retreat. 186 A discreet
resolution of a General. ibid. A notable sentence. 188 A treaty of peace
broken. ibid. A prodigious storm at Venice in a night. 190 A wonderful
apparition to a poor Fisherman. ibid. A General assault given to Zara. 194 A
wonderful earthquake. 196 At what time the infection began and ended in
Venice. 197 Albert Prince of Croatia pardoned. 198 A discreet act of the
General. 199 A cruel night-fight. 201 Arragonois General slain in the
battle. ibid. A new Genouesan army commanded by Pagano Doria. 205 A great
bravery of a Genouese Gallie. 207 Aristocratia reputed best of the
governments. 208 An excellent architect punished for conspiracy. ibid. A
religious and godly act. 210 Almaines defeated through their own default. 214
A City bravely defended. 215 A peace more necessary than honorable for the
Venetians. ibid. Ambassadors sent every where against the Candiots. 216
Advertisement to Christian Princes against the Candiots. ibid. A free speech of
two Senators of Candie. 218 Almiron. 219 A new commotion in Candie. 221
Anopolis taken. 224 A merry answer of a soldier to one of the Rebels.
ibid. A Venetian army against the Thryestines. 225 A base retreat of the
Almanes. 226 A new war with Francisco Carrario. ibid. Alberto Carrario in
Rayniero his place. 229 Almaine merchants imprisoned in Venice. 230 An absolute
peace with Leopold. 231 An agreement betwixt thy Venetians and the king of
Cyprus. 235 A stratagem of the Genoueses to avoid the fight. 236 A brave
answer of those of Sicco. 237 A quarrel against the Venetians at Barletta
soon appeased, 239 A battle at Sea betwixt the Venetians and the Genoueses.
ibid. A memorable enterprise of Carrario. 242 A divine punishment. 245 A new
decree of the Senate in favor of those who should relieve the City. 250 A
liberal offer made to the Senate by a Citizen of Chioggia ibid. An enterprise
attempted with bad success. 251 A great Barze of Genoa taken. 252 A Genoueses
ship esteemed to be worth 500000. crowns. ibid. A sharp fight in the haven
of Brondolli. 254 A great fight on the lakes. 259 A discreet answer of the
mercenarie Captains to the enemies. 261 After what manner the Paduan had
enclosed the passages toward Treuisa. 266 An unworthy act of a Garrison for
want of pay. 268 Asill yielded to Carrario upon Composition. 270 Ambassadors
sent from Venice to Tr^uiso to Leopold. 273 A monster borne at Venice. 274 A
Venetian army to subdue Tenedos. 276 A law against murderers. 277 Antonio of
Escalla defeated by Giouanni Galeas Visconte. 278 A French man punished for
indiscreet speaking. 282 A Venetian Garrison sent to Vincenza. 283 Albert de
Aeste makes war on the Venetians in behalf of Carrario. 284 Accio of Aeste
recalled from Candie to make war on Albert. ibid. An Amphitheater in Verona.
286 A cruel and unusual punishment. 287 A marvelous storm. 291 Ambassadors
of Philip Duke of Milan at Venice. 298 Alliance concluded betwixt the Venetians
and Florentines. 305 Articles of the agreement. ibid. A Rampire built against
the Castle of Bressia. 310 An assault given to the Castle of Bressia. 311 An
agreement made with the Garrison in the Castle. 312 A new league against
Philip. 314 A troop of Venetian Mariners defeated by Philips forces. 316 A
furious sallie of the besieged. 318 A battle betwixt the Venetians and
Philip. 319 An extreme frost at Venice. 327 A cruel decree of the
Florentines. 328 An enterprise upon the Castle of Lodes discovered. ibid A
bloody fight. 330 A nauall fight betwixt the Venetians and Genoueses. 331 A
fierce fight by land. 332 An enterprise of the Venetians upon Cremona. ibid.
Attendulo recouereth sundry places for the Florentines. 334 Articles of peace
betwixt the Venetians and Philip. 336 Accord betwixt Sforza and Picinino. 339 A
Treaty of peace almost concluded is broken off. 341 A Cittadell made at
Bolognia. 342 Articles of agreement betwixt Philip and Sforza. 346 A complot to
assail the Venetians on all sides. 348 Auogadre his remonstrance to the
Senate. 357 A wonderful proposition of a Candiot. 360 After what manner the
Vessels were brought to the lake of Benac. ibid. A league concluded betwixt the
Venetians, Florentines, and Sforza. 361 A nauall battle betwixt the Venetians
and the Mantuan. 363 A fierce fight necre the lake of Benac. 365 A Venetian
army for the Lake. 371 A new design of Sforza to relieve Bressia. 372 An
enterprise upon Verona. 374 A league betwixt Philip and Cornetano the Popes
General. 379 A battle upon the lake b^twixt the Venetians and Philips
forces. 382 Ambassadors come to Sforza from Bressia and Bergamo. 385 Andre^
Dandulo sent Ambassador to the Sultan of Babylon. 396 A great deluge at Venice.
ibid. Alexander, S^orza his brother, reuolteth from him. 401 Andrea Donato
accused to have been corrupted, is condemned in a pecuniarie fine. 402
Attendulo his incursions upon the Millanous 403 Anconitans yield to the
Veneti^ans. ibid. Accord betwixt the Milanois and Sforza. 404 Ambassadors sent
from Milan to Venice: with Venetians answer. ibid. A nauall Army against
Pirates. 405 Alphonso imprisoneth all the Venetians in his kingdom. ibid.
Alphonso his answer to the Venetian Ambassadors. ibid. Accord betwixt the
Venetians and Sforza. 408 A battle betwixt the Turks and Christians at
Adrianople. 409 Aphonso expels the Venetians out of his dominions. 411 A
motion of peace betwixt Sforza and the Milaneses. 411 Accord betwixt the
Venetians and Milaneses. 412 A cruel fight at the mouth of the haven of
S^racusa. 414 Ambassadors assembled at Venice. ibid. A great dear^h in Milan.
ibid. An excellent example of chastity in a German Lady. 415 A fierce fight
with victory on neither side. 419 Alphonso pursues the Florentine^. 420 Aid
enters into Constantinople by Sea. 422 Ambassadors sent into Germany to the
Emperor. 426 Antonio Marcello Prouidator besieges Thryesle. 435 Assault given
to Thryeste has no good success. ibid. Arimini and Thryeste freed from the
siege. 436 A memorable offer of two brethren of Candie. 444 A general assault
given to Nigrepont by the Turks. ibid. A new policy of Ottoman. 447 A generous
act of a Dalmatian woman. 452 Ambassadors of Vssan-Cassan king of Persia come
into Italy. 453 A brave deed of a young man. 466 Ambassadors of Cassam*bet sent
to the Venetian General. 467 After what sort the Ianisaries are made. 468
Ambassadors come to Mocenigo from the king of Cyprus sister 469 A battle
betwixt the Turks and Persians. 470 Andrea Cornari murdered. 474 Antonio
Legiero Governor of Scutarie. 486 Arragonians deseate the Florentines. 490 A
cruel assault by night. 501 Alphonso aided by the Colonessi and the Sauelli
besieges the Pope. 502 A cruel fight betwixt Alphonso Duke of Calabria, and
Roberto of A rimini General to the Venetia^s. ibid Alphonso his great
progression. 508 A subtle stratagem of Viari. 510 Alphonso takes Carpinetta.
511 Alphonso takes Azzola. ibid. Alphonso his exclamations. 512 Arrogant brag
of Porco. 514 Alphonsos army at Quintiana. 515 Alphonso takes Metella. ibid. A
great plague at Venice. 517 Ambassadors sent to the K. of Romans and to the
king of Portugal. 521 A league betwixt the Pope and Venetians. 522 Almaines
besiege Rouero. 524 A law carefully observed by the Venetians, with their great
justice. 531
B
BOnitendius opinion concerning the association of a colleague in the
government or principality. 20 Blondus his opinion concerning the French war
against the Venetia^s. 23 Battle of Crotona. 35 Benet the Pope comes to
Venice. ibid. Berengarius defeated by the Hunnes. 40 Battle betwixt the
Venetians and the Hunnes. 41 Burial of Pietro Candiano, and his young son.
47 Berengarius and his son Albert defeated. 51 Bishop of Grada his present to
the Duke. 56 By what means the Normans grew great. 65 Beamond assailed by
Alexis subjects. 73 Battle betwixt the Christians and the Infidels. 74
Beamond gives the first assault to the City of Antioch. 76 Beamond his great
authority. 78 Bethlehem, Braim, Berithon. 80 Bodies of S. Theodore, and S.
Nicolas, brought to Venice. 84 Baldwin king of Jerusalem. 85 Beamond is set at
liberty, and returns to Antioch. ibid. Baldwin surnamed Burgensis king of
Jerusalem. 86 Baldwin taken prisoner by Dalochus king of the Parthians. 89
Barbarians defeated by the Venetians before Ioppa. 91 Building of the hospital
of the public charity. 95 Baldwin of Flanders chosen Emperor of the East. 121
Boniface king of Thessaly. 124 Bishops Sea at Malamoc translated to Chioggia.
127 Benedicto Treuisano. 141 Brent and Bachillion turned backwards. 142
Bolognians intent discovered. 154 Bolognians defeated. 155 Buconio his (...).
166 Brave resolution of a great captain. 183 Bressia besieged by Luchin
Visconte. 187 Bressia and Bergamo taken by Luchin. ibid. Building of Saint
Anthonies Hospital. 194 Battle betwixt the Venetians and Genoueses. 203 By
what means the plot was discovered. 208 Base retreat of the Almans. 226 By
what means the Isle of Tenedos came into the Venetians possession. 232 Battle
at Sea with the Genoueses. 233 Bebia recovered. 264 Bressia and Senia taken by
Lauretano. 267 Boucicault a French man, General of the Genoa-army. 281 Both
fleets dissemble. ibid. Bathes in time past at Vero^a. 286 Boldness of
Picinino, one of Philips Captains. 312 Brissels taken. 315 Battle betwixt the
Venetians and Philip. 319 Bressia somewhat relieved 362 Barbaro his politic
wisdom. 368 Bressians term Barbaro Father of their country. ibid. Bressians
are put to rout. 369 Brave message of the Governor of the old Palace to the
Prince of Mantua. 376 Bressia is relieved with victuals. 379 Borsia de Aeste is
put to rout. 384 Bregnan, Trioill, and Rimolca in the Gyradade recovered by
Sforza. 385 Battle of Anglare betwixt Picinino and those of the league. 386
Bressians recompensed for their loyalty. 388 Bistice assailed by the Venetians.
396 Bologneses having recovered their liberty, crave the alliance of the
Venetians and Florentines. 399 Bertoldo D'Aeste is slain at the siege of
Corinth. 433 Bartholomeo of Bergamo brings forces into Tus^anie. 440 Battle
of Molinella. ibid.
C
CReation of Tribunes. 8 Coming of the Lombards into Italy. ibid. Churches
builded by Narses. 9 Church of Grada made Metropolitan by the Pope. 10 Church
of Grada robbed. ibid. Complaint against the Tribunes. 11 Creation of Exarch.
14 Conspiracy against the Duke. 20 Cruel death of the bishop of Grada 21
Conspiracy against the Duke discovered. ibid. Cause of the war betwixt the
two Empires. 22 Coming of Theodosius to Venice. 34 City of Crotona. ibid.
City of Venice new fortified. 39 Civil war betwixt the Hunnes. 40
Commachians vanquished. 43 Complaints against the Narentines. 45 Church of the
Augustines builded. 46 Complaint of Vitalis bishop of Grada. 51 Civil
discords. 53 Cruel intent of the Calloprini. ibi. Calloprini return to
Venice. 54 City of Pharos destroyed. 58 Conditions of peace granted to the
Narentines. ibid. Church and Monastery of Bennet, builded by the Phaledrini.
60 Conspiracy against the Duke, and his banishment. 61 Centranico deposed from
his dignity, is by the people shorn, and made a Monk. 62 Custom of taking a
Colleague into the Principality abolished. 63 Cruelty of the Mahometans. 70
Charlemain his exploits against the Infidells. 71 Complaints of the Christians
before Antioch. 78 Caesarea. 80 Christians besiege Jerusalem. 82 Christians
take Jerusalem. 83 Castle of Soball built by Baldwin. 86 Chioggia built with
the ruins of Malamoc. 87 Ciprians Monastery built. ibi. Caloman king of
Hungary dies suddenly. 88 Croatia brought under the Venetians obedience.
ibid. Conditions granted by Varimond to the Venetians. 92 Christians
stratageme before Tire. 93 Corfu taken by the Venetians. 98 Contagious
sickness in the Venetian army. 103 Creation of the Ten. 104 Cruelty against
the Law of Nations. 105 Cruel determination of a woman. ibid. Christian
Princes arrived at Venice. 116 Complaint and request of young Alexis. 117
Constantinople besieged by Sea and Land. 118 Constantinople besieged the second
time. 121 Constantinople yeeldes. ibid. Coronation of the Emperor Baldwin. 122
Cause why the Emperor Emanuell hated the Venetians. ibid. Colonie sent into
Corfu. 127 Count of Auxerre chosen Emperor of the East. ibid. Count Mailloc his
enterprise upon Candie. 130 Colonie sent to Candie. 131 Candace taken by
Tepulo. 132 Cyani willingly deposes himself. 134 Constantinople besieged
again by Vattasus. 137 Craft and subt^ltie of the Genoueses. 138 Court of
Requests established in Venice. 139 City of Pola taken and ruined. 140 City
of Epidauro called at this day Maluasia. 149 Cruelty of the Greeks and
Genoueses. 150 Christians in Syria divided in to sac^ions. ibid. Cania in
Candie ruined by the Genoueses. 152 Certain Genoa ships taken by the Venetians
ibid. Carolo and Andraea Dandulo Generalles of the Venetian Army. 165 Cydon in
Candie taken by the Genoueses. 166 City of Ferrara recovered by the Popes
Legate. 168 Conspiracy of Tepulo. ibid. Conspirators purpose. ibid.
Conspirators assail the Dukes palace. 169 Course of the war with those of
Escalla. 176 Cause why the Paduans revolted from those of Escalla. 185
Caminensis wife slain in the habit of a servant. 186 Charles son to the king
of Boheme, encamped before Feltra. ibid. City of Feltra taken by the king of
Hungary. 187 Candie is appeased by the Rebels punishment. 191 Certain Lords
of Candie do rebel. ibid. Chief conspiratours punished. 208 Cause of the
war betwixt the Venetians and the king of Hungary. 212 Commissioners sent
into Candie to appease the troubles. 216 Calergo the murderer taken. 218
Candiots resolve to yield to the Genouese. ibid. Candiots cruelty to the
Venetians. 219 Candiots defeated. 220 City of Candace yielded. ibid. Candiots
defeated and put to flight by Giacomo Bragadino. 222 Contareni his fault
inexcusable. 225 Carrario his purpose discouerd. 226 Cause of the fourth war
with the Genoueses. 231 Carrario begins war against the Venetians. 234
Cause of the taking of Famagosta. ibid. Cities of Cesalta and Saligetta taken.
237 Caballa of Verona, General of the Venetian footmen. 241 Carrario joins
himself with the Genoueses. 242 Chiurani, for not doing his duty is condemned
to perpetual imprisonment. ibid. Cap-darger taken by Carrario. 245 Common
complaint of the people. 246 Charles, son to Lewis King of Hungary, comes
before Treuiso. 248 Charles returns to Hungary. 249 Citizens resolution.
ibid. Caloianes earnest entreaty to the Venetians for succor. 252 Cornari
seizes on Brondolli. 253 Carolo Zeni arriueth in the haven of Chioggia. 255
Cap-Histria taken by the Genoueses and given to the Patriarch of Aquileia. 264
Carolo Zeni General of the Venetian army. 266 Cape-Histria taken by the
Genoueses. 271 Conditions of peace betwixt the Venetians and the Genoueses. 274
Cruel war at Tenedos. 276 Carrario imprisoned in the Medozian Tower. 279
Carrario his lands divided. ibi. Castle of Padua recovered for Nouello. ibid.
Carrarians make incursions on the Vencenzans. 282 Carrario wrongeth the
Venetian Ambassador. 283 Carolo Malateste of Arimini general of the Venetians
army. 284 Conditions of peace made with Albert Aeste. 285 Conditions of peace
propounded unto Carrario. 287 Carrario his great cruelty. 288 Ciuidalians
yield to the Venetians. 293 Carmagnolla leaves Philip, and comes to the
Venetian. 297 Cornari his Oration to Philip. ibid. Carmagnolla called into the
Senate, with his Inuectiue against Philip. 302 Carmagnolla General to the
Venetians. 307 Certain Venetian troops defeated by the army of Philip. 310
Castle of Bressia yielded to the Venetians. 312 Casal-Maior taken by Picinino.
315 Carnagnolla before Monteclaro. 317 Carolo Malateste General of Philips
army. 320 Chief cause of Carmagnolla his death. 321 Cause of the renewing of
the war betwixt the Venetians and Philip. 323 Carmagnolla escapes by flight.
328 Carmagnolla gives over his charge, for sorrow that he had done a fault. 331
Carmagnolla convicted of treason is beheaded. 334 Cornari dies in prison. 336
Cause of the renewing the war betwixt the Venetians and Philip. 338 Carrario
comes forth of Germany to take Padua. 339 Carrario is discovered and executed
at Venice. 340 Cosmo de Medicis sent to Venice. 344 Cosmo goes to the Pope.
346 Casall yields to Picinino. 348 Cause of the commotion of Padua and
Vincenza. 367 Commissioners of Verona come to Venice. 378 City of Antiuari
subject to the Venetians. 396 Christians possess the Straight. 397 Cause of
Sforza's hatred to king Alphonso. 398 Ciarpelions death. 400 Carolo Montone
takes the Venetians party. 403 Coione takes the Venetia^s part. 406 Coyone his
victory. 409 Crenia yeeldes to the Venetians. 411 Coyone assailed by command of
the Senate. 416 Carolo Gonzaga imploreth the Venetians aid. ibid. Coyone makes
incursions upon the Bressan territory. 418 Constantinople besieged. 422
Captains of galleys punished for leaving the fleet without license. 425
Conditions of peace concluded betwixt Sforza and the Florentines by means of
an Hermit. 426 Cause of the war betwixt the Thryestines and those of Cape
Histria. 434 Capel his exploits. 439 Capel dies with grief. 440 Canalis
speech to Mocenigo. 447 Canalis condemned to perpetual banishment. ibid.
Commissioners return from Constantinople without any conolusion. ibi. Coccina
in the Isle of Lemnos is reedified. 448 City of Vdina affrighted at the
coming of the Turks. 454 Christians besiege Smyrna. 465 Coric yielded. 468
Caraman his present to the Venetian. ibid. Conspirators fly from Cyprus. 475
Croia yielded to the Turks. 486 Conditions of peace betwixt Ottoman and the
Venetians. ibi. Confederate army against the Florentines. 489 Comparison
betwixt the Romans and Venetians. 491 Cause of the war of Ferrara. 493
Castel-nouo yields to the Venet. 498 Conditions of peace betwixt the States of
Italy and the Venetians, upon the end of the (...) of Lombardie. 516 Ceremony
at the Duke of Venice his funeral. 522 Charles the eight French king sends an
Ambassador to Venice: with the Senates answer. 532
D
Diverse opinions of the Historians concerning this History. 3 Duke Paulutio
the first takes oath. 12 Duke Horteo murtherd by his own Citizens. 14
Difference arising about the c^eation of a new Duke. ib. Dominico Leon, the
first master or Colonel of the men at arms. ib. Duke Giouanni and his son
expelled the City. 21 Description of the situation of Venice 24 Different
intents of Combatants. 25 Dukes Palace in Rial^o. 27 Description of the Dukes
Palace. ibi. Duke Giouanni flies. 32 Duke Giouanni deposed from his charge,
and becomes a Priest. 33 Duke Tradonico murdered. 35 Dorsse-Dura newly
inhabited. 37 Duke Giouanni his brother taken by the Count of Commachia. 38
Duke Giouanni does voluntarily depose himself. ibid. Duke Pietro dies
fighting with the Narentines. 39 Duke Vrso his son taken at sea* 42 Duke Vrso
voluntarily deposes him self, and becomes a Monk. ibid. Duke Pietro his
son, who was his Colleague, stirs up sedition in the City, and is banished.
45 Duke Pietro dies for grief. ibi. Duke Pietro the fourth marries Walderta
daughter to Guido. 46 Duke Pietro his tyranny. ibid. Death of the Duke and his
son. 47 Duke Pietro Vrseolo his secret departure. 52 Dominico Morosino murdered.
54 Death of Otho the second, Emperor. ibid. Duke Tribuno voluntarily deposes
himself. 55 Description of Illyria. 56 Duke Vrseolo the second his great
wisdom: permitted to associate his son Giouanni into the government. 59
Duke Vrseolo the 2. his last will. 60 Dominico Vrseolo usurps the Dukes
Palace. 62 Durazzo besieged by the Normans. 66 Description of Jerusalem. 81
Duke of Venice comes to Jerusalem. 92 Description of Tire. ibid. Distrust
conceived against the Venetians. 93 Death of Rogero King of Sicil. 99 Diverse
opinions of the Historians concerning the reconciliation of Pope Alexander and
Frederick the Emperor. 109 Death of Cyani, and his last will. 110 Description
of S. Marks church. ibi. Description of Constantinople. 118 Discreet answer of
a young Emperor. 120 Death of the Emperor Baldwin. 122 Decree of the Venetians
about possession of the Islands. 124 Damiet in Aegipt taken. 128 Description of
the I Will of Candie. 129 Death of Theodore son to Vattasus. 148 Death of
Baiamont. 169 Dalmasio the Spaniard proves a traitor to the Venetians. 171
Dalmasio divinely punished for his treachery. ibid. Dandulos piety
acknowledged. 173 Description of the Arcenall. ibid. Diverse sorts of
Earthquakes. 196 Discreet act of the General. 199 Doria spoileth the
Adriaticke Gulf. 205 Duke of Venice denied a pasport. 213 Duke of Austria
comes to Venice. 215 Dominico Michaeli General of the Venetians nauall army.
217 Demand of the Greek multitude. ibi. Death of Nicholao Dandulo and his
brother. 221 Duke of Austria brings aid to the Thryestines. 226 Diverse
opinions concerning Rainiero his dismission. 229 Diverse opinions in the Senate
concerning the taking of Tenedos. 232 Diverse opinions concerning the taking of
Famagosta. 235 Description of the haven of Brandissa 236 Description of the
city Chioggia. 243 Diligence used in fortifications. 247 Diverse and sundry
incounters where the Venetians had the better. 248 Dandulo goes to Venice
about the soldiers demands. 269 Duke of Sauoy a Mediator for peace. 272
Diverse public shows made in the city for love to the Duke. 280 Death of Paulo
Sabello. 285 Duke of Milan his victory over the Florentines. 296 Description
of Bressia. 308 Duke of Sauoy and Montferrat make incursions on the Milanois.
319 Double treachery upon the Castle of Soncina. 328 Discourse betwixt Gonzaga
and the Venetians. 347 Description of the lake of Benac. 349 Duke of Ferrara
complains unto the Pope. 352 Death of Pietro Lauretano, and his strange
burial. 360 Disposition of Picinino. 374 Doubt of those of Verona. 375
Description of the River Adice. 376 Diverse Galleys armed at Venice against the
Turks. 397 Diversity of opinions in the Venetians camp. 407 Dandulo his brave
answer. ibid. Diverse towns of the State of Milan yield to Sforza. 409 Death
of Hermolao Donato. 416 Death of the last Emperor of Constantinople. 424
Description of Morea. 431 Description of Corinth. 433 Death of Hieronimo
Barbad^co. 440 Description of the Isle of Nigrepont. 4^2 Description of the
Isle of Chios. 445 Description of the Isle of Cyprus. 475 Death of Julian de
Medicis. 489 Death of Ottoman. 492 Description of the Isle of Rhodes. ibid.
Duke of Ferrara declares himself enemy to the Venetians. 494 Description of
Lombardie. 495 Death of Roberto of Arimini. 502 Defeat of the Ferrarois. 503
Duke of Lorraine returns into France. 509 Death of Giouan Heme. 510 Diverse
expostulations upon the yielding of Azzola. 511 Death of General Marcello. 514
Dukes Palace reedified. 516 Death of old Sanseuer in the noble Venetian
General. 527
E
EXtent of the Country of Venice. 2 Exhortation to the Venetians. 40 Enemies
that came to sccour Antioch, defeated. 78 Emanuel his request against the
Normans. 98 Emanuel his Ambassadors at Venice. 101 Emanuel seizes on the
Cities of Dalmatia. 102 Example of great affection to a man's Country. 104
Example of great love toward ones country. 114 Eccelin in Padua. 138 Eccelin,
what he was, with his coming into Italy. ibid. Eccelin before Mantua. 143
Eccelin his cruelty against the Paduans. ibid. Enforced peace betwixt the
Venetians and the Genoueses. 166 Enterprise against the Turks broken. 175
Earthquakes of diverse sorts. 196 Earldom of Val-marin fallen to the Venetians
by the death of Phalerio. 211 Enemies cunning. 244 Enemies unjust demands. 248
Enterprise attempted with bad success. 251 Entertainment given by the
Christian Princes to the Venetian Ambassadors. 217 Entertainment given to the
Veronagentleman. 288 Effect of Cornari his Oration to Philip. 297 Exploits of
Philip. 314 Eugenius the Pope leaves Rome, and comes to Florence. 338
Eugenius the Pope, Venetians, and Florentines in league together. 339 Enemies
intent against the Venetians. 354 Enemies are driven from the mountains
tops. 355 Enemies assail the forragers. 358 Enemies answer to Sforza who
offered them battle. 369 Enemies take the Castle of Maderna. 371 Enemies
vanquished at Thyenna. 373 Enemies in Verona. 374 Enemies fly from Verona. 377
Effect of Auogrades speech to Sforza. 383 Eugenius the Pope his death. 402
Emperor of Constantinople in despair. 424 Enemy builds a bridge over the
Gulf at Nigrepont. 442 Enemies fleet afraid of the Venetians. 446 Enemies take
the Isle of Lissa. 509 Enemies retires from Corfou. 510
F
FOundation of Padua. 2 Fruitfulnes of the Venetians country. ibid. Foundation
of the Rialto. 3 Four and twenty houses burned at once. 5 From whence the
Venetians that now are be descended. 6 First government of Venice under
Consuls. 7 From whence the Lombards are descended. 8 Foundation of Heraclea. 10
Foundation of Equiline. 11 Faelix Cornicula, the second master or Colonel of
the men at Arms. 14 First association into the Principality. 20 French take
Commada. 23 French vanquished by the Venetians. 25 From whence came the name of
Saracens. 29 From whence the Sarracen Moors are descended. 34 Flight of the
Calloprini to the Emrour Otho, with their promise to him. 54 Forty Narentine
Merchants taken. 57 Family of the Vrseoli for ever banished from the city. 63
French arrive at Constantinople. 72 Frenchmen and Venetians joined together. 84
Faneses made tributary to the Venetians. 97 Family of the Iustiniani worn out
by the sickness: and again restored. 103 Flight of Pope Alexander. 107
Frederickes answer to the Venetian Ambassadors. 108 Frederickes menaces. ibid.
Frederickes fleet put to flight, and his son brought prisoner to Venice.
ibid. Fourth rebellion of Zara. 113 Frederick the Emperor dies in Armenia.
114 Famine in the Camp before Ptolomais. ibid. Flight of Alexis. 119 Fifteen
men appointed to elect a new Emperor. 121 Friendship betwixt the Emperor
Robert and the Venetian Magistrate. 128 Frederick against the Venetians. 139
Fifth rebellion of Zara. 140 Form of the electing the Venetian Prince. 141
Flight of Ansedin. 143 Fleet of the Genoueses in the Adriaticke sea. 164 Fort
of Thealdo taken by the Venetians. 168 Francisco Dandulo his great piety. 172
False reports against the Genoueses. 173 Fort of the salt pits taken. 184 From
whence the contagion came to Venice. 197 Four new Officers created in the
Army. 202 Fear, which was in Venice for the enemies coming. 205 Fifteen
villages revolt. 222 Fontaino's exhortation to his soldiers. 229 Feltra
besieged by the Venetians. 231 Famagosta taken by the Genoueses. 234 Flight of
three Genoueses galleys. 236 Flight and deceit of the Venetians. 240 Fort of
Nasariola taken. 242 Famine enforces the Genoueses in Chioggia to yield. 262
French Kings Nephew and Duke of Austria come to Venice, to go to the holy
Sepulcher. 280 Frenchmen punished for indiscreet speaking. 282 Francisco
Gonzaga General of another Army for the Venetians. 284 Francisco Carrario his
great cruelty. 288 Forty Gentlemen of Verona come to Venice in Embassage.
ibid. Faires of Tanerobbed and spoiled by the Scythians. 291 Florentines
Embassage to the Venetians. 296 Florentine ambassadors Oration. 299 Florentines
overcome the Crenonois under the conduct of Nicholao d'AEst. 308 Francisco
Sforza commanded to relieve Bressia. ibid. Francisco Gonzaga a brave and
courageous Captain. 309 Fregosi banished from Genoa defeated. 315 Fortes
builded by Philip in the midst of the Po. 316 Fortes taken by the Venetians.
ibid. Florentines avouch what Bracchian had done: and will him to proceed on.
325 Florentines defeated by Picinino. 326 Four Venetian galleys taken. 330
Fiesca and Adorini are treacherously slain. 332 Francisco Gonzaga gives over
his place of General. 344 Florentines answer to Sforza. ibid. Five and 20000.
men in the Venetian Camp. 350 Famine and Pestilence afflict the besieged
Bressians. 357 Fight betwixt Paris Lodron and Italus. 359 Forlimpopoli is taken
by Sforza 366 From whence the Hadrtatick sea takes the name. 367 Fight betwixt
the Bressians and Italus. 369 Fear of the Florentines. 380 Francisco Barbaro
highly esteemed in Venice. 388 Fight betwixt Picinino and Sforza broken off by
approach of night. 390 Famous theft enterprised by a Greek. 409 Frederick the
Emperor with his wife comes into Italy. 415 Florentines send to the French
King. 418 Florentines recover Foglian. 421 From whence Dyrrachium took the
name. 477 From whence the Po took her name. 497 Ferrarois abandon Trecenta.
498 Ferrarois complaints. 504 Florentines crave Council of the Venetians: with
their answer. 535
G.
General assembly held at Heraclea 11 Government of Dukes restored. 17 Greeks
defeated before Commada. 23 Giouanni deposed by the people. 28 Greeks fly. 35
Great strife among the Citizens. ibid. Giouanni Partitiatio takes again the
Government upon him. 39 Great cruelty of the Huns. 40 Great praise given to
the Duke Tribuno. 41 General Council held at Rome, declares the Church of
Grada for Metropolitan. 46 Great harm done by fire. 47 Guerin comes in
Pilgrimage to Venice. 52 Great ingratitude of the Venetians. 33 Greeks over
thrown by the Normans before Durazzo. 67 Great effusion of blood in the
Temple. 83 Godfrey of Bolloigne King of Jerusalem. ibid. Great privileges
granted to the Venetians by the Emperor Henry the fourth. 86 General Council
published to be held at Dijon. 106 Great famine in the Camp before Ptolomais.
114 Great ingratitude and cruelty of a brother. 116 Greeks put to flight
near Constantinople. 110 Genoueses defeated by the Venetians. 125 Great
friendship betwixt the Empero^ur and the Venetian Magistrate. 128 Governor of
Candie flies disguised like a woman. 131 Great reasons in Sanuto's behalf. 132
Gradonico dies. 135 Greeks defeated. 137 Genoueses resolution. 147 Genoueses
defeated by the Venetians. 148 Great treachery of a Greek. ibid. Genoueses
defeated by the Venetians. 148 Great treachery of a Greek. ibid. Genoueses
league with Palcologus. 149 Genoueses put to flight. 150 Genoueses defeated
before Trapani. 151 Genoueses come into Candie. 152 Great scarcity of victuals
in Venice. 153 General of the Venetian Army punished. 157 Great ouerflowing
of the sea, with an earthquake. 158 Godly deeds done by Prince Marini. 171
Great piety of Francisco Dandulo. 172 Girard Caminensis takes Vderza 181
Great insolences of the Lancequenets. 184 Great dearth in Venice. 191 Great
desolation in Venice. 197 Genoueses take Nigrepont. 199 Greeks base flight.
201 Grimaldi General of the Genoueses. 203 Great cruelty falsely imputed to the
Venetians ibid. Great lame^tation made at Genoa. 204 Genoueses commit
themselves to Giouanni Viscont Archbishop of Milan. ibid. Genoueses take
Parenza. 205 Great discomfort in Venice. 207 Great bravery of a Genoueses
gallie. ibid. Great sedition in Candie. 216 Genoueses answer to the Ca^diots.
218 Great joy at Venice for the recovery of Candie. 220 Great boldness of the
rebels. 222 Giacomo Caballa General of the Venetians Army by land. 230 Great
ingratitude of a son to his father. 232 Governor of the Island for the
father refuses to obaie the rebellious son. ibid. Genoueses surprise Lemnos.
233 Greeks and Genoueses defeated by Zeni at Tenedos. ibid. Genoueses allie
themselves against the Venetians with the King of Hungary, Bishop of Aquileia
and the Carrarians. ibid. Genoueses put to flight. ibid. Girard Caminensis
takes the enemies party. 234 Genoueses revenge. ibid. Genoueses fly from the
fight. 239 Genoueses challenge the Venetians. 240 Genoueses before Chioggia. 241
Genoueses take Loretta and the Tower of Bebia. 245 Great sorrow in Venice for
the loss of Chioggia. ibid. Genoueses wholly ruinate Malamock and Poueggia.
250 Genoueses fortify Chioggia. 251 Great loss sustained by the Genoueses at
the taking of Brondolli. 258 Genoueses put all unprofitable eaters forth of
Chioggia. ibid. Genoueses policy to get forth in despite of the Venetians.
261 Genoueses on their knees beg life. ibid. Great dearth in Treuiso. 267
Garrison of Nouella for want of pay, yield it to Carrario. 270 Genoueses fleet
flies. 271 Genoa-prisoners in great danger at Venice. 272 Genoueses take 14.
Venetian vessels. ib. Galeas Visconte takes Padua. 278 Galeas besieges Mantua
with forty thousand men. 279 Caleas is repulsed by water and land ibid.
Genoueses great loss. 281 Giles the black greatly honored. 282 Giacomo
Carrario departing from Verona, is taken in flight. 285 Gonzaga besieges
Padua. 286 Giouanni of Padua punished for having secret conference with the
enemy. 287 Gonzaga his answer to Carrario. ibid. Great contention among the
Sibensans. 291 Great cruelty of the King of Hungary. 292 Great disorder in
the battle by reason of dust which blinded the soldiers. 319 Guenesio going
about to treat with the Florentines is discovered by Sforza. 326 Genoueses
revolt from Philip. 340 Grecian Emperor and the chief of the Greeks Empire,
come to Venice to confer with the Pope about religion. 342 Gone zaga makes
alliance with Philip. 347 Great spoil in the Camonic valley. 350 Great
disloialtie. 355 Great distress of the Bressians. 368 Great extremity of
Bressia. 370 Great joy in Venice upon the recovery of Verona. 378 Giouanni
Cornetano is committed to prison in S. Angelo's castle. 379 Great cruelty. 383
Great entertainment given to Sforza at Venice. 388 Great triumphs at Venice at
the wedding of the Princes son. ibid. Gotholans vanquished at Ortona. 411
Great entertainme^t given to the EmFrederick at Venice. 416 Great rejoicing at
Venice in regard of the peace. 426 Genoueses come into Morea about the yielding
up of the Island. 427 Gauardo Iustinopolitato is sent against the Thryestines.
435 Giacomo Venieri returns safe to the Fleet. 438 Great outrage committed in
Oenos. 441 Great valor of a young maid. 481 Galeas Duke of Milan s^aine at
Mess. 489 Governor of Coric his answer to Mocenigos Herald. 486 Great
mortality in the Venetian Camp. 501 Greatness of the Vrsini. ibid.
Gallipolis taken. 514 Great prosperity of the Venetian State. 521
H.
HOw the Islands were inhabited. 3 How the Original of Venice happened. 5
Heraclea after it was repaired, was named Villa-noua. 27 Huns come into Italy
the second time 39 Hunnes assailed Venice. 40 Husband and wife vow chastity.
51 Histrians tributary to the Venetia^s. ib. How tho Prince spent his time till
he departed. 52 Hadrians defeated by the Duke. 60 Henry the Emp. comes to
Venice. 68 Hugo comes to aid Beamond. 72 How great Beamond's authority was.
78 How glad the Army was to fight, to free themsel^es from famine. ibid.
Hnngarians give over their pretended right to Dalmatia. 84 How the Columns
were erected, and by whom. 105 How the Venetians entertained the Pope when they
knew him. 107 How far Otho his entreatie prevailed with his father. 109 How
long the Venetian Princes have used the Canopie. ibid. Histria reduced to the
Venetians obedience. 117 Henry, brother to Baldwin, Empeperour of the East. 112
Henry the fisher makes attempts on the Isle of Candie. 125 How great mischief
the Emperors absence out of Italy has caused. 167 How highly Pietro Rossis
was lamented. 188 How men may foretell an earthquake. 196 How long the
Earthquake lasted at Venice. 197 Histrians reduced to the Venetians obedience.
ibid. How the Senate disdained the loss of the battle. 202 How hardly
Contareni accepted his dignity. 225 Hungarians come to aid the Paduduans. 228
Humaga, Grada, and Caorli taken by the Genoueses. 241 How the Mariners loved
Pisani. ibid Haven of Venice fortified. ibid. Hatred which Nouello bare to the
Venetians. 282 How much money was spent in the war with the Carrarians. 288
How secret those things are kept, which are determined in the Senate. 334
Hannibal Bentiuole trecherously murdered by his enemies. 399 Honest answer of
the Florentines. 427 Happiness and content of Venice during Foscari his
Principality. 430 Hadria taken by the Venetians. 498 Hercules d'AEste comes to
the relief of Stellata. 510 Hercules plaintiue letters to Alphonso his
brother. 512 How much the Venetians spent in the war of Lombardie. 516
I.
I Vliano Cepari, the fourth Master or Colonel of the men at Arms. 14
Iustiniano, the Dukes son sent to Constantinople. 27 Justinians last will and
Testament. 31 Infidels advertised of the Christians enterprise. 72 Infidels
retire. 74 Jerusalem. 80 In whose time the Turks recovered the holy land. 95
Incursions of the Bandetti of Zara. 118 Isaac the Emperor ratifies what his
son had promised. 119 Isaac delivered out of prison. ibid. Isaac dies
suddenly. ibid. Isle of Candie given to the Venetians. 122 It is lawful for all
men to defend their own. 138 I^ppa besieged by the Barbarians. 91 Inconstancy
and lightness of the Greeks. 151 Ingratitude of the Venetians neighbors. 153
Incursions of the Turks. 175 In what place and manner the battle was fought.
203 Ingratitude of a son to his father. 232 In what manner Pisani fortified
Venice. 247 In what place Zeni received news of the loss of Chioggia, and the
Cities siege. 252 Jealousy betwixt Pisani and Thaddeo Iustiniano. 254 John d'
Agons a Frenchman General of the Venetian Army. 257 Iustiniano is sent to
Apulia to forage. 259 Iustiniano is taken by the Genoueses. ibid. In what
esteem the City of Verona is. 286 Incursions of Nichola Stella, upon the
Lucan territories. 324 Italus of Friull, and Giacomo Guiuano are put to death.
401 Inestimable value of the treasure of Venice. 410 Invention of the Art of
Printing attributed to a German. 431 Isle of Lemnos delivered to the Venetians.
436 Isle of Delos described. 451 Italian Princes send a present to Matthias
King of Hungary. 479
L.
LOmbards give limits to the Venetians. 8 Luitprand Duke of Forleini. 11 Leo
the Emperor gives many goodly relics to the Prince. 28 Lewis King of
Germany, Tributary rye to the Huns. 40 Leo the Pope comes to Venice. 64 Leo
the Pope vanquished by the Normans. 65 Length of the siege of Antioch, with the
want in the Army. 78 League with Wil^iam King of Sicill 100. League of Achaia
with the Venetians. 150 League renewed betwixt Paleologus and the Venetians.
155 Ligustick and Lybick war had almost one self same end. 163 League and
alliance against those of Escalla. 176 Lewis King of Hungary defeated before
Zara. 195 Luchin Vermio of Verona, General of the land Army. 217 Lightness
and inconstancy of the multitude. 218 Lithernians return to the Venetians
obedience. 223 Liberal offer made to the Senate by a Citizen of Chioggia. 250
Loretta recovered. 256 Leopold accepts the Venetians offer. 278 Leopold his
proud answer to the Paduan. 273 Leopold enters Treuiso. ibid. Leopold
renders Treuiso to Carrario upon conditions. 277 League against Galeas
Viscont. ibid Ladislaus sells Zara to the Venetians. 290 Lauretano respected
and beloved of every one. 352 Lauretano besieges Sermon. 360 Legnaga is
taken. 365 Longina is taken by Sforza. 369 La Garda, Bardolin, and Lansiza are
taken. 383 Lionello d' AEst comes to Venice. 397 La Marca reduced under the
Popes obedience. 400 Lodes and Plaisancia yield to the Venetians. 404 Leonesio
his death. 421 Lauretano his exploits in the Isle of Nigrepont. 425 Lamentation
and great courage of a woman. 465 Lodouico Lauretano comes from the Popes
Legate. 470 League betwixt the Venetians and the Kings of Portugal: with the
cause of that league. 518 Law of Nations violated. 524 Luca Pisani his opinion
on Sanseuerino his design. 525
M.
MAcrin Governor of Hungary overcome by the Huns. 3 Monegario his miserable
end. 19 Miraculous aparition of S. Mark 30 Malamoc ruined. 32 Moors return
into Italy. 34 Murcimirus, King of Croatia, sends Ambassadors to the Duke. 57
Molloc, Governor for the Greek Emperor, deceives his fellows. 66 Murasis
yielded. 76 Moors came into Dalmatia. 35 Michael the Emperor, driven from
Constantinople. 66 Murderers punished. 36 Malamoc burnt and drowned. 87
Myrtillus issued from mean parents. 120 Myrtillus speech to the people. Ibid.
Myrtillus flight. 121 Meaning of the Prophecy. 123 Modona and Corona
receptacles of thieves and Pirates, ruined. 125 Mount Ida. 130 Michael
Paleologus his treachery. 148 Mastin beggeth peace of the Venetians. 181
Mastin raises his camp from Pontremolle. 182 Mestra yielded to the Venetians.
185 Mastin incampeth to shut victuals from the Venetians. 186 Marsilio his
answer to the Venetians. 188 Mastin imploreth aid of the Duke of Bauiere,
ibid. Mastin enforced, accepts peace on any conditions. 189 Mastin made a
gentleman of Venice. 190 Manner of Phalerio his conspiracy. 207 Marco Cornari
Vice-duke, during the troubles. 209 Miserable death of Andrea Cornari. 217
Marco Gradonico murdered in the Palace. 218 Mocenigo his resolution. 223
Marsilio Carrario forsakes his brother. 230 Mestra besieged by the Carrarians.
237 Mestra relieved by the Venetians. ibid Mutatio his answer to the Venetians
and Genoueses. ibid. Market place of S. Mark paued with brick. 280 Malateste
gives over the Generals place. 284 Massolerio convicted and punished for
treason. 287 Milanois offer to Philip. 314 Malateste General of Philips Army.
320 Marquis of Montferrat comes for refuge to Venice. 334 Mellato his valor.
343 Mellato conducteth the Venetian Army. 346 Mantuans excuse. 347 Mellato
speedily dislodgeth. 348 Martinenga's and Auogadres in Bressia are reconciled.
349 Mellato comes forth of Bressia, and is constrained to return. 353
Mellato departs from Bressia, and marches toward the mountains. 354 Mantuan
fortifieth Po. 356 Mellato made General of the Venetian Army. 357 Mellato
prouides to relieve Bressia. 359 Mantuans plot to send the war far from his
own Country. 362 Mantuans policy for the passage of his galleys. 363
Mantuans galleys pass into the Adice. 364 Mellato fortifieth the passages
near to Torbolles. 372 Malateste Prince of Cesenna is taken prisoner. 373
Maguis entreats the Prince of Mantua not to spoil Verona. 375 Mantuan
proclaimed Prince of Verona. ibid. Mantuans preparation for defense of Verona.
ibid. Maguis brought before Sforza, is cl^ered. 377 Malatestes take the enemies
party. 379 Mellato his death. 396 Mount Barri is taken. 403 Milaneses suspect
Sforza. 408 Manerbia and Ponteuico yield to Sforza. 421 Malateste besieges
Sparta. 437 Mocenigo his answer to Canalis. 447 Mocenigo his first exploit.
448 Mocenigo his Oration to the Popes Legate. 451 Mocenigo his incursions into
Asia. 454 Mocenigo his answer to the King of Cyprus. 469 Micra is taken by
composition. ibid. Mocenigo his answer to the Ambassadors from the King of
Cyprus his sister. ibid. Mocenigo his answer to Lauretano. 470 Mocenigo
advertised of the enemies purpose. 474 Mocenigo his diligence to relieve
Cyprus. 475 Mocenigo punishes the murderers of Cornari. 476 Mocenigo is
chosen Governor of Cyprus. ibid. Matthias King of Hungary a great soldier.
479 Mantuan Prince goes to the Confederates Army. 509 Mantuan discontented,
leaves the Army. 510 Maximilian is chosen King of the Romans. 521
N.
NArses comes into Italy. 9 Narses answer to the Empress. ibid. Narentines
rodes even to Caorli. 35 Narentines great incursions. 55 New officers sent to
the Cities newly conquered. 58 Normans drive the Saracens and Greeks forth of
Italy. 65 Nicholas the Pope, Tributarie to the Normans. ibid. Normans defeat
Molloc. 66 New titles given to the Duke of Venice. 68 Nicea besieged. 73 Nicea
yielded: and upon what conditions. 74 Number of those who took the Croisado
after the council at Cleremont. 71 Number of the dead Infidels far greater
than of the Christians. 75 Number of the Infidels Army. ibid. New religious
order. 97 New army against the Normans. 98 New deceit of the Greeks. 102 New
manner of electing the Prince. 113 New Army of Christians for recovery of the
Holy Land. 114 Number of the Christian Army. 116 New Greekish invention to
deceive the Christians. 120 New agreement betwixt the Venetians and the
Princes. 121 New strife betwixt the Venetians and Paduans. 126 New commotion in
Candie. 131 Noble courage of a Prenestine. 143 New war against the Greeks.
94 New war against Bolognians. 154 New war with those of Cape-Histria, and
with the Anconitans. 156 New contention with the Paduans. 167 New stirs in
Candie soon suppressed. 174 New Magistrates created. 195 Nicholas Pisani
General of the Venetian Army. 200 New Prouidatori sent with supplies to
Candie. 222 New suplies come to the Army. 225 Nouello son to Francisco
Carrario comes to swear to the peace at Venice. 230 Number of the Genoueses
army. 240 Nou^lla besieged by the enemy. 267 Nouello son to Carrario
recouereth Padua. 279 Number of the Venetians army. 311 Number of Philips
army. ibid. New league against Philip. 314 Number of the Venetians navy. 352
Nicholao de Aeste fortifieth his own estate, and is afterward freed from his
fear and suspicion. 353 Notable service of women. 356 New Orgies yielded to
Picinino by treachery. ibid. Nicolao de Aeste his motion made to the Senate.
358 Nicholao de Aeste is received into the league. 361 News of the league
brought to Venice. 362 Nicholao de Aeste comes to Sforzas camp to treat a
peace. 387 Nicholao de Aeste brings the Lady Bianca to Mantua. ibid. Nauall
Army determined against the Milanois. 404 Nauall Army against Pirates. 405
Nicholo Canalis General of the nauall Army. 441 Nauall Army gives an
assault to Sattalia. 452 Number of the Turks and the Persians Armies. 471
Number of the Turks Army before Scutarie. 477 Noblest families of Rome. 501
O
Original of the Huns, and their coming into Italy. 3 On what day the City
of Venice was builded. 4 Obellerio practices treason against Pepin. 23 Otho
the second hates the Venetitians. 53 Otho the second his design. 54 Otho Duke
of Venice vanquisheth the king of Croatia.. 61 Otho the Duke dies in Greece.
62 Original of the Plays, dedicated to them that are married. 43 Otho the
Emperors answer to Vitalis. 51 Occasion of the war betwixt Alexis and Beamond.
86 Ordelapho comes again into Dalmatia. 88 Ordelapho dies, and the Venetians
are defeated. ibid. Otho his discourse to his father Frederick. 109 Orlando
Rossis chosen General of the Army. 188 Of all earthquakes the agitatio^ of
the water is most dangerous. 196 On what conditions Arbawas delivered to the
Genoueses. 265 On what conditions Te^edos was yeel ded. 276 Officers sent by
the Sen. to Padua. 288 Occasion of the war against Philip Duke of Milan. 295
Oration of Cornari to Philip. 297 Oration of the Florentine Ambassador. 299
Oration of Carmagnolla to the Senate. 302 Oration of the Milanois to Philip.
313 One Prince waits upon another funerals. 430 Occasion of the Ottomans
war against the Venetians. 431 Order of Ottomans camp against the Persian.
470 Ottoman besieges Rhodes. 491 Ottoman takes Ottranto. ibid. Opinion of
those dissuading war with the Ferrarois: with the contaries answer. 494
Original and spring of the Po, with her course. 496 Original of the Rheticke
war. 523
P
PAduan fugitives dwell at Embragola. 10 Pepin king of Italy. 22 Pepin retires
to the firm land. 26 Public games at Shrouetide. 28 Policy of those which
carried Saint Marks body into the ships. 30 Prophecy accomplished. ibid- Pola
an ancient City. 33 Pythagoras and Milo, the two ornaments of the Crotonians.
35 Pope Bennet comes to Venice. ibid. Pouegia newly inhabited. 36 People swear
to the Prince. 50 Palace, and Saint Marks Church repaired. ibid. Prince
resolves to give over his place. 52 Plague and famine in the City. 60 Pepin,
Patriarch of Aquileia, disquiets Grada. 61 Pepin obeyes the Popes
commandment. 64 Pope Leo comes to Venice. ibid. Pope Leo vanquished by the
Normans. 65 Pope Nicholas tributarie to the Normans. ibid. Peter tells his
message to the Pope. 70 Pope Urban comes to the council at Cleremont. ibid.
Pope Urban his Oration. ibid. Peter the hermit ignorant of martial discipline.
72 Prohibitions to pay no more tribute to the Barbarians. 55 Privileges
granted to the Venetians by Henry the fourth. 86 Pope Calixtus his resolution
for succor of the Holy Land. 89 Phaenicians the inuenters of Arithmeticke, the
Alphabet, and Astronomy. 92 Proof of the Venetians loyalie. 93 Paduans
defeated. 97 Plague very great in Venice. 103 Prince Vitalis murdered. 103
Pope Alexander comes to Venice in disguise. 107 Preparations for war against
Frederick. 108 Ptolomais yielded. 114 Pisans take Pola. 115 Pisans defeated by
the Venetians. ibid. Peace granted to the Brundusians. 116 Prince Dandulo
deceaseth. 122 Pleasant games invented at Treuiso. 126 Paduans and Venetians
quarrel at the games at Treuiso. ibid. Paduans make roades on the Venetians.
ibid. Paduans defeated. ibid. Peace betwixt the Paduans and the Venetians. bid.
Peter Count of Auxerre chosen Experour of the East. 127 Pope Gregory's
entreatie to arm against the Turks. 138 Pietro Tepulo defeated and taken
prisoner. 139 Pope Alexanders diligence to make peace betwixt the Venetians and
the Genoueses. 147 Power of the French much decayed in Greece. 148 Paleologus
takes Constantinople. 149 Paleologus ready to leave Constantinople. ibid.
Popular commotion in Venice. 152 Pope Clement endeuoreth to accord the
Venetians and Genoueses. 153 Peace granted to the Bolognians. 155 Paleologus
defeateth them of Nigrepont. ibid. Patriarch of Aquileia succoureth the Rebels.
156 Patriarch of Aquileia allieth himself with Count Gorcian. 158 Patriarchs
Army comes to Thryeste. 159 Pope Nicholas exhorts the Christian Princes to
undertake the voyage into Syria, with his offer. 160 Popular tumult about the
creation of the Duke. ibid. Pisans vanquished by the Genoueses. 164 Pera taken
and burnt by the Venetians. ibid. Punishment of the guilty. 166 Peace with
Paleologus. 167 Punishment of conspirators. 169 Pension given to the woman that
slew Baiamont. ibid. Polans and Valesians brought under the Venetians
obedience. 175 Power of those of Escalla. 176 People come from all parts to the
Venetian Army. 178 Pietro Rossis declared General of the Venetian Army. 179
Pietro Rossis his first victory. 180 Pietro de Rossis arriueth at Venice. 181
Pietro Rossis Oration to his soldiers. 183 Padua reuolteth from those of
Escalla. 187 Pope Clement, the Venetians, and other Christian Princes in league
against the Turk. 193 Pope Clement permits traffic with Infidels. ibid.
Prince Dandulo causes all the decrees of the City to be gathered into one
form. 195 Pagano General of the Genoa Army. 200 Petrarch his speech
concerning the battle. 202 Pisani General of the Venetian Army. 203 Pisani
joins with the Arragonois. ibid. Petrarch Ambassador for the Milanois. 205
Pisani retires to Dalmatia. ibid. Prodigies appear before the loss of the
Army. 207 Phalerio his picture razed out of the great Hall. 208 Phalerio is
put to death by decree of the Senate. 209 Peace betwixt the Venetians and the
Genouses with their allies. 210 Peace refufed on unjust conditions. 213
Pretense of a murderer to execute his enterprise. 217 Popes Indulgences
against the Candiots. 222 Pisani with the Captains of the five Galleys
imprisoned at Venice. 240 Pelestrina taken by the Genoueses. 241 Pisani set at
liberty by the Senates decree. 246 Pisani his great modesty. ibid. Prince
Contareni his speech to Pisani in open Senate. ibid. Pisani his answer to the
Prince. ibid. Pisani restored to his former Office. 247 Prisoners sent home
upon their word. 231 Prince Contareni with his Army in the Haven of Chioggia.
253 Passage of Brondolli shut up to the Genoueses. 254 Pisani appeaseth his
murmuring Soldiers. 255 Pisani enters into Brondolli. 259 Paduans defeated.
ibid. Pola taken by the Genoueses. 264 Paduans besiege Treuiso. 265 Pisani
dies, and is honorably buried. 266 Peace betwixt the Venetians and Genoueses.
273 Perfidious treachery. 282 Paulo Sabello a Roman, General of the
Venetians. 284 Padua taken, and the Tyrant with three of his children brought
to Venice. 288 Prisoners by the Senates command strangled. ibid. Paduans
Ambassadors come to Venice. 289 Pius the Florentine makes incursions on the
Venetians. 292 Prince Mocenigo constrained to pay forfeiture for infringing the
Senates decree. 295 Philip his dissimulation. 296 Philip his answer to
Cornari. 298 Prince Foscari his Oration. 394 Peace between Philip and the
Venetians. 312 Philips complaints to the Popes Nuncio. 313 Philips answer to
the Milanois. ibid. Philip changing his mind, the Milanois wax clold. 314
Philip renews the war with the Venetians. ibid. Philips forces driven forth
of Brissels. 315 Philippes speech to the Milanois. 318 Philip comes to the
Army. ibid. Philips Army marches in battle against the Venetians. 320
Philip has recourse to the Emperor Sigismond. 322 Philip marries the Duke of
Sauoys daughter. ibid. Peace betwixt the Venetians and Philip. ibid. Philippe
contrary to his promise makes war on the Bandetti. 323 Paulo Guenesio Tyrant
of Luca. 324 Prince Foscari outraged by a mad man. 325 Picinino comes to the
aid of the Luquois. 326 Philippe promises to give his daughter in marriage to
Sforza. 327 Picinino defeateth Barnabo Adorini. 333 Picinino and Stella make an
accord together. 338 Pope Eugenius leaves Rome, and comes to Florence. ibid.
Picinino defeateth the Army of the league. 339 Philip solliciteth the Paduans
against the Venetians. 340 Picinino his complaints against the Florentines. 341
Prince of Mantua General of the Venetian Army. 342 Picinino defeateth the
Venetians at Pontoglio. 343 Prince Foscari and the Senates answer to Sforzas
Agent. 344 Picinino encampeth before CasallMaior. 347 Picinino his design to
famish the Venetian Army. 349 Picinino besieges Rhoades. 351 Philip exhorts
his Captains to besiege Bressia. 355 Philip enforced to raise his camp from
Bressia. 357 Penetra yielded to the Venetians. ibid. Pilosus death. ibid.
Philip delayeth and deludeth Sforza. 361 Picinino flouteth Sforza. ibid.
Picinino besieges Legnaga 364 Picinino attempteth to burn the Venetians
Army. 372 Picinino put to rout. ibid. Picinino escapes in disguised hahabit.
373 Picinino makes war in Flaminia. 379 Politiana is taken by Picinino. 380
Picinino his good fortune begins to decline. ibid. Prouidators answer to
Sforza. 383 Picininos project. 385 Picinino despaireth after the loss of the
battle. 386 Picinino his unlooked for arrival into the country of Bressia.
388 Picinino his complaints upon report of peace. 391 Philip is reduced to
great necessity. 390 Peace is concluded betwixt Sforza and Philips
commissioners. 391 Pope Eugenius and Philips discontents. 398 Pope Eugenius,
king Alphonso, and Philip make a league against Sforza. ibid. Picinino
departs from La Marca. ibid. Picinino entirely defeated by Sforza, and the
death of Picinino. 400 Philippes Ambassadors come to Venice to treat of peace.
402 Pope Eugenius death. ibid. Pcinces son confined into Candie. ibid. Plague
in Venice. 403 Philips death. 404 People of Milan come forth disbanded against
Sforza. 409 Peace betwixt the Venetians and king Alphonso. 415 Pope Nicholas
honors the Venetian Prince with the Golden sword, the girdle, and ornament
for his head. ibid. Paleologus the Emperor his exhortation toward his
soldiers. 423 Pope Nicholas his recompense to as many as should arm against
the Turk. 424 Pope Nicholas his Nuncio comes to Venice to tre^t of peace.
42^ Pope Pius comes to Ancona to prepare an Army against the Turks, and there
dies. 438 Pietro Mocenigo is chosen General of the nauall Army. 446 Peace
concluded betwixt Ottoman and the Venetians. 486 Peace betwixt the Florentines
and the associates. 490 Persia^svanquished by the Turks. 470 Pope Sixtus
withdrawes himself from the Venetians. 506 Pope Sixtus excommunicateth the
Venetians. 507 Part of the Dukes Palace burnt 511 Peace concluded betwixt the
States of Italy and the Venetians. 516 Peace betwixt the Pope and Ferdinand.
521 Prince Barbadico his instructions to his children on his death bed. 522
Peace concluded betwixt Sigismond and the Venetians. 528 Philip de Commines
Ambassador for Charles the eighth at Venice. 534
Q
QVirini safe conducts the great vessels to the fleet. 464
R
RAuenna taken by the Venetians. 14 Rialto chosen for the Princes ordinary
residence. 27 Revolt of Cape-darger. 54 Raoul the Norman Captain becoms a
Christian. 65 Raimond, a Germane chosen in the Hermites steed. 72 Raimond
flies to the enemy. ibid. Rebellion of Zara. 87 Rogero son to Guiscard king
of Sicilie. 98 Robert the Emperor his unfortunate marriage. 128 Radamanth and
Minos Lords of Candie. 130 Rainiero Dandulo his death. 131 Request made to the
Venetians for the preservation of the Greek Empire. 136 Reason why the
Venetians suc^oured Constantinople. 138 Rogero Morosino General of the
Venetian army. 164 Rossis departs in disguised habit. 180 Rossis first
exploit. ibid. Rossis receives the ensigns of Saint Mark. 182 Rossis
chalengeth Mastin. 184 Rossis at the gates of Padua. 185 Resolution of a
desperate man. 186 Reward propounded against the Rebels. 191 Reddition of Zara.
195 Rethimna taken by the Rebels. 222 Rebels enforced by famine yield to the
Venetians. 223 Rebels executed. ibid. Rashness of a Rebel. 224 Rainiero Vasco
General of the Venetian Army. 227 Retreat and dismission of the General. 228
Roberto de la Marca hanged at Venice. 261 Resolution of the Counselors of the
widow of Galeas 283 Rampire builded against the Castle of Bressia. 310
Remonstrances of Urban of Dertonna to keep Sforza and Picinino from battle.
339 Rhoades and diverse other Towns yeela to Picinino. 352 Riua is taken by the
Venetians. 383 Rauenna under the Venetians. 387 Ragusa in Dalmatia described.
479 Roberto Malateste General of the venetian Cauallerie. 489 Rouero yielded
to the Almanes on composition. 524 Reception of the Queen of Cyprus at Venice;
530
S
Sundry opinions of Historians concerning the building of the City. 6 Sophia
the Empress reproacheth Narses. 9 Strange prodigies. 10 Succor sent to the
Greek Emperor against the Sarrazens. 29 Saint Peter's Church at Rome taken by
the Moors. 34 Spoils made by the Moors. ibid. Saba the Moore before
Tarentu^. ibid Sarracens before Grada fought withal. 37 Sundry opinions of
the Normans coming into Italy. 66 S. Marks miraculous apparition. 68 Sixty
thousand Turks come to succor Nicea. 73 Soliman General of the army. 75
Strabo his opinion concerning Moses. 82 Sin the cause of the destruction of
Jerusalem. ibid. S. Cyprians monastery builded. 87 Strange case of a Pigeon. 93
Sudden fire. 99 Secret league betwixt the Greek Emperor and the king of
Sicily. 101 Saladines Army defeated. 114 Sedition against the young Emperor.
119 Sedition of the Constantinopolitanes affirming their Church not subject to
Rome. 127 Sedition in Candie. 131 Sanuto comes to aid the Venetians in Candie.
ibid. Sanuto chief of the rebels. 132 Sanuto narrowly follows the enemy.
ibid. Sanuto his design. ibid. Sedition in Candie by overmuch liberty. 134
Sanuto comes to the aid of Candie. 135 Since when the form of electing the
Prince has been in use 142 Sacco taken by the Legate and the venetians. 143
Scarcity of victuals in Venice. 153 Situation of Italy. 162 Sundry opinions
touching the battle at Corfu. 165 Strange death of one of the Generals of the
Venetians Army. ibid. Strange prodigies happened that day that the conspiracy
should have been executed. 169 Sixth rebellion of Zara. 170 Sentence of a great
Captain. 180 Sacceans yield to the venetians. 183 Secret practice of Marsilio
Carrario with the venetians. 185 Serrauall under the venetians. 186 Sundry
opinions upon Earthquakes. 196 Strangers that would come and people the City
made Citizens of Venice. 197 Spoils made by the Candiots. 222 Situation of
Tarentum. 236 Sicco taken by the venetians. 237 Soldiers molested with hunger
and cold. 238 Stratagem to avoid fight. 236 Supplies come to the Genoueses.
244 Seventh rebellion of Zara. 194 Sharp fight in the haven of Brondolli. 254
Senates answer to the garrison of Serrauall. 270 Severe justice of a father on
his own son. 278 Sabello endeuoreth to stay his amazed soldiers. 285 Secret
practices of Marsilio Carrario. 291 Strife betwixt the Bishop of Aquileia and
the Vdinois. 293 Skirmish near unto Cremona, where the venetians had the
worst. 316 Sforza coming to aid the Luquois causes the enemy to raise his
camp 325 Stratagem of Philips Captains. 329 Supplies from Genoa to Chios. 333
Siluester Morosino sent to the aid of Corfu. ibid. Sigismond in the behalf of
Philip comes into Italy. 335 Sigismond crowned Emperor at Rome. ibi. Sforza
seizes on the Marca os Ancona. 338 Sforza his success. ibi. Sforza and
Attendulo join together. ibid. Spinola author of the Genoueses rebellion. 341
Sforza recouereth that which Picinino had taken. ibi. Sforza at the venetians
entreaty com meth to Regio. 343 Sundry exploits betwixt Sforza and Picinino.
344 Sforza his demands to the Senate and the Florentines, with their answer.
ibid. Subtilty of a Centurion. 355 Senates answer to Nicolao D'Aeste 358 Sundry
opinions concerning the venetians retreit. 364 Sforza goes forward toward
Verona. 369 Senats care for the Bressans. 371 Sforza exhorts his soldiers.
373 Sforza his great valor. ibid. Sforza marches to the rescue of Verona. 375
Sforza his speech unto his Captains. 376 Sforza puts supplies into the Fort of
Feliciana. ibid. Sforza his advise to the Prouidator, and Captains of the
army. 383 Sforza vanquisheth the enemies. 384 Soncina taken. ibi. Sforza
recouereth Casal-Maior, and takes Carauazza. 385 Sforza his great conquest.
386 Sforza his answer to those that entreated him to go thither where Bianca
lay. 387 Sforza recouereth the bridge of Valeza. 389 Sforza his speech to his
soldiers. ibi. Sforza besieges Martinenga. 390 Sforza his Oration in the
Senate: with their answer to it. 392 Sforza his speech to his future Bride. 392
Sforza his sentence concerning the strife betwixt the Ambassadors. 393 Sforza
with his wife comes to Venice. 394 Sforza sends his brother to the aid of
Renatus. 398 Sforza comes to the field. 404 Sforza takes diverse towns. 406
Sforza besieges Carauazza. ibid. Sforza defeateth the venetians. 407 Sforza
his resolution and his secret practices with the venetians. 408 Sforza marches
against the Milanois. ibid. Sforza besieges Milan. 409 Sforza his answer to
the proposition of peace. 411 Sforza makes war against Venice and Florence.
412 Sforza his preparations. 414 Sforza his wise and discreet resolution. 415
Sforza is proclaimed Duke of Milah. ibid. Senates decree to get money to
furnish the expense of the war. 417 Sforza with 20000 men comes into the
Bressan territory. ibi. Sforza his troops defeated. 419 Sforza takes
Caluisiana. ibi. Sforza compared to Caesar. ibi. Sforza refuses fight, and
retireth into his winter garrisons. 420 Stephano Porcio his conspiracy against
the Pope. ibid. Stephano Porcio put to death. 421 Sundry incounters betwixt the
venetians and Sforza. ibid. Sforza his exploits in Lo^bardie. 424 Saint Andrews
head brought ^o Rome. 432 Senate grieved at the news of the siege of Nigrepont.
443 Scanderbeg a famous captain. 453 Smyrna is taken by the Christians. 465.
Senate recompenceth the brother and sister of the young man that burned the
Turks galleys. 466 Situation of Coric. 468 Seleucia yields to the venetians.
ibid. Souranza his proposition to the conspirators. 475 Situation of Scutary.
476 Soliman the Eunuch General of the Turks army before Scutary. 477
Scutarians prepare for defense. 478 Siege raised from before Scutary. 480
Soliman besieges Lepanto. 481 Some of the Milanois defeated in an Island. 500
Sanseuerino in battle before Ferrara. 504 Sanseuerino his Apology to the
Senate, with their gracious accep^ation. 508 Situation of Valegia. 511
Sanseuerino comes to Valegia. 511 Sanseuerines speed. 512 Sanseuerino his
magnificent entertainment at Venice. 513 Sanseuerino aids pope Innocent 519
Sanseuerino recouereth Pontenomenta^a. 520 Sanseuerino despoiled of his forces.
521 Sauorgnane defeats the Almaines. 525 Sanseuerino his resolution, ibid.
Siege of Trent resolved. 526 Senate sends George Cornari into Cyprus to demand
the Realm of the Queen for the Venetians: her answer, his reply, and her
consent upon it. 529
T
THe true original of the first Venetians. 2 The trouble which the first
Venetians had to keep that which they had conquered. ibid. The true time when
the City of Venice was built. 6 The parts of man's life compared with Cities.
8 The Triestines defeated. 9 The taking of Rauenna by the Venetians. 14 The
troubles round about Grada. ib. Theodore, the third Master or Colonel of the
men at arms. ib. The retreit of Valentine, and all the Venetians to Rialto. 24
The Princes household servants retired into the Palace capitulate. 36 Three men
appointed by the people to enquire of the Princes murder. ib. Treuiso taken by
the Hunnes. 40 The Dukes son wars on the Venetians. 45 The Duke seeks to
save himself and his young son. 47 The Dukes request to the people. ibi. The
bodies thrown upon the common dunghill. ibi. The Emperors cruel Edict
against the Venetians. 54 The peoples revenge on the Calloprini. ibi. Three
sons of Stephano Calloprini slain. ib. The situation of Pharos. 57 Those of
Pharos summoned. ibi. The taking of the Castle and Town of Pharos called
Lessina. 58 The Emperor graunts sundry privileges to the Venetians. 59 Tho
Emperor Otho comes to Venice in disguise. ibid. The Dukes last will. 60 Too
great niceness of a woman. 84 The sundry passages of the Christians into
Syria. 72 The strength of Nicea. 73 The Turkish succor defeated. 74 The great
danger the Christians were in. ibi. The taking of Iconium. 75 Tharsis being
yielded is given to Baldwin. ibi. Treachery of a Citizen of Antioch. 78 The
taking of Antioch. ibid. Tripoly besieged by the Christians. 79 The defeat of
the enemy before Jerusalem: with the number of the dead 83 Acon taken by
Baldwin. 85 The taking of Sydon. 86 The Castle of Soball builded by Baldwin.
ibi. The Emperors mediation between the Venetians and Paduans. 87 Two great
accidents of fi^e. ibid. Truce with Hungary for 5. years. 88 The Duke of Venice
comes to Jerusalem. 92 The lot fell upon Tire. ib. Tire besieged. ibi. The
distrust conceived against the Venetians. 93 The Christians stratagem before
Tire ibid. The third part of Tire given to the Venetians. 94 The building of
the Hospital of the public charity. 95 The original of the games at
Shrouetide. 101 The answer made to the Greek Ambassadors. ibi. Treachery of
Emanuel. 102 The contagious sickness in the Venetian army. 103 Three great
pillars brought to Venice. 104 The recompense which the Inginer demanded. 105
The true cause of Vitalis his death. 106 The Emperor Fredericks rigorous Edict
against the Pope. 107 The Prince imbarketh himself in the Popes presence. 108
The Emperor arriues at Venice. 109 The Emperors obedience to the Pope. ibid.
The ornaments and ensigns of the venetian Princes. 110 The death of Cyani, and
his last will. ibi. The recovery of Zara. 117 Theodore Lascaris sallies forth
on the Christian pilgrims. 118 The mutual comfort of the father and the son.
119 The treachery of Myrtillus. 120 Thomaso Morosino Patriarch of
Constantinople. 121 The Princes liberality to the new Emperor. ibid. Thrace
reduced to the Emperors obedience. ibi. Thomaso confirmed Patriarch by the
Pope. 122 The names of the Islands possessed by particular persons. 125 The
Bishops See at Malomoc translated to Chioggia. 127 The Emperor Peter murdered.
ib. Tepulo Governor of Candie. 131 Two Prouidators given to every army. 135
The Pope excommunicateth the Emperor Frederick. 139 The rivers Brent and
Bacchillion turned backewards. 142 Twelve thousand Praenestines slain by Sylla
in cold blood. 143 The original of the war betwixt the Venetians and
Genoueses. 146 Their difference referred to the Pope. ibidem The Popes
Sentence. ibidem The treaty of peace broken. 147 To what extreamitie Baldwin
was brought. 149 Treachery of the Greeks against the French. ibid. Tire
besieged by the venetians. 151 The Genoueses ambush discovered. 151 Three
Genoueses galleys taken by the venetians. ibid. The people bear small respect
to the Prince. 152 Truce granted betwixt the venetians and the Genoueses. 154
Those of Ancona complain to the venetians. 155 The truce betwixt the venetians
and the Genoueses prolonged. ib. Thrieste besieged by the venetians. 159 The
distance betwixt Venice and Genoa. 162 The Conspiratours design. 166 The
tenor of the Excommunication. 168 Those of Pera constrained to sue for peace.
173 Turks put to flight by the venetians. 175 Treachery practiced by Mastin.
182 The suburbs of Mestra burnt by Mastin. 183 The territory of Verona spoiled.
186 The King of England craves aid against the French King. 191 Truce take
with Lewis king of Hungary. 197 Those of Cape-histria revolt. ibi. Those
punished which did not follow the Senates commandment. 198 The Genoa-gallies
taken. 199 The army returns to Venice with great booty. 200 Truce taken with
Visconte. 207 The manner of Phalerio his conspiracy. ibi. The discouerer of the
conspiracy recompensed with his discontent. 209 The king of Hungary his great
army in Dalmatia. 212 The king of Hungary besieges Treuiso. ibid. Treuiso
bravely defended. 213 The king infringeth the peace. 214 Threatenings of the
Candiots. 288 The situation of Anopolis. 224 Thryestines do revolt. 225
Thryestines resolve to yield to the Duke of Austria. ibi. Thryestines return
to the venetians obedience. 226 Traitors in the Senate known and punished.
226 The king of Hungary resolves upon peace. 230 The enemies put to flight
before Longina. 231 The Fort of Catharra yielded. 236 The common complaint of
the people. 246 The peoples talk in favor of Pisani. ibi. The Genoueses
determination fearing to be shut up. 253 The Genoueses beat back the
Venetians to their galleys. ibid. The Stellani war on the Genoueses. 254 Two
and fifty galleys in the venetians army by sea. 255 Tumult in the venetian
army. 257 Thryeste reuolteth and yields to the Genoueses. 263 The Castles of
Thryeste razed by the inhabitants. 264 Treachery of two Captains of the
garrison of Conigliana. 272 The traitors punished. ibid. Thryestines yield to
Leopold. 277 The Castle of Padua recovered for Nouello. 279 The death of Paulo
Sabello. 285 The goodly situation of Verona. 286 Two Forts at Verona. ibid. The
poor entertainment which the Paduans gave Carrario returning without peace.
287 The death of Pipus. 292 The Florentines Ambassador at Venice. 298 The
Castle of Bressia yielded to the Venetians. 312 The Dukes of Sauoy and
Montferrat make incursions on the Milanois 319 The chief of Florence animated
against the Venetians. 324 Those of Luca crave aid of the venetians, of
Philip, and the Sienois. ibid. The Prince outraged by a madman. 325
Thessalonica in Macedonia taken by the Turks. 327 Tollentine leaves Philips
party. 329 The Prince of Mantua Genera^l of the venetian army. 334 The two
nauall armies of the venetians and Genoueses return home* 335 Treaty of peace
almost concluded broken off. 341 Those of Casal desire parlie. 347 Treachery
plotted against the vene^ians. 348 The two armies skirmish. 352 The unlooked
for danger whereinto the Commonwealth was like to have fallen. ibi. Those of
the valley of Sabia seek to s^op their passage. 354 The order which the
besieged Bressans kept in the City. 356 The part of a true General of an
army. 373 The valor of Contareni. 382 Three new Procurators of S. Mark
created. 396 The king of Arragons daughter comes to Venice. 397 The thief
that would have robbd the treasury of Venice hanged: and the accuser
recompensed. 410 The king of Bossina sends Presents to the venetian Prince.
416 Turkish cruelty. 424 Turks success both in Asia and Europe. 427 Traitor
punished according to his deserts. 432 Turks before Naples. 434 Turks leave
Naples. ibid. Thryeste besieged. 435 Thryeste and Arimini freed from the siege.
436 Turkish fleet at Tenedos. 441 Turkish fleet before Nigrepont. 442 Treason
discovered. 443 Turks take Nigrepont. 444 Tabia a city of Caria. 450 Turks
put to rout at Pergamus. 451 Turks incursions into Italy. 453 Turks enter
the Country of the Forlani. 454 The Popes Legate his speech to Mocenigo at his
departure. 465 The King of Cyprus speech to Mocenigo. 418 The Turks design
upon the Boyano. 478 The manner of the Turks assault at Scutarie. ibi. The
Turk retireth from the assault. 479 The Turk besieges the Isle of Lemnos.
281 The great valor of a young maid. ibi The Turk besieges Croia. 482 The
Turks come to the river Lizonza. 483 The Turks take the Fort near the
bridge. 484 The Turks burn the Country of Fri^l. 485 The Turks great labor
and danger to pass the mountains. 487 The Coritian Prince flies into
Germany. 493 Two Venetian fleets at once. 495 The State of the Rossians of
Parma yields to Lodowicke. 508 Two of Sanseuerines sons fly to the enemy.
ibid. The Tower Tristania taken. 513 The French King by reason of sickness
staieth at Ast. 537 The King visites John Galeas Duke of Milan: the Duchess
her lamentation to the king: and his answer to her. 538
V
VIsion in a dream. 10 Venetians great modesty. 7 Venetians first voyage to
sea. 8 Vderza ruined by the Lombards. 10 Venetians have ever kept their ancient
liberty. 23 Venetians policy. 25 Venetians resolution. ibid. Venetians
compared with the Romans ibid. Vlric Bishop of Aquilcia vanquished by the
Venetians. 28 Usurper punished. 32 Veronois request against those of Bena^. 33
Venetian army defeated before Crotona. 35 Vrso declared Protos-pater of the
Grecian Empire. 37 Venetians constant resolution. 41 Venetians overcome the
Hunnes. ibi. Vderza taken and ruinated by the Duke. 46 Vrseolo ouercomes the
Sarracens before Barri. 50 Venetians brave resolution. 54 Venetians free over
all the Grecian Empire. 55 Venetians army against the Narentines. 56 Venetian
galleys surprise the haven of Pharos. 57 Venetians army succoreth Nicephorus.
66 Venetians victorious over the Normans. ibid. Venetians defeated. 67
Venetians defeat the Pisans at Rhodes. 77 Venetians take Smyrna. ibid.
Venetians coming into Syria. 83 Venetians take Ascalon. 84 Venetians and
Frenchmen joined together. ibid. Venetians agreement with Caloman, King of
Hungary. ibi. Venetians take Brundusium. ibid. Venetians take Faronia by
assault. 86 Venetians and Paduans reconciled. 87 Venetians resolve to succor
the holy land. 91 Venetians army in Sicilie. 98 Venetians neighbors take
arms against them. 101 Vlrich Bishop of Aquileia brought to Venice prisoner.
ibid. Vitalis Duke of Venice murdered. 103 Venetians bounty to the Christian
Princes. 116 Venetians and the Princes resolve to go to Constantinople. 118
Venetians fleet against the Pirates. 125 Venetians send a Colonie to Candace.
ibid. Venetians army in Candie. 131 Venetian supplies in Candie. 132 Venetians
defeated in Candie. 133 Vattasus his army succoureth the rebels in Candie. 135
Vattasus army leaves Candy and suffers shipwreck. ibi. Vattasus sends new
aid to Candy ibi. Venetians fight with the enemies. 136 Venetians fleet
comes to the aid of Constantinople. ibid. Venetians joy at the return of
their Navy. 137 Vattasus Navy put to flight, and his death. ibid. Venetians
take Frederickes great ship. 139 Venetians commanded to leave Acre. 146
Venetians send a fleet to guard the Islands. 149 Venetians in Nigrepont. 150
Venetians victory against the Geno^eses. 152 Venetian fleet scattered by
tempest. 157 Venetian Ambassadors brought back to Rome. ibi. Venetians take
truce with the King of Rabilon. 159 Venetians offer for the voyage of Syria.
160 Venetians and Genoueses compared to the Romans and Carthaginians. 162
Venetians defeated at Corfu. 165 Venetians defeated at the straight of
Gallipolis. 166 Venetians masters of Ferrara. 167 Venetians excommunicated by
Pope Clement. 168 Venetians restore the Paduans unto their liberty. 174 Viari
confined to perpetual prison* 175 Venetians besiege the Fort of the saltpits.
114 Upon what cause the Venetians made war on those of Escalla. 189
Venetians, Rhodians, and Cypriots defeated by the Turk. 193 Venetians in
league with the King of Arragon. 200 Visconte his answer to the Genoueses. 204
Victory of the Venetians over the Genoueses in Morea. 205 Venetian Senate
displeased with Viscont. ibid. Venetians incensed against Carrario. 213
Venetians enforced to sue for peace. 214 Venetian Ambassadors taken prisoners
in Germany. ibid* Venetians vanquished by the Barbarians. 228 Venetians build
two forts on the lakes. 229 Venetians victory over the Hungarians. ibid.
Venetians General his son taken prisoner. 231 Venetians in Constantinople
wronged. 232 Victor Pisani General of the Venetians. 233 Viscont of Milan
gives his daughter to the King of Cyprus. 234 Venetians take the Haven of
Famagosta. 235 Venetians deceived by the Anconitans, taken and spoiled by the
Genoueses. 239 Venetians enforced to retire into Chioggia 244 Venetians besiege
Pera, in hatred of Andronicus. 252 Venetian barks taken and burnt by the
enemies. 253 Venetians and Genoueses lodge at one time in one Haven. 254
Venetians repulsed from the fort at the Milles. 259 Venetians recover Chioggia.
262 Venetians nauall Army of 100. vessels. 265 Venetians recover Cap-histria.
ibid. Venetians enforced to offer Treuiso to the Duke of Austria. 268 Venetians
hated of all their neighbors. 269 Venetians troubled about the yielding up of
Tenedos. 275 Verona pillaged. 279 Venetians in danger before the coming of
Hermolao. 281 Verona possessed by the Carrarians. 282 Vincenzans aduertisment
to Galeas his widow. 283 Venetians entertain the Vincenzans Commissioners.
ibid. Venetian Garrison sent to Vincenza. ibid. Venetians allie themselves with
Gonzaga. ibid. Venetians nauall Army defeated. 284 Venetians affrighted at the
arrival of young Carrario. 285 Verona in the Venetians power. 286 Venetians
enter Padua in the night by Scalado. 217 Venetians recover Feltre, Belluna, and
other places. 294 Vdinois voluntarily yield to the Venetians. ibid. Venetian
Ambassadors sent to Duke Philip. 296 Venetians denounce war against Philip.
306 Venetians enter Bressia by treachery. 308 Venetians troops defeated by
Philips Army. 310 Venetians send new supplies to Bressia ibid. Venetian
Commissioners ill dealt with at Milan. 313 Ven^tians take Casal-maior. 319
Venetians besiege Macale. 320 Venetians take the new Orges. 321 Venetians
answer to the Ambassadors of Sienna. 325 Venetians summons to Philip. 326
Venetians proclaim war against Philip. 327 Venetians put to rout upon the
Cremonese. 328 Venetians nauall Army defeated. 330 Venetians defeat the
Genoueses Navy. 332 Venetians defeated by Picinino. 335 Venetians persuasions
to the Genoueses. 340 Venetians crave aid of Sforza. 342 Venetians great
distress. 355 Venetians ratify the league with the Florentines. 363 Venetians
victory near the lake of Benac. 365 Union of the Greek Church with the
Latin. 370 Venetians Navy defeated on the lake of La Garda. 371 Veronois
protestations to clear themselves. 377 Venetians victory upon the lake. 382
Venetians take Pescara. 387 Venetians in Sforza's behal^e denounce war to
Philip. 401 Venetians vanquish Philips forces. ibid. Venetians revoke all which
had been given to Sforza. ibid. Venetians take Brebia. 403 Vitalis Sarde the
Pirate hanged. 405 Venetians Nauall Army defeated. 406 Venetians suspect
Sforza. 410 Venetians Nauall Army against Alphonso. 411 Venetians resolve on
war against Sforza, and choose Malateste for their General. 414 Venetians
Ambassador murdered in Milan. 415 Venetian troops come to the gates of
Milan. 417 Venetians besiege Soncina. ibid. Venetians great discretion in doing
nothing without good advise. 426 Venetian Army besiege Argers. 432 Venetians
make a Wall at the Straight. 433 Venetians raise their Camp from before
Corinth. ibid. Vrso Iustiniano is General of the Venetians Navy. 436 Vrso
Iustiniano gives two assaults to Mytilen^. 437 Vrso Iustiniano dies with
grief. ibid. Venetians assault Rhodes. 438 Vittore Capello General of the
Nauall Army. 439 Venetians defeated, and Barbadico the Prouidator slain.
ibid. Venetians take Oenos. 441 Venetian Fleet escapes from the Turks. 442
Venetian Fleet enters the channel of Nigrepont. 443 Venetians enterprise upon
Nigrepont fruitless. ibid. Venetians join with King Ferdinands Fleet. 450
Venetians resolution. 452 Venetians install Hercules d' Est in the
Principality of Ferrara. 454 Venetians present to the Persian king. 466
Venetian Fleet in Cilicia. 467 Venetians take Sichin. ibid. Venetians besiege
Micra. 469 Venetians care for the relief of Scutarie. 477 Venetians prevail
against the Turks. 478 Venetians defeated. 483 Venetians fortifications
against the enemies incursions. ibid. Venetian Captains resolution more
valliant then discreet. 484 Venetians defeated by the Turks. 485 Venetians
aid comes too late into Friull. ibid. Variance betwixt the Venetian General
and the Turks. ibid. Venetians be^iege Ficarolles. 498 Venetians put to rout
and their enterprise made frustrate. 500 Venetians take Ficarolles. 501
Venetians Army crosses the Po. 504 Venetians build a bridge upon the Po near
to Ferrara. ibid. Venetians answer to the Pope. 507 Venetians come to
Stellata. 510 Venetians crave a general Council. 513 Venetians besiege
Gallippolis. 514 Venetians take Calce. 515 Venetians put to rout. ibid.
Venetian Galleys assailed by Pirates. 518 Venetians loyalty. 521 Venetians
defeated. 525 Venetians in amaze. 527 Venetians send a fleet to guard Cyprus.
528
W.
WHereof the Authors meaning is to treat. 1 Who they were that began to fly.
4 What those places were, whereon Venice is at this day built. ibid. Where the
first foundations of the City were laid. ibid. What day the City of Venice
was built. ibid. What manner of people were received into this new City. 5 What
the true foundation of Venice was. 6 Whence the Venetians that now are, be
descended. ibid. What the Venetians exercise was in the beginning. 7 Wherein
the Venetians aided Narses. 9 What moved the Venetians to change the
government. 11 What form they observed at the first Dukes election. 12 What
Bonitendius says concerning the association. 20 Who led the French Army
against the Venetians. 22 Why the French did assail the Venetians. 23
Wherefore they are (...) Perguais. 27 Why S. Marks body was brought from
Alexandria. 30 What moved those of Pharos to defend themselves. 58 What the
Normans were, and their original. 65 Who was the Author of the war against
the Turks. 69 Wonderful vision happened to Peter the Hermit. ibid. What
Charlemaine did against the Infidels. 71 Who gave the name to Armenia. 75 What
Antioch the Christians did besiege. 76 Why Alexis refused Antioch. 79 What
account Baldwin made of Beamond. 85 War against the Paduans with their
discomfiture. 86 When the Loan began at Venice. 106 Wherefore the Emperor
Frederick hated Pope Alexander the third. ibid. What time the Venetian Prince
began to seal with lead. 108 What time the Venetian Prince began to marry the
ses. ibid. Who was the Author of the public Alms. 112 Who were the chief
of the enterprise against the Turks. 114 What moved the Genoueses to attempt
on Candie. 130 What Eccelin was, with his coming into Italy. 138 Wonderful
cruelty of a Tyrant. ibid. Wisdom of the Governor of Tire. 147 William
Prince of Achaia set at liberty. 149 What was the number of the Bolognians
Army. 154 What miseries the excommunication brought to the Venetians. 168
War concluded against those of Escalla. 178 Who they were that appeared to
the fisherman. 191 Why the feast of the decollation of S. John is celebrated at
Venice. 199 What the Thracian Bosporus is. 201 Why the Author names not those
that were guilty of the conspiracy. 208 What tribute the King of Hungary
demanded of the Venetians. 212 Who won the honor at the Turnie in Venice.
221 What they ought to do that are called to public Offices. 225 War
prepared against the Carrarians. 226 War denounced to the Genoueses. 233 What
Carolo Zeni did after his departure from Venice. 251 What Loretano did after
Pisani his death. 267 What harm three Genoa-gallies did the Venetians. 272
What estimation Verona is held of. 286 What Philip did in the vale of Sabia.
359 Wonderful proposition of a Candiot. 360 What moved Sforza to make aleague
with the Venetian. 361 War renewed in La Marca. 398 William of Mountferrat is
vanquished by Sacramor Viscont. 418 War against the Turks begun in Morea.
432 What G^idos was in former times. 451 War resolved against the Duke of
Ferrara. 495
Z.
ZAra taken again, which was revolted. 63 Zara rebelleth again, and recovered
by the Venetians. 88 Zara revolted the third time, is recovered. 95 Zara made
an Archbishopricke. 100 Zara again revolted and recovered. 117 Zara the fifth
time revolted and recovered. 140 Zara rebelleth the sixth time. 170 Zara reduced
under the Venetians obedience. 172 Zara rebelleth the seventh time, muested by
sea and land, assaulted, and at last yielded. 195 Zeni makes spoil upon the
river of Genoa. 251
FINIS.
A Table of the principal matters contained in the second Volume.
AGreement betwixt the Pope and the Venetians. Fol. 4 A strong suspicion of the
Pope concerning the French king. 6 Aduertisements to the Princes of Germany to
clear the suspicion. 7 Aluiana his exploits in Friul. 9 An old man's speech to
the Senate. ibid. Ambuscado to surprise the Count Petillan. 13 All Romagnia
yields to the Pope upon the fame of the kings Victory. 17 An enteruiew
resolved on betwixt the Emperor and the French king. 20 A Treaty of truce
motioned betwixt the Emperor and the Venetians broken. 26 A general Council
published at Lions. 37 A great earthquake at Venice. 42 A strange miracle in the
mine at Bolognia. 49 Andrea Gritti, and Antonio lustiniano taken prisoners. 53
Articles of the league betwixt the French King, and Venetians. 59 All the
Duchy of Milan in an uproar. 60 Aluiana his earnestness to the Senate, that
he might fight with the enemies. 72 Aluiana shows himself at the enemies
passage. ibid. Aluiana encampeth at Olma, determining there to tarry for the
enemy. 73 A Venetian Ambassador s^nt to Selim. 75 Achmat brother to Selim
vanquished and slain. 76 Achmat son to Achmat in arms against Selim. ibid.
A great fire in Venice. 78 A new compromise in the Popes person concerning the
strife betwixt the Emperor and the Venetians. ibid. Aluiana takes Rouigo. 84
A Croizado in Hungary against the Turks. 85 Ambassadors from Venice with
their request to the king of England. Aluiana relieueth Vincenza 92 Agreement
contracted with the Suisses and broken the same day. 94 Aluiana his enterprise
upon Bressia. 100 Aluianas death. ibid Asola and Lona taken by the Venetians.
101 Articles concluded betwixt the Pope and the French king. 103 Assault given
to Verona. 111 Assailants retire with loss. ibid Alliance renewed betwixt
Soliman and the Venetians. 119 After what manner the Pope would consen^ to the
French kings propositions. 120 A league betwixt the Emperor and the King of
England. 137 Ambassadors of the Emperor and the King of England meet at
Venice. ibid. Articles of the alliance made betwixt the Emperor, Francis
Sforza, and the Venetians. 139 Accord betwixt the Pope and Emperor. 152 Accord
betwixt the Pope and the Venetians. 153 Articles of the agreement. ibid.
Agreement betwixt the Emperor and French king. 154 Army of the league
retireth from Milan. 157 Aquila taken by Rance de Cera. 168 Andrea Doria in the
French kings service. 179 Articles of agreement betwixt the Pope and Emperor.
180 A colorable excuse of the king of England to the Venetians request. 184 An
accord made with the Duke of Ferrara. 185 Ascoli and diverse other towns yield
to the confederates. 190 A vain and ridiculous challenge. 191 A policy of the
enemies. 192 An enterprise of the Spaniards against the Galleys of Philippin
Doria. 192 A fierce encounter of those of the league and the Imperials. 193
Andrea Doria reuolteth from the kings service. 194 Articles of Agreement
betwixt the Emperor and Doria. 195 Aquila recovered of the Imperials. 207
Antonio de Leua assaileth the L. S. Paul. 210 Antonio de Leua follows the
Duke of Vrbin in his retreat to Cassan. ibid. A discourse made in Senate
conc^rning peace with the Emperor. 219 A discourse against the former. 220
Articles of peace betwixt the Empe rour and the Venetians. 222 Almaines require
to have a General Council. 227 A league betwixt the Pope, Emperor and all the
Italian potentates, the Venetians except. 235 A fight at scabetwixt the
Venetians and Turks. 240 A new practice betwixt the Pope and the Venetians.
246 Ajax Basha persuades Soliman to make war on Italy 253 A league betwixt
the Pope, the Emperor, and the Venetians against the Turk. 265 Andrea Doria
chosen General of the Army for the league by Sea. 274 A Treaty of peace
betwixt the Emperor and French king broken off. 276 Ambassadors chosen at
Venice to be present at the assembly of Nice. 277 A worthy recompense. 279
Army of the league returns to Corfu. 290 All men cry out upon Doria. 292
Agreement betwixt the Pope and the Duke of Vrbin. 298 Ambassadors answer to
the Basha. 302 An Hungarian Ambassador comes to Venice. 306 Answer of the
Emperor and French king to the Venetian Ambassador. 307 Ambassadors brave
answer. 109 A Turkish Ambassador comes to Venice. 322 Agreement betwixt
Strossi and the Venetians concerning Milan. 323 A new practice to draw the
Venetians to the league with the king. 324 A Spanish Friar biginneth the
treaty of peace betwixt the Emperor and the French King. 325 A tyrannical
law of the Turks. 328 Ambassadors from Venice to Edward 6. king of England.
336 A general dearth. 342 A discreet answer of the Venetians to the Duke of
Ferrara. 345 A great Turkish fleet at sea. 347 All Germany banded against the
Emperor, and his brother Ferdinand. 348 Almans band themselves against the
French concerning Metz, Thou, and Verdune. 354 A popular commotion in Rome. 362
A strange accident at Rome. 365 A mischievous practice of a revolted Jew. 368
Arcenall of Venice burnt. 370 Answer of the French King and Queen his mother
to the Pope. 377 Astor Baillone General in Cyprus 385 A fierce assault given
to four bulwarks at one time. 390 An assault given to the bulwark Constantia.
391 Articles of peace propounded by the Venetians. 399 Articles of the league.
403 Arrival of Don John with Spanish forces. 411 Articles of the Capitulation
at the taking of Cyprus by the Turks. 416 Adu^se of Bernardino de Requesens,
for fighting or not fighting with the enemy. 418 An accident likely to have
bred great mischief. 420 Ali Bascha his speech of encouragement to his
Captains and soldiers at the instant of battle. 440 Attempt upon Castelnouo
in vain. 453 Ambassadors sent from Venice to France and Spain. 457 A vain
and unprofitable engine. 466 Articles of peace betwixt the Turks and the
Venetians. 474 Ambassadors speech to Selim. 478 Amurath confirms peace with
the Venetians. 480 Ambassadors sent to the king of Spain. 484 A decree against
superfluous diet. ibid A Persian Ambassador comes to Venice. 485 A Venetian
Gentleman executed to satisfy the Turk. ibid. A duchess is cruelly
murdered in Padua. 486 A prodigy. 490 A solemn Ambassade from France to
Rome. 491 A decree concerning building of Churches. 494 Articles on which the
interdiction was revoked. 499 After what manner the prisoners were delivered.
ibid.
B
BEntiuoli discouraged, yield to the Pope. 5 Bolognia yielded to the Pope.
ibid. Bressia yields to the king. 16 Bishop of Gurcia comes into France
from the Emperor. 37 Bentiuoli with the French are in Bolognia. 44 Breach made
at Bolognia. 49 Bergamo expels the French. 52 Bergamo taken and soon lost.
84 Battle renewed betwixt the French and Suisses by break of day. 97 Bressia
besieged by the Venetians, and again by the French. 101 Bressia yields on
composition. 108 Belgrade taken by the Turks. 123 Battle of Bicoca. 136
Bosco and Alexandria are taken by Lautrec. 181 Brunswich Duke returns into
Germany. 192 Brundusium yields to the Venetians. 208 Barbarossa spoileth the
Islands of the Archipelago. 278 Barbarossa comes into Candy. 280 Barbarossa
his retreat from Candy. 281 Barbarossa his consideratio^s upon the sundry
opinions of the Turks. 287 Barbarossa repents his coming forth of the Gulf
of Preueze. 289 Barbarossa summoneth the Governor of Catarra to deliver the
town unto him. 300 Barbarossa his vain assaults to Catarra. 301 Badoario
greatly perplexed. 308 Barbarossa his fleet at Marselles. 320 Barbarossa takes
Nice. ibid. Barbarossa his cruel spoils in his return home. 326 Baily of
Venice his remonstrance to the Bascha Mahomet. 379 Bascha Mahomet reniueth the
trea tie of peace. 398 Badoario contrary to Tepulo. 401 Bascha Mahomet his
proposition to the Venetian Baylie. 405 Bragadino his exhortation to his
soldiers. 412 Bragadino comes to Mustapha his tent. 416 Barbarico his speech
persuading to fight. 419 Basha Mahomet solliciteth the Emperor. 451 Bishop of
Aix Ambassador from the French king at Constantinople. 473 Bressia afflicted
with the plague. 483 Building of the bridge of Rialto. 489
C
CAstle of Creste yielded to the Venetians. 10 Confederacy of the Pope,
Emperor, French King, and king of Arragon against the Venetians. 12
Casal-Maior yielded. 14 Cadora taken and sacked by the Imperials. 21 Count
Petilla^ co^mander of Padua. 23 Contention betwixt the Pope and the French
king. 37 Cause of the Venetians hatred to the Duke of Ferrara. 25 Confederacy
a new betwixt the Emperor and the French King. 37 Concorda taken by the Popes
army. 39 Cardinal of Pauia deals badly with the Duke of Vrbine. 45 Cardinal
of Pauia slain by the Duke ibid. Confederacy betwixt the Pope, the king of
Arragon and the Vene tians. 47 Cardinal of Medicis prisoner at Milan. 56
Cremona taken and sacked by the Spaniards. 67 Constancy of the Venetian Senate.
74 Compromise made by the Pope. 75 City of Vd^na abandoned to the enemies. 79
Country of Frinl acquit by means of the taking of Frangipan. 85 Cardinal of
Syens Oration to the Suisses. 95 Cardin. makes use of false rumors. 96 Charles
king of Spain chosen Emperor. 118 Commissioners of the Emperor and the
Venetians meet at Verona. 120 Conditions of agreement betwxt the Pope and the
Emperor. 126 Colonna fortifieth Milan. 130 Cremonia yielded to the enemies.
136 Creation of Pope Adrian the sixth. 138 Creation of Pope Clement the seventh.
142 Cause of the French kings discontent with the Emperor. 145 Conditions of
peace propounded by the Pope. 146 Children of France in hostage for the king
their Father. 156 Confederates send Commissioners to the king of England. ibid.
Capitulation of Cremona. 161 Colonessi enter Rome violently. ibi. Chief
Articles of the treaty. 163 Confederates provide to resist the Emperor. ibid.
Confederates consult about the siege of Naples. 167 Confederates Army still
follows the Imperials. 171 Cardinals meet at Bolognia to treat of the Popes
delivery. 177 Cause of Andrea Doria his revolt. 194 Capitulation about the
yielding of Auersa. 198 Confederates take Pauia. 200 Castle of Genoarased by
the people 201 City of Cambray chosen for the treaty. 212 Circumcision of
Solimans children 226 Castle of Milan, and the City of Coma renared to Duke
Sforza. 228 Coron and Patras tak^ by Doria. 223 Cariadin Barbarossa his great
experience at Sea. 241 Cariadine takes Thunis. 244 Creation of Pope Paul the
thiird. ibid Cariadine his fleet. 247 Confederacy confirmed betwixt the
Emperor and the Venetians. 249 Causes of the kings discontent with the Duke of
Sauoy. 250 Confusion of the Venetian Army seeing the Turks lie near them. 262
Canalis commanded by Soliman to send to the Venetian Senate. ibid. Candiots
preparations for their defense. 280 Capello his answer to Doria. 288 Capels
speech to Doria to provoke him to the battle. 290 Confederates Army comes
to besiege Castelnouo. 293 Castelnouo taken by Barbarossa. 300 Cantelmo
departs from Venice without any commission. 304 Cause of the war of
Hungary. 312 Controversy betwixt the Venetians and Ferdinand put to
compromise. 319 Cardinal of Ferrara exhorts the Venetians in the French
kings behalf. 324 Capitulations of the peace betwixt the Emperor and the
French king. 325 Commissioners decide the controversy betwixt Ferdinand and
the Venetians. 326 Contention betwixt the Venetians and the Turk. 328
Cardinal Farnese comes to Venice. 334 Cardinal S. George sent Legate into
France. 336 Contention concerning the place where the Council should be kept.
340 Cardinal de Monte chosen Pope and called by the name of Julius 3. 341
Catherine Zeni sent Ambassador to the Turk. 342 (...) (...) (...) (...) the
memory and execution of the Last will of Cardinal Zem. 356 Creation of Pope
Pius the fourth. 363 Cardinal Caraffa, and three of (...) ^ (...) are put to
death. 363 Charles the ninth French king ibid (...) sent by the Pope to the
(...). ibid. (...) of bringing Ambassa dors to the great Turk. 368 Counsel
of Mahomet the Vizier (...). 371 Chancellor of Persia his answer Concerning
the Emperors de (...). 378 Contents of Selims letters to the Venetians. 380
Count Roccas slain. 391 City of Nicosia taken. ibid. Cyprus yields to the
Turks. 392 Colonna escapes two great dangers in his return homewards. 397
Colonna his remonstrance to the Venetian Senate. 4^0 Christians surprise the
enemies by (...). 409 Care of those in Famagosta for their (...). 412 Cornia
his speech confirming Barbarico. 419 Catholic kings resolution before the
Ambassadors arrival. 458 Colonna his advise. ibid Colonna his opinion
concerning (...) setting forward toward the enemy. 459 Christians d^scrie the
Turkish fleet. 460 Christians discampe from before (...). 467 (...) moving the
Senate to embrace (...). 473 Charles of Lorraine, Duke of May^n (...) the
confederates fl^ete. 465 Cause why Amara^h hated the Emperor. 480 Contention
betwixt the Venetians and the knights of Malta. 485 (...) of Pope Sixtus the
fifth 486 Creation of Pope Gregory the fourteenth. 489 Creation and death of
Pope In^o cent the ninth, and the creation of Clement the seventh. 490
Cardinal of Florence Legate in France. 492 Creation of Pope Paul the fifth. 495
Censures against the Venetians are publ^shed. 496 Cardinal Perron conferres
with the Pope. 498 Commission is given to Cardinal Ioyeuse to revoke the
censures at Venice. ibid. Cardinal Ioyeuse his reception at Venice. 499
D
DVke of Venice his answer to the French kings Herald. 14 Duke of Ferrara
declares himself against the Venetians. 17 Duke of Ferrara defeateth the
Venetians nauall Army. 26 Duke of Ferrara takes Loretta. ibid. Difficulties
concerning the agreement betwixt the Emperor and the Venetians. 58 Diverse
Venetian young Gentlemen sent to Padua and Treuiso. 7^ Death of Lewis the
twelfth French king. 88 Dissension among the Suisses in Milan after the
battle. 99 Duke of Burbon Viceroy in the Duchy of Milan. 104 Demands of
the Venetian Commissioners. 120 Duke of Milan comes to Pauia with six
thousand Lansequentes. 134 Different opinions in the Senate concerning their
alliance with the Emperor. 139 Duke of Vrbin General to the Venetians. 1^0
Duke of Burbon forsakes the French kings party. ibid. Duke of Vrbins
difficulty to execut^ the Senates command. 142 Duke of Albany inuades Naples.
146 Duke of Burbon comes to Milan. 157 Doria suspected to relieve Genoa. 159
Duke of Vrbin brings supplies to the siege of Verona. 161 Duke of Burbon
marches into the field in d^spite of all difficulties. 189 Domnico Veniero put
to his trial. 172 Duke of Burbons speed in his march to Rome. ibid. Duke of
Burbon assaults the suburbs of Rome. 173 Death of Duke of Burbon. ibid. Duke of
Vrbin takes Perusa. 178 Duke of Brunswich comes into Italy with great
forces. 191 Duke of Brunswich joined with Anto nio de Leua besige Lauda. ibid.
Duke of Vrbin runs to the defense of his own state. 208 Duke of Milans
great humility to the Emperor. 202 Doria his subtle meaning. 233 Duke of
Ferrara reconereth Modena and Reg^o by the Emperors sentence. 234 Dandulo
banished at his return to Venice. 239 Death of Pope Clement the 7. 244 Death
of Francis Sforza Duke of Milan. 248 Duke of Sauoy denies the French king
passage. 249 Difficulties to accord the Emperor and the French. 250 Doria his
incursions causes the Turks to suspect the Venetians. 261 Doria his policy to
enforce the Venetians to join with him. 262 Description of the Isle of Corfu.
264 Doria his answer and departure toward Genoa. 266 Description of Naples in
Romagn. 267 Description of Maluesia. 268 Difficulties alleged by the Duke of
Vrbin. 284 Don Ferrans de Gonzaga comes to Corfu. 285 Doria comes to Corfu.
286 Doria in favor to the enemies causes his Army to retire 287 Doria his
remonstrance to the whole Army. 288 Doria his retreat encourages the Turks.
290 Doria his excuse for shunning the fight with Barbarossa. 294 Doria with his
Galleys retireth into Sicill. 294 Death of the Duke of Vrbin. 295 Draguts
policy to compass the Venetians Galleys. 298 Dori^ his proposition to the
Prouidator Contaren. 301 Diverse opinions of the Peace betwixt the Emperor and
French king 3^5 Duke of Saxony and Lantgraue of Hesse their suite to the
Venetian Senate: with their answer. 333 Death of Francis, the first, French
king, and Henry the eight king of England. 336 Death of Pope Paul the third.
341 Duke of Florence takes the Emperors party. 344 Duke of Ferrara advises
with the Venetians. 344 Discreet answer of the venetians to the Duke. 345
Death of Edward the sixth King of England. 356 Duke of Florence sends forces
against the Siennois. ibid. Duke of Alua takes diverse towns from the Pope.
359 Duke of Guise comes into Italy. 360 Death of Pope Paul the fourth. 362
Death of Andre Doria. 363 Death of Pope Pius the fourth. 367 Death of Solomon
before Zighet. ibidem Discord among the Commanders in Famagosta. 387 Doria
returns home. 394 Diverse places subject to the Turks do yield to the
Venetians. ibid. Difficulties propounded by the Spaniards. 395 Don John
D'Austria General of the army. 402 Duleigna yields to the Turks upon
composition, which is badly observed. 408 Diligent care of the Captains in
Famagosta. 413 Don John's objections against Venieri. 421 Don John his Oration
to his soldiers. 429 Death of Pius quintus. 453 Death of Sigismond king of
Poland. 461 Difficulties arising about the meeting of Don John. 463 Don John
goes into Afric. 478 Death of Selim Emperor of the Turks. 479 Dukes of
Ferrara and Neuers come with king Henry to Venice. ibid. Death of Cosmo de
Medicis the first great Duke of Tuscany. 480 Decrees against the Venetians
superfluous expenses. 484 Deceit of a Greek. 489 Death of Pope Gregory the 14.
ibi. Diverse Pirates defeated. 494 Death of Pope Clement the 8 494 Duke Donato
reuoketh his first declaration. 499
E
ENteruew of the Kings of France and Arragon at Sauona. 6 Enteruew resolved on
betwixt the Emperor and the French King. 20 Enterprise upon Genoa. 33 Earl of
Mirandola sent from the Pope to the Lord of Chaumont. 38 Enemies spoil and
ruin Vincenza. 71 Emperialls brave resolution. 73 Enteruew betwixt the Pope
and the French King at Bolognia. 103 Excuses alleged by Lautrec that he might
discampe. 109 Emperialls besiege Parma. 127 Enemies pass over the River Adda
without impediment. 128 Enemies come to Milan, and win the Roman gate and
suburb. ibi. Enemies surprise Lauda. 136 Emperialls take Garlas. 144 Englands
courtesy toward the French King. 154 Enterprise of Milan broken. 200 Enteruiew
of the French and Venetian army. 209 Enemies beaten by the Duke of Vrbin 211
Expectation of the Enteruew at Bolognia. 219 Entertainment given to the Emperor
on the Venetian territory. 224 Effect of Rangone his Oration to the Senate.
259 Expense divided betwixt those of the League. 274 Enteruew of the emperor
and French king at Aigues-Mortes. 278 Enemies escape by fault of the Leaguers.
289 Enemies besiege Milan. 325 Enterprise of Naples being found difficult, is
rejected by the French king. 354 Enterprise of Marguerites broken off through
the difficulty thereof. 383 Enemies inca^ped before Nicosia. 387 Enemies fierce
battery at Nicosia 390 Enemies fleet retireth forth of the gulf of Venice.
409 Enemies army before Famagosta. 412 Enemies make 5 batteries at one time.
ibid. Every Captains charge. 413 Enemies repulst from the breach. 414 Estate of
the besieged enforces them to yield. 415 Emperors excuses to free himself
from entering into the league. 449 Extremity of the Turkish fleet. 466 Enemies
retire to Modon. 465 Entertainment given to the french K. at Vienna in Austria.
479 Election of Pope Leo the tenth, and his sudden death. 494
F
FLight of the Venetian garrison 10 French King complains of the truce. 11
French king dissembleth. ibi. French take Treni. 14 Frangipane makes war in
Histria. 22 French king greatly perplexed. 28 Ferrarois defeat two fleetes of
the Venetians. 36 French army marches toward Bolognia where the Pope lay. 37
Flight of the Duke of Vrbin. 44 French Kings great desire to be at peace with
the Pope. 46 French after long fight become masters of Bressia. 53 French are
victors in the battle of Rauenna. 55 French besiege Nouara in vain. 63 French
camp in fear at the Suisses coming. 64 French Kings answer to the Venetians.
68 Frangipane takes Maran by treachery. 77 Frangipane enters Maran with his
succors. 78 Frangipane taken by the Venetians. 80 Francis Duke of Angolesme
French King. 88 Francis confirms the league with the Venetians. 89 Francis
his dissimulation. 91 French Kings great preparation. ibi. French pass into
Piedmont by Argentire. 93 Four armies at one time in Italy. 95 French Kings
entry into Milan. 100 French kings complaints against the Pope. 108 French and
Spanish kings aspire unto the empire. 118 French king and the king of England
talk together. 124 French and Venetian armies on the Cremonois. 131 French
camp before Milan. 133 French take Nouara. 134 French come to Milan. 145
French Agents sent to Venice to treat of an agreement. 153 Fortifications of
Genoa. 159 Francis Sforza yields the Castle of Milan to the Imperials. 160
Francis Sforza ratifieth the league. ibi. Foscari his exhortation to the
Florentines. 165 Florentines answer and resolution. 165 French king sends
Rance de Cera into Italy. 166 Frossolana besieged by the Viceroy. ibidem
French and Venetian fleetes scattered by tempest. 182 French Kings Ambassador
with the Pope. 186 French kings instance to the Venetians in the Popes behalf.
202 Florentines send Ambassadors to the Emperor. 212 Florentines great
troubles. 222 Ferdinands designs against the Turks. 231 Francisco Dandulo
taken by Pirates 239 Fight at Sea betwixt the Venetians and Turks. 240 French
Kings Ambassador to the venetians about Milan business. 249 French take Thurin,
Fossan, and Pigneroll. 250 French king sends Count Guy de Rangon to Venice.
259 French kings designs. 274 French King refuses to enter into the league.
275 French Ambassadors design. 299 French kings love toward the Venetians.
303 Force offered to the lodging of the French ambassador at Venice. 308 French
King complains to the venetian ambassador: with the answer. 309 French king
incensed against the emperor. 316 French king at one time raises three armies
against the Emperor. 317 French king displeased with the Venetians. ibi.
Ferdinand peaceably enjoys Transiluania. 347 Ferdinand to free himself from
war with the Turk, offers to be tributary. 348 Friar George the Cardinal
murdered. ibid. French king as far as the Rhine in favor of the Protestant
Princes. 350 French king makes incursions upon the Duchy of Luxembourg. 351
French kings demand to the Siennois 355 Francis Daulphin of Viennois marries
the Queen of Scots. 361 French take Thyonuille. ibid. First motion of the
enterprise of Cyprus for the Turks. 370 French kings offer to the Venetians.
377 Flight of the enemies galleys. 402 French king forbids his subjects to
go into Flanders. 456 French kings answer to the Venetian Ambassador. 457
French Kings magnificent reception at Venice. 479 French Kings marriage
celebrated at Florence. 492 French King mediates peace betwixt the Pope and the
Venetians. 497
G
GReat preparations of K. Lewis, and the Venetians, to stop the Emperors
passage. 8 Genoa assured for the King. 31 General Council published at (...).
37 Gaston of Foix his incursions. 43 Gaston comes to the aid of Bolognia. 49
Gaston relieues the Castle of Bressia. 51 Gaston defeates Meleager of F^rli. 52
Gaston besieges Rauenna. 54 Gaston slain by the Spaniards. 55 Genoa reuolteth
from the King. 58 Great harm which the Croizado did in Hungary. 86 Great
dearth in Bressia. 102 Gritti the Prouidator his answer to Lautrec. 109 Great
joy of the Veronois for being reduced under the Venetians obedience. 113 Great
numbers of Suisses in the French camp. 133 Genowais bravely repulsed. 160
George Frondsperg leuieth great numbers of Lansequenets for the Emperor. 163
Genoa reduced under the Kings obedience. 182 Great sorrow of the Lord Lautrec.
194 Great discommodity which the revolt of Doria procured. 195 Genoa by means
of Doria reuolteth from the King to the Emperor. 198 Genowaies fill the Haven
of Sauona with gravel. 201 Great valor of a woman in man's attire. 211 Great
preparations of the Venetians. 212 Great entertainment given the emperor on
the Venetian territory. 224 Great troubles in Germany concerning the Duke of
Wittemberg. 242 Great (...) (...) at one time in sundry places. 243 Goletta
besieged. 247 Genoueses forbid Doria to carry the galleys out of Genoa. 257
Great signs why men did suspect the (...). 274 Gritti goes to (...) to treat
of an (...). 296 (...) of (...) (...) (...) to Barbarossa. 301 Great hope of a
long peace. 312 Great preparations for war on all (...). 319 Gonzaga his
excuse (...) the death of Pietro Lodoui^o. 337 German princes treat with the
french King against the Emperor. 347 Germany wholly banded against the (...)
and his brother Ferdi^and. 348 Great (...) done by the (...) after the manner of
Spain. 366 General of the Venetians and (...) use reasons to Doria to
persuade his stay. 394 Great (...) against the dead. 418 General Foscarin his
answer to Colonna. 458 Gills Andrada his opinion. 459 Great charity of a
Prelate. 481
H
HOw the Venetians were daunted at the report of the battles loss. 16 How the
French K. ordaines his army 96 Hugo de Moncada sallieth forth upon the
confederates. 168 How the Venetians behaved themselves upon the agreement
betwixt the Pope and Emperor. 180 Heretics begin to stir in Germany. 218 How
Doria's departure did trouble the Venetians. 266 Hungarian ambassador at Venice
306 Henry the second, french king. 336 Horatio Farnese marries King Henry's
daughter. 337 Horatio Farnese puts himself and family under the French Kings
protection. 342 Hostages given (...) both sides of Turks and Christians. 416
Henry Duke of Ani^w chosen King of Poland. 478 Henry the fourth French king
motioneth a marriage with the Princess of Florence. 492
I
John Paul Baillon yields up Perugia and her territory to the Pope. 5 I^rring
betwixt the Commissioners assembled about the truce. 11 Imperialls succor
Veroni with men and victuals. 25 I^iurie offered to the Popes st^tue in
Bolognia. 45 In what manner the Venetians provided for their Cities on the
form land. ibidem John Paul Baillon defeated and broken by Gaston of Foix. 52
Imperial army by night passes the river Brento. 72 John James (...) general
of the Venetian army. 101 In what manner the Venetians did relieve the State of
Milan. 127 In what order the French did assail the enemies. 135 Imperialls
pursue the French and take Garlas. 144 John de Medicis a great captain 164
Imperial fleet beaten by the confederates. 166 Imperialls great cruelty in
Rome 174 Italy amazed at the Emperors coming. 212 Imperialls demand
concerning the accord for Milan. 221 Incursions of the knights of Malta against
the Turks. 226 John Pisani extraordinary Ambassador into France. 229 Islands
taken from the Venetians by Barbarossa. 268 Instructions sent by the French
king to be propounded by Cardinal Tournon to the Senate at Venice. 345
Institution of the Venetian Academie 490 Italy jealous of the Spaniards. 493
L
LEague betwixt Maximilian Emperor and Lewis the (...) King. 3 Lewis his
Ambassadors at (...). ibi. Lewis comes into (...). 5 Lord of Chaumont
General of the kings army. 14 Lord of Chaumont takes the Polles^ of Rouigo.
29 L^gnaga taken. ibi. Lord of Chaumont takes diverse (...) which stopped the
Emperors coming into Italy. 30 Lord of Chaumont with his (...) returns to
the Duchy of Milan. 31 Libells set up in diverse places against the Pope. 45
L^sse of Bressia troubles the Venetians. 53 La Palisse forsakes the field and
guardeth the Town. 57 League betwixt the Pope and the Emperor. 59 League
betwixt the French King and the Venetians. ibid. Lancequenets defeat the
Venetian forces. 60 Legnag^ taken and dismantled by the Venetians. 65 League
betwixt the Emperor, the king of Arragon, the Duke of Milan and Suisses. 91
Lautrec besieges Bressia. 108 Lautrec master of Br^ssia forthwith restores it
to the Venetians. 109 Lancequenets refuse to besiege a city belonging to the
Emperor. 110 Lewis K. of Hungary prepares for defense against the Turks.
119 Lord of Lescut discouers the enterprise of the Bandetti of Milan 125 Lord
of Lautrec succo^s Parma. 127 Lautrec fortifieth Milan. 128 League betwixt the
Pope, the Emperor, the Venetians, the Milanois, and Florentines. 138 League
concl^ded at Coignac. 156 Lauda is taken by the Confederates 157 Lord of Langi
comes to Venice. 158 Lancequenets come into Italy. 164 Lautrec enters the
Duchy of Milan with great forces. 181 Lautrec leaves Milan and marches
toward Rome. 183 Lautrec (...) toward Naples* 187 Lautrec defi^th and (...)
the Imperialls to b^ttell. 189 Lautrec incampeth within two miles of Naples.
190 Lord of Barbezieux comes to Sau^na. 193 Lord Lautrec his nature. 194 Lord
Lautrec his sickness and death. 196 Lord S. Paul leaves Milan to go to the
relief of Genoa. 201 Lord Chastilion comes to Venice 206 League betwixt the
Pope, the Emperor, and Venetians, against the Turk. 265 Lodouico Badoario
^hosen Ambassador by the Senate to go to Solomon. 306 Loss of the battle of
Saint Laurence, and the taking of S. Quintines by the Spaniards. 360 Long
delays used in the conclusion of the league. 395 Lodouico Martinenga sends
supplies to Famagosta. 396
M
MAximilian the Emperors Ambassadors at Venice in the Popes behalf. 3
Maximilian the Emperors request ^to the Venetians. 4 Maximilian Emperor
frustrate of his hopes. 7 Maximilian Emperor sommons the Veronois to give him
passage. 8 Maximilian Emperor reiterath his Ambassade to the Venetians. 9
Maximilians Army dissolved for a small occasion. 10 Maximilian emperor
breaks the enter^ew betwixt himself and the French King. 20 Maximilian the
emperor (...) to assault Venice. 21 Marquess of Mantua taken pris^ner and
brought to Venice. ib. Maximilian besieges Padua. 22 Maximilian returns into
Germany 24 Maximilian and the French King displeased with the Pope for
absoluing the Venetians. 27 (...) with her Cast^e taken and ruined. 31 Marquis
of Mantua set at liberty 33 Mirandola yielded upon safety of lives and goods.
39 Maximilian the Emperor inclines to peace. 42 Maximilian Sforza in
possession of the Duchy of Milan. 59 Motion of agreement betwixt the French
king and the Venetians. ibid. Maximilian Sforza (...) to N^uara. 62 Milan
reduced to the French government. ibi. Means which the Sen^te v^ed to get
money. 81 Mark Antonio Colonna gardeth Verona. 95 Milan yeeldes to the French
king. 99 Manfron and de Bue defeated by the Imperialls. 105 Marquess of
Brandenburg comes to the Emperors army. 108 Mamal^kes vanquished by Selim.
116 Maximil* the Emperors death. 117 Milan sacked ten days together. 129
Marquis of Pescara causes the Imperialls to tarry in Lombardy. 147 Marquis of
Pescara his audacious demand to duke Francis Sforza. 153 Malateste Baillon
before Cremona for the league. 161 Marquess of Salusses passes the Po. 164
Marcello dies for grief. 113 Marquess of Mantu^ joined to the league. 185
Monopli and Tr^ni yielded unto the Venetians. 190 Marquess of Salusses
General of the army after Lautrec his death. 198 Marquess with his army
retireth to Auersa. ibid. (...) taken by the Imperials. 207 Monopli besieged by
the Marquis of Guasto. ibid. Marquis (...) from (...). ^08 Marquisate of (...)
into a Duchy. 224 Means which the French Ambassadors (...) to Solomon against
Charles the fifth. 253 Moro his (...) to the Gentlemen of Candie. ^79 Most part
of (...) (...) cast away by tempest. 294 Marquess of Guasto his speech to the
Sena^e. 304 Mocenigo the General his (...) to the people of Naples. 309 (...)
is taken from Ferdinand. 317 (...) is taken by the French. 350 Maximilian
Emperor in his fathers sted. 365 (...) General of the enterprise of (...).
384 Mustapha by gifts (...) to win the (...). 385 Mustapha maintains the
contrary opinion to Piali, and is followed. ^86 Mustapha his great credit among
his ^ouldiers. 387 Marquess Rangon Palauicin his excuse. 396 Mustapha his
fained courtesy. 416 Mustapha his per^idious cruelty. 417 More than barbarous
cruelty. ibid. Mehemet B^y his speech dissuading from fight. 431 Memorable
battle of Lepanto. 440 Mother-Queene of France writes to the Pope. 457 Motion
of peace at Constantinople with the Venetian Batly. 470 Murderers put to
death. 487
N
NVmber of the French Kings army against the Venetians and the Venetians
against him. 15 New agreement between the Pope and the French King. 21 New
confederacy betwixt the Emperor and the French King. 37 Number of the enemies
before Pa^ina 70 New compromise in the Popes person for the strife betwixt the
Emperor and the Venetians. 78 Number of the Venetian Army conducted by
Aluiana. 94 Number of Suisses in Milan. 95 New succors enter into Bressia
unknown to Aluiana. 100 Nouara taken by the French. 134 Nouara and Vigena
yielded to the French. 140 Number of the Army of the League 157 Navarre his
courageous proposition. 165 Number of the dead and prisoners in a fight at sea.
193 Nouara and diverse other towns yield to the Confederates. 200 Number of the
Emperors forces in Italy. 212 Number of the Turkish Army. 232 New practice
betwixt the Pope and Venetians. 246 Number of the Venetian forces at sea. 258
Number of ^ouldiers and munition in the Island of Corsou. 264 (...) yee^ded to
the (...) ^ 282 Naples and Maluesia consigned to the Turks. 310 Number of the
Emperors Army in Germany against the Protestants. 332 Number of the
Protestants Army. 333 Number of the Christian Fleet. 393 Number of soldiers
in Famagosta. 403 Number of the Turkish Fleet. 404 Number of serviceable men
in F^magosta. 412 Number of the Christian and Turkish Fleet at Lepanto. 460
Number of the Confederates Fleet. 464
O.
OF what importance the taking of Padua was. 69 Oration of the Hungarian
Ambasdour. 121 Oration of the Popes Nuntio in the Senate. 86 Order of the
French Army in battle. 96 Oration of Triuulcio in defense of his opinion. 40
Offer of the Pope and Venetians to the French King. 159 Octauio Farnese
marries the Emperors base daughter. 277 Oration of Selun the French Kings
Ambassador to the Venetian Senate. 353 Octauio Farnese restored to his
Duchy. 360 Offers of D. John to the Venetians. 411 Ostages given betwixt the
Turks and Christians. 416 Order and form of the Christian battle. 422 Order
of the Turkish fleet. 432 Order of the Confederates fleet. 464
P.
POpe Julius his answer to the Venetians offers. 4 Pope Julius his request to
the French King. ibid. Pope Julius threatens the Bentiuoles. 5 Pope Julius
refuses the (...) request. 8 Pope Julius his secret menaces to the Venetians.
12 Pope Julius ratifieth the Treaty of Cambray. 13 Pope Julius his terrible
monitorie against the Venetians. 14 Pope Julius moved with pity, takes
compassion on the Venetians. 18 Pope Julius his answer to those who hindered
the Venetians absolution. 24 Pope Julius absolueth the Venetians. 27 Pope
Julius his meaning to the French King. ibid. Pope Julius in hatred to the
French King assaileth the Duke of Ferrara. 28 Pope Julius his secret practices.
31 Pope Julius his Army takes Modena. 32 Pope Julius his preparations against
the City of Ferrara. 36 Pope Julius excommunicateth Alforso d'Est and his
adherents. 37 Pope Julius his entertainment given to the Bishop of Gurcia. 43
Pope Julius breaks off the Treaty betwixt the Emperor and the Venetians.
ibid. Pope Julius his answer to the Bolognois 44 Pope Julius his perplexity.
56 Pope Leo the tenth elected. 59 Pope Leo (...) the agreement betwixt the
Emperor and the Venetians. 67 Pope Leo his reproachful speeches of the
Venetians. 68 Pope Leo sends succors to the Emperor against the Venetians.
ibid. Provisions made by the Venetians. 69 Paduafurnished of all things
necessary to sustain a siege. 70 Prouidator Loretano s^aine. 74 Pope Leo
resolves on peace. 76 Pope Leo his arbitratiue sentence. 80 Prince Lauredano
his answer to the Popes Nuncio. 87 Pope Leo his determination against the
Venetians. 90 Pope Leo his publication against the Venetians. 91 Passages of
Suza and other places guarded by the Suisses. 92 Prospero Colonna taken
prisoner by the Lord Palisse. 93 Pescara taken by the Venetians. 101 Pedro of
Navarre his mine blown up. 102 Pope Leo motioneth a peace. ibid Pope Leo
yields Parma and Placentia to the French King. 103 Pope Leo his practices to
break the siege. 105 Pope Leo sends the Cardinal Bibiena Legate to the
Emperonr. 106 Pope Leo exhorts Christian Princes to take Arms against the
Turk. 117 Pope Leo and the Emperor make seeret alliance against the French
King. 125 Pope Leo suspecteth the Imperials. 127 Pope Leo his sudden death.
130 Pauia besieged by Lautrec. 134 Policy of Lautrec. 135 Pope Adrian the
sixth his creation. 138 Pope Adrian zealous of an universal peace. ibid. Pope
Adrian his death. 142 Pope Clement the seventh created. ibid. Pope Clement his
remonstrance to the Venetians. 145 Pauia besieged by the French King. 146 Pope
Clement a Mediator betwixt the Emperor and the French king ibid. Pope Clement
protests against them both, if they agree not. 147 Pope Clement and the
Venetians fear least the French King should come to battle. 148 Pope Clement
his resolution after the defeat of the French. 149 Pope Clement and the
Venetians answer to Don Hugo for the Emperor. 156 Pedro of Navarre General
of the Nauall Army. 158 Pope Clement his agreement with the Colonnesi. 162
Pope Clement makes means to the Viceroy for an agreement. 166 Pope Clement
his error in disarming himself. 169 Pope Clement acknowledges his error,
and imploreth the aid of the Confederates. 171 Pope Clement with diverse
Cardinals retireth to the Castle of S. Angelo. 173 Pauia taken by Lautrec. 182
Pope Clement complains of the Imperials dealings. 185 Pope Clement his
excuses to shun a new Confederacy. 186 Pope Clement his answer to the King,
concerning Doria his entertainment. 195 Proposition of the Count S. Paul. 199
Pope Clement his intention. 204 Prince of Orange determines to go to Perusa.
208 Prince of Orange changes his mind 209 Part of the enemies defeated by the
Duke of Vrbin. 211 Publication of the Treaty of Cambray. 215 Pope Clement and
the Emperor come to Bolognia. 221 Pope Clement his excuses concerning the
convocation of a Council. 227 Pope Clement acquainteth the Venetians with all
his designs. 242 Philippo Mazzo a knight of Malta looses his head for his many
robberies. 244 Pope Paul the third takes Arms for the Duchy of Camerina.
245 Propositions in the Senate for the answering of Count Rangon. 259 Pople
Paul his answer to the Venetian Ambassador. 265 Pope Paul sends to the
Emperor and the French King to reconcile them. 274 Pope Paul resolves to go
to Nice, to atone the Emperor and the King. 276 Pope Paul denied entrance
into Nice. 277 Proposition of the Captains in Dalmatia. 283 Patriarch Grimani
his enterprise upon the Castle of Preueze. 285 Petro Zeni chosen Ambassador to
go to Soliman. 299 Pope Paul sends the Cardinal Farnese Lega^ into France.
306 Peace concluded with the Turks according to their own minds. 308 Peace
confirmed betwixt the Turks and the Venetians. 315 Polin soliciteth the
Venetians to make a league with the French king. 316 Polin his practices
against the Venetians. 317 Pope Paul goes about to make alliance with the
Venetians. 319 Pope Paul and the Emperors enteruiew at Busset to no pupose.
321 Pope Paul gives Parma and Placentia to his son Pietro Lodouico. 329
Protestants suite to the Venetians. 333 Pope Paul his discourse to drive the
Venetians from their suspicion. 334 Protestants take Chiusa. ibid. Pope Paul
his complaints against the Emperor. 335 Piero Strossi sent for from France to
trouble the peace of Italy. 337 Pope and French King solicit the Venetians
against the Emperor ibid. Pope Paul to satissie the Almaines sends a Legate
into Germany. 339 Paul the third his death. 341 Parma is kept by Camillo
Vr^ino. ibid. Presages of great wars. 342 Pope Julius the third, not thinking
thereon, causes great wars in Italy. 343 Proposition of agreement about
Parma. ibid. Pope Julius seeks means of agreement with the French King.
ibid. Pope Julius, by his Legatgoeth about to atone the Emperor and the
French King. 347 Prince of Salerne comes into France. 351 Prince of Salerne
his proposition to the Venetian Senate. ibid. Pace of Chiusa taken by the
Protestants. 325 Peace betwixt the Emperor and Germane Princes. ibid Prince of
Salerne returns to Venice from the French King. ibid. Pope Paul the fourth
enemy to the Spaniards. 359 Peace betwixt the Pope and the Spaniards. 360
Peace toncluded betwixt the French and Spanish Kings. 361 Pirates pursued by
Bembo* save themselves in Durazzo. 362 Pope Paul dies. ibid. Pope Pius the
fourth created. 363 Pope Pius ends the controversy betwixt the Ambassadors
of France and Spain. 364 Pope Pius sends to the Catholic king to toyne in
the war against the Turks. 376 Pope Pius soliciteth the French King to have
an hand in this war. 377 Pope Pius his proposition to a^oid delay. 382 Pope
Pius armeth twenty Galleys whereof Colonna is made General. 383 Piali of
opinion to besiege Famagosta first. 386 Prayers and processions in Nicosia. 388
Pope Pius his exhortation for conclusion of the league. 395 Pope Pius and the
Spaniards seek to the Venetians to conclude the league. 400 Prince Mocenigo
his remonstrance to the great Council. 403 Pope Pius the fifth solliciteth the
king of Poland. 450 Priuce Mocenigo his Oration to the Council of Ten. 471
Peace propounded in the Council of Ten. ibid. Peace concluded betwixt the
Turks and Venetians. 474 Prince and Senates Vow to God. 481 Price set upon
allwares. 482 Pope Alexander the third sends a golden Rose to the Venetian
Prince. ibid. Pope Sixtus death: with the creation of Pope Urban the seventh.
489 Pope Clement the seventh blesses and absolueth the French King. 491 Peace
betwixt the French King and the Duke of Sauoy. 493 Pope Paul the fifth
complains to the Venetian Ambassador. 495 Pope Paul his resolution upon the
Venetians refusal. ibid. Pope Paul grants a Commission to the Cardinal
Ioyeuse. 498
R.
RAuenna taken and spoiled by the French. 55 Resolution of the Suisses. 63
Rance de Cera his brave exploites. 79 Rance de Cera puts Siluio Sauello
torout. 84 Rance de Cera leaves the Venttian party. 95 Rhodes taken by
Soliman. 137 Resolution of the assembly held at Venice by the Confederates. 205
Resolution of the Venetian Council upon the Kings coming into Italy. 206
Report of the Lancequenets coming causes the Venetian Army to retire. 212
Retreat of Soliman, and of Charles the Emperor. 232 Retreat of the Turkish
Army. 233 Rangon is answered according to the opinion of Cornari. 260 Reasons
of those who desired peace with Soliman. 274 Reasons of those who were desirous
to war on him. 275 Resolution of the inhabitants of Naples and Maluesia. 281
Resolution of the Turks in Dalmatia 283 Resolution to give battle, rejoices
the whole Army. 288 Rimon and Fregosa sent Ambassadors to Soliman, murdered
in their return. 313 Reasons that moved the Venetians to keep themselves
Neuters. 314 Reasons propounded to the Pope to move him to relieve the
Venetians. 375 Rumors diu^lged by the Spaniards. 451 Reasons alleged by the
Protestants to move the French King towarre. 456
S.
SEnates answer to the Emperors Ambassadors. 3 S^range suspicion of the Pope
concerning the French King. 6 Six thousand Suis^es come to Varesa against the
French King. 32 Speech of agreement betwixt the Emperor and the Venetians. 43
Sundry thoughts of the (...). 44 Suisses defy Gaston of Foix* 47 Suisses come
into the Duchy of Milan. ibid. Suisses return home again. 48 Strange
miracle in amine. 49 Suisses hatred to the French King. 57 Suisses
discontented, make war on the French. 62 Suisses great boldness, and their
victory at Nouara. 64 Selim marches into Asiawith an Army prepared for
Europe. 76 Strasoda and Montfalcon taken by Frangipan. 78 Senate recompenceth
Sauorgnane. 80 Selims victory against Ismael. 85 Soliman enters Hungary.
ibid. Suisses determination in the streights of the mountains. 92 Suisses
retire to Nouara. 93 Suisses retire with soft pace to (...). 97 Siege of
Bressia resolved on. 100 Senates recompense to the widow and children of
Aluiana. 101 Suisses nature. 106 Senate disburdeneth the Commonwealth in time
of peace. 115 Selims victories. 116 Selim takes Cairo. ibid. Selim graneth the
Venetians demands. ibid Soliman resolves to invade Hungary. 121 Suisses leave
the French Camp for want of pay. 128 Sforza arriueth at Milan. 134 Suisses
boldness in assailing their enemies. 136 Sundry opinions on the publication of
the League. 147 Senates answer to the Imperials. ibid. Sorrow of all France
for the kings captivity: and the Councels resolution. 152 Senates answer to
the French Commissioner. ibid. Senates answer to the Lord of Langi 159 Senate
after the taking of Rome, determine to oppose against the Emperor. 176 Sundry
opinions about the Popes delivery. ibid. Strife betwixt the Confederates
concerning the taking of Alexandria. 181 Solimans liberality to the Venetians.
183 Senates answer to the Pope. 188 Sundry opinions of the Imperials
Captains. ibid. Six Cities appointed to the Venetians by the agreement of the
League. 190 Secret practices betwixt the King and the Venetians. 203 Senates
suspicion concerning the kings coming. 207 Soliman takes Buda. 218 Sundry
opinions in the Senate concerning the motion of peace with the Emperor. 219
Soliman restores John king of Hungary to his Kingdom. 223 Soliman suspecteth
the Venetians. 225 Solimans purpose to enrich Constantinople. 226 Solimans
design against the Christians. 229 Soliman with his Army comes into
Hungary. 232 Sundry opinions in the Senate concerning Canalis cause. 240
Senate acknowledge Canalis service by recompencing his son. 241 Solimans
great preparations for war. 242 Senates holy resolution. 243 Senate sends
eight Ambassadors to the Pope. 245 Soliman aduertiseth the Venetians of what
he had done in Persia. 247 Soliman consents to make war on the Emperor.
253 Soliman aduertiseth the Venetians of his determination. ibid. Sundry
reports concerning the Turkish Army. 256 Senates care for means to discharge
the expense of war. 257 Solimans discontent for two accidents. 260 Soliman
resolves to war on the Venetians. 262 Senate determines to fight with the
enemy. 264 Soliman dislodgeth from Corsou. 267 Soliman determines to assail
Naplesin Romagnia. ibid. Scardona taken by the Venetians. 269 Soliman seems
to desire peace with the Venetians. ibid. Senate determines war against
Soliman. 274 Senate uses means to get money to defray the expenses of the
wars. 276 Succors sent to Antiuari. 283 Sibensans brave resolution. ibid.
Sundry op^nions of the Turkish Army. 286 Sundry opinionsin the Confederates
Council. 293 Spaniards insolency. 294 Senate resolves on peace with the
Turk. 295 Senates answer to the Emperors Ambassador. 296 Spaniards not
being able to keep Castel-nouo, offer it to the Venetians. 300 Senates answer
to the Ambassadors of the Emperor and French king. 305 Sorrow and grief of
those of Naples and Maluesia when they understood the conditions of peace. 309
Soliman incensed against Ferdinand determines to make war in Austria. 312
Senate refuses to have the Council held at Vincenza. 314 Senate refuses to
make any new alliance. 315 Senates answer to Polin. 316 Senates answer to the
French ambassadors and their answer to Ferdinand. 318 Sharp war about
Morea. 322 Senates answer to the Cardinal of Ferrara. 324 Soliman falsely
informed of the Venetians. 327 Senates answer to the Protestants. 333 Siennois
rise against the Spaniards. 336 Solimans army against the Persians 339 Soliman
makes truce with Christian Princes. ibid. Strife betwixt the Emperor and
French King. ibid. Soliman sends imperious letters to the Emperor. 340
Senate sends Ambassadors to the Pope. 341 Strossi his policy to victual
Parma. 344 Senates answer to the Cardinal of Tournon. 345 Senates answer to
the Prince of Salerne. 352 Spaniards demands upon the Treaty of Peace with
the Pope. 360 Senate of Milans answer to the king of Spain concerning the
Inquisition. 369 Selim resolves to invade the Isle of Cyprus. 371 Senate
advertised of the Turks enterprise. 373 Supplies sent to Cyprus. 375 Selim
sends a defiance to Venice unless they would surrender Cyprus. 379 Senates
answer to the Chiaus. ibid Senates answer to Selims letters. 380 Selim
discontented for the small respect given his Chiaus. 381 Situation of the City
of Nicosia. 387 Sundry opinions of the Captains of the Christian Fleet. 393
Spaniards idle excuses. 395 Sebastiano Venieri made General in Zanne his sted.
397 Senates answer to Colonna. 400 S^pplies sent to Famagosta. 402 Small hope
in the revolt of the Turks subjects. 449 Spaniards fear least the Ve^etians
make Peace with the Turk. 452 Souranza honorably entertained by D. John at
Messina. 454 Spaniards jealous of the French men's actions. 456 Senates
resolution perceiving the Spanish delays. 458 Situation of the Castle of
N^uarin. 466 Spaniards desirons to return into the West. 468 Spaniards
conference with the Venetian Ambassador. 471 Senates resolution to peace. 473
Sundry opinions concerning the Venetians peace. 476 Sundry prodigies seen in
the air. 483 Senates decree against the Clergy. 494 Senates answer to the
Pope. 496
T
THe king of Arragon comes into the Realm of Naples. 5 The false reports
which the Pope threw abroad against the French king. 6 The Senates answer to
the Emperors Ambassadors. 9 Truce betwixt the Emperor and the Venetians. 11
The Pope ratifieth the Treaty of Cambray. 13 The Duke of Venice his answer to
the French kings herald. 14 The kings resolution to enforce the enemies to
fight. 15 The great progression of the French Army. 27 Treuiso continues
obedient to the Venetians. 18 The Venetian Ambassadors come by night into Rome.
22 Treaty of Truce betwixt the Emperor and the Venetians broken. 26 The kings
anger against the Suisses. 28 Those of Mirandola yield upon safety of their
lives and goods. 39 Triuuleio his Oration in defense of his opinion. 40 The
king sends the Bishop of Paris to Mantua. 42 Triuulcio takes Concorda. 43
Triuulcio draws near to Bolognia. 44 The kings forces in the Duchy of
Milan. 47 The Pope will by no means have peace with the French. 56 Triuulcio of
opinion to abandon the Duchy of Milan. 57 The Treaty betwixt the Emperor
and Venetians handled. 58 The king prepares for his return into Italy. 60 The
whole Duchy of Milan yields to Sforza. 64 The French kings submission to
the Pope. 68 The incursions of Rance de Cera Governor of Crema. 69 The tenor
of the Senates letters to Aluiana. 74 Troubles in Asia. 75 The Emperor
Maximilian provoke Selim against the Venetians. 76 Traitor punished. 77 To
what intent the Spaniard spoke to the Venetians of peace. 88 Those of Bressia
make a sally on the Venetians camp. 101 The retreat of the Venetians Army.
ibid. Triuulcio leaves his charge. 104 The Emperors coming into Italy. 105
The whole country betwixt Oglio, Po, and Adda, yields to the Emperor. 107
Truce renewed betwixt the Emperor and the Venetians. 117 The King of England
chosen Vmpier betwixt mighty Princes. 124 Traitors in Milan give
advertisement to Prospero Colonna. 128 Triuulcio taken prisoner by the
Imperials. 129 The protestation of the Emperor, and King of Englands
Ambassadors in Senate. 139 The French King will by no means discampe from
Padua. 148 The French King is taken by the Imperials, and the Army defeated.
ibid. The Emperors speech and gest^re upon news of the victory. 149 The King
of Englands courtesy toward the French king. 154 The King of Englandes
a^nswere to the Commissioners of the league. 156 The two Armies of the Pope,
and the Venetians march together to Milan. 157 The offer of the Pope and the
Venetians to the King. 159 The King of England offers the Pope a great sum
of money. 163 The Emperors preparations by sea and land. ibid. The two Armies
of the league, and Imperialles at once in Tuscanie. 171 The king of Fraun^e and
England resolve to free the Pope. 176 The Emperors dissimulation concerning
the Popes taking. 177 The French kings great preparations to send into Italy.
179 The Turk being assailed by Marcello, has speedy revenge. 183 The
Emperor commands the Pope to be enlarged. 115 The French kings answer to
the Venetians Ambassador, and his determination. 206 Treason discovered in
Barlet^a 207 The two Armies of the French, and Venetians distrust one another.
209 Triuulcio his request from the king to the Venetians. 213 The Emperors
arrival at Genoa. 212 The Kings request to the Venetians. 215 The king
entreats the Emperor to make an accord with the Venetians. 216 The Emperor
is desirous of an accord with the Venetians. 218 The Emperor is crowned at
Bolognia. 224 The Emperors gift to the Venetian Ambassadors brought into the
public treasury. ibid. The Turks complaints against the Venetians. 226 The
Emperor grants an Interim concerning the difference in Religion. 228 The
king of Hungary seeks peace of the Emperor and Ferdinand. 230 The Emperor
with a mighty Army encampeth before Vienna. 232 The Emperors and Solimans
nauall Army. 233 The Emperor returns into Italy. 235 The Turks recover
Coron. 243 The Turkish fleet scoureth the Seacoast of Calabria. 244 The
Emperor seeks to the Venetians. 245 The Emperor for the Venetians sake does
maintain the Duke of Vrbins caufe. 246 The Emperors preparations for Afric.
ibid. The Emperors great Army for his voyage into Affricke. 247 The taking of
Thunis and Bonna. 248 The Emperors captious answer to the Venetians
concerning the State of Milan. ibid. The Emperor challenges the French King
to single fight. 250 The Emperor enforced to retire forth of Prouence. 251 The
three chief points which the Pope handled with the Christian Princes. 252 The
French king sends an Ambassador to Venice to draw them from the Emperor.
ibid. The king purposes to use the Turk against the Emperor. 253 The king
comes to Lions to go into Italy. 257 Three sundry accidents that caused
war betwixt Soliman and the Venetians. 260 The Turks of Obrouazzo retire to
the Castle. 269 Treaty of peace betwixt the French king and the Emperor
broken off. 276 The Emperor declares that he could not take Arms for the
league. ibid. The Emperor and French King refuse to s^e one another at Nice in
the Popes presence. 277 The Turkish feasts of Baieran. 278 The Turks wast
Dalmatia. 281 The Turks take the Castle of Laurana. 282 The Turks leave
Dalmatia, and go into Hungary. 283 The Turks arrival makes the Venetians
quit Obrauazza. 284 The Turks wonder at the Christians boldness. 286 The
Turkish Galleys put to rout by the Army of the league. 287 The Turks come
forth of the Gulf and put themselves in battle. 288 The Turks purpose
broken by Doria. 289 The Turkish Army retireth into the Gulf of Larra. 292
The Emperors excuses for not performing his promise. 295 The Turks great
preparations for recovery of Castel-nouo. 298 Truce for three months betwixt
the Turks and Venetians. 299 Truce prolonged with the Venetians. 300 The Basha
his demands to Contaten. 302 The Emperor desires passage through France to
go into Flanders. 303 The Emperor and French king send to the Venetians to
divert them from peace with the Turks. 304 The Emperor comes to Paris. 307
The traitors which bewrayed Badoatio his Commission to the Turks discovered.
308 The traitors punished. 309 The Emperors resolution contrary to his
promise. 313 The Emperor allieth himself with Henry King of England. 319 The
Turks take Regio in Calabria* 320 The Emperor returns into Italy. ibid. The
Emperor refuses to confer with the Pope. 321 The Turk makes war in
Hungary. 322 Two Legates sent to the Emperor and the French king to procure
peace. 324 The Emperor and Ferdinand send Ambassadors to treat of peace with
the Turk. 326 Truce for one year betwixt the Emperor, his brother, and
Soliman. 328 Tyrannical law of the Turks. ibid. The Emperor refuses to inuest
Pietro Lodouico in the Duchy of Parma and Placentia. 329 The Emperors and
the French kings difficulties, cause of peace in Italy. 330 The Emperors
complaints against the Pope with his return so Milan. 335 The Turk sends
an Ambassador to Venice. 342 The Turks make war in Hungary and Transiluania.
347 The Emperor sends the ViceRoy of Naples against the Siennois. 355 The
Emperor Charles resigneth his whole state to his son Philip, and to his
brother. 358 Truce granted and soon broken. 358 The taking of Calais by the
Guise. 361 The form of the great Turks oath. 369 The opinion of the other
B^shaes contrary to that of Mahomet. 371 Treason practiced by a Cypriot,
discovered, and punished. 374 The King of Spaines aunsw^re to the Popes
content. 376 The Turks preparations for the war of Cyprus. 378 The Emperors
answer to the Venetian Ambassador. 382 Turks repulsed from Tina. 385 The
Turkish fleet landed in Cyprus. ibid. Turks build 3. Forts near to Nicosi^.
390 Turks take the Bulwark Constantia 391 The Emperor resuseth to enter into
the le^gue. 396 The Emperor will not allow of the Popes new Title given to the
Duke of Florence. 399 Tepulo his opinion tends to war. 401 The league against
the Turk concluded. ibid. Turks put to rout in Candie. 404 Turks waste the
Islands of Xant and Zephalenia. ibid. The League published at Venice. 407 Turks
before Dulcigna. 408 Turks before Mandrachia. 410 The king of Spaines answer
to the Cardinal Alexandrine. ibid. The leagues offer to the Emperor. 411 The
besieged in Famagosta make a counter-batterie. 413 The Tower of the Arcenall
ou^rthrowne by a mine. ibid. The Turks in pre^ence of their General give a
furious assault, and are repulsed. 414 The Turkish fleet in the Gulf of
Lepanto. 420 The speech of Hassan Bascha persuading to fight. 430 The King of
Portugalles answer to the Cardinal and the Venetians. 450 The Turks opinion
of the Christians before the battle. 451 Treaty of peace broken. 452 The true
cause of Don John's delay. 454 Tepulo his suite to the K. of Spain 458 Turks
re^ire from the Christian fleet. 461 Turks coming to relieve the Castle much
annoy the Christians. 467 The state of D^lmatia during the war. 469 The
Turks build a Fort against Catharra. ibi. The Emperor seeks to hinder peace.
471 The Turks deal roughly with the Venetian Bailie. 474 The King of Spain
not discontented with the Venetians peace. 476 The Turkish fleet departes from
Constantinople. 477 Troubles in the Duchy of Vrbin. 478 The king of Poland
returns secretly into France. 479 Troubles in Genoa appeased. 480 The Turkish
Army in the Empires confines. ibi. The cause of the Venetians jealousy of the
Spaniards. 493 The manner of reuoking the Popes censures against the Venetians.
499
V
VEnetians answer to the Emperor. 4 Venetians greatly perplexed. 7 Venetians
resolute answer to the Emperors Ambassadors. ibid. Venetians refuse to grant
Maximilian truce for three years. 10 Venetians secret practices with
Maximilian. 12 Venetians attempt in vain to beereconciled to the Pope and
Emperor. 13 Venetians astonished at sundry bad presages. ibid. Venetians
recover Treui. 15 Venetians loose the battle of Gyradade. 16 Venetians seek
to be reconciled to the Emperor. ibid. Venetians quit Padua, Verona, and their
places of the firmeland. 17 Venetians take Padua. 21 Venetians masters of the
champaine Country. ibi. Venetian Ambassadors come by night to Rome. 22
Venetians recover Vincenza. 24 Venetians nauall army scowreth the Po as far
as Fiquerolles. 25 Venetians recover the Pollesin of Rouigo. ibid. Vincentine
Commissioners crave pardon of the Prince of Anhalt. 29 Vincentines yield
themfelues to the victors mercy. ibid. Verona and her Territory pawned to the
French King for a hundred thousand crowns. 30 Venetians recover all the places
near to Padua, which had been taken by the French. 32 Verona besieged. 33
Venetians raise their camp from before Verona. ibi. Venetians take Azola.
ibid. Venetians intelligence upon Bressia discovered. 36 Venetians still
maintain their forces and greatness. 47 Venetians returning to the assault of
Bressia enter the City. 52 Venetians constancy in maintaining their alliance.
60 Venetians take Valegia, Pescara, and Cremona. 61 Venetians besiege and
batter Verona. 65 Venetians offers to the French King. 67 Venetians loose
Pescara. 69 Venetian Ambassador sent unto Selim. 75 Venetians besiege Maran. 77
Vitturi the Prouidator defeated and taken. 84 Venetians give great
entertainment to Rance de Cera. 85 Venetians send Ambassadors to the French
King, and to the King of England. 88 Venetians desirous to draw the Pope to
their party. 90 V^netians send an Ambassador to the Pope. ibid Venetians
exhortation and their offer to the French King. 106 Verona besieged in two
several places 111 Venetians remonstrance to Lautrec. 112 Verona again
besieged. 113 Verona consigned to Lautrec for the French King, is delivered to
the Venetians. ibid. Veronois joy for their reduction to the Venetians
subjection. ibi. University of Padica reestablished by the Senate. 115
Venetians send two Ambassadors to the Turk. ibi. Venetians send Ambassadors
unto Charles King of Spain concerning traffike. 116 Usual trade of the
venetian vessels. 117 Venetians answer to the Popes exhortation. ibi.
Venetians answer to the French king. 118 Venetians Army against the Pirates.
119 Venetians suspect the French King. 120 Venetians send the King of Hungary
thirty thousand ducats. 123 Venetian Commonwealth christen a daughter of the
French King. 125 Venetians seek to appease the Popes indignation against the
French. 126 Venetians dissuade Lautrec from his resolution. 130 Venetians levy
forces to march into the Duchy of Milan. ibi. Venetians great discretion in
their resolution. 137 Venetians embassage to the Pope. 138 Venetians send
Ambassadors to the Emperor to rejoice with him for the new league. 140
Venetians preparations against the French. ibi. Venetians suspect the motion of
peace betwixt the Emperor and the French King. 142 Venetians make new leuies
of horse and foot. ibid. Venetians send Ambassadors to the new Pope. ibid.
Venetians stand in fear of Solomon 144 Venetians sought unto by the Imperialls
and the French. 146 Venetians discourse on the French K. taking. 149 Venetians
send Ambassadors to the Emperor. ibid. Venetians make means to draw the
King of England into the League. 155 Venetian ambassadors remonstrance to the
Pope. ibid. Venetians answer to the Pope, inuiting them to an agreement with
the Emperor. 162 Venetians answer to the French king concerning the renewing of
the war of Naples. 172 Venetians place a garrison in Rauenna for the behoof
of the Sea of Rome 177 Vitturi contrary to the Duke of Vrbin. 178 Vitturi
called to account for being against the Popes delivery. 179 Venetians oppose
themselves against Lautrec his proposition to go to Rome and leave Milan. 181
Venetians suspect the Duke of Vrbin. 183 Venetians Ambassade to the Pope. 185
Venetians preparations against the Duke of Brunswich. 191 Venetian forces much
diminished. 201 Venetians keep the Cities in Apulia. 202 Venetians answer to
the Kings Ambassade. ibid. Venetians great preparations by Sea and Land. 204
Venetians love to the French and the Duke of Milan. 205 Venetians solicit the
King to come into Italy. 207 Valor of a woman in man's attire. 211 Venetian
Senate malcontent with the French King. 212 Venetians meaning for the
articles of peace at the treaty of Ca^bray. 213 Venetians answer to Triuulcio.
ibi. Venetians recourse unto the King of England. ibid. Venetians exhortation
to the Confederates. 215 Venetians offers to the Duke of Ferrara. ibid.
Venetians answer to those that motioned peace with the Emperor. 219 Venetians
send Ambassadors to the Pope and the Emperor. 223 Venetians send an Embassage
to Soliman. 225 Venetians forbid the Knights of Maltato come no more upon their
gulf 226 Vmpires chosen to end the controversy betwixt the Archduke and the
Venetians. 228 Venetians crave the nomination of Bishoprics under their
dominions. 229 Venetians crave the Tenths levied upon the Clergy to help
them against the Turks. ibi. Venetians by chasing the Pirates secure the Seas.
230 Venetians in vain solicit the Pope for the King of Hungary. ibid.
Venetians exhort Ferdinand to peace 231 Venetians answer concerning the
renewing of the league. 235 Vmpires appointed with a third man to end the
controversy, betwixt Ferdinand and the venetians. 238 venetians victory at
Sea against the Moore of Alexandria, who was taken. 240 venetians ships stayed
by the Turkish officers. ibi. venetians answer to themperor. 245 venetians seek
to appease the strife betwixt the Pope and the Duke of vrbin. 246 venetians
answer to the Emperors Ambassador. 252 venetians answer to Solomon. 254
venetians preparations to stand upon their guard against the Turk. 257
uncertain course of the Turks fleet puts the venetians in doubt. 258
venetians remain Neuters betwixt the Imperialls and the Turks. ibi. Venetian
Fleet loses four galleys taken by the Turks. 262 Vizier Basha his reasons
to direct Soliman from his resolution. 263 Venetians imprisoned and their goods
seized over all the Turkish Empire. ibid. Venetians remonstrance for the Pope.
265 Venetians constancy. 266 Vizier Basha couns^ileth Soliman to raise his
siege in Corfou. ibid. Vittore de Garzons Governor of Naples. 268 Venetians
suspect Soliman, desiring (...). 269 Venetians diligence to fortify the
Islands against the Turks. 273 Venetians acquainted with Solimans preparations
forwarre, are exhorted to peace. 274 Venetians seek to draw the King of
England to the league. 275 Venetians take Obra^azza. 284 Venetians naual Army
and the Pope joined together. ibid. Venetians grieved because there was no Duke
of Milan. 315 Venetians solicited to leave their Neutralitie. ibid. Venetians
raze the Fort of Maran. 318 Venetians excuses to the Emperor and Ferdinand
concerning Maran. 323 Venetians reasons to divert the Pope from meddling with
the Protestants 332 Venetians grant passage to the Pope and Emperors troops.
ibid. Venetians gentle answer to those of Ausburge. 333 Venetians preparations
against the Turks. 344 Viceroy of Naples spoileth the Country of the Sienois.
355 Venetians entreated by the Pope seek means to pacify the Duke of Alua.
359 Venetian Prelates that were present at the Council of Trent. 364 Venetians
chase the Pirates. 365 Venetians send Ambassadors to Selim the new Emperor.
368 Venetian Ambassadors Oration to the Emperor. 369 Venetians purge the seas
of Pirates. ibid. Venetians prepare for the war of Cyprus. 373 Venetians
implore the aid of Christian Princes. 375 Venetians solicit the Persian to
make war on Selim. 378 Venetians send Ambassadors to the Emperor,
soliciting him to enter into the league. 382 Venetians propositions in the
Court of Spain, with the difficulties alleged thereupon. ibid. Venetian
Flect leaves Corfou by the Senates commandment. 384 Venetian General
resolves to send aid to (...). 306 Venetians great doubts and perplexities
with their request to the Pope. 398 Venetians resolve to hearken to peace. 399
(...) Venetians expect the Confederates Fleet. 407 Venetians will not hear of
(...). 408 Venetians complaints to the Pope 410 Valor of the besieged in
repulsing the enemy. 415 Uniting of the Confederates Fleet. 418 Venieri his
answer to D. John his objections. 421 Venetians preparations against the
Spring. 449 Venetians solicit the Cardinals in the Vacancie of the Sea. 453
Venetians Ambassadors discourse to the French King. 457 Vluzzali his policy.
461 Vluzzali determines to assail D. John. 463 Vluzzali returns to
Constantinople. 468 Venetians complain to the Pope. 469 Venieri his honorable
entertainment and welcome at Venice. ibid. Venetians send an Ambassador to the
Pope. 476 Venetians fear. 480 Upon what occasion the Pope caused ten days
to be taken from the year. 485 Venetians jealous of Turks and Milanois. 489
Venetians send Ambassadors to the French King. 491 Venetians defeat the
Vsicoques. 492
W.
WHat was concluded in the Diet at Constance. 7 War resolved against
Maximilian. 10 What was practiced under hand against the Venetians. 11 Whereunto
the Popes actions teded. 28 What astonishment the loss of the battle brought
to Rome. 56 Whole Duchy of Milan yields to Sforza. 64 What importance the
taking of Padua was of. 69 What shifts the Pope used to declare himself openly
against the French King. 91 (...) Country (...) Oglio, Po, and (...), (...)
(...) (...) Emperor. 107 (...) the French King distrusted the elect (...). 119
What (...) the Emperor to send his Ambassadors to the French King. 124 Why
the King delaied to conclude the league. 125 What the Popes and Emperors
designs were. ibid. What hindered the Lord of Lautrec from assailing Milan. 133
With what feruencie the Milanois endured the discommoditie of the siege. ibid.
What Prospero Colonna did upon report of the arrival of the French. 140 Why
the Grisons would not leave their houses. 144 Why the French king was
displeased with the Venetians. 145 Whereunto the Pope attended. ibid. What
moved the Senate to allie themselves with the French. 147 What caused the
Imperials to come into the field. 148 What let the taking of Naples. 168
What moved the Pope to seek agreement with the Viceroy. 169 What caused the
Duke of Bourbon to march to Rome. 172 What great forces were requisite to free
the Pope from prison. 178 What moved the Lord Lautrec to change his
determination. 183 What moved the Venetians to be at the charge of the war in
Lombardie. 184 What was the Emperors meaning concerning peace. ibid. What the
Popes intention was. 186 Wants of the army before Naples. 195 What kept the
(...) from sending Ambassadors to the Emperor. 212 What moved the Emperor to
enforce the Florentines to obey the Pope. 223 What moved the Kings of France
and England to make war on the Emperor. 231 Wrongs done the Venetians in
Solimans Dominions. 254 What the Senate propounded to write to the Baily. 275
What moved the Emperor and French King to grant the enteruiew at Nice. 277
War renewed betwixt the Emperor and the King. 278 What Doria his purpose
was. 289 What the Senate enioy^ed Badoario Ambassador to Soliman. 306 Who they
were that took part with the Protestants. 333. What be Venetian gentlemen
with their prerogative. 334 Who hindered the Emperor from allowing the
agreement. 343 War continued in (...). 344 War betwixt Solimans two sons
361 War opened in all places. 381 War resolved against the Turk. 401 What
moved the General Venieri to sail to Mess^a. 407
FINIS.

